An eye to Heaven in Earth.

A Necessary Watch for the time of Death, consisting in Meditations and
Prayers fit for that purpose.

WITH The Husbands Christian counsel to his Wife and Children, left poor
after his Death.

PSALM. 65. 4. Blessed is the man whom thou choosest and causest to come unto
thee: he shall dwell in thy Courts, and be satisfied with the pleasures of
thine House, even of thine holy Temple.

PSALM. 116. 15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.

LONDON Printed by W. Stansby for Richard Meighen, and are to be sold at his
shops at Saint Clements Church over against Essex house, and at Westminster
Hall. 1619.

1. January called of the Latins, Ianuarius. ^ath 31. days. Graecians.
Gamelion. Hebrews, Tebeth, and is their 10. month.

1 A Calends. 2 b The first day of this Month Christ was circumcised, Luke 1.
21. The tops of the mountains appeared unto Noah, Gen 8. 5. The Israelites put
away their wives, Ezra. 10. 16. 3 c Nones of Ia. 4 3

4 d 5 e 6 f Day before the N. 7 g Nones of Ianuar. 8 A 9 b The 5. of this
month word was brought unto Ezechiel the Prophet, that the City Jerusalem was
smitten, Ezechiel 33. 21. 10 c Idus of January. 8 7 6 5 4 3

11 d 12 e 13 f 14 g Day before the Id. The sixth of this month Christ was
worshipped of the wise men, Mat. 2. 1. etc. baptized, Mat. 3. 15. turned water
into wine, Ioh. (...). 1. etc. as testifies Epiphanius. 15 A Idus of Januarie.
16 b 17 c 18 d 19 e 20 f The 10. of this Month Nabuchadnezzar, King of Babel,
moved thereunto by the rebellion of Zedechiah, besieged Jerusalem most fiercely,
as may appear 2. Kings. 25. etc. Ier. 52. 4. Also Ezechiel was willed to utter
his parable, Ezech. 2. etc. 21 g 22 A Calends of February. 17 16 15 14 13 12
11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3

23 b 24 c 25 d 26 e 27 f 28 g 29 A Paul called, and converted the 25. of this
month, Acts. 9. 3. 30 b 31 c Day before the Calends of Feb.

Festiual days in this month be Circumcision the first day. Epiphanie the
sixth

2 February, called of the Latins, Februarius. has 28 days unless it be
year Bissextil, and then 29. Graecia^s, Elapheb^lio^. Hebrews, Shebat. and is
their 11. month.

1 d Calends. The first of this month Mose* repeated the Law unto the children
of Israel, Deuteronomy. 1. 3. 2 e Nones of Februar. 4 3

3 f 4 g Day before the N. 5 A Nones of Februa. The second of this month our
Savior was presented to the Lord, and Marie purified, Luke 2. 22. 6 b 7 c 8 d
Idus of Februar. 8 7 6 5 4 3

9 e The ninth of this month, Noah 40. days after he had seen the tops of the
mountains, sent out of the Ark a Raven, and afterward a Dove which returned,
Ge. 8. 6. etc. 10 f 11 g 12 A Day before the Id. 13 b Idus of Februar. 14 c 15
d The 15 of this month, the Jews spend merrily together, for that the Spring of
the year does enter then, as they think. 16 c 17 f 18 g 19 A 20 (...) The 16.
of this month, Noah the second time sent out a Dove, which returned with an
Olive branch in her bill, Genesis 8. 10. 21 c Calends of March. 17 16 15 14 13 12
11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3

22 d 23 e 24 f 25 g The 24. of this month, Zechariah was commanded to
prophecy, Zechary 1. 7. Matthias was elected into the number of the Apostles,
Acts 1. 26. 26 A 27 b 28 c 29 d Day before the Calends of March.

Festival days in this month be the 2. called the Purification of Saint
Marie. The 24. which is Saint Matthias day.

3. March called of the Latins, Martius. has 31. days, Graecians, Mouuichyon,
Hebrewe, Adar: and is their 12. month.

1 d Calends. The Temple of Jerusalem was finished the 3. day of this month,
Esra. 6. 15. In the 1. of Esdr. 7. 5. it is said to be the 23. of this month.
2 e 3 f Nones of March. 6 5 4 3

4 g 5 A 6 b Day before the N. The tenth of this month, Christ was advertised
that Lazarus was sick. Ioh. 11. 3. 7 c Nones of March 8 d 9 e A feast was
celebrated among the Jews, for the overthrow of Nicanor, the 13. of this
month 2. Mac. 15 37 Also upon the same day all the Jews under Ashuerosh were
commanded to be put to death, Esth. 3. 13. upon the same day the Jews had a
privilege given them to slay all their enemies. Est. 8. 12. This day also the
Jews solemnized for their ioifull deliverance, Est. 8. 17. 10 f Idus of March.
8 7 6 5 4 3

11 g 12 13 b 14 c Day before the Id. 15 d Idus of March. 16 e 17 f 18 g 19 A
20 b 21 c 22 d Calends of April. 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3

23 e The 14. day of this month was called of the Jews, Mardocheus day, 2.
Macc. 15. 37. also Purim, as may appear Esth. 9. verse. 21. 26. 24 f 25 g 26 A
27 b 28 c The 15. also is another day of Purim, Est. 9. 21. 29 d 30 e The 16.
of this Month Lazarus was raised from the dead, John 11. 43. 31 f Day before
the Calends of April.

This Month has one festiual day called the Annunciation of Saint Marie,
celebrated the 25. of this month.

4. April called of the Latins, Aprilis. has 30 days Grecians, Thargelion.
Hebrews, Abib or Nisan, and is their 1. month

1 g Calends. The first of this Month Noah uncovered the Arc, and saw earth,
Ge. 8. 13. Moses reared the Tabernacle, Exo. 40. 2. 17. the Temple began to be
sanctified, 2. Chapter 29. 17. 2 A Nones of April. 4 3

3 b 4 c Day before the N. 5 d Nones of April. 6 e 7 f The 10. of this month
the children of Israel passed through the river ^orda^ on dry foot, Iosu. 4.
19. the Paschal Lamb was chosen, Exo. 1 23. 8 g Idus of April. 8 7 6 5 4 3

9 A 10 b 11 c 12 d Day before the Id. The ^3. of this month the edict of King
Abashuerosh came out for the murdering of the Jews, Esth 3. 12. 13 c Idus of
April. 14 f 15 g 16 A The 14 of this month the Passover was kept Exo. 12. 6.
Leuit 23 5. Ios. 5. 10. 17 b 18 c 19 d The 15. of this month the Israelite,
departed out of Egypt. Numb 33. 3. 20 e 21 f Calends of May. 18 17 16 15 14 13
12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3

22 g The 16. of this month Hezekiah made an end of sanctifying and purging
the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 29. 17. 23 A 24 b 25 c 26 d The 18. of this month the
childie^ of Israel walked on dry land through the midst of the red sea, Exodus
14 19. 27 e 28 f 29 g 30 A Day before the Calends of May. The 24, Daniel saw
his vision, Dan. 10 4.

The 25. of this month the feast of S. Mark is observed.

5. May, called of the Latins, Maius. has 31. days. Graecians, Scri^ophorion.
Hebrews, Liar, which is their 2. month.

1 b Calends. The first of this Month Moses was commanded to number the
children of Israel, Numb. 1. 1. etc. 2 c 3 d Nones of May. 6 5 4 3

4 e 5 f The 5. of this Month, Christ is thought to have ascended up into
heaven, Mar. 16. 9. Luke 24. 51. Act. 19. They which could not keep the
Passover at the day appointed by the Lord, were willed to celebrate the same
the 14. of this month, Nu. 39. v. 10. 11. So did the Israelites at the
commandment of King Hezekiah, 2. Chapter 30. 15. 6 g Day before the N. 7 A Nones
of May. 8 b 9 c 10 d Idus of May. 8 7 6 5 4 3

11 e 12 f 13 g 14 A Day before the Id 15 b Idus of May. 16 c 17 d The 16. day,
Manua rained from heaven, Exodus 16. 14 18 e 19 f The 17. day Noah entered the
Arc, and the flood began. Genesis 7. 11. 13. 20 g 21 A 22 b Calends of June. 17
16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3

The 22. fire from Heaven consumed such as murmured against the Lord, Nu. 11.
23 c 24 d 25 e The 23. the Israelites with great joy triumphingly entered into
the Castle of Jerusalem, 1. Mac. 13. 51. 26 f 27 g 28 A 29 b Noah, the 27. the
wate^ being dried up, came forth of the Arc, Genesis 8 14. etc. 30 c 31 d Day
before the Calends of June

The first of this Month is usually celebrated for the feast of Philip and
Jacob.

(...). June, called of the Latins, lunius. has 30. days. Graecians,
Ekat^mb^i^n. Hebrews Siuan which is their third month.

1 e Calends. The first coming of the children of Israel unto mount Sinai was
the 1. of this month, where they abode 11. months, and 20. days, in which
time all those things were done, recorded in Exodus cap 19. 1. etc. 2 f Nones of
June. 4 3

3 g 4 A Day before the N. 5 b Nones of June. 6 c 7 d 8 e Idus of June. 8 7 6 5
4 3

9 f The sixth of this month Alexander that mighty Monarch of the world was
borne, of whom Dan. c. 11. 3. does pro^phesie. Also on this day that famous
temple of Diana in Ephesus, numbered among the 7. wonders of the world, was set
on fire by Herostratu. The Jews likewise kept their feast of Pentecost on this
day. 10 g 11 (...) 12 b Day before the Id 13 c Idus of June. 14 d 15 e 16 f 17
g 18 A 19 b 20 (...) 21 d Calends of July. 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5
4 3

22 e The 23 of this month the first edict came out for the safety of Gods
people the Jews, against Haman, and the rest of their enemies, Esther 8, 9. 23
f 24 g 25 A 26 b 27 c 28 d The 29. of this month the Arc of Noah through the
increase of waters was lifted up from the earth, Genesis 7. 12. 29 e 30 f Day
before the Calends of July.

Festival days in this month, are the 24. which is the feast of S. I^^.
Baptist. 29. which is S. Peter's.

7. July, called of the Latins, Julius. has 31. days. Graecians, Metageitmon,
Hebrews, Thamus, being their 4. month.

1 g Calends. 2 A The 5. of this month Ezechiel saw his visions. Ezech. 1. 1.
3 b Nones of July. 6 5 4 3

4 c 5 d 6 e Day before the N. The 6. of this month the Capitol of Rome,
counted one of the 7. wonders of the world, was burned: and the mirror of
Christian Princes King Edward the sixth, died the sixth of this month, Anno
^553. 7 f Nones of July 8 g 9 (...) 10 b Idus of July. 8 7 6 5 4 3

11 c 12 d 13 e 14 f Day before the Id. 15 g Idus of July. 16 A The 9. of this
month Jerusalem, after it had a long while been besieged by Nebuchadnezzar,
was taken, Ier. 39, 2. 17 b 18 c 19 d 20 e 21 f 22 g 23 A Calends of August. 17
16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3

The (...). of this month, Julius Caesar, the first Roman Emperor was borne. Of
him is this month called July. 24 b 25 c 26 d 27 e 28 f The 18. of this month,
the Egyptians begin their year, Plin. lib. 8. cap. 47. 29 g 30 A 31 b Day
before the Calends of August.

The 25. of this month is the feast of S. James the Apostle: and upon this day
K James was crowned King of England. 1^^3.

8. August, called of the Latins, Augustus. has 31. days. Graecians,
Boedromion. Hebrews* Ab, which is their 5. month.

1 c Calends. 2 d Nones of August. 4 3

The first of this month, Aaron, 40. years after the children of Israel were
come out of Egypt, died on mount Hor, Number. 33. 38. Also on this day Ezra with
his company came out of Babel unto Jerusalem, Ezra. 7. 9. 3 e 4 f Day before
the N. 5 g Nones of August. 6 A 7 b 8 c Idus of August. 8 7 6 5 4 3

9 d 10 e 11 f 12 g Day before the Id The 7. of this month Nebuchadnezzar
burnt the house of the Lord, and ^l Jerusalem. 2. King. 25. 8. 9. 13 A Idus of
August. 14 b 15 c 16 d 17 e 18 f The 10. of this month, some think Jerusalem
to have been burnt by the Babylonians, Ierem. 52. 12. Josephus (lib. 5. cap.
26.) said it was burned afterward by the Romans the same day. Therefore do the
Jews on this day observe a most straight fast, and go barefooted, and sitting
on the ground, read twice over the Lamentations of Jeremy. 19 g 20 A 21 b
Calend. of September. 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3

22 c 23 d 24 e 25 f 26 g 27 A 28 b 29 c 30 d Day before the Calends of Sep. 31
e

The 2^. of this month is usually called S. Bartholmewes day.

9. September called of the Latins, September. has 30. days. Graecians,
Maimacterion. Hebrews, Elul, which is their 6. month.

1 f Calends. 2 g Nones of September. 4 3

The first of this Month Haggai the Prophet began to prophecy, Hag. 1. 1. 3 A
4 b Day before the N. 5 c Nones of September. 6 d 7 e The sixth of this month
Ezechiel saw another vision Ezec. 8. 1. 8 f Idus of September. 8 7 6 5 4 3

9 g 10 A 11 b 12 c Day before the Id. 13 d Idus of September. The 7. of this
month our late most noble Queen Elizabeth was borne at Greenevvich, Anno,
1533. 14 e 15 f 16 g 17 A 18 b 19 c 20 d The 8. of this Month, Anno, 73.
Jerusalem was utterly with fire and svvord destroyed by Titus the Emperor*
Joseph. lib. 7. cap. ^6. 21 e Calends of Octobe^ 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8
7 6 5 4 3

22 f 23 g 24 A 25 b 26 c 27 d 28 e The 25: of this month, Nehemiah finished
the wales of Jerusalem, Nehem 6. 15. 29 f 30 g Day before the Calends of
October.

Festiual days in this month be. the 21. S. Matthew. 29. S. Michael.

10. October called of the Latins, October. has 31. days. Graecians,
Pianepsion. Hebrews, Thisr^, and is then 7. month.

1 A Calends. The 1. of this month the Jews celebrated the feast of Trumpets,
Leuit. 23 24 the later Jews call this day the beginning of the new year. 2 b 3
c Nones of October. 6 5 4 3

4 d 5 e 6 f Day before the N. Jerusalem, after it had bin possessed of
Christian Princes 88. veeres through mortal dissension came into the hands of
the Saracen, Ann. 1^87. 7 g Nones of October 8 A 9 b 10 c Idus of October. 8 7
6 5 4 3

11 d 12 e The 3. of this month some hi^ke the Jews fasted for the death of
Gedaliah* whereby occasion was offered to bring them again into the miserable
servitude of the Egyptians, 2. King. 25. 25. Ierem. 41. 1. 2. etc. 13 f 14 g
Day before the Id 15 A Idus of October 16 b 17 c 18 d 19 e 20 f The 10. of this
month the feast of reconciliation was kept, Leuit. 23. 27. So did the year of
Iubile every fifty veere begin as on the same day, Leuit. 25. 9. 21 g 22 A
Calends of November. 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3

23 b 24 c 25 d 26 e The 15. of this month the Jews observed the feast of
Tabernacles 7. days together, in memory of the Lords protecting them i^ the
desert, Leuit. 23. 34. 27 f 28 g 29 A 30 b 31 c Day before the Calends of
Nouemb.

Festival days in this month are, 18. day, S. Luke, 28. Simon and Jude.

11 November called of the Latins, November, has 30. days. Graecians,
Authesterion. Hebrews, Mar^esuam, their 8. month.

1 d Calends. The third of this month Constantius the Emperor, Son to
Constantinus the great, departed out of this world, An. 364. Hist tripart. in
the end of the fifth book. 2 e Nones of Nouemb. 4 3

3 f 4 g Day before the N. 5 A Nones of Nouem. 6 b 7 c The tenth of this month
An. 1483. D. Martin Luther was borne in Islebia. 8 d Idus of Nouemb. 8 7 6 5 4
3

9 e 10 f The 15. of this month was made a new holiday by Jeroboam without the
commandment of God, whereupon he committed most ^icked Idolatry in Dan and
Bethel: but he remained not long unpunished, nor his people vnplagued for the
same, as may appear, 1. Kin. 12. verse 32. 33. 1. King. 13, 1. 2. etc. 11 g 12
A Day before the Id. 13 b Idus of Nouemb 14 c 15 d 16 e 17 f 18 g 19 A 20 b 21
c Calends of December. 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3

22 d Queen Elizabeth began happily to reign for the advancement of the Gospel
of our Savior Christ* the 17. of this month. 1558. 23 e 24 f 25 g 26 A 27 b
The 18 of this month Titus the Emperor most cruelly executed to death a great
number of the Jews, Joseph. lib. 7. cap. 10. 28 c 29 d 30 e Day before the
Calends of December.

Festival days in this month are the first day. The feast of All Saints. The
30. and last day, Saint Andrew the Apostle.

12. December called of the Latins, December. has 31 days. Graecians,
Pos^idon. Hebrews, Sisleu, and is their 9. month.

1 f Calend. The 15. of this month Antiochus placed an abominable Idol upon
the altar of the Lord, 1. Macc. 1. 57. 2 g Nones of December. 4 3

3 A 4 b Day before the No. 5 c Nones of December. The 20 of this month Esdras
exhorted the Israelites to put away their strange wives, 1. Esd. 9. 5. 6. etc.
6 d 7 e 8 f Idus of December. 8 7 6 5 4 3

9 g The foundation of the second Temple was laid the 24. of this month. Hagg.
2. verse. 11. 19. 10 A 11 b 12 c Day before the Id. 13 d Idus of December. The
25. of this month our Savior Christ was borne of the Virgin, the year after the
worlds creation, 4018. On which day also Antiochus Epiphanes entered into
Jerusalem with a mighty army, ^^poiled the same, Ios. lib 21 c. 16. On this day
he profaned the altar of the Lord, 1. Macc. 1. 62. which day also the Jews
kept holy, because thereon the Temple was purged from idolatry. 1. Mac. 4. 59.
14 e 15 16 g 17 A 18 b 19 c 20 d 21 e 22 f Calends of January. 19 18 17 16 15
14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3

23 g 24 A 25 b 26 c 27 d 28 e The 28. of this month Herod caused the poor
Innocents to be murdered, thinking thereby to have slain Christ, Mat. 2. 16.
etc. 29 f 30 g 31 A Day before the Calends of Ianuar.

Festiual days in this month are the 21. Thomas Apost. 25. The Nativity of
Christ. 26. S. Steven 27. John the E^ang. 2^. Innocents, called commonly
Childermas day*

A rule to know how many days be contained in every month in the year.

Thirty days has November,
April, June, and September.
The rest have thirty and one,
Except it be February alone,
Which always has twenty eight mere,
When it is no Bisextile or Leap year.
A note of the Months, weeks, days and hours, throughout the whole year.

The year contains Months 12. Hours 69478 VVeeks 52. Days 365.

Day Natural, has 24 hours. Artificial. 12

Almanacke for ten years

The year of our Lord. The prime. Sundaies letter. Leap year. Ash wednesday
the first day of Lent. Easter day. Whitsunday. 1615 1 A Feb 22. Apr 9. May 28.
1616 2 G F Feb. 14 Mar. 31 May 19. 1617 3 E Mar. 7. Apr. 20. June 30 1618 4 D
Feb 18. Apr. 5. May 24. 1619 5 C Feb. 10 Mar. 28. May 16. 1620 6 E A Mar. 1
Apr. 16. June 4. 1621 7 G Feb. 14. Apr. 1. May 20. 1622 8 (...) Mar. 6 Apr. 21.
June 9. 1623 9 (...) Feb. 16 Apr. 13. June 1. 1624 10 D C Feb. 11. Mar. 28. May
16.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR Henry Hobart Knight and Baronet, Lord chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, CHANCELLOR to Prince CHARLES, and to the rest of
that honorable Society of his Highness Commissioners of Revenues Prosperity
in this life temporal, and blessedness in that which is Eternal.
IF it should be demanded (Right Honorable) why I would adventure to undertake
a matter of this subject; so far (in opinion) differing from my ordinary
employments: It may please you to conceive, that it is not altogether contrary
to my public profession, as being a Christian, though no professed Divine: and
therefore may stand with my ordinary worldly travails. For I am not ignorant,
that every man is bound, to endeavor, in his function of this present life, to
seek the means, to know, and to attain unto the life to come. And what I
have done in this, I may truly say I have done it only, (with earthly, and
corporal) to entermixe and increase my spiritual consolation and comfort; by
these private, (though weak) Meditations: Not purposing to have exposed them
to the variable censures of exquisite wits, whereunto I know they are now
subject: But that some of impartial judgment (as I hold them) having an
accidental view of them, thought it not unfit (weak as they are) that they
should be made public: for the moving of others, to a consideration of their
frail estates, being all subject to one and the same mortality; as also in
the course of their lives, to the like censure of their doings, and execution
of their vocations in this present life; which reasons, I trust, may excuse
both mine undertaking and the publishing of these my weak Meditations.

I may also be demanded how I could presume, to make choice of your Honorable
Patronages, of a work so weak, and unworthy. It may please you also to
conceive, that they more properly belong unto your Honors (as being my labors)
then to any other: especially for that I am subject in account, unto that
Honorable Table, of mine employments, principally undertaken by your directions
and commands: And for that your employments require not the total allowance of
time, which (to my little profit) I find my self to have; I can no better
expend the idle interims of the rest of my liberty (my duty and care, to
answer your expectations in my service, duly respected and performed) then to
seek mine own satisfaction, in that which immediately concerns not your
ordinary employments: But my future account of another service, enjoined me by
another Master. And although it be true, that, a man cannot serve two Masters,
God and Mammon: he may yet serve GOD and Man: But in several respects; God in
Spirit and Truth: And Man in Love, and faithful execution of his vocation: And
he that so serves the one, as he neglect not the other; He is that faithful
servant of that one, that shall reward him here with an invisible gratuitie,
peace of conscience: and of that other, who shall recompense him with a
competent temporal salarie. This is that golden mean, which whosoever keeps (be
he of highest or lowest function in the world) wades safely between the two
extremes: for, he that so serves Man, as he neglects God: Or so serves God, as
he is no way serviceable to the Church or Commonweal, serves rightly neither
God nor Man. For, as GOD created Man for himself, as touching his spiritual:
so has he enjoined labor for man, as touching his corporal part. And both
these may be performed (and ought) by every man, without exception, according
to his calling: Nay, one stands not without the other: But the one is
performed the better for the other: for, without serving of God, no blessing is
obtained, and without Gods blessing, corporal labors neither prosper, nor
profit man: and without an honest calling duly and truly executed, God nor Man
is rightly served. Therefore I, (though I come far short of perfection in
either) do endeavor with unfeigned desire, so to walk and work, as I may
perform my duty to both: Humbly requiring your Honors to show the like mind
toward me, as does my heavenly Master, namely, to accept the Will for the
Deed: So shall I think my self happy in my reputed unhappiness, and
endeavor to bestow the residue of mine unpleasant pilgrimage, as near as I
can, to the discharge of my duties and services to GOD and Man; Recommending
your Honors to GOD, my self to your service, and this silly Pamphlet unto
(though unworthy of) your pervsalls.

At my house at Hendon, the 10. of April. 1619. Your Honors in all service
ready to be commanded, IO. NORDEN.

A most necessary and patheticall MEDITATION and CONFESSION of man's miserable
estate by nature: And of his restoration by the death of Christ; with many
necessary Petitions concerning this life, and a happy death, fit for men of
whatsoever estate or quality often to ruminate.
IDoe acknowledge and confess unto thee, most merciful God, and loving
Father, that I am in thy sight, a most miserable and wretched sinner, as well by
the original corruption of my nature, as by the continual course of my
sinful life, wherein (I cannot but confess) I daily transgress and break
thy most holy Commandments. The thoughts of my heart are only evil evermore;
The words of my mouth are often profane, and all mine actions evil, whereby I
acknowledge my self, to have worthily deserved thy fierce and just
indignation, and consequently, mine own fearful condemnation. And were it
not that thou art a God most merciful and truly gracious, full of compassion,
forbearing long to punish sinners, I had perished through thy just judgment
long agone, even in my youth; for, as soon as I was able to speak, though
understanding little, I endeavored to excuse my childly errors with untruths,
falsehood, and lying; growing to man's estate, and to the ability to act greater
sins, I omitted no one forbidden vanity offered to any of my senses, but
greedily embraced it; and as I increased in years, and in strength to sin,
so did I increase in committing wickedness; neither reuerencing thee, nor
seeking to know thee, or to obey thee according to my duty, but rebelled
against thee and thy Laws, as if thy threats against sin and sinners, had
been only to terrify and not to punish them: And thy promises of spiritual
comforts and future happiness, had been only to withdraw me from my carnal
delights (wherein I reposed all my felicity) persuading my self there was no
danger in sin, nor reward for well-doing.

Thus foolish was I, and ignorant by nature, showing that I had no original
goodness in me, but corrupt in my conception, sinful in my birth, and wicked
in my life; and consequently, the child of wrath.

This mass of misery befell me by the fall of the first man ADAM, in whom I
was first good, and pure, and righteous, and holy, like unto thee, O God of
heaven: And had not Adam defaced that Image of sanctity in himself, I should
have remained holy, as thou art holy for ever. But by his disobedience I lost
in him all obedience toward thee, and became a Rebel like unto him, even in
his loins, for, in him I was conceived in sin, and through the corruption of
that my conception, I only bring forth iniquity.

Being thus miserably cast down from glory to shame, from light to
darkness, from sanctity to sin, from Heaven to Hell; to whom shall I appeal
for relief? whose aid shall I crave for the obtaining of thy favor and love
again? for, being deprived of thee, I am dead, being alive: if I die without
thee, I die eternally: But, Lord, now I know thee, and whom thou have sent,
JESUS CHRIST; and I know, that in thy severe justice through him, thou
remembrest mercy; and in thy fierce wrath, thou show compassion, which in
nothing appears so much, as in the performance of thy promise in sending thy
Son, the Seed of the Woman, who according to thy Covenant has conquered
Satan, and trodden down the Serpent, by whom our first Parents were inuenomed
and stung unto death, and I in them: But now in and by that sacred Seed Jesus
Christ, that poisonous sting is removed, and all believers restored to life:
Therefore, Lord Jesus, thou Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the
world, have mercy upon me, take away my sins, wash me and make me clean,
through thy blood, from all my filthiness, give me a lively faith to take hold
of thy merits, and to depend upon thy promises of salvation: And that I may
apply thy salutarie death unto my sick and diseased soul, wounded by the dart
of sin, and guilt of disobedience; set thy righteousness against my sins;
and thine obedience, to my disobedience, cover me with the Robe of thine own
Innocence, that the foulness of my deseruings may be hidden from mine
highly-offended God, who by promise will impute thy most absolute integrity to
be mine, as he imputed and laid all the sins of Adams posterity upon thee, as
thine.

Lord, now at the last, lighten mine understanding, purify my heart, sanctify
my will, order all mine affections, and actions, and rectify so my
conversation, as I may walk as thy truly adopted son, in holiness and true
righteousness, and be kept ever blameless, until the glorious appearing of
Christ my Savior, in whose name I now come unto thee, most loving and
merciful Father, beseeching thee for his sake, that I, feeling and confessing
the heinousness of my sins past, and groaning under the burden of them, may
feel the release and ease of them, in that I, through thy holy Spirit am
assured and steadfastly do believe, that CHRIST my most loving Redeemer, has
borne the burden of them, even for me. Grant, dear Father, that I being
assured hereof in my conscience, may be renewed in the inner man, through thy
grace, that I may hate, detest, and abhor sin, and endeavor to live according
to thy will all the days of my life.

And for as much, gracious Lord God, as I must here continue, during thine
appointed time, in this dangerous wilderness of many vanities, subject to many
troubles, tried with many temptations, and compassed with many and infinite
miseries and dangers: having of my self no succor, no defense, no safety,
but in thine alone favor, power, and providence, I humbly pray and beseech
thee, O merciful Lord God, to look down from heaven upon me, in mercy and
loving kindness: Show me thy ways, teach me thy paths, lead me ever in
thy Truth, and instruct me in the things that I ought to learn, and learn me
how to practice, and to lead my life according unto the same, lest I follow
vanities, and delight in sin; lest I fall into troubles, and there be none
to deliver me; lest Satan prevail against me, and I fall from thee; and lest
I fall into dangers, and perish in my miseries.

Turn thy face toward me, O Lord, and cheer me with the brightness of thine
amiable countenance, for when thou turnest thy face from me, I faint; and when
thou hidest thy countenance, I fall fearfully. As long as thou art with me, I
am safe; when thou leauest me, then troubles afflict me, enemies insult me,
and triumph over me; I am then subject to all miseries: Satan with his
temptations prevails, my corrupt affections misleade me, the world with
vanities distract me, and I am not able to look up, my heart is cast down, my
mind is estranged from all goodness, and my will is carried into all forbidden
things. So that I am as a dead man, or rather no man, but the mere image of a
man, in whom dwells neither right reason nor humane understanding, a beast in
thy sight.

Hide not therefore thy face from me, O Lord, nor cast thy servant away in
displeasure. Thou have been ever, and in all things, my succor, leave me not
now, O Lord, nor forsake me, O God of my salvation: But continue thy love and
favor toward me, that I may again recover my spiritual strength, and be
enabled to serve thee with a faithful, constant, and obedient heart, unto the
end.

In my necessity furnish me, O Lord, with all competent means for the
maintenance of my present life and estate here, in plen tie make me truly
thankful, in want patient, in sickness be thou my Physician and heal me,
and prevent Satan, that he in the time of my final visitation over charge me
not, laying before the eyes of my weak conscience, my sins past; but arm me
with the assurance of thy mercies, and with a lively hope of future glory with
thee in the heavens. If enemies rise up against me to take away my life, my
goods, or good name, preuc^t them of their purposes, and make their counsels
and practices like Achitophels. If I be persecuted for the testimony of thy
Truth, give me perfect knowledge, constancy, courage, and boldness, through
a lively faith, to suffer what it shall please thee shall be laid upon me; In
captivity, banishment, and whatsoever other trials, be thou ever near unto
me, and ease me, relieve me and comfort me, and never lay more upon me then I
shall be able to bear; and in my troubles never leave me, nor for sake me, and
let all things work for my comfort in thee.

Bless and prosper unto me my vocation, give me wisdom and strength to
execute the same, and that sincerely without corruption: let thine holy Angels
go with me, take charge of me, and defend and prosper me in all my iourneys,
travails, labors, enterprises, and endeavors: And let my conversation be
such, so upright, and unblameable, that the wicked have no just cause to carpe
at the course of my life. So will I give thanks unto thee, thy praise shall be
in my mouth continually. The godly shall see it and rejoice: and I will publish
thy goodness toward me, before the sons of men; and will tell how ready thou
art, to help them that call upon thee: as for me I will confess that before I
sought thee, thou offeredst thy self to be found of me; when I prayed unto
thee, thou heardest me; when I came unto thee, thou reiectedst me not, but
pardonedst my sins, and deliueredst me out of all my fear.

Glory be to thy Holy Name, O gracious Lord God, in Jesus Christ: and thy
Name be ever glorified, my heart in thee comforted, my sins by thee covered,
my necessities by thee truly relieved, a competent estate unto me by thee ever
preserved, my hope in thee ever confirmed, and all mine undeserved enemies
converted, or confounded.

Make me wise, O Lord, to understand and consider my latter end, let my whole
life be a preparation to death; and the meditation of death, the rule of my
life: let me study to bring forth good fruits in mine age, and let my latter
days be the days of my chief spiritual comfort, and mine obedience unto
thee, more at the last then at the first, enable me so to walk in mine old
age, as I may increase from strength to strength, that at the length I may
appear with the rest of thy Saints, in that Kingdom of glory, which thou have
prepared for all them that love the appearing of thy Son our Lord Jesus
Christ, whose coming grant to be quickly, to finish these days of sin.

AMEN.
Lord evermore increase my faith, and multiply thy blessings upon me unto the
end.
An eye to Heaven in Earth. A necessary Watch for the time of death.
MEDITATION I.
A Meditation concerning Death.
IT is a thing not seldom coming into my mind that I must die, and that I have
but a short time to live: and that the Time, Death certain, the time
uncertain.
when; the Place, where; and the Manner, how I shall dye, is utterly unknown
unto me: And that I shall come unto Judgment, for all that I have done, or
shall do in the flesh.

These things I know, yet have I not learned what it is to die. To die, all men
know, is the separation of the soul from the body: but what the soul and the
body feel at the instant of separation, may be coniectured, but never uttered
or conceived.

I see men of all ages die, and that by sundry kinds of death, and no doubt,
there is great difference of pains to the body, for every death is not alike
tolerable, nor every humane creature of like resolution and patience, which may
something extenuate or aggrauate the pain. And, no doubt, there is likewise
great difference of the joy or grief of souls departing, for according to the
life and death of the party, so is the soul in hope or horror, at the instant
of separation: for the Angels Luke 16. 22.
of God, or Satan, do attend the instant of time, to receive it, and to
transport it to it place of divine appointment; and therefore is it sensible of
present succeeding joy or pain; but in what degree of either, either has,
never any dying, by whatsoever death, returned to declare it.

As touching the future joy and pain, the rich man Future joy, and pain in
the extreme degree.
and Lazarus do in part show, both in the extreme degree, and so unspeakable,
as they cannot be truly conceived nor expressed. And whether the soul be
sensible of any earthly or material thing, in it passage from the body to it
place (as some without warrant have dreamed) is needless to dispute; yet thus
far I am bold to affirm, That the spiritual apprehension of the place
whither it passes, swalloweth up all sense, affection, and desire of visible
creatures.

I leave therefore to inquire and search into that which is no further
reueiled, then I have warrant to believe, and do only desire to be prepared,
and to be ready when the time of my separation shall come. A conflict, no
doubt, I shall feel in the approaching of death, between my body which is
earthly, and my soul which is spiritual; howsoever, notwithstanding, they
differ in condition, yet they are lovingly linckt together, and Body and Soul
lovingly lin^kt.
therefore, undoubtedly, unwilling to be sundred: How, and whatsoever I feel,
it shall be unto me (as is death it self) advantage.

It cannot be avoided but a divorce must be, as testifies the holy Ghost: It
is appointed that all men Heb. 9. 27.
shall die once. There is the separation, and that but once. It is not with the
Soul and the Body, as it is between Man and Wife, who may admit a divorce,
and yet be conjoined again: So cannot the soul, once severed from the body,
unless by special miracle, as was that, that Christ wrought upon dead
Lazarus; who, though he had been so long dead, as Job. 11.
he stunke in the grave, yet Christ, by virtue of his Word, which was God,
raised Io. 1. 1.
him, soul and body; so that he may be said to die twice; which was an
extraordinary miracle to show the glory of God; as was also that of the
Rulers daughter, whom Christ Matt. 9. 25.
made to live being dead: This was by the power of the great Prophet. And both
Eliah and Elisha did the same thing by the power of the same GOD. 1. King. 17.
22.
The first, in giving life to the dead son of the Widow of Sarepthah: the
other, to the son of the 2. Kin. 4. 35 Dying twice.
Shunamite Woman; these may be also said to die twice. But has any man
learned by their relations what it is to die? Or may a man by their examples
presume, that though he die, he may yet revive again, as did the Soldier
cast into Elishaes grave? 2. King. 13. 21.
And so by often dying, learn to die better? No, it is neither permitted nor
necessary, to foreknow Not necessary to know the hour of death.
the moment of our natural death: for, the hour wherein are many minutes, and
the minute wherein are many moments, as touching natural death, are equally as
uncertain to man, as is the Hour, the Day, the Week, the Month, the Year,
of Christ's Time of the last Judgment unknown.
coming to Judgment, which, that he will come, is as certain as death: but,
as touching the time of the co^summation of al things, Christ, as he was man,
Mar. 13. 32
confessed, he knew not the time, yet was no earthly thing hid from him, no not
the thoughts of men. But that Day is concealed in the general, as the hour of
man's death in particular; only to make us, and to keep us in such a continual
obedience, as if death should suddenly steal upon us, we may be ready to
embrace him, in what manner soever he should execute his severity upon us.

Whereby I learn, that, as I tender mine own safety: So I should prepare me
for that, and to that, which come it sooner or later, cannot be avoided.

It is then the principal point of divine Wisdom, to learn and to practice
to live well: for without a godly life, I cannot willingly A good life must
precede a happy death.
and comfortably embrace death, which can never be evil, if a good life have
gone before. As I shall dye, so shall I rise: If I dye justified, I shall rise
to be glorified.

To live well, as some account it, wealthily; is not well. And to dye rich, is
not to dye righteous; for so should the rich Glutton have been carried into
Abraham's bosom, with, Luke 16. 22. 23.
or before poor Lazarus.

The condition of worldlings, no doubt, is glorious, were it good and pleasant,
were it truly profitable. It is high in conceit, but not as it is taken, true
happiness. It is no higher then the Eye can see: It consists but of the
Earth and earthly things. The Swine thinks his condition happy, yet only
noozels in the Earth, for Apples and Acornes, never looking to the Tree from
whence they fall: So do Worldlings wallow in all carnal care, how to become
great and glorious in this life: seldom or never Difference between Gods
children and worldlings
looking up, with the Eye of Faith to him, from whom and from none else comes
the riches that makes a man blessedly happy. Contrary, is the condition of
the Child of God, who loves God in fear, and fears him in love: accepting
every small gift as a great measure of his bounty: resting content with
whatsoever God will vouchsafe to bestow on him, living in the world but dead to
the World, following with diligence and truth, his Vocation, be it never so
base and contemptible; receiving with thankfulness to GOD, whatsoever he
enjoys in this life, not setting his affection upon that which the World
loves, but affects whatsoever he has for his sake that gives it, having
the Eye of his sanctified Soul always, and in all things in prosperity, in
adversity, in health, in sickness, in peace and persecution, in fullness and
in want, and is always conversant (as it were) in Heaven, desiring to be
dissolved, Phil. 1.
to be with Christ. These are the pleasures of that life that precedes a
happy death.

My desire therefore, A Christian resolution.
and continual endeavor shall be to learn, and my care to practice the life
and conversation of a lively Christian, in continual filial obedience, not
after the flesh in show only, but after the Spirit in Truth; not for the body
only, as does the beast that perishes, but for the Soul, which being safe,
the body cannot finally perish; and safe I cannot be in soul or body,
unless I live in Christ, and Christ Gal. 2. 20.
in me: for I now find that, as long as I lived without Christ, I did but live
in show, as the Angel of Sardis, Reave. 3. 1.
who had the name to live, but yet was dead: so I, though I lived and breathed,
and had a natural being, yet was I dead spiritually without him, as the wanton
Widow, that was 1. Tim. (...).
dead while she lived. But by the Spirit of Christ, I am now again made alive,
desiring to live in him; he is life in deed: to walk in him, he is the true
way indeed, John 14. 6.
and to believe in him, he is truth in deed.

My former learning to live was in carnal liberty, What it is to live
carnally.
which I now find to be but foolishness, falsehood and deceit. I now seek to
learn to live according unto Christ, though late, though it be the very
evening of my day being called unto, and if I do persevere in my labor,
according unto my duty, I doubt not but to receive my penny, as well as if I
had Matt. 20. 9.
carried the burden of the whole day of my life: for, he that calls me into
his Vineyard, is truly bountiful, and respects not the God is bountiful
without our merit.
quantity, but the quality of my work: not how much I do, but how well and
willingly I do it, for, he rewards none for merit but in mercy. And now
finding my self, to be, not only in the way, but near unto the end of my day,
I desire so to finish it, as I may live in him unto the end, that is life
eternal: that as he is eternal, I, beginning here to live in him, I may live
eternally with him, in Heaven after this death. And therefore I do heartily
abhor the life that I have led without him, desiring now a right
preparation, so to lay down this mortal body, as it may be taken up and
raised by the virtue of Christ's Resurrection, at the coming of him in the
Clouds: and in the mean season I desire so to walk in my spiritual part, as
in his time also he may again receive it, that gave it: for, I know that if
my 2. Cor. 5. 1, 2
earthly house be destroyed, I have a building of God, an house not made with
hands, but eternal in the Heavens. And through the mercy of God in Christ, I
shall then remain for ever in Abraham's Luke 16. 23
bosom, the Paradise of God, a new and spiritual Jerusalem.

I confess, I ground not Our merit Gods mercies.
mine assurance of my future blessedness, upon any worthiness or merit of
mine own, whose merits I acknowledge Gods mercies. Therefore (being dissolved)
I believe not, that the Prayers of friends, or mediation of Saints or Angels,
or any Missall Sacrifice, after my soul has left my body, can avail me any
thing. But do contrarily believe Post-Prayers, to be merely fruitless, if
not sinful, the intercessions of Saints or Angels to be needless, if 1. Tim.
2. 5.
not fabulous. I only rely upon the All-sufficient Sacrifice of the blood of
Jesus Christ, shed upon the Cross for me, and his merit and mediation to be
mine only atonement with God for my sins being living, and through his power
my soul to be transported to glory, my body being dead, from whence neither
sin nor Satan, principalities nor powers shall be able to remove Reave. 3. 11.
me, nor to take me out of my Redeemers hands. Glory therefore be unto God
in Jesus Christ, who has delivered me from Col. 2. 15.
the power of Satan, Death, and Hell.

This mine assurance gives me peace in Christ, yet do I withal feel
another law within me, stirring me up, or rather casting me down into
sundry corrupt motions, tending to sin: and did not God assist me with his
Grace, I could not but fall back, and run the way wherein I walked before I
was called: and to that end Satan cease not to apply all his malice, and
means, to allure me to Satan's policies.
do those things I should not do; taking advantage of my corrupt inclination,
and to hinder me from doing those things I should do: besetting me with many
fears, as first of Death that is every hour ready to seize upon me. Secondly,
by laying my sins before the eyes of my guilty conscience, and lastly, the
dark and ougly grave, that gapes to swallow up my fleshly part.

But what of these? No need to fear Satan. Job. 26.
should I be afraid of them? no, Satan himself, I know is chained, and the
execution of his malice limited: and beyond the compass and extent of divine
permission he can not do. And he that keeps the house of my soul, is that
absolute strong man, that has already conquered Matt. 12. 29
him in me, and for me, and has redeemed me out of his power: my ransom is
paid, and I am become a freeman in Christ; who, although he leave me Job. 7. 1.
for a time, here in a warfare against many enemies, and many kinds of
adversaries, of whom I may receive some stripes, sometimes wounds, and many
foyles: yet shall I never be overcome, nor fall finally, for he that fights
for me, has chosen me, whose election is sure: for whom he once receives,
he loves to the end. And therefore I Romans 8. 33. 34. 1. Job. 2. 10. Job. 10.
28.
know that under his power and protection, I shall maintain that good fight of
faith, until I have subjected all mine enemies, and at length be renewed, and
enjoy his full presence by whom I have gotten the victory. Then who shall
Romans 8. 34.
lay any thing to my charge? Or who shall condemn me? It is Christ which is
dead, yea rather which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God,
and makes request even for me. And where the judge of Judges iustifies, no
inferior judgment may condemn. But I am so far, both from cause The
Christians hum blenesse.
or conceit to justify my self, as I acknowledge my sins so great, and my
well-doing so weak, as I utterly condemn my self, worthy not only of infinite
stripes, but of eternal death; yet I have hope, for he that is Truth it
self, has promised mercy to penitent sinners, among whom I acknowledge my
self the greatest: Yet I Psalm. 145. 9
know his mercy and goodness to be greater, whose manifold mercies showed
unto others confirms my assurance, that my sins Gods mer cies greater then
our sins
(great as they are) are not only pardonable, but already pardoned in Christ,
his beloved, and my souls best beloved: On him I fix the eye of my soul in
faith; from his virtue I receive, the most salutarie oil of grace, whereby I
am cured of all my death, bringing diseases: And from whom and by whom, I have
tasted such an heavenly antidote, that hereafter, none of Satan's poisonous
confections shall re-inuenime my spiritual part. He may take and tread on my
heel: But I shall trample on his head, through the power of that great
conqueror. And therefore The assurance of a good Christian.
though his principal and chief Champion Death, take me and bind me hand and
foot: I shall break his cords, as easily as Samson did his. If he cast Judge.
15. 14
me bound into the grave, cover me with dust, and fill my mouth with clay, shut
mine eyes, bereave me of my senses, and send me into utter oblivion, out of
the sight of all my natural friends, I shall rise and come Job. 19. 27.
forth again, I shall see again, even with these eyes, and in despite of all
his despite, receive a far greater strength the^ death can bereave me of
here; and am assured, that neither death nor the grave shall retain me under
their power, for ever. But as there There is a sowing time, and reaping time of
bodies.
is a sowing time of bodies in the earth, so shall there come a reaping of
them, when they shall be carried into the Garner of everlasting glory.
Therefore I do not only not fear this death, this bodies dissolution, but
desire it rather when it shall please him, that gave me my life, to take it
again. For, I am not ignorant, that it was but lent me at the first, as a Life
but lent us.
pledge of a better life after this death: And therefore shall I most willingly
restore it, when it shall be required.

Christ my Savior was once among the dead. But his death, is my life, as to
Christ's death a Christians life.
all also that believe. By his death he conquered death: And by his rising
again, made way for me and them also to ascend, where he is ascended,
namely, into the highest heavens, into the bosom of his Father, and my Father
and their Father, and there remains in our flesh glorified, holding the
possession of that heavenly Kingdom in the name of, and for all his members.
Should I then or need I to be afraid to lay down this my mortal body, also
among the dead for a time? My Savior lay three days in the Grave, and rose the
third. If I lie three thousand years, it is but as three days, for with him a
2. Pet. 3. 8.
thousand years are but as one day: And therefore, as sure as he rose in
three days; So, in time, though it be according to the Suns reuolutio^ after
many years, yet I shall find no tedious tarying, for the accomplishment The
body finds no tedious tarrying in the grave.
of his promise, touching my resurrection: for, the uttermost of this temporal
death, is but the separation of the soul from the body, which lasts but for
a season finite, and after, they shall meet again for a time infinite and
without time. And what is the Grave, The grave a bed of rest.
but a bed to rest me in? A place of protection, as it were, to free my mortal
body, from danger, from sickness, from labor, and carke, and care, and fear,
and grief, and enuies, and crosses, and sin? Blessed Reave. 14. 13
are they that die in the Lord: for they rest from their labors, and all
inconveniences. It is not so with all such as die: not so with them that die,
but not in Christ, whose labors do then but begin.

What then is death, but Death a sleep.
a sleep, out of which, I know, I shall awake again in the most glorious
morning Mar. 9. 44.
of the most joyful appearing of my Redeemer in the clouds?

This death then carries Death in show more fearful then in deed.
a name far more fearful and more terrible, then indeed it is: rather to
be desired, and willingly to be embraced, then to be feared or fled from,
especially of them that truly understand the benefit it brings; and the
discommodities that accompany men in this life, especially living after the
flesh, and not after the Spirit. Romans 2. 5.


As there is a natural and a Spiritual death, so is A spiritual and carnal
life here.
there a Spiritual life and a carnal life, and that in this Pilgrimage or
Passage from birth to buryall, the first cannot be properly called a natural,
but a spiritual life, though it partake of both. The Bondwoman and her seed
must awhile remain with the Freewoman and her son the earthly body, and the
corruption thereof, with the heavenly soul. Though the fleshly part be here
maintained by natural means, as by the air wherein I breathe and move, and
by food which nourishes blood the vital spirits and outward members visible
to men: yet in the same house of clay, there is a spiritual and an invisible
life which is nourished in a more divine manner, not by bread that perishes,
but by the word of God, which works faith the life of the soul, which
feeds on things that are above, and not on things of the earth. And therefore
does the Spirit of God for instruction, lay down before the sons of men, the
fruits Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21.
both of the one and of the other, of the flesh and of the spirit (which are
contrary one to the other) to show what bitter fiuits proceed of the flesh,
to move man to fly them; and the sweet fruits of the Spirit, to allure us to
follow them.

The fruits of the flesh Gal. 5. 19, 20.
(says Saint PAVL) are manifest; (meaning indeed too common) which are
Adultery, Fruits of the flesh.
Fornication, Uncleanness, Wantonness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Debate,
Emulations, Wrath, Contentions, Seditions, Heresies, Envy, Murder,
Drunkenness, Gluttony, and such like: affirming also, that they that do such
things shall not inherit the Kingdom of heaven.

A fearful conclusion against those only, that with delight commit them, for
that they are so contrary to the Law of the Spirit, which produces Love, Joy,
Peace, Long suffering, Fruits of the Spirit.
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance; against such there is
no Law.

But here arises, and I do apprehend a fearful fallacy, to lie hidden in
the performance of these spiritual works: for as I may flatter my self to
be spiritual, and yet be more carnal; so may I censure a man carnal that is
more spiritual: for the performance of these spiritual works, as it were,
literally and in outward show, is mere carnalitie, ostentation, tending to
Pharisaicall glory: and better fruits proceed not from me by nature, then to
seem, what Counterfeit imitation of good men.
indeed I am not, sincere and pure, religious and holy, counterfaiting the
works of the Spirit, by a kind of outward imitation of men indeed truly
sanctified. And above all other sins, this, which is hypocrisy, is most to be
condemned, for Hypocrisy most to be condemned.
that it deceiues not only other men, but the counterfeit himself. But being
indeed endued with the quickening Spirit, which causes me to die unto the
world, and the vainglory thereof; then shall I inwardly and spiritually live
unto God; and the works that I shall do, shall witness unto men that I
dissemble not with God; yet when I find my self most and best inclined to
spiritual actions, I find and feel again and again the buffets of my
corrupt nature Romans 7. 16.
wresting me to the contrary: what shall I then say? do I good, because I
will do good? and do I not evil, because I will not do evil? nothing less;
for, my will is no further How Will is free and not free.
free to do that which is good, then it is made free by the grace of God. And
again, my will is so far prone to evil, by how much I am not prevented by
grace. To every good work God gives the will and the deed; and evil is
always present with me. Therefore I in part desire, and in part fear to die,
yet I must die.

Forasmuch therefore, as I know I shall die, and that the way to die well, is
first to live well, which is not in my own power, I must seek the means of
God: and therefore it behooves me to be much conversant in his Word, wherein
the way is described, and the means prescribed, and yet not understood by
natural wisdom, but by the Spirit of God which reueileth the same; therefore
ought I to ask wisdom of him that is wisdom 1. Cor. 2. 10.
it self, who wills me to ask, and I shall receive Mat. 7. 7, 8
wisdom; to seek, and I shall find grace; to knock, and he will open the
door of divine knowledge; how to walk in the way of a godly life, the true and
perfect preparation to a happy death: and this death is the gate of eternal
life: To ask, seek Prayer.
and knock, imports prayer; and prayer, an inward hearty desire to obtain
that at the hands of God, which I by no other means can obtain: and this by a
Psalm. 25. 1, 2 and 86. 4.
fervent, firm, and constant assurance, that GOD, to whom I pray, will grant
my request in the merits and mediation of his Son; so that I need not doubt,
but that if I ask spiritual things spiritually, and waver Iam. 1. 6, 7.
not in my Faith, I shall obtain grace, so to walk in this life, as I shall
not fear to die, but with cheerful alacrity embrace it, when it offers it
self unto me: therefore will I open my mouth unto him that has promised to
fill it, I will address my heart to him that can and will direct it, and so
present my prayers before his mercies Seat, prostrate upon the knees of mine
unfeigned heart, and he will hear me and save me.

A Prayer for a godly life, and a happy death. The Prayer.
O Gracions and most loving Lord God in Jesus Christ, the fountain of Life,
and the Disposer of the same by death, how, where, or when it shall best please
thee, ever for the best to them that love thy name. I cannot but confess and
acknowledge, that death cannot but be fearful, if a godly life go not before.
O what a terror therefore befalls me, O Lord, through the consideration and
calling to mind the former course of my most corrupt and sinful life? How can
I but fear to be dissolved, when I think of and call thy judgments into my
mind, and that hell and destruction attends the death of the wicked, but the
righteous shall be glad in thee, and trust in thee, and all the upright in
heart shall rejoice, to whom death shall be great advantage.

Let it therefore please thee, O my most gracious God and loving Father, to
remember thy mercies, and in the multitude of them put away and cleanse me of
all my sins, and so reform me, that henceforth I may walk before thee and
be upright.

I am a man void of counsel, neither is there any understanding in me: I am
not sufficient of my self, so much as to think a good thought, but my
sufficiency is of thee. Therefore teach me thy way, O Lord, that I may
henceforth walk in thy truth. Knit my heart unto thee, that I may fear thy
name, make my heart upright in thy Statutes, for, thou Lord, have pleasure in
righteousness, and he is blessed, in whose heart are thy ways.

Grant therefore, gracious Lord, that according to the riches of thy grace, I
may be strengthened by the Spirit of the inward Man, that CHRIST may dwell in my
heart by faith, and so my whole spirit, soul and body, may be kept
blameless, to the coming of the Lord Jesus.

And if I have found favor in thy sight, show me thy way, that I may know
thee, and may walk from henceforth all the days of my life, in a sincere and
sanctified conversation, and take away the veil wherewith my mind is covered,
that I may behold thy glory, and be changed into the same Image by thy Spirit.

It is thou only that give wisdom, and out of thy mouth proceeds knowledge
and understanding: therefore, Make me more and more to abound in knowledge and
all judgment, that I may discern between good and evil; and be kept pure
and without offense, until the final dissolution of this my mortal body,
filled with the fruits of Righteousness which are by Jesus Christ unto the
praise and glory of God.

Let me not, good Father, be given over to the lust of my Adversary, nor to
mine own corrupt hearts desire, that iniquity should have dominion over me^;
but make me perfect to every good work, who workest in thy Children both the
will and the deed.

O Lord, teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God: make my heart constant,
and ever keep it unblameable before thee in holiness, that I may serve thee in all holy duties with a good conscience, and may walk before thee in truth, and
with a perfect heart, doing that which is good in thy sight.

Let thy peace, which passes all understanding, preserve my heart and mind in
Jesus Christ, even to the end and in the end; yea, even when the Messengers and
pangs of death shall take hold on me, even then support me, that Satan with his
malicious suggestions, and infernal temptations, prevail not against me, in
laying before the eyes of my guilty conscience, the ugliness of my sins
past, or by drawing my mind into any forbidden thought or desire.

Draw me out of the net that he privily lays to catch my soul in, break it
for me, for thou art my strength, make haste to deliver me and save me: for,
My soul is filled with Psalm. 89. 48
evils, and my life draws near unto the grave. And what man lives and shall
not see death?

Seeing then, dear Father, I am appointed to die, and that death cannot be
comfortable unto me when it comes, unless a godly life go before: prepare
my heart, O Lord, prepare it to a holy conversation, and a joyful and gladsome
resolution, that I may lay down this mortal body of miue in the dust, whence
it was taken and made, and to surrender my soul with all heavenly alacrity
into thine hands that gave it. And when the snares of death, and the terrors
of the grave take hold of me, then Lord, let me find favor with thee in
Christ my Redeemer, in whom I beseech thee to deliver my soul. Amen.

Lord, ever increase and confirm my faith.
MEDITAT. II.
NOw then, I having by the grace of God, in some measure, learned to live, and
to know I shall dye: what remains, but that I Luke 12. 39 Iam. 4. 13.
look for the day, and attend the hour, not knowing when it will come? And
therefore to be always ready: having also (through Christ,) received 2. Cor.
5. 6.
the spirit of boldness, to remove out of this body, to be with the Lord.
This boldness, I confess, I have not of my self, it is the gift of God, who
in the beginning made me to his Image, without spot; but spotted before I was
borne, by him that was once without spot, whose fault is now by imputation,
nay, by action mine: whereby I bringing sin and corruption into the World
with me, have deeply defiled my self, by like actual disobedience, and
therefore may justly fear the face of that severe and just Judge; especially
having so many, and so strong Adversaries; Satan with his principalities Col.
2. 10.
and powers, and spiritual wickedness, a million of sins, and a guilty
conscience; besides the horrors of Death and the Grave, enough to cast my
sinful soul into utter destruction, were there not a power above his power
and principalities, to subdue his.

I thank God in Christ, I have been taught, and I know that the seed of the
Col. 2. 15.
woman has subdued Satan, led him and all his powers, principalities, and
spiritual wickedness captive, triumphing over him and them upon the Cross,
making a show of them openly. And this I am not only taught to know, but I
believe the same, steadfastly: Lord, strengthen my belief.

As for my siunes past, I fear them not: for Christ suffered for them once,
the just for the unjust, to bring me to God. As touching death: I knew that my
Redeemer The benefit of Christ's death.
lives, and he has taken away the sting thereof; and made a way for me
through the grave to come unto glory: through the valley of death, to pass
until I come to the Lord my God in Sion.

I cannot yet but confess, that notwithstanding my boldness, I feel many
wauerings, I am not at all times alike bold, but often tremble at the
consideration of death, because I have had no experience of the terror
thereof: and therefore though the Spirit be willing, my flesh is weak. But I
am so much the more strengthened, by how much I do consider, that even the
dearest of Gods The best men often stagger at the consideration of death.
Children have sometimes staggered at the consideration of death: Saint Paul
himself confesses, that he had fightings without, and terrors within. Peter
for Ioh. 18. 17.
fear of death denied his Master. And our Savior Christ, being lest unto his
manhood, wished (though contrarily resolved) that the Cup of the Cross might
Mat. 26. 39
pass, and that he might not drink of it.

Death comes with an ugly and fearful countenance to all, but especially, to
them that have their consolation here. Death, Ecclus. 41. 1
nay, the remembrance of death (as the Wiseman affirms) is better to him,
that has the wealth, the pleasures, and happiness of this life. And unless
the Lord by his grace support and sustain the best man, he will fear and
faint at the approaching of death. Therefore will I make my prayer unto God in
Christ, to give me strength, and an holy resolution, to embrace death when it
shall come.

A Prayer against the fear of death, fit to be said at all times, especially
in sickness. The Prayer.
O Lord my God, and gracious Father in Jesus Christ, who have formed me of the
dust of the Earth: and by thy Spirit made me a living soul in a mortal body:
Give me grace continually to remember my mortality, how I am borne to dye, and
that after death I shall come to Judgment, yet have thou hidden the time when,
the place where, and the manner how I shall dye, from me, all known to thee.

Teach me therefore, Gracious Father, teach me so to number my days, as to
consider, that the more they increase in number, so much the nearer I draw to
the time of my dissolution: therefore give me wisdom and a heart, whereby I
may apply me thereunto, that I may be at all times, and in all places,
watchful and ready to embrace the coming of that, which I cannot avoid.

Let me not rest secure in health, nor be dismayde in sickness; but let my
heart be ever set on the things that are; where I desire, and hope to come:
and not on the things which I see, and partake herein this life.

Teach me thy ways, instruct me in thy Laws, give me a repe^ting heart, a
sanctified spirit, that I may walk here before thee, and here do thy will, as
thy Saints and heavenly Companies do thy will in Heaven: that in this earthly
Pilgrimage I may be numbered among thy Saints Militant, that I may not fear to
be translated from this place of banishment, unto that Inheritance purchased
by Christ my Redeemer: where I shall partake of his glory with thy Saints, now
Triumphant in that most glorious new Jerusalem.

While I live here, let thy Word be dear unto me, let the Cross of my Lord
and Savior Christ, be ever before the eyes of my mind, ever assuring my self,
that his death is my life: make me therefore holy, as he is holy. And as he
laid down his most sacred body in the Earth for a time, and rose again to
glory, and as he resigned his afflicted (yet innocent) Soul, into thy hands,
even for me to follow him: so grant that whenever or howsoever my soul shall
leave this mortal body, it may follow my Love Jesus, to the place to which
he is gone before.

While I live here, leave me not (Father) unto my self: for I am weak, and
mine enemies are strong, but thou art Truth, the strongest, keep me under thy
feathers, and bind me up in the bundle of thine Elect, never to be divided or
set apart from them that shall be saved: make my life perfect to every good
work, and work in me that which is pleasant in thy sight, through Jesus
Christ, Amen.

Lord, increase and ever confirm my faith.
MEDIT. III.
THough death, now be the end of my fleshly part, it is sufficient, that I am
assured of the continuing life of my soul, after the temporal death of my
body, which yet shall not so perish, but Body and soul shall be glorified.
it shall have a future being, and be reunited to my soul, and so be made
one glorified body, by the glory of Christ my Redeemer.

The present consideration of death, can therefore but put me in mind of, and
give me desire to be dissolved, to enjoy a better life. And thereby so much
the more move me to frame my life in my health, as if I were presently dying.

Death is certain, common to all, the time uncertain to all, yet all live not
as if their death were near, or that they did think that death would come at
all. But let no man deceive himself by his long life, that death is far off,
or that it has forgotten him; it will come as a Thief Death will come not
looked for.
suddenly, to some sooner, to some later; to all when they least suspect it.

In the first Age of the World, men lived long, many hundred years. Methusalah
Genesis 5. 25. verse 4.
almost one thousand years, Adam, Noah, Genesis 9. 29.
and many others, to an extraordinary age. In their days it might have been
conceived, by the number of their years, that they might have lived many
thousand years. But being all seen, in their times and turns to dye, the
opinion of a perpetual life in earth was found erroneous.

As the World grew in Decrease of men's ages.
age, so decreased the ages of men. In David's time the age of man was seldom
above threescore and ten; if he lived to fourscore, it was reputed a great
age and rare, yet nothing pleasant to the party; for weakness and infirmities
of so many kinds, commonly possess the bodies and minds of that age, as these
days are but a burden unto them, yielding only sorrow, heaviness, griefs and
miseries. And yet many of that decrepit age are loath to dye, which may argue no
godly preceding life.

Moses, before David's Deuteronomy. 34. 7.
time, lived one hundred and twenty years, and was then in that state of
strength, and agilitie of body, and perfection of his senses, as in his best
age, and strongest years; yet he dyed. Mine own natural father lived one
hundred and three years, lusty and strong; much admired for his agilitie, even
to that age: yet I do not by these precedents, collect any probability or
hope, that I shall live much more then half his years, though I presently
feel no apparent tokens (but desire) of my dissolution. And therefore I
account my life, but a mere watch for the time of death.

If I had seen the man that had lived many thousand years, and were yet in
health and strength, I should be far from flattering my self, that I Not to
depend on long life.
might live the longer for his long life: yet I see that one man couets to
attain unto the years of the most aged. The man of sixty, or seventy years
desires to live to eighty, he of eighty to one hundred, yet do we scarcely
see one man of ten thousand, to see one hundred, nor one of one hundred,
seventy years, nor one of fifty, forty years.

If I should live one hundred years, when death comes, it is but as if I were
in my Cradle. Twenty Time past short, in expectation long.
years in expectation, seems far more then one hundred years past.

I think it therefore wisdom, not to allow unto my self the assurance of
many years, not of many days, nay, not of one hour: for I see some suddenly
stricken dead, yea, in a moment: a fearful spectacle, Sudden death in others,
a fearful spectacle.
yet little moving some beholders. But this use, Wisdom teaches me to make
of other men's lots, namely, to keep continual watch over my desires, words
and ways, that I may so live, as if I saw Death with his Dart at my breast.

Death then being certain, and his coming uncertain, by the rule of right
reason, I should be always readily prepared, for Death imports fear; and
Fear presupposes danger; Danger requires watchfulness; Watchfulness,
patience; Patience, Faith and Hope.

As touching the first, namely, fear; it is both filial Fear. Mat. 14. 26 1.
Pet. 2. 17. 1. Ioh. 4. 18.
and son-like, and servile or slavish, which last I exempt, as not the fear
required of me in this expectation and watchfulnes for death. But the fear
which becomes a most dutiful son to a most loving father is it, wherewith I
desire always to be truly qualified, having an eye ever unto God, as the Col.
3. 22. Psalm. 33. 18
eye of a Maiden to the hand of her Mistress: fearing in love, not loving for
fear.

When Baruch read the book of the curses against Judah and Israel, unto the
people: both the good and the bad feared. Some Difference of fear.
fearing as children, desiring to be reformed according to the Law of the Lord;
some as slaves feared the horror of punishment threatened, without either the
love of God or their own reformation. This is not the fear that Solomon
prescribes, where he says; Fear ye the Lord, all his Saints, and depart from
evil. He that says he fears God, and walks not in his ways, fears not
at all, as he ought to fear, and that for want of The want of wisdom, the
want of fear. Hos. 14. 9.
Wisdom: for as wisdom is given to them that fear God, so does the fear
of God show it self by wisdom, namely, by governing his life according to
the Word of God.

Blessed is the man that Psalm. 128. 1.
fears the Lord, and walks in his ways. So that it is not in me, nor of
my self to fear God, I must be first blessed of God, before God must bless
us, before we can fear him.
I can truly fear him, then that fear being blessed and sanctified,
^restraynes me from sin, to walk in the ways of God: therefore I fear and
walk, because I am blessed: and not blessed, because I either fear or walk in
his ways: for, God by his blessing, which is his grace, gives me the will,
without which the deed cannot follow; so, both Romans 7. 18. Phil. 2. 13.
the will and the deed, the desire and the work, in me, are of God.

He that fears the Lord, will neither speak nor do evil, because both
speaking and doing good, comes from the fear of doing evil, which holy fear,
being Fear, the gift of God.
the gift of God, has great commendation in the Scripture. It is the beginning
of wisdom, says Psa. 111. 10
Solomon, and wisdom the end of all heavenly perfection, and tends not only
to restrain from evil, for fear of Gods Judgments, as it wrought in David,
when he said, My Psalm.
flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments: But to
retain me in the love and favor of God.

Job was reputed a just and upright man, because he feared God, and in fearing
God, he eschewed evil. Job 1. 1.
Satan himself confessed that God, preserved Job, and blessed all that he had,
for that he feared God.

The fear of God then is that true rule of wisdom, which directs unto a
godly life: and a godly life, an infallible forerunner of a happy death: and
to die in the Lord, is chiefest blessedness, Reu. 14. 13.
the passage from a miserable mortal, to a blessed immortal being.

This fear then, being the first step to a godly preparation to live well,
and to die blessed, is that true and most precious Iem and Jewel, which I
seek and desire to obtain at the hands of God, whose gift it is.

And therefore, according as Solomon has defined this fear of the Lord, I
will endeavor to abandon evil, and to abhor sin. David also teaches, and
I will desire to practice the same fear, in keeping my Psalm.
tongue from evil, and my lips, that they speak no guile. I will seek to
eschew evil, and to do good; to seek peace, Romans 12. 9.
and to follow it: for, Who has ever continued in the 1. These. 3. 15
fear of the Lord, and has been forsaken of him in life, or in death?

A Prayer for the fear of God, and wherein I may so live, as I may not be
afraid to die. The Prayer.
O Lord my God, who have made me and fashioned me of the dust of the earth,
and have breathed into me the breath of Life, here to travail upon the face of
the earth, during a time appointed by thy Providence, which I shall not pass,
for thou have set down the number of my days, which how many they shall be, I
am utterly ignorant; give me therefore a holy ^eare, that I may think every
day to be the day appointed for my death, that I may so much the more warily
walk in the ways of true wisdom, in a holy and sincere conversation, before
the sons of men, and in the sanctification of the inner man, lest I be found
more formal before men, then faithful in thee.

I beseech thee, hearken to the prayer of thy Servant, who desires unfeignedly
so to fear thee, as I may not fear or be afraid of death. Give me that holy
fear of thy Name, which thou have commanded, that I may not err from thy
ways, nor harden my heart from thy fear: for I know, that great is thy
goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee.

Knit my heart therefore unto thee, that I may fear thy Name, and may receive
grace to serve thee; so that I may so please thee with reverence and fear,
that I not only may not fear to die, but desire it rather, passing all the
time of my dwelling here, in continual meditation of thy future life,
sanctifying thee, the Lord God of Hosts, who art evermore my fear, for thou
only art able to kill, and to make alive; to cast down, and to raise up;
therefore art thou only to be feared, like unto whom there is none among all the
gods; so glorious in holiness, fearful in praises and doing wonders.

I thank thee, gracious Father in Jesus Christ, that in and by him I have
received the Spirit of re conciliation and adoption, whereby I am enabled to
cry, Abba Father; and am freed from the spirit of servile fear, from the
fear of Satan, by thy Spirit.

Though for a little while, O Lord, thou may seem to forsake me, and leave
me to the spirit of bondage, yet with great compassion, according to thy
wonted mercies, I find thee ever ready to receive me again: For a moment
thou hidest thy face from me, but with everlasting mercy thou will have
compassion upon me, and after this my mortality, receive me to eternity,
who art my Lord, my God, my strength and my Redeemer.

Lord, increase my fear of thee, my faith in thee, and love toward thee.
Amen.
MEDIT. IIII.
Watchfulness.
THE second point of my preparation, is, to be watchful, and that for three
especial causes.

The first, for that I have 1. Pet. 5. 8. 1.
an Adversary, who is maliciously watchful, therefore ought I to be
religiously watchful.

The second, because 2. Romans 14. 12.
death will steal suddenly upon me as a Thief.

The third, because of 3. Eccles. 12. 14. We must give account after death.
my general account, to which, I know, I shall be called, as soon as my soul
is gone from my body: if then I be not able to yield a ^ust reason, how I
have spent the time of my life here, I shall be cast into prison, never to be
redeemed.

First then, to apply my watchfulnes, to the watchfulness of mine enemy, it
behooves me ever to have an eye unto the thoughts, The heart the fountain of
al evil. Iere. 17. 9.
motions, and affections of my corrupt heart; for, from my heart proceed all
the evils, that by any part or member of my body, are actually committed: and
all the thoughts of my heart are evil evermore, Genesis 6. 5.
yet thence is my tongue moved to speak, how then can my words be holy,
proceeding from so polluted a fountain?

I am often violently carried, whither the thoughts of my heart do move me,
and am often incited to commit those things, howsoever evil, which my corrupt
heart has conceived. And mine enemy Satan, Satan watchful over our
inclinations as well as actions.
that thirsts for my confusion, takes advantage by the inclination of my
heart, manifested by mine accustomed actions, to frame his bayts according to
my corrupt appetite, coveting ever to draw actual evils out of the polluted
puddle of sin conceived in my heart.

This do I find by the experience of his long practice and infer^all
stratagems: for upon my committing of some sin, and Satan in his temptations
steals upon us.
heartily repenting the same with a resolution never to commit the like. I have,
as it were, sensibly felt and plainly observed, how by little and little, he
has endeavored to lay snares to draw me to the same evil, not as with a
violent hand, but as it were stealing upon me, like a flattering, and
deceitefull Thief, whose policies I have no power to prevent, but only by that
promise, which GOD made unto Paul, that his grace is sufficient for me, yet
does it much behooue me to take continual heed unto my ways: yea to the very
motions of my corrupt heart: for mine inward desires are not long hid from him,
who will never let slip the least show of whatsoever evil and profane
inclination: But as the fire is a little inkindled in and by mine own nature:
So is he ready with a thousand ministers, and impious means, to blow it, and
to bring it to an unquenchable flame of sinful actions.

Therefore, my hearty The watch of a Christian.
desire is, for the withstanding of his temptations, to practice whatsoever
things Phil. 4. 8.
are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever
things are pure, whatsoever things are worthy love, whatsoever things are of
good report, the practice of which things is true watchfulnes, most irksome and
most offensive to al mine enemies. Things true, Satan, the father of lies,
hates deadly; things honest, are contrary to mine own natural and carnal
inclination, which of it self delights in pleasure, in vanities, and all
kind of profaneness. Things of good report, the World indureth not, but
rather backe-biting and slandering.

This capital Adversary, the Devil, does not assail Satan encounters us not
alone.
me singly, nor alone: but commonly combines together with the World, and my
corrupt nature: then, as so many Captains, each of them with a band of
infernal Soldiers, the Devil with his angels powers, and principalities; the
Flesh with a thousand contagious cogitations, ungodly affections, and forbidden
vanities; and the World with a million of vexations set upon me.

A man having but one mortal enemy, will watchfully beware of him, either to
fly him, or be prepared with weapons sufficient to encounter him, though he
seek but to deprive the life of the body. How much more then behooves it me
to be watchful, having so many, and so mighty, and so mortal Adversaries,
that seek not only my bodily death, but the confusion also of my soul? and if
I be not armed with grace, the least of these will easily prevail against me.

There is nothing more Our corrupt inclinations advantage to Satan.
adua^tagious to these mine enemies, then mine own corrupt inclination, the
fruits whereof are as meat and drink unto mine Adversaries, which are the
works of darkness: therefore will I strive with an holy endeavor, to abandon
and cast off the works Ephesians. 5. 11.
of darkness, dear unto mine enemies, and to put on Tit. 2. 12.
the armor of light, which is unto them as death: I will Romans 13. 12
set mine affections on things that are above, and not on things that are on
the earth: I will avoid evil, and cleau^ Romans 12. 9.
unto that which is good.

Many venomous and viperous Though we be tempted, we shall not fall.
Serpents lurk in the way of this life: to escape their poison in practice, I
look not, but to resist their power, I doubt not, for the Lord is my strength,
to whom I will fly for succor.

A Prayer against Satan and his ministers, the World and mine own corruption.
The Prayer.
MOst gracious Lord God, and most merciful in Jesus Christ, who art most
pitiful in beholding the daily strong tentations, where with I am tried by the
policies of Satan: look upon me, for he takes, as it were, unto himself, in
aid, the vanities of the world, laying them before the eyes of my corrupt
mind, to seduce me from the sweet consolation that I have in the
contemplation of heavenly things, unto the delights and pleasures of earthly
deceits. And further, thou know, O Lord, how subtly he windeth himself,
as it were, into the secret inclinations of my heart, by observing the least
show of my outward actions, maliciously watching to trap me, and by his baits
painted out, as it were with the glittering show of ease, of pleasure, of
profit, and such like, deceiving, succeeding contentments, indeuoureth to
train me into his snares.

What am I, good Father, that I should undergo, and bear the burden of so
many subtle wiles, secret snares, and strong temptations, as this most mortal
adversary of mine frames against me? how can I escape so vigilant and so
powerful an enemy, that can command principalities, powers, and all
spiritual wickedness, to attend his most deadly designs, unless thou by thy
grace prevent him?

I disclaim any power in my self, to resist his devices, and do rather
acknowledge, that in stead of resisting, I do assist him against my self by
the vanities of mine own corrupt nature; and therefore do wholly and
altogether rely upon thy mere mercy, wherein thou have compassion on thy
weak children, thus beset with such and so many deadly Adversaries, and
compassed about with so great a trsupe of wickedness.

Make me therefore strong, good Father, in the power of thine own strength;
Put upon me thy defensive armor, that I may yet manfully in the Spirit of
truth, encounter all my spiritual and secret enemies.

Gird me with the girdle of Truth, put on me the breast plate of
Righteousness, and the invincible and impenetrable shield of Faith, so shall I
be able to quench the sterie darts of the Devil; and with the sword of the
Spirit, wound the strongest of them that rise up against me: for, thou with thy
Helmet of salvation, shall keep me ever safe, so as neither Satan, Death, nor
Hell shall be able to prevail against me.

O Lord my God, work I beseech thee in me, that which is pleassng in thy
sight, and grant according to the riches of thy grace, that I may be
strengthened by thy Spirit in the inward man, that Christ may dwell in my heart
by Faith, and so my whole spirit, soul and body, may be kept free from the
power of sin and Satan, blameless to the coming of the Lord Jesus: to whom
be glory and praise for ever.

O Lord increase my faith.
MEDIT. V.
The second cause of watchfulness, the uncertainty of the time of death.
THe second cause of watchfulness, is the uncertain coming of death. To the
end therefore that I may provide for his coming, and not be afraid; as no
doubt by nature, flesh and blood cannot but be, at the consideration of the
supposed horror it brings with it: I must entertayne a godly care to live
well, and that in the continual expectation of the time when it will come: for
a godly, sincere, and a religious life, can never be too suddenly surprised by
death, come it where, when, and how it will: so shall I be sure to die in the
Lord. Though I should lose my head with John Baptist; be stoned with Matt. 14.
Stephen; though I should Act. 7. 59.
be burned with fire, slain by the sword with James, Act. 12. 2.
or by whatsoever other ignominious, cruel, or tormenting death, yet I am the
Lords, and with him I shall live for ever.

Yet am I not secure, as if I needed not to fear; for, I cannot but confess,
that howsoever I endeavor to lead a godly life; I find in my self many and
sundry relapses, and desertions, though not final, yet fearful, through the
manifold temptations of Satan working by, and through mine own corruptions;
and therefore I find it fit, to stand always upon my Watch-towre in
continual Mar. 13. 33 Mat. 24. 42.
Prayer, that I be not under the least power of any of mine enemies, when my
separation shall come.

I will endeavor to make The Parable of the Thief. Luke 12. 39.
use of the Parable of Christ my Savior, who by way of premonition, says,
Understand this, as being a matter of chief consequence for my safety. If the
good man of the house, (which is the soul of every man dwelling in the body)
knew at what hour the Thief (namely Death) would come, he would be ready to
entertain it: And would not suffer his house (his body) to be dug through,
namely, by violence to be surprised, and to be desperately spoiled of his goods
(his soul to be tormented, and perplexed by a guilty conscience and an
unrepentant heart for sin committed against God) but would be still
watching, to prevent every evil motion to sin, and wait for that Thief
Death, willingly to lay down his body for a time, in the grave, and to yield
up his soul to God that gave it, in Christ who redeemed it.

As touching this watchfulness, it is comprehended 2. Cor. 6. 6.
in a godly life, and in a continual serious obedience to God, eschewing 1.
Pet. 3. 10, 11.
evil, and doing good: in seeking peace and following it. This is true
watchfulness, and blessed is the man, whom Ecclus. 4. 20
the Lord when he comes shall find thus waking. For he that slumbreth in
security* careless of future dangers, leding an ungodly life, not remembering
his end, and what account he is to make, when Death comes upon this man, he
shall be sudde^ly carried to the place of ex treme and perpetual torment, never
to be relea sed. I will therefore pray, that I may retain a continual
watchful heart, and strive to live soberly, because I know not the time.

A Prayer that I may be always readily prepared for Death. The Prayer.
O Lord my God, who have created me of nothing, here to live and breathe in
the Earth for some few days, (few were the many thousand years, in comparison
of thine Eternity) and yet the end of these my days altogether unknown unto
me: Therefore thou command me, to watch and to awake to sieve righteously,
and not to sin, and yet by nature I sleep in carnal security.

Thou willest me not to sleep as do other: but to watch and be sober: but,
alas, I slumber in mine own vanities, the deceits of sin.

True Wisdom wills me to watch, because the time of my dissolution is at
hand, when I shall be no more, breathe no more, but be taken from all the
pleasures and delights of this life.

Frame in me therefore, I beseech thee, good Father, a watchful heart. Banish
from me, the darkness of ignorance, and all wicked affections, by the
knowledge of thy truth: Give me grace to order my life according to that
certain and sure rule of all righteousness and sincerity, by the virtue of
the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

The darkness of the night is past, and I have the light of thy Word: give me
therefore the will and ableness, to cast off the works of darkness, and to
put on the armor of light: That I may henceforth walk honestly, as in the
day, not in gluttony and drunkenness, nor in chambering and wantonness, nor in
strife and envying, but by putting on the Lord Jesus Christ; and not to take
thought for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof.

I am subject, O Lord, to many temptations, give me therefore the Spirit of
Wisdom, and strength to resist and overcome them: And that I may keep
continual watch over all my thoughts, words, and ways, that I be at no time
idle in well-doing, that Death which stands at my door find me not without
the Lamp of Love, faith, and Obedience, burning in my heart.

Make me holy, and constant in all good and godly duties, that with a pure and
sanctified con science, I may at all times and in all places serve thee,
walking before thee in truth, and that with a perfect heart: that I fall not
into the power and lust of mine Adversaries, nor be ouer-swayed with the
destres of my corrupt heart, but be found perfect to every good work; for
thou art my God.

Uigilant and watchful is Death, still attending to seize upon me, yet cannot
before thine appointed time, for my time is in thine hand. Give me therefore a
watchful heart, that I may live to thee, and die in thee, that whenever it
shall come to pass, that I must yield my body to the dust, I may be sound
waking, my heart settled upon Heaven, and heavenly things. So shall not this
death be terrible, but most acceptable unto me, being the way by which, I shall
enter into that holy place new and spiritual Jerusalem, where the filthy
garments of sin, shame and confusion, shall be taken from me; and the most
glorious Robes of Righteousness, in the merits of thy glorified Soune, be put
upon me, never to war old, which grant most loving father, for his sake: So be
it.

O Lord, increase my faith, and give me ever a watchful heart, pure and holy.
MEDIT. VI.
The third cause of watchfulness, the uncertain Coming of Christ to
Judgment.
THe third cause of watchfulness I find to be, lest my final judgment come
upon me suddenly, as by unprovided Death, and I be found not only idle in
well-doing, but in doing that which is evil. And if I should not (though much
unlikely) lay down this mine earthly Tabernacle, before that general
dissolution of all things (being doubtless not far off) the sudden coming
of that Day will not excuse me: for as I shall be then found, I shall be
judged, and I shall receive the sentence due unto me, either in mercy, or
severity at the instant of Christ's appearing, and yet shall not prevent them
that have slept, ever since the death of innocent Abel. So that whether I go
before, or stay till he come, I shall find no difference; for in the grave
there is no remembrance of good or evil, no fear of future danger, or hope of
Happiness to come: and therefore the time of my bodies sleep in the Earth, be
it long or short, is not conceived or felt. Only my soul that shall go
before, cannot but apprehend it self, not fully perfect until that general
Day, when my body shall be raised again out of the dust, and partake together
with my soul, the unspeakable glory of Christ my Savior, not that I have
deserved it, but the praise I yield unto him that has merited the same for
me, even by his death.

It much behooves me therefore to watch, and to make mine account ready, for I
find that the general The general Audit is at hand, therefore to prepare our
account.
Audit is at hand, where I shall be strictly examined, how I have bestowed the
talents which I have received of my Lord. At which general Audit all must
appear: Mat. 18. 24
Emperors, Kings, Potentates, Bishops, yea, from the greatest to the least,
all shall be summoned with the fearful sound 2. Pet. 3. 10 Mal. 4. 1. Zeph.
1. 14. 15, 16.
of a terrible Trumpet, sounding far louder then the most horrible thunder, and
all things shall be suddenly surprised, by the greatness of his Majesty that
shall appear with flames of fire: And many that shall live to behold this
fearful Apparition (as all men shall remaining alive in that Day, for none
shall be able to shut their eyes, and the eyes of them that are now rotten in
the graves shall be opened) shall seek to hide themselves from the face of
that most terrible Judge, but in vain.

The sight of the Judge that can condemn but the body, is fearful to the
offender. What then will the sight of this Judge of Judges be unto the wicked,
to sinful and secure worldlings? who comes not with a mortal Sheriff,
accompayned with a Train of fantastical Attendants: but with millions of
Angels, at whose presence, the Heavens shall shrink away with a noise, the
Elements 2 Pet. 3. 10. Christ's second coming fearful.
shall melt with ^eate, and the earth with the works thereof, the great and
glorious Buildings, and the things therein shall be burnt with unquenchable
Sulpher.

O, who will not consider this? who will not watch and be sober, knowing that
this great and terrible Day, this Day of Wrath is coming and at hand, a Day of
Wrath to the wicked, but to them that fear God in love, and live in his fear,
a Day of joy and gladness: there fore shall they hold up their heads, for their
redemption draws near.

Seeing then that all things that we see, and here enjoy, the Heavens above
us, the Earth beneath us, the Seas, and all things in them shall be thus
consumed, and we know not how soon: nor when one particular judgment,
namely, the day of our death shall be. What manner persons ought we to None
shall be able to answer the severe Judge.
be? appear must every man and answer: answer, alas, what can we answer,
to him that comes not to judge the body only, which yet is terrible, but the
soul and body, not to a temporal punishment, but to eternal torment? The
stoutest cannot but be stricken dumb at the very sight of this great Judge,
who will give sentence, according to that every one has done in the flesh,
good or evil.

O, that I could therefore, cleanse my heart, from evil to good! I cannot, it
is the work of the Spirit of God in me, which he works even of his own
good pleasure freely; therefore I pursuing this good begun in me, daily going
on from faith to faith, from grace to grace, I shall become fit through Gods
acceptance in Jesus Christ, to wait for the Day of death, or the general
dissolution, with gladness. It is the rich grace of GOD bestowed on me,
whereby I have my conversation in 1. Cor. 1. 7.
Heaven, from whence I look for the coming of my Phil. 3.
Savior the Lord Jesus: In whom, and by whom, there is laid up for me the 2.
Tim. 4. 8.
Crown of Righteousness, and not for me only, but for all them that love and
look for his second appearing.

I will therefore, watch, and pray (by the grace of Luke 21. 36.
GOD) continually, that I may be counted worthy to escape all these things
that shall come to pass, and that I may stand before the Son of man without
fear.

A Prayer for continual watchfulness, that neither the general, nor the
particular Day of Judgment come upon me unprovided. The Prayer.
O Lord my God in Jesus Christ, who art terrible and fearful, even to them
that seek thee, how much more fearful will thou appear, when thou set
thy wrathful countenance against the wicked, such as now have no fear of thy
Name!

Give me, I pray thee, a continual watchful heart, ever to be exercised in
divine and heavenly things, and leave me nor unto mine own affections, which
are by nature full of corruption and sin, wherein if thou should take me
suddenly, I should be found a most unprofitable servant, to be bound hand and
foot, and east into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth. O Ps. 50. 3, 10.
hide thy face from my sin, and blot out all mine iniquities. Create in me a
clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. Restore to me the joy
Ver. 11.
of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy free Spirit.

Why art thou cast down, O my Soul, and unquiet Psalm. 42. 5.
within me? wait on God: he never fails them that trust in him. Wait thou
on the Lord, O my Soul, keep his way, and he shall exalt thee, that thou
shall inherit the Land, even the Land of Promise, Spiritual Canaan, new
Jerusalem. Psalm. 37. 34.
When the wicked shall perish, thou shall see it. Such as are blessed of GOD,
shall inherit the Land: And they that be cursed of him, shall be cut off.

Endue me therefore, good Father, with thy grace, that I may ever think of my
end, that I presume not upon long life resting secure, as if I had none account
to make unto thee, of my time and talents here received of thee, and how they
have been spent by me: nor any holy duties required to be performed, in this
my Pilgrimage and Banishment, where I have no continuing City, but I seek one
to come.

Holy Father, give me thy Spirit and Grace, ever to bring forth heavenly
fruits, that whenever, wheresoever, or howsoever I shall depart hence, I may
be yet found faithful, and of the number of them whom Christ when he comes
may find waking, in well-doing: that the sentence, Go ye cursed, be not
pronounced against me, but be of the society of them, that shall hear, Come
ye blessed.

Grant this for Jesus Christ's sake, in, and by whom I have the promise of
eternal life: to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost, be all power and praise
ascribed, for he is worthy.

Lord, increase my faith.
MEDIT. VII.
Watchfulness then, being a principal mean to prevent the sudden surprise
that death might make upon me, there follows necessarily Patience, an
inseparable Patience.
companion of Watchfulness; which implies care, attendance, and attention.

The care here meant, is Matt. 6. 25. 1. Pet. 5. 7. Psalm. 55. 22.
not for any worldly thing; for these I cast my care upon God; for he cares
for me. But such a care as Paul had 2. Cor. 11. 28
of all the Churches, 2. Cor. 11. 28. seeking the kingdom of God and the
righteousness thereof, Matt. 6. 33. then Heb. 13. 7. Matt. 6. 33
will not God fail me nor forsake me.

The care therefore that I covet to have, is, how to prevent sin, and fly
Security, which are contrary to a godly care; and consequently, contrary to
true watchfulness, and therefore far from true patience, which works not
upon security and carnal peace, but upon waiting for the promise of
Redemption. This is the patience which the Children of God have, whose patient
abiding shall Pro. 10. 28.
be gladness.

I will not therefore render 1. Pet. 3. 9.
evil for evil, nor rebuke for rebuke, but contrariwise, I will bless,
knowing that I am thereunto called, that I should be the heir of blessing 1.
Pet. 3. 9. And if I be rayled on for the name of Christ, shall I discover my
weakness through impatience? no, there is a blessing promised: for the Spirit
of glory 1. Pet. 4. 14.
and of God, rests on the patient man, which on their parts that rail on
him, is evil spoken of, but on his part is glorified. The Lord is a Esa. 30.
18.
God of judgment, and they are blessed that wait on him with patience.

Attendance, another Attendance.
branch of Watchfulness, may be said an expectation with patience, for a
thing feared or desired: how fear and desire may How fear and desire stand
together.
be of one and the same thing, in one and the same subject, being of contrary
effects, may be thus answered; Fear in this place is not servile, but
filial; and therefore may well stand with the desire.

A son having a charge Example.
imposed by his loving father, though he endeavor to perform the thing
commanded never so carefully, fears yet that he may come short of some part
of his duty; and therefore fears how his father will accept of what he has
done; and yet being persuaded through a clean and clear conscience, that he
has done his best endeavor, hops his father will take it well; and therefore
desires that his father would return to observe the performance of that he
had in charge. Although he cannot make his account with such absolute
perfection as he should, yet, no doubt, his father cannot but hold him
excusable, in showing his good will to do it well; so stands his fear with
desire.

So I, having charge of mine heavenly Father, to do his Commandments, I
confess, I cannot perform them as I ought, though I have a desire, and a
fear, lest when I have done all what I can, I The most diligent may be found
unprofitable
may yet be found unprofitable, not withstanding my greatest care, and most
diligent attendance of the outward part: to which attendance is required
Attention, Attention twofold.
namely, the mind and will, which I conceive to be twofold.

The first is, to the Will and Word of God, to practice 1.
it.

The second, to mine own imperfections, to reform 2.
them, and to keep mine affections in due co^formitie with the Commandments
of God.

Attention to the Will and Word of God, is that, whereby I am directed to
perform that, which is honest, just, and right, and that in faith, waiting
with patience the reward set before me, not as a reward for my work done, but
as a free gift of God in Christ, in whom, and by whom, my work is accepted as
perfect, though imperfect.

Attention to mine own Attention to self imperfections.
imperfections, is also double of the soul and of the body. As touching the
first, it is to hearken unto (as it were) and observe the motions of my corrupt
heart, not to yield unto, and to fulfill them; but to suppress and prevent the
fruits that grow from them, even in the buds, though they seem and show
themselves never so pleasant, sweet, and delectable: for, they breed Security
and a careless life, insensible of true patience, and so become subject to a
sudden surprise. And the rather, for want of the second attention; namely, to
the uncertain estare of my feeble body, which is subject (besides infinite
casualties, being in health) to a thousand infirmities and mortal diseases,
which may suddenly dissolve this mortal life, though they be not at the
instant feared nor felt.

This Attendance and Attention, are the fruits and effects of Watchfulness,
through Patience; for, without patience who can wait for any future benefit?

The Husbandman is The Husband man's atte^dance and attention.
brought in by the Holy Ghost an example of waiting with patience; for he
commits and commends the seed to the earth, with great diligence, he
waits for the crop with patience, and attends the former and latter rain, and
by due attention hearkens, how the course of things go, that he may make the
best of his commodities.

Does nature afford men this care, patience, attendance, and attention, in
vvorldly and perishing things? And shall I come short of these in spiritual
and heavenly things? and not rather in watchfulnes, patience, and godly
obedience look for the end of this mortality, in hope to reap and receive
celestial and eternal glory? God forbid.

But I acknowledge, that all my whatsoever watchfulness Watchfulness in
patience merits nothing, because it is all imperfect.
in patience, or suffering, deserves not the least grain of glory: for, I am
often, not only beset with temptations to sin, but also pressed with the
continual cares and troubles of this life; and I through weakness do yield
unto the one, and faint under the burden of the other* and in stead of true
watchfulness with patience, I fall either into the slumber of Socuratia, o^
unto a kind of servile fear, or despair; and most seldom watch I with the
open eyes of true attention and patience: A kind of patience I seem to have,
but mixed oftentimes with a kind of grudging discontent at my corporal and
domesticke crosses, and worldly, troubles, where with I often find my self
much oppressed; which yet God (I know) for no other cause lays upon me, but
to make me sensible of mine own imperfections, and to correct me for, and to
reform sin in ^e, while I live in the world, that I b^ not, condemned with
the world; though it be unto me for the time very unpleasant, until I enter
into consideration, that through many tribulations I must enter into the
Kingdom of heaven: and, that the man is Correction necessary.
blessed whom God corrects: and God gives that blessed man patience to bear
his corrections, without grudging, and gives always a comfortable issue to
every temptation.

There is a kind of patience, wherein a man indureth that which he would and
cannot avoid; this has the name, but not Counterfeit patience.
the nature of that true patience, which I wish to have.

The patience which I endeavor to attain unto, is a constant bearing of True
patience.
my crosses, and a settled expectation through faith, for the end of that which
cannot be avoided, nor better obtained, but by death.

Therefore, casting aside all hope of temporal freedom, and the fear of
death; I only rely upon, and wait the performance of his promise, who has
reserved all true freedom of The place of freedom is heaven.
those that are his, of his own free mercy in the heavens only, as from
hunger, thirst, nakedness, enemies, labors, sickness, sins, and all other
miseries whatsoever, which in this life short and evil, I am enforced (yet
with patience) to endure.

This freedom, I know, I cannot attain unto, but by changing this life by
death, and therefore with patience I daily expect it, reuerencing the entire
love of mine heavenly Father, in chastising me here, and do acknowledge the
riches of his bountifulness, patience, and long suffering, that he has spared
me so Gods forbearance to punish.
long to live, where he might justly have confounded me long agone for my
sins: but contrarily has favorably kept me under his Fatherly discipline,
thereby to lead me in the way I ought to walk in, as in watchfulness,
patience, attendance, and attention, according to godliness, through JESUS
CHRIST, in whose name I will address my prayers unto my heavenly Father, for
the Spirit of patience, to wait for a better life by death.

A Prayer for patient waiting for a future better life by death, fit to be said
in sickness. The Prayer.
O Lord my God, I wait on thee: My soul keeps silence unto thee, for, of
thee comes my salvation; therefore do I submit my self unto thy will, giving
thee thanks for thy patience toward me in Jesus Christ; nor thou have showed
thy self toward me slow to wrath, and full of goodness and mercy.

Increase ever, more and more thy graces toward me, that in this my
Pilgrimage toward my grave, I may possess my soul in patience, waiting thy
good time for my delivery: for, here where I now dwell, I neither hear, nor
see, taste nor touch any truly comfortable thing, only thy Word is my
spiritual consolation, and the hope of future glory, my joy.

And were I not fed with the hope of a better life by death, I were of all men
most miserable: for nature could not with patience bear the burden of this
miserable life, being so full of all infirmities both of body and mind, so
fraught with sins of all sorts, and accompanied with so many and sundry
crosses, and finally, subject to thy severe Judgment.

But thy favor and thy love, and thy patience toward me, worheth in me
patience, knowing that the time is coming, and at hand, wherein I shall be
freed from this mortal and miserable, to enjoy a life immortal and glorious.

O confirm therefore and increase the patience, attendance, and attention,
which thou have begun in me; that after I have here done thy will, I may
receive the promise, wherein thou have assured me, that the patient abiding of
the righteous, shall be gladness.

Thou art a God of mercy, and blessed are they that wait for thee. Grant
therefore, Lord, that I may be found blameless in the day of my distation: and
that I may here walk worthy of thee through Christ, being strengthened with all
might through thy glorious power, to all patience and long suffering, with
ioyfulnes. Amen.

Lord, increase my faith.
MEDIT. VIII.
Of Repentance, and Merit.
NO man, be he never so holy, is free from sin, and therefore never free from
occ^sions to move him to Repentance. And I acknowledge, that Repentance,
Patience, Watchfulness, Attendance, and Attention, are of no force, unless
Faith be the ground of every of them. For, it suffices me not to be sorry
for my sins (as it seems Judas and Kain were) un* less by Faith I can feel,
and assure my self, that my sins are also pardoned (as neither of them did)
for it is the free gift of God, which God vouchsafed not to them. Neither is it
sufficient for me to watch with Patience, or to attend the bringing forth of
outward oftentiue and vainglorious works; but I must feel in my self, the
infallible tokens of mine effectual calling, and ingrafting into Christ
through Faith, before I can bring forth works worthy amendment of life, which
is true Repentance.

Some tokens of mine effectual calling, I fe^le in my self, for I desire to
do good, yet even then is evil present with me. I delight in the Law of God,
as conceruing Romans 7. 21, 22, 23.
the inner man: Namely, as I am regenerate. But I see another Law in my
members, rebelling against the Law of my mind, and lending me captive unto the
Law of sin which is in my members. So that I cannot Verse 19.
do the good I would do, but the evil which I would not do that I do.

Should I then think, that because I feel not the signs of my calling in
perfection, and because I am not free from all touch of infirmities and sins,
in thought, word and deed, that therefore I have no Repentance? God forbid, for
to persuade my self, that I have no sin, were to deifie my self, and to
make me equal with Christ, as do those that are faithed from, yet by their
works of Merit and of Supererogation, presume to affirm, that they can bring
not only themselves, but others to salvation, The opinion of Merit, and Works
of Supererogation, blasphemy.
whose arrogate Merit stinkes before God, making the death of Christ of none
effect; the highest Blasphemy that mortal man can spew out against the
Trinity: for, hereby is the most unsearchable love of God the Father in
sending his Son, made vain and fruitless; the obedience of Christ to his
Fathers will, made needless, and his death causlesse, and the work of the
Holy Ghost who gives Faith in the hearts of them that shall be saved
excluded; and the corrupt heart of miserable man, wherein, by nature, is
nothing but sin (the dregs whereof will remain, even in the regenerate man
during this mortal life) exalted above the merits of Christ. Which Blasphemy
be far from me.

He that can merit his They that can merit, need no Repentance.
own Salvation, needs no Repentance, which I disclay me; and cleave only and
alone to the merits of Christ my Savior, in whom my Repentance imperfect, is
reputed true Repentance, howsoever the ^ing of sin remains in me, yet
without mortal venom, only to keep me ever in mind of mine imperfections:
for when sinful motions arise in me, I cannot but acknowledge in my self,
corruption, which cannot but humble me before God, and occasion me to pray for
the Spirit of Repentance, and that God will deliver me from this body of
sin.

A Prayer for true Repentance, and a reformed life. The Prayer.
O Lord, my God, I come here into thy presence, fearful to look up to
Heaven, where thou sit, from whence thou beholdest all my ways, and
obseruest all mine actions in earth, cursed and evil: and wherein I have too
too long wallowed my self, and as it were bathed my self in the blood of mine
own soul, which I have diversely wounded, through my sins, seldom or never
calling my self to an account what I have done: but resting secure, have
followed vanity upon vanity heaping ^^^ne upon sin, as if there were neither
pleasure nor profit but in a carnal course of life.

O touch my heart, with a true sorrow for every idle thought of my heart, for
every vain word of my mouth, and for every act that I have committed against
thy sacred Majesty, give me grace to call to mind my sins of all sorts, of
all seasons, and of all places, howsoever or wheresoever I have done and
committed them that they appearing unto me in their ugly likeness, I may
truly loathe them, hate and abhor them, and unfeignedly repent them, while
Ihane time, and while thy Mercies may be found, for in death there is no
remembrance of thee, and in the grave who shall praise thee? Return, O Lord,
deliver my soul, save me for thy mercies sake, withdraw not thy tender mercy
from me, O Lord, let thy Merry and thy Truth always preserve me.

Open, Lord, my dim eyes, the ^ies of my heart, that I may henceforth see
and walk in thy ways. Soften and molliste my hard and stony heart, that with
Peter, I may go out of my sins and bitterly bewail them. Send thy Psalm. 43.
3.
light and thy truth, let them lead me, let them bring me unto thine holy
Mountain, and to thy Tabernacles.

Give me a truly repenting heart, through a lively Faith in the Merits of thy
Son, in whom say unto my Soul, and seal it unto me by thy holy Spirit,
that thou art my Salvation.

Lord, increase my faith, and accept my Repentance.
MEDIT. IX.
Of Faith and Hope, and the effects of them both, and of the glory to come.
FAITH and HOPE, the maine Pillars whereupon are builded all other Divine
Virtues, are the mere gift of God, without which I do acknowledge I cannot be
saved.

Saint Paul writing unto Heb. 11. 6.
the Hebrews, describes the faith whereby I believe in Christ, not to be a
dead, but a working faith, Iam. 2. 20.
known by the effects, whereof are many Examples, Romans 11. And whereby Romans 11.
many most worthy men approved themselves to be of God, and to be beloved of
God, who by their faith apprehended things absent and unseen to their
unspeakable comfort, as really and truly, a^ if they had been present and
visible: confirming thereby, that faith is the Romans 8. 24.
ground of things which are hoped for, and the evidence of things which are not
seen.

By this, our faithful Forefathers saw Christ long before he came in the
flesh, and believed him to The Fathers before Christ saw Christ to come.
come to be the Messiah. Moses (says Christ) saw my days. So did the
Prophets, David and many other, who hoped for that which they saw not, yet at
length obtained the visible glory of the same Son of God, by whom, and in
whose blood to be shed they were saved.

Without faith howsoever a man may live in a seeming sincere course of life
before men, though he be observed to do no man wrong, yet if he take not
hold of Christ by this lively faith, if he embrace not his Word, lay it up in
his heart, if he bring not forth fruits worthy amendment of Mat. 3. 17.
life; he pleases not God: for, in nothing is GOD Mat. 17. 5.
pleased, but in and by his Son: and is delighted is 2. ^et. 1. 17.
none, but in such as seek him and serve him, in and by his Son.

I cannot come unto God without Christ; nay, Heb 9. 24.
I cannot believe that God is, but by Christ. I cannot hope to receive the good
things of Heaven, not with patience abide for them, but that Christ has
purchased the same for me; and promised the same unto me. And therefore I
believe them to be certain and sure, though yet but in expectation; therefore
I wait with patience.

The Husbandman wayteth for the Harvest, many Patience in the husbandman.
days after his chargeable and laborious committing the Seed unto the earth:
if the Harvest were instant upon the casting away of the Seed, there were
neither Patience nor Hope in the Seedes-man. And if by experience he found
not, that the Seed cast into the Earth, would render recompense, he would
either forbear to cast it away, or being sown, never hope for fruit. So I
wretched man, though I deserve no other fruit to reap then I have sown,
namely, of the flesh corruption: yet I hope to reap what I have not Gal. 6. 8.
sown, namely, of the Spirit, everlasting life: and that through Jesus Christ,
who, (and not I) has cast the Seed of the Spirit into my Soul, the fruit
whereof I shall reap, at the general Harvest, to mine own everlasting use,
as if the Seed had been mine own, for which I hope with patience in Faith.

As the Light follows the Sun, so Hope follows Faith. But if I believed
not God in Christ, and in him had assurance through Faith, of the performance
of his promise Men most miserable, but for the hope of another life.
of future glory, I might well say with Saint Paul, I were of all men most
miserable, for to endure here miseries, crosses, enemies, labors, anguishes,
and perplexities of body and mind, and to be also frustrate of future
comfort, my case were worse then the Bird in the Air, the Fish in the Sea, or
the brute Beast of the Field. But glory be to God in Christ, who has assured
me of a Kingdom to come, an inheritance immortal.

Edify your selves (says Saint Jude) in your most holy Jude 20. 21.
Faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, and keep your selves in the love of God,
looking for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.

Eternal life then, being the end of my Hope, I will with patience abide it,
for coming I know it will come. And the delay of mine enjoying it, is but the
try all of my faith, which yields me that assurance, that to me is much more
precious then Gold that perishes: and shall be found to my glory, at the
appearing of Jesus Christ, whom, though I have not seen, yet I love him,
believe, and rejoice in him with joy unspeakable and glorious, and shall
receive the end of my Faith, even the salvation of my soul after this death.

It may be demanded, Vain and carnal objections against Faith and Belief.
Is it so easy a matter to obtain eternal life? To believe only? no, I
believe not, that simply to believe, can obtain salvation: But if I confess
with To. 10. 9, 10
my mouth the Lord Jesus, and do believe in my heart, that God raised him up
from the dead, I shall be saved. It may be again objected, Here is yet but
faith of the heart, and confession of the mouth. If this be all that is
required to salvation, it is not so hard a thing, as it is conceived, to
obtain it.

I hold, in deed, that the bare confession of Christ, and to believe that
Christ is, though I believe him to be the Savior of the World: and yet do
not apply his merits and death unto my self, my Faith profits me little, and
my Confession nothing at all. Thou beleeuest (says Saint James) that there is
one Ia. 2. 18, 19.
God, thou do well: the Devils also believe and tremble: and therefore
barely to believe, that there is a God and a Christ, and to confess as much,
is no more then the Devils do. Therefore this Faith and this Confession is not
sufficient to my salvation; for then should the Devils that believe, be also
saved, but they believe and tremble: I believe and hope desiring to show my
Faith, by my works.

Abraham indeed was justified Iam. 2. 21. Genesis 22.
by his faith, and that before the attempting of the offering of his son. But
by the offering of his son, he showed that his faith was not a naked, and
bare faith, but a faith accompanied with obedience, and good Works; for his
works preceded not his justification, but being first justified, he believed
and obeyed. Abraham believed Iam. 2. 23.
God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness.

Faith being the gift of God, brings forth good Faith the gift of God, yet ours
by imputation.
Works, which in Abraham grew not by nature, but by the free mercy of God,
wrought, and working by the Holy Ghost, whose fruits they were; yet in Gods
mercy imputed as the fruits of Abraham: so what-soeuer good thing proceeds
of my faith in Christ, I assume it not as mine, though through Christ so
imputed.

I believe, that true and saving Faith cannot be without good Works, for
without good Works faith is Iam. 2. 20.
dead. And I also believe, that there may be works of themselves good, and yet
without true faith, not only not acceptable to God, but rather condemned of
him: for, whatsoever Romans 14. 23
is not of faith, is sin. And therefore, the opinion of meritorious works,
and works Heb. 11. 6.
of supererogation, I believe cannot be grounded on a true saving faith: for,
to assume selfe-power to do good, and there-by to merit salvation, is merely
against Christ and his merits: as is also the pretended propitiatory sacrifice
Sacrifice of the Mass.
of the Mass, and the real being of Christ's flesh in the Eucharist, not only
not necessary to enter into my belief; but rather, that I believe that the
death of Christ, once for all, apprehended by a lively faith, and his merits
applied for the pardon of my sins, to my understanding (...), is a (...)
sufficient for the washing away of the sins of as many as do truly believe,
and earnestly repent; and do receive in that faith the sacramental signs of
the breaking of his body and sheading of his blood upon the cross; namely,
bread and wine faithfully.

I believe that Christ Act. 7. 49.
co^tinues really in heaven, sitting at the right hand of God, a continual and
alone Mediator, even for Heb. 4. 14. 1. Tim. 2. 5.
me, and that the heavens shall so contain him until his second coming;
until which time, the Sacrament is left unto all believers, to be a
remembrance unto them of his death, which is a sufficient propitiation, for the
sins of all believers.

I do therefore believe, that the holy Ghost, possessing my heart at my
participation of that holy Sacrament, works faith in me, which faith looks
back unto the death of The true use of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
Christ upon the cross, beholding (as it were) by the eye of the same faith,
the breaking of his body, and the pouring out of his blood, even then
sacrame^tally represented unto me by the bread broken, signifying his body,
and by the wine powered out, signifying his blood; which I corporally eating and
drinking, I do as verily taste of the virtue of Christ's death in my heart by
faith, as I do taste in my mouth the bread and wine. And this I believe to be
the true use of this holy mystery, whereof all faithful receivers do no
otherwise partake of Christ's body now crucified, then the faithful Jews did
partake of him in eating the Paschall Lamb, prefiguring the death of Christ to
come, as now we solemnize the commemoration of his death past; but that they
had it under a more dark veil, which now being taken away, appears to us
most perspicuously and clearly.

MEDIT. X.
Christ elected none for foreseen works.
I Do not believe, that GOD elected me, for the foreseen good works, that I
would do; for I disclayme all inherent goodness by nature; and do believe
that God gives me Romans 7. 18, 19. and 2. 13.
both will and the power to do good; and all the good that I do, I
acknowledge to be of God: and the evil that I do, to be of my self:
therefore the good that I do, I do not believe to be the cause, but the
effect of mine election. I confess that God did foreknow I would do good, not
but that he likewise forepurposed to indue me with his own Spirit, whereby I
should do it, therefore is not the work mine, but the Spirits, that God has
given me: for, if I should believe that God foresaw the good that I (setting
the Spirit of God aside) should do, and therefore did elect me; were it not
to believe, that mine own works were the cause of Ephesians. 2. 8, 9.
mine election, and so assume unto my self power to work mine own salvation?
which God forbid God gives the will and the power to work, and rewards the
work, not as a debt he owes me for my work; but as he first gave me the
will and the power freely, so he rewards not my work, but manifests his
mercy, wherein he likewise, as he freely elected Gal. 5. 4.
me, so he freely bestows upon me his salvation, through his own means:
and therefore I rather utterly condemn my best works, then to expect any
meritorious reward for them.

I feel the force of mine own corruption daily, and that appears in the
whole course of my life by the fruits, which of themselves We cannot suppress
sin, but by grace.
are ever evil, which I cannot suppress but by the grace of GOD in Christ.

If I knew nothing by my self, to yield me cause of doubt, yet were not I
thereby justified. But I know no good in my self, what shall I say then? am I
condemned? God forbid: for as God did freely elect me, so he freely iustifies
me, not for mine own good works, the best of which are imperfect, but of his
own free mercy, by imputing Christ's righteousness and merits unto me; in
whom, and with whom, a Crown of glory is laid up in heaven, even for me:
from whose fullness, I receive even here, Job. 1. 16.
grace for grace: whereby, and not by any means of mine own, I do grow and
increase, and the elder I wax in Christ, the more I fasten my root, and the
more I flourish in the Spirit: for, They that are planted in the Courts of the
Lord, shall flourish in their age, and bring forth fruit: and happy are they
that are in Christ Jesus, whom neither life, nor death, nor things present, nor
things to come, shall separate from the love of God.

Shall not Death then separate The benefit of death
me from Christ? no, it shall not only not separate me, but it shall bring me
into his Real and Royal presence, into his Kingdom of glory, new Jerusalem;
where I shall see his Majesty, as far to exceed the glory of Solomon in the
day of his magnificent Coronation, as the Sun exceedes in brightness the
darkest and blackest cloud.

Is this then the hurt that Death can do unto me? and shall I fear it? will
a wise man refuse a rich possession, for not passing to it by an ordinary
bridge, by which he has seen millions go before him? And shall I desire to
dwell in this base and beggarly cottage, this ruined and rotten house of clay,
in labor, travail, care, fear, trouble, envy, grief, and a thousand
miseries, rather then passing by the ordinaire way of death, to inherit a
glorious Kingdom? God forbid.

I desire far rather to be The glory to come, far exceedes man's
understanding.
with CHRIST in glory, which glory, I believe, far surpasses, both what is
or can be spoken, or conceived of it. The very Angels that presently partake of
it, cannot express it: nay, the holy Ghost, though he do assure us that it
is prepared for all Gods elect, yet the very fullness Words cannot express
the glory to come.
of it is not reueiled, words cannot so sufficiently declare it, as that the
most illuminate man can express it; not Paul himself, though he were taken
up into the third Heaven, where he heard, and no doubt, saw wonderful
things, yet could he not discover them to the full apprehension of any mortal.

But, by the glory that If worldly things be glorious, how much more are
heavenly?
God has reueiled in his works, by the Firmament, the Sun, the Moon, the
Stars, the Seas, the Earth, the order and course of all his creatures visible,
may lead us to judge by way of comparison, That if the things, for the use of
mortal men here, be so wonderful and glorious, what are they that are in the
heavens, where no base or corrupt thing comes?

The Sun is a creature Mat. 24. 29 Luke 21. 25.
that shall be darkened, yet who is able firmly to fix his eyes upon the
glory thereof? How much more glorious, may I think, is he that made it? whom
never mortal man could ever see and live. Moses seeing, as it were, but the
shadow of his glory, received yet such a tra^splendencie of glory in his
countenance, through that little spark of Gods glory, as the Children of
Israel could not behold the brightness of it.

What glory then, shall I think the Elect of God shall receive from GODS
al-fulnesse of glory, which is so unspeakable as cannot be conceived? But as
the Iron, partaking the fervent heat of the fire, becomes like unto the fire:
so I, with the rest of Gods Saints, shall so partake of his glory, as this my
corruptible body, when it has put on incorruption, shall become totally
glorious, through the transplendencie of his glory.

The body of man is a Great difference between the beauty of the soul and
body.
beautiful visible workmanship, yet it is of the earth, earthie: how much
more beautiful is the invisible soul of the regenerate man, which is of
heaven, heavenly; spiritual and invisible?

Seeing then that earthly and visible creatures be so glorious, as they do
administer great contentment and delight unto the carnal eye: How much more
will Gods invisible works delight the spiritual sense of Gods elect, when they
shall at full partake of them? Who then will not long and desire to see them?
much more to be partake^ of them? especially of that glory, which whosoever
inioyeth, shall be delighted with no other object? And I verily believe, that
one day I shall see it, and say with David: As I have heard, so have I seen in
the City of our God: and shall not but acknowledge, that it exceedes all that
I have heard with mine ears, seen with mine eyes, or conceived with my heart,
by infinite degrees.

So gracious is God, as he gives greater things, then man can conceive by
Eternal joy cannot be had but by death.
his promises: and although I cannot as yet sufficiently conceive, much less
speak of the surpassing excellency of that glory; yet will I meditate
thereupon: the more to make the pleasures of this life of no account, and the
more to kindle in me a desire to be dissolved, to enjoy that unspeakable
glory, which cannot be attained unto, but by death.

The word Glory imports The word Glory, what it imports.
matter of dignity; and I see the whole multitude of humane creatures desire
it; bending all their studies and endeavors to obtain it. But, alas, what is
it? is it not like Ionahs Gourd, growing Ion. 4. 6, 7.
up and withering all in a day?

What man then of ordinary understanding, will be so earnest and eager in
atchieuing this moment any, and so remiss and careless in seeking to obtain
that perpetual glory? for, I see that this worlds glory The glory of the
World, what it is.
is full of suspicion, care, fear, troubles, and dangers, even in the best
estate subject to change: but the future shall be free, full Future glory.
of all constant happiness and absolute content, and therefore more to be
desired then all humane greatness: it fades not, as did glorious Salomons, and
other temporal Potentates and Princes; who yet, may truly challenge condign
glory above others in this life, through their moral virtues; yet not thereby
truly glorious, without the assurance of that which is to come, which, nothing
shall be able to blemish, as do enemies, sickness, and crosses, dishonor and
eclipse the earthly honored.

Gods judgments also do often fall upon the unduly dignified, not upon Act.
12. 23.
the truly honorable, as they are honored by men, but as they are men
offending the GOD of glory, Who exalts the humble and Luke 14. 11.
meek, and casts the insolent and proud (even Princes) down to the ground.

The glory to come shall no man or matter blemish, or diminish, which glory I
see now, but as through a veil, as in a glass much imperfectly: but when I
shall be dissolved, and when my earthly and spiritual parts shall be made one
again, then, I verily believe, that I shall see at full, and freely enjoy that
inestimable glory, namely, my glorified Redeemer, face to face, and shall be
transformed into the same glory; so that nothing shall be left in me, but
that which shall be wholly glorious.

O, how has the Lord magnified his mercy toward me! He has raised me from
the dust: he has Gods wonderful favors toward us.
delivered my soul from hell, and assured me to sit with him in glory, and
to be filled with the joys that are at his right hand, to eat at his Table,
to drink of the Rivers of his pleasures: and in his light I shall see light,
and be changed by the sight of his countenance.

The faces of the just shall shine as the Sun in the firmament, when the
glory of God shall shine upon their souls and bodies together, changed from
corruption, and made partakers even of the divine nature.

Can the tongue of Man The glory to come unspeakable.
or Angels then, express the abundant felicity, that the Saints of God shall
enjoy? no, it confounds all the imagination of man, to conceive the
unspeakable glory that there will appear, now darkely apprehended through
faith.

One torch gives light to the whole room where it burns, but where there are
many burning, the light is far the greater. If one Sun in the firmament
give light to so ample and spacious a world as we here live in: and the face of
every just man shall shine as the Sun; what a glorious light and beautiful
sight will there be in the heavens, where millions of millions of glorified
Men, with Angels, Archangels, Seraphins, and Cherubins, shall shine as so many
bright and beautiful Suns together; all taking their light from that
all-shining Light of lights, the Son of the living God, all knit together in
the band of one Spirit, in so sacred a communion and union, that every one of
them shall account the glory of another, the augmentation of his own joy,
contrary to the course and condition of the worldly glorious; who emulate and
envy all others that exceed or equalize them in glory! Moreover, with what
spiritual joy shall I behold my most loving Redeemer and Savior Jesus Christ,
sitting as absolute Prince of Glory, by whose Merits I have obtained this
surpassing glory.

MEDIT. XI.
The glory to come makes the the godly willing to dye, and the rather for the
crosses of this life.
NOw then, seeing so great a weight of glory, set before the eye of my faith;
why should I be afraid to lay down this my mortal body in the grave?
although I know, it shall there rot, putrify, and turn again to dust: yea, to
more vile Earth, then whereof it seems now to be made. Were my beauty as
Absaloms, it shall become a stinking Carrion, loathsome, and filthy.

To what end then Not to pa^per the body.
should I so unnecessarily respect it, as to adorn it with superfluous and
needles Ornaments? Why should I covet to fill and feed it with dainty and
delicious fare? And why should I fulfill the desires, and vain delights of my
corrupt heart? Why should I sweeten and perfume my outpart, to make it
odoriferous to others, mine inward part resting yet odious to God?

This superfluous care of my bodies vanities, would not only make me the more
sweet and pleasing, but far the more hateful to God and godly men: therefore
shall my desire and practice be, by The sum of a Christians care.
the grace of God, during the short remaining part of this my miserable life,
to cover my nakedness with apparel, merely needful, and seek to maintain
it with food, such as it shall please my God to bless unto me, and through
the same grace, my hearts delight shall be in the continual true service of
my heavenly Father, having ever an eye unto, and desiring that time when, and
that place wherein I shall need neither raiment nor food, and where I shall be
only delighted with the glory, wherewith I shall be filled after this bodies
death: which, although it perish for a time, my soul rests ever immortal,
God, being the God not only of mine immortal soul, but of my mortal body
also.

And I believe that he God will raise the body totally at the last Day.
will not lose one hair of mine head, nor the smallest dust that shall come of
my putrified carcass, nor one bone of my rotten and consumed body; and that
he will raise my mortal part in all fullness of all the parts, and make them
all ioynt-partakers of eternal glory in Heaven, in the Day of Christ's second
appearing, in what manner soever it be dissolved; burnt in the fire, drowned
in the Sea, devoured by wild Beasts, or by any other mean whatsoever.

I hear natural reason say, It is an easy matter to Hard for natural men to
believe the Resurrection.
believe that I shall dye: experience makes it so common. But to believe that
this my body, when it shall be rotten, and consumed to dust, eaten with
fishes, devoured and digested by wild beasts, or burnt to ashes, or be
utterly otherwise consumed; that it shall rise again to glory, is not so
easily apprehended: no experience teaching it, but the resurrection of Christ,
which I have not seen.

I disclaim in this point all natural reason, and do faithfully believe,
that as my Redeemer Jesus Christ Romans 10 9. 1. Pet. 1. 3.
dyed and rose again: So after my death I shall, by the virtue of his
Resurrection, rise again to eternal life.

Job prophesied of the Resurrection of humane dead bodies, and affirms that
he knew, that his Redeemer Job 19. 26, 27, and 14. 14.
lived, and that though after his death the worms should devour his flesh:
yet in the same flesh he should see God, look upon him, and behold him, and
that with his own, namely, with the eyes that then he had. And the Prophet
Esaias affirms, that the dead bodies in the grave shall rise again, some to
glory, some to torment. The dead men (says he) Esai. 26. 19, 20.
shall live, even with their bodies shall they rise.

Christ says, marvel not at this: The hour shall John 3. 25.
come, when all that are in the Graves, shall hear his voice, and shall come
forth, they that have done good, unto the Resurrection of life, but they that
have done evil, unto the Resurrection of condemnation.

Christ also affirms, that it is his Fathers will that sent him, that he
shall lose nothing of that he has given him, but that he shall raise it up at
the last Day. They that sleep in the dust shall awake.

Infinite are the proofs The godly and the wicked shall rise, but to contrary
ends.
of the Resurrection of humane bodies in the Scriptures: both of the just and
of the unjust, of the godly and the wicked, but to two contrary final effects.
The godly shall rise to everlasting life, ever to remain with the Lord: the
ungodly shall rise to everlasting punishment, to be tormented for ever with
the Devil and his Angels, in continual horror, weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Here is matter of Meditation; hence arises hope and horror, comfort and
calamity. There are The Resurrection of the just and unjust.
but two ends of the Resurrection, life and death, and both perpetual: And
these succeed the death of the body. Should I then be so injurious unto my
silly soul, that dwells in my mortal body, as to forget that it shall come
into judgment, in a time coming, and at hand? and that this body, this
fleshly and corrupted part shall again be raised to glory or shame, to
partake of either, with the soul? were it not, as if I should say in my heart,
there were Psalm. 14. 1.
no God, no Heaven to glorify, or Hell to torment? persuading my self, that
either after death there remains neither evil nor good? but that I should
go into utter oblivion, to an eternal sleep, never to return into any
second existence? or that GOD were a God, only of the immortal soul, and not
of the mortal body, or a God of Mercy, and not of Justice? Should I thus
foolishly, for less then a mess of Pottage, sell my Birthright in Heaven? for
a grain of temporary vanity, sell a Crown of perpetual glory? Far be
it from me, for a Kingdom, I know, is prepared for me, and a Kingdom I seek,
waiting for it, until it fall unto me, as mine Inheritance, through Christ,
who has purchased the same by his blood. In the mean time, I must taste and
undergo many troubles, afflictions, poverty, want, enemies and the scorn of
the World.

Does GOD suffer his own Children to be afflicted in this life? how can he
then be said a loving Father unto them? Does not that worthy Prophet and King,
David, affirm that Psalm. 119. 165.
they that love his Law, shall have great prosperity, and no hurt befall them?
How An objection. Answer.
then comes the contrary to pass? The Answer: The Spirit of God, that spoke
thus by the mouth and pen of David, lies not: for the afflictions that I
feel, and the crosses that I have, proceed from the love of God, and hinder
not, but rather do much further my spiritual prosperity: For whom the Lord
loves, Heb. 12. 6, 7, 8.
he chasteneth, and scourges every son that he receives. If therefore I
patiently endure chastening, God offers himself unto me as to a son. If I
were without correction, whereof all Gods Children are partakers, I were a
bastard and no son.

Blessed is the man, says Job 5. 17.
Job, whom God corrects, therefore will not I refuse the chastening of the
Almighty: let him therefore deal with me according to his own will, in
giving me what he will, health or sickness, wealth or want, prosperity or
adversity; for I know, that all things Romans 8.
work together for the best to them that love God: he may make a wound, but he
will bind it up again: he may smite, but his hands make whole again: he
gives Job. 5. 18.
always the issue with the temptation. GOD forbid, therefore, that I should
entertain the least thought in my heart, that whatsoever cross or affliction
befalls me, were in GODS indignation; but only in love.

I do acknowledge Sin the cause of affliction. Hag. 2.
that sin is the cause of all the crosses, calamities, afflictions and
miseries that I endure, and if God should deal with me answerable to what I
have done, I could not bear his punishments: But in stead of ouer-pressing me
with troubles, he mitigat^s even the small corrections that he sends: nay,
rather which I draw, as it were upon my self. And among other dangers, I find
poverty and want, not the easiest to be borne, neither can my debts be long
borne withal; for I see, a necessity inforceth that which my will is ready,
but I am unable to perform. And therefore no small portion of affliction
oppresses me: for as I acknowledge my self worthily inferior to other men in
Virtues: so in greatness: for as by birth I had no pricefull patrimony: so
has not the World affoorded me a gai^full faculty: yet labor I though I
lack. What shall I say, or think? Is God only gracious unto the
worldly-glorious? and has he not regard to such as are of a mean estate in
this life? Does the Holy Ghost visit the souls of the wealthy with comfort, in
their carnal fullness and delights? and leaves he Gods children have inward
comforts in outward crosses.
the poor, forlorn and comfortless here? Nothing less; but as Christ had
meat to eat, that his Disciple knew not of: so the poorest of Gods Children
have their inward and spiritual consolation, such as worldly and carnal men
know not of.

But what is this to the Spiritual wealth will not pay carnal debts.
satisfaction of the World? can my inward and spiritual wealth, pay worldly
debts? It may be a good means thereof: for God has promised unto the
faithful, that he will be their helping Father: what they want, he will in
his (...) supply, though he delay the performance of his promise, the more to
occasion me to pray; yet i^ his promise yea, and Amen, as truly to be
performed, as if it were already done.

But (says the fleshly A carnal opinion.
mind) it is long looked for. And it is but foolish idleness of a curious
brain, that seeks not timely means, by right or wrong, to relieve his wants,
nay, that endeavors not his own advancement in this life, as do such as are
careful to provide for themselves and their posterities.

Thus the worldly man speaks to his own heart, not vocally, but by his
present greediness of thi^ Carnal security of the rich, and assurance and
content of the poor.
life's fullness; Soul, take thine ease, thou have enough: to whom, again, the
poorest true and faithful child of God may answer; that in his meanest estate
he rests as well content, and has, through the blessing of God, a sweeter,
and more refreshfull Dinner and Supper with a morsel of Bread, or a dish Dan.
1. 8.
of Roots and Herbs, in his poor, base and beggarly Cottage, yea, in a Prison
or Dungeon, then has the covetous Glutton Luke 16. 19.
faring deliciously every day.

It may be said unto me; Why do I then complain? I answer, Not for that I am
not rich in Revenues, in Gold, Silver, Jewels, Sheep and Oxen, Menseruants,
and Maydeseruants: nor for that I equallize not others in worldly glory: but
for that, necessity (a great and powerful Debt, a heavy burden.
Commander) has me under her foot, keeping me low, that I cannot rise nor
attain unto means by mine honest endeavors to to pay what I owe: only my
heart earnestly desires, to owe nothing to any man, but love: But this
discharges me not of the burden of my Creditours clamours, and of the
conceived shame that my penury procures me. What then? what remains that I
should do? Surely I will wait on God, who never leaves those that are his,
without help in their greatest need. I will endeavor to satisfy all men their
due, and my desire shall be in all good conscience, to discharge mine uttermost
duty, and then I doubt not but God in his Christ will excuse all my enforced
defects, and although man will not, God will accept the will for the deed.

MEDIT. XII.
Gods Providence sufficient for the faithful man.
I Have learned, that man lives not by bread only, but by the Word of God.
which contains such and so many sweet promises of Gods presence with me, and
of his Providence over me, as I laying them up in my heart by Faith, am fed
with that blessed sacietie of spiritual and inward comforts, which makes the
new man to grow daily in all fullness of heavenly contentment, drowning and
swallowing up all superfluous cares of this life: wherein I am indeed seen to
live, and yet (I speak as I desire) I wish to have my conversation totally in
Heaven.

As I have a corporal being, so I converse in the Al have a corporal and
aspirituall being.
Earth, and earthly things, but I have also a spiritual: and so I have my
conversation spiritual; namely, in Heaven, from whence I received my
spiritual life. And where, after this life I know I shall live ever.

The true Child of God lives here but in show of his bodily presence, his
inward part which is his regenerate The godly have their conversation in heaven.
mind, is always co^uersant in heaven, which is his home: but the carnal and
unregenerate man, has both his visible and invisible parts, set especially
Phil. 3 20.
on worldly things, conversant with the vanities of this world in spiritual
darkness.

Heaven, I confess, in respect Though local heaven be far above us, heavenly
comforts are near, the earnest of our inheritance
of the local situation thereof, is far above the apprehension of my
natural eyes; yet by the grace of God I apprehend such spiritual comforts
from heaven, as I believe, they are even here, the very true earnest of that
joy, which I shall hereafter receive at full: and though this earnest be not
the quantity, yet it is of the quality of the heavenly joy, there laid up for
me after this life, when and where all corporal miseries shall have an end,
and I shall become a freeman of that heavenly City, where I shall want nothing
that is good, nor be oppressed with any thing that is evil.

But who can be persuaded of this my happy estate to come, considering my
hard estate here? I cannot in my body, which is corrupt and sinful, show any
visible token of the assurance of glory to come, as it were from heaven, as
sanctified Steven did, whose face did shine Act. 6. 15.
before his Persecutors, as the face of an Angel.

Such a confirmation of inward comfort, in mine afflictions, by celestial
visible tokens, now needs not: for, that I strive not to seem a Saint, or to
be so reputed, in or of the world, (though I doubt not but I am so) wherein,
the more sincere I seem to show my self, so much the more procure I the
contempt of the world. The Kings daughter is all The glory of the godly is
within.
glorious within: so the children of God, howsoever base and abject they may
seem to the world, they are beautiful within.

They may be outwardly as was poor Lazarus; Luke 16. 20
beggarly and full of corporal diseases, as was holy Job in his miseries: and
Job 2. 8. to 13.
were not the doctrine of the bodies resurrection true, and that I believed it,
could I with patience undergo The miseries of Gods children great, eased
through hope.
the harsh entertaynment that the world imposes upon me, as crosses, miseries,
emulations, envy, poverty, labor with contempt, and al sorts of discontents,
domesticke and foreign, within and without, in body and mind? In all which
the assurance of my bodies resurrection to glory, (which none but mine own
heart feels) is the hand, whereby I receive comfort from heaven here in
earth, even in my greatest miseries.

I am not ignorant of other Some grow somestand at a stay, or wither.
men's growth, from a grain of wealth to an ounce, from an ounce to a pound,
from a pound to an hundred weight. And I that have labored more peradventure
then some of them, am left so far behind them, as I am forgotten ever to have
been of their company.

What shall I say? shall I fret my self at their prosperity? and grudge at
mine own mean estate? no, I will trust in the Lord, Psalm. 37.
I will delight me in him, and commit my way unto him, I will not envy him
that prospers in his way; Psalm. 37.
nor him that obtayneth his desires in this life. It is too much, and I rather
pity then envy them; for their fullness makes them fall; and their fatness
makes them without Gods fear, the more fit for the slaughter.

It is enough for me, that In our dependence on Gods providence we must labor
in our callings.
I depend on Gods Providence: yet do I not so depend, as that I think, that
he will feed me, though I put not my hand to my mouth, and that by his
providence and power, my wants and my necessities should be supplied, though I
labored not. No, it is so far from me so to think, as I endeavor to use all
the lawful means that my calling (base as it is reputed) and mine endeavors
therein (weak as they are known) can administer unto me.

But I acknowledge all Nothing prospers without Gods blessing.
my labors vain, without the blessing of God, without which, I know, nothing
can prosper under my hand. And I am not ignorant, that according to the outward
man, al things succeed alike to the good and to the wicked, health and
sickness, riches and poverty, enemies and friends: the Sun shines, and the
rain falls on both alike, not to the best by desert, nor by chance, in that
which is to either of them good for their corporal being: but that Gods
blessing in earthly things, should make even the wicked without excuse; and
that GOD may have the glory, not only for the salvation of the one, but for
the condemnation of the other: for, his glory appears as well in judgment as
in mercy.

I will therefore trust in the Lord, I will (during my time limited by God)
labor in my calling, according to my duty and occasions administered, and
therein will I wait with patience in hope: I will rest content with my
portion, knowing that a small thing, blessed by God, is better then the
greatest riches of the insatiable.

MEDIT. XIII.
Not to sorrow for a man's death, but to hope of his better life.
NOw, forasmuch as I know I shall change this vile body for a better, such as
are my friends, in reason, will not be against it, though for a time they
shall lose mine, and I shall lose their corporal and comfortable society, but
we shall meet again in more complete and comfortable joy in the heavens,
then the earth can afford us; and therefore I wish them not to sorrow for my
departure, when it shall please GOD to appoint the time.

But me thinks I hear Fear of future want, causes mourning most.
some (whom the Law of Nature (especially of Religion) binds me much to
respect) lamenting their miserable estates, which cannot but befall them, after
my final departure from them; it is hard with them now; and they may justly
fear that they shall want, what my poor endeavors, while I live and have my
health among them, do in some measure supply.

And (which may aggrauate Debt of a man dying, is grievous to him and his.
their sorrow, and my grief the more) I am indebted, and thereby shall leave a
more heavy burden of misery and contempt upon them, then the poor means
which I shall leave for them, will be able to sustain: for, they say, and true
it is, that creditors are cruel, and there is little mercy among men: and
therefore may they justly fear, that they shall be oppressed beyond their
power, which may justly give them the greater cause of fear before, and of
mourning after my The effects of poverty and riches, left to posterity.
death.

As riches left unto posterities, are the cause of carnal content and
rejoicing: so is poverty, cast upon them by Parents, the occasion of sorrow
and calamity. The confideration whereof breeds more grief in my heart, then
the remembrance of death brings fear, not in respect of my self, who am
taught, that in what estate soever I be, to be therewith content: but my
contentment works not in the^ the true knowledge, how to use things
indifferent: for, being poor, I am patient; and where patience is, there is
hope; and where hope is, there is the mind at peace: or, being rich, I may have
discontent and distraction; so that neither wealth nor want, of themselves are
good or evil, but as they are made by the use, or abuse, of either of them.

Poverty in Parents, makes The benefit of poverty, and the inco^moditie of
riches left to children.
oftentimes children virtuous, knowing it is their portion: whereas the hope
of riches, often imboldens the indifferently well inclined, to be the worse
conditioned, knowing, the greatness of their portion will maintain their
vanities. Virtue, is a far Virtue, a great patrimony.
greater patrimony then possessions; and with an inheritance, wisdom is
necessary; but precious, where no earthly inheritance is, for that by it, the
life is governed by true discretion; whereas without it, the best patrimony is
suddenly consumed with shame.

If therefore I could leave Virtue and riches of the mind, not by propagation.
unto them, that riches of the mind, to direct their ways, they might then
spend their short and evil days as sweetly and as contentedly in a poor
cottage; and therein offer unto God, as pleasing sacrifices of prayer and
praises, as in a Princes Palace; but God is the giver of these heavenly virtues.

Poverty is not to be imputed Poverty in it self no fault.
as a fault, to the honestly minded and truelyindustrious. The fault is in the
mind that deemes it a fault: but few, howsoever Philosophical they seem, can
without divine wisdom bear with gladness, to be left poor by Parents: and
what wife is she, that with willing acceptance will embrace a poor life,
after her (though) most virtuous, and most loving and beloved husband?

Widdowhood of it self Widdowhood a sorrowful portion.
seems, and to the virtuous woman is, a sorrowful portion, especially so
left by a beloved husband; but Widdowhood with poverty, is mere misery: yet
a virtuous woman married will take her lot with patience, being a widow; for,
no estate, time or trial, can alter her constancy.

MEDIT. XIIII.
The discovery of a mean estate reputed a fault, is none.
I Have been often condemned of simplicity, by many of my friends, for that I
bewray mine own poor estate, so publicly to the world, which peradventure
may repute me rich, and of competent means. This I acknowledge is a show of
their love and friendly affection, and I so take it, but cannot observe it, nor
follow their counsel; for if I should conceal my necessity, and make an
outward show to have what I have not, and to be what I am not; am I the richer,
or the better? shall my posterity receive the greater portion of prosperity
after me? nay, shall they not rather undergo the greater penury? can I make a
show of greatness: and will not that require a superfluous and needless
charge? and will not that charge impair and diminish, even that little that I
have? therefore fear I not to bewray mine own wants; but desire rather to
show my self as I am, and to be as I show my self: for GOD abborreth a double
heart.

Again, it has been objected against me by A taxation for poverty in a
seeming aduantagious calling.
way of a kind of reproving admiration, that I having lived long, and labored
much in a seeming adua^tagious employment, should grow no greater, or wax no
richer.

What should I answer to this objection? To be silent is best. If they could
as well tax me with riotous expendings, and a prodigal life, whereby I have
consumed that which by Gods blessing I have gotten: I would answer by a plain
confession, that I were not worthy to be worth a morfell of bread: or if they
could charge me with idleness, or neglect of the execution of my calling,
according to occasion; I should show my self destitute of understanding: Pro.
12. 11. Ecclus. 33. 26. Ecclus. 40. 14.
and through mine ldleuesse bring upon me much ^^d. But prosperity and
adversity, life and death, poverty and riches, come of the Lord. A man may
labor, and yet lack; he may be idle, and yet abound. A righteous man may
want, and the wicked grow wealthy, and neither the religious industry of the
one makes rich; nor the carnal security of the other, seconded by worldly
policy, prevent it: therefore will I labor, referring the success to him that
blesses every work to the poor and the rich, according to his own will, but
to diverse ends good and evil, Good and bad are blessed, but to several ends.
as are the subjects of the blessings, though none are truly blessed, but such
as God has made righteous, yet in respect of God, the good success of the
works of wicked men are reputed a blessing, the abuse whereof, turns in the
end to a curse.

MEDIT. XV.
A third taxation.
AGAIN, a second main negligence is objected, and laid to my charge, by way
of taxing me for my poverty: That, if I provide not for my family, I am worse
then an Infidel. These remembrancers are like Jobs comfortars, that in stead
of consolatorie counsel, do afflict me with words of sorrow and bitterness.

I know and acknowledge 2. Cor. 8. 21. Romans 12. 17
that I am bound to provide for my family things honest; the scope of which
charge I conceive not, necessarily to be stretched so far, as some seem to
tenter it, making it the color of detested covetousness.

I understand the true The meaning of providing for families.
meaning of this piece of Scripture, to tend to the moving of Christian
parents of children, and Masters of families, to a necessary care of the
sustentation and education of those of their families, and to this I
acknowledge my self bound, lest that they through my negligence, idleness,
and vnthristie course of life, should want those things, that necessarily
appertain either to their relief, maintenance, or education, whereby indeed I
should be guilty of their miseries.

If therefore my heart can (as it does) sincerely testify unto me truly the
contrary, though the world condemn me therein; he, I know, to whom I stand or
fall, will excuse me.

The brute beasts and The care of brute creatures over their young.
birds have, by the instinct of nature, in a sort, the same care that is
enjoined unto man: they provide for their young as long as they are tender and
weak, but when they become stronger and able to prey for themselves, the old
forsake them.

The true meaning of this former Scripture, as I conceive, requires no more of
me necessarily, though Reason and Religion bind me, never to forget to do
them what good I can, and to add unto their comfort, according to their
necessity, and my lawfully gotten means. The contrary of the true meaning of
providing for families.


Some yet think themselves Infidels, if they use not all possible means, by
right or wrong, to enrich their posterities, to advance their greatness, to
equalize them in lands, livings, and possessions, with their Superiors,
pretending thereby, that it behooues them even by the Law of Love and Religion,
thus to provide for the superfluous future maintenance of their children, and
their heirs, intayling their possessions Intayling possessions.
from generation to generation; and what do they but thereby argue their
distrust, that the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, of Jacob, Joseph, Job, and
other godly men, who only cast their care upon God, is not now as provident,
powerful, and careful of the necessity of his children, as he was of them?

Does not this prove A kind of infidelity in providing.
worldly minded men, more to resemble Infidels then do they, that cast the
care of providing for their children upon God, themselves not able by all
their lawful endeavors to leave them competencie after their death? but do
work as much as in them lies, to bring their children to the fear of God,
that they again by their godly lives and holy conuersations, might teach their
Posterities. Riches without the fear of God quickly spent.


This in deed is the greatest portion, and most perpetual, without which it is
daily observed, that the greatest earthly portions and possessions, are
commonly spent and consumed, before their too careful fathers carcasses be
half rotten in the Grave.

There be some by their Virtues have worthily Honor maintained by possessions
but better by virtue.
merited Honor, which cannot be maintained, but by possessions, and
revenues: whose Virtues imprinted in their children, do more magnify the
dignity of fathers, then the possessions they leave them after their deaths.

Honor, in deed should be the reward of Virtue, A kind of preposterous
dignifying.
but contrary, commonly Virtue follows Honor: and Honor, Possessions: for as
a man's greatness is, so are his reputed Virtues. So that Possessions are as
the Lodestone, to draw on Titles of Honor, and Honorable Offices: and far
the more gloriously does Virtue shine, by how much it is found in men honored.
In men base in show, let their Virtues be Virtue not observed in poor men.
never so great, they will not shine to the eyes of the world; nor be
discerned, but by their contraries, nor made perfect, but by adversity: and in
whomsoever true virtue is found, be he never so base in outward show, he
deserves more respect, then he that has much wealth, and is vicious, though
he be dignified with the title of honor.

MEDIT. XVI.
A justification of good endeavors.
NOw then, although I strive not to justify mine endeavors, which I know, are
not to all men hid: Yet may I justly justify my lawful defense against the
former imputations: And I think I erred not, if I did in some measure:
challenge unto me the merit of some gratuitie, among other laborers, whose
estates testify, that either their wit, policy or friends have far exceeded
mine: or else it has so fallen upon them by Chance; which last I believe not;
for the The word Chance excludes divine providence.
word excludes Divine providence: which to deny, is proper to Atheists and
Epicures, as Eliphas reports, or rather whereby he vpbraided, faithful and
holy JOB, saying, How should GOD know? How should he judge through the dark
clouds? The clouds hide him that he cannot see.

This was his blindness, Worldly wisdom, spiritual folly and contrary. 1.
Cor. 3. 19.
his eyes were open to carnal, but shut to divine understanding. But GOD sees
the blindness of them, that are wise to the world, and fools to God, and
observes also those that are fools to the world, who are wise to GOD. Though
he have his dwelling on high, he yet abaseth himself, to behold things, as
well in the Earth, which is his footestoole, as the things in Heaven, the
throne of his Majesty. And I know, and verily believe, that God is no idle
obseruer of the things that befall unto every man in this life.

Some things come to pass even of his own mere providence, for the corporal
comfort, and relief of his distressed children, as to the widow of Sareptha:
Some to their spiritual comfort, as when 1. Kin. 17. 8.
Philip was sent to the Eu^uch: And some things Act. 8. 27.
God tolerates men to atchieue by unlawful means: As Ahab, Naboths Vineyard. 1
King. 21.


And because things fall not out to an equal allotment to all, but some to be
advanced, some kept low, some in prosperity, some in poverty, some
undeserving, richly rewarded, some deserving, not regarded: there be that
think of God, as the Syrians did, only to be a God of the 1. King. 20. 23.
Mountains, of great men of the world; not of the Vall^ies, of poor, oppressed
me^ of the world: as if he were not (...) God that cared for the poor.
Whatsoever therefore the men of worldly minds think, howsoever they persuade
themselves: I do constantly believe, that there is nothing, great nor small,
no man high nor low, but is under Gods Providence; as touching All things are
under Gods disposing.
the success of whatsoever they do.

Does God number the hairs of ^^r heads, and Mat. 10. 30 Luke 12. 7.
put our tears in a bottle? and shall I not think, that he regards,
rules, appoints, and disposes greater things that concern me? I believe
that the preferment and dignity of one, and the keeping of another in mean
estate: is as far from fortune and chance, as it is from a man's own power, to
add a cubit to his stature, or to make a hair black that is white. It is not
then in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that gives what
every man runs for.

And therefore I think, He that has done all that he can, may be excused.
that when I have done all I can by my best and sincerest endeavors to increase
my portion, I can lawfully add no more then I have done, to the enlarging of
mine estate. To heave, to shoue, to strive, to struggle, to insinuate, to
flatter, to cogge, to face, lie and deceive, are as easily learned, as to be an
honest man. And he that is either ignorant of, or not apt in practice of
these, he may live censured (...) simple man, but no laudable Politician, but
of a base, weak and dejected condition, of which rank I am numbered.

But I may answer my Censurers, as David did. How long will ye judge
vn^^^^ly, and accept the persons of the (...): yet there is no doubt, but that
many rich and wealthy men may be free from the former No doubt but many rich
men may be good.
kind of policy, and have inno^ent hearts and clean hands.

MEDIT. XVII.
Not good to yield to evil means, to get wealth.
IT is a fearful thing to yield unto unlawful motions and means to become
rich by the Examples of Achan and Gehezi, Josh. 7. 1. 2. Kin. 5. 22.
whom God gave up to their covetous hearts, and to walk according to their own
counsels, whose rewards well weighed, may make others (as I desire) to beware:
yet according to the course of common carnal policy these were wise fellows
and provident. There was not so thriftie a fellow in all the Camp of Israel,
as Achan was: for although many precise and scrupulous Fools past by and
neglected, the wedge of Gold, he thought it wisdom to singer it: though a
curse were laid upon it, having learned, belike of Horace, A foolish
proposition.
That none but Fools will refuse Gold that can get it. A foolish Proposition,
without a disjunction, and restriction. Gold, indeed, is lawful, lawfully
gotten, not contrary.

Elisha refused, but Gehezi his servant took the 2. Kin. 5. 15. He that gave
the spirit to Elisha, knows all things.
forbidden reward: as many servants of great men at this day do, who have not
Elishaes spirit to follow and discover them. But he that gave the spirit to
Elisha, knows all altogether; though the Achans and Gehezies of this old
politic World have learned to be more secret, unseen and vn-noted. They grow
wealthy vn-awares to men: having but some colorable office or trade, Offices
color Briberies.
who can tax them with Talents of Silver, or Wedges of Gold? Only they are
admired for their wit, much reverenced for their wealth, gazed on for their
glory, and flattered for their felicity: and therefore think they are even
here in the very bosom of Paradise, and in so high favor of God, as they
could be content to dwell here in the Earth (with that contentment they now
have) all eternities; seldom or never calling to mind that they must dye, and
that (it may be) suddenly, as others do: and that they must yield an account,
both for the getting and using of their wealth and greatness.

God is not ignorant of Briberies, Extortions, Oppressions God not ignorant of
Briberies.
and wrongs, that men unlawfully commit in their lawful callings, as they
(with Gehezi) think he is: no, he knows their thoughts, much more secretest
Briberies, nicely termed Gratuities.

Gehezi was leprozed 2. Kin. 5. 27
for one, and that a seeming lawful Gratuitie: and should I think to escape a
more deadly leprosy by such and so many extorted Gratuities, plain Briberies,
as I might take, to make me rich? One common Gratuitie, nor twenty can effect
that, which some men bring to pass, under color of some employments: The
benefit whereof lawfully taken, cannot so much and so speedily enrich them, as
they are observed to enrich themselves: partaker of whose secrets, let my soul
never be!

Unhappy is he, that Unlawful execution of a lawful calling, dangerous and
unhappy.
cannot live contentedly in a lawful calling, by the fruits of the lawful
execution of the same, and more unhappy is he, that to increase his competent
estate, does use unlawful and forbidden means. Such a man no doubt is
ignorant; that the fear of God is great riches, and that godliness is gain.
Neither 1. Tim. 6. 6.
of which can stand with a covetous desire of superfluous riches. For the fear
of God and godliness, are Twins, borne at one birth, by the Siprit of God,
working by faith, which brings forth hope, both which they seem to want, that
are sollicitous and ouer-greedie, to get the pelf and pillage of the World;
who cannot contain themselves within the limits prescribed by the Holy Ghost,
namely, In whatsoever estate we are, Phil. 4. 11.
therewith to be content, not caring for too morrow, as Mat. 6 25. 34.
doubting of Gods Providence: but having food and raiment, to be therewith
satisfied. Genesis 28. 20.


This Doctrine, though it be Christ's own, is too restrictiue, it is a hard and
harsh Commandment, so contrary to the practice of carnall-minded men, as many
of them would either wish it stricken out of the Book, or to hear such a
pleasing gloss upon it, as might moderate the severity of it. They are
content to take what the time present will afford them: yet they think it not
sufficient, unless they provide and lay up for many years.

A godly respect, no A godly care not forbidden, so we show no distrust in God.
doubt, is not hereby forbidden, as namely, to labor to day, the better to
live to morrow; this year to sow and reap, to nourish us the next year: and
so to provide for future times, as we show not any distrust in God, though we
have not to day, but only for the day, he has willed us to ask of him Bread,
which comprehends all Mat. 6. 11.
necessaries; which he has promised to give us every day. By that Petition
which he has taught us, Give us this day our daily bread.

And though he give me not dainties to eat, I know that by his blessing, the
meanest fare shall satisfy my continent appetite, and temperate Diet.

Daniel and his fellows were as well filled and fed, Dan. 1. 8.
waxed as fat and fair, with Water and Pulse, as were any, that fed on the
full furnished and variety of the Kings dainty Dishes. Therefore it is not
Mean fare by Gods blessing, nourishes sufficiently.
the meat that I eat, be it never so rare, that feeds and preserues my
body, but the meanest, and least, (blessed to my use by God) works the same,
and through faith a better effect.

The like (...) conceive of Riches and Possessions: what could I account me
the better, were I owner of a whole County? were I not still the same, and
only one man? And had I the fairest and most spacious House in the World, I
could be but in one room at one time: were my calling never so great. What
need I then hazard my soul for this bodies vain delights, and superfluous
vanities?

I do consider the variety of the wished contentments, that wise Solomon made
proof of, in his most absolute experime^ts; wherein I observe his final
discontents, who cried out against all his delights, that they were but
vanity, yea, Vanity of vanities, Eccles. 1. 2.
all vanity.

Many superfluous things The rich are never satisfied, yet ever poor.
men covet, and the covetous are never full, the eye is never satisfied with
seeing, nor the heart in desiring, crying, More, more; their Chests are full,
their commings in are great, and greatest of all is their desire of more; and
having too much, they still plead poverty: and so truly I do believe, many of
them may, for in their greatest outward abundance, their wants are great within.

If therefore I should As gain, so desire increases.
strive to get much, my desire to get, would always be greater then the gain,
and of less true value then my travail, that I might spend upon better things.

I will therefore content me with my poor portion, and give GOD the praise,
if he be pleased by his blessing to increase it, by the lawful execution of
that employment whereunto I am called, fearing (by experience) that if once the
desire of riches possess my heart, it will be hard for me to bridle it: for
the obtaining of that I couetously desire, would be but the increase of the
desire of having, and so I should at length want, as well that which I should
attain unto and not use, as that which I had not.

A true mean in desiring A true mean, hard to find.
a lawful manner of gathering, and a right use of keeping and disposing of
riches, are as hard to find, as a couetuous man to be a good man: for, no man
that sets his affections on the things of this world, can have true peace with
God, nor have a good conscience.

If I settle the love of God and the World cannot dwell in one heart. Luke 16.
13.
this world in my heart, the love of God cannot dwell there, I cannot love God
and Mamman: and where the creature is entertained before, and preferred unto
the Creator, I exclude Christ my Savior, in whom, and by whom, and for whom, I
enjoy all good things here: should I not then set him before all? yea, as All
in all things in my heart? if I have Christ, I have all things, even in my
corporal poverty; and without him I have nothing, in my greatest seeming
something.

I may, and I am commanded, to use all lawful means according to my calling,
to live competently in the world: but that I ought first to seek Matt. 6. 33
the kingdom^ of heaven, and the righteousness thereof, so all things
necessary, by divine promise, shall be administered unto (...). And, I hold
things only necessary, sufficient, being obtained.

But what are the things, What are things necessary.
that in this life, may be reputed only necessary? Tha^ which may be truly
held suffici^^^^, that a man find himself neither to w^^t, no^ to have more
then he has just occasion to use necessarily, according to his calling, high
or low: he has most, I think, that couets least, and he has enough, that
owes naught, that neither needs to flatter nor to borrow.

Here is the difference Difference between humane policy and divine wisdom.
between humane policy, and divine wisdom, and hereupon they are at od^:
Policy prouides and laye^ up in bank, increasing it more and more, until too
much be not sufficient, grounding the care upon the providence of the
P^ssemire and Be, and such small creatures, who through the instinct of
nature, are taught to provide in Summer for the consequent Genesis 41. 47 48.
Winter. Joseph provided in seven years plenty, for seven years scarcetie:
this divine wisdom and nature it self teaches, but neither of them,
especially divine wisdom, to provide but according to necessity; and
whatsoever God sends by blessing a man's lawful labors and honest endeavors, is
a Christian man's greatest portion.

Food and raiment was Genesis 28. 20.
Jacobs desire: and the same request I daily make unto A competent estate to
the contented
God, namely, that he will afford meat, drink, and raiment competent for my
self and family, and to free me, and ever to keep me from debt and danger of
other men. If I can attain unto this mean estate, I shall hold me happy among
men, and blessed of GOD; and this is the mark unto which I only aim all my
desires of earthly preferment; for that I labor, and for that I pray, and rest
in hope, which hope, I know, shall not finally make me ashamed: though, for
the time, a kind of shameful imputation seems to be laid upon me, for not
raising my means to a higher proportion, as if Gods purpose and work were my
fault, who knows what lot in this life is best and fittest for me; and
therefore I rest and rely upon his providence, wherein I steadfastly believe,
he will never fail^ me, nor forsake me, to the end of my life, short and evil.

MEDIT. XVIII.
All men in this life have use of their own labors.
MY time, at the first, was reputed but a spanne long, and now I cannot account
it a fingers br^adth: yet, while I have my being in this life, I shall stand in
need of the continual use of mine own labors (having no other revenues, no,
not the breadth of a foot) wherein I crave Gods divine aid, direction, and
blessing, who has been mine original Scholemaster God in all things has been
my Schole master.
in all the good things that ever I have learned, or have been able to
practice: for, of my self I am a fool, ignorant, not only of divine, but of
humane profitable knowledge, yea of mine own worldly profession; and finding
mine own insufficiency, I sought and found that which I have (slender as it
is) at the hands of him that made Iub^l a Genesis 4. 21. and verse. 22.
pleasant Musician, and Tubal a painful Smith.

And to say as I find, my A thankelesse profession.
profession agrees little with the quality of the first, but much with that of
the last: for, it is mixed with far more pain, then pleasure; and with more
care, then comfort; and with more grief, then gain; and with more suspicion,
then thanks.

Can there be (may some A calling subject to censure.
say) a profession, bringing with it such a troop of inco^ueniences? yes,
though I be no publik Magistrate, my calling is as subject to censure: for,
what man is he that deals between two, or more, of contrary desires, that
can truly give them all contented satisfaction, be he the most judicious and
iustest Judge or Magistrate? How much more, to deal with multitudes of
perverse and preiudicate people: yea, if it be in a business that concerns
their souls, by the sincerest Minister of God, will they not censure according
to their several conceived (though corrupt and perverse) opinions? But if the
business concern their worldly estates, much more will the most of them kick
against the most just, and most indifferent judgment of the Agent, who being
tied by the band of duty and a good conscience, to give a true account of his
imployme^ts to a second person, the maintenance of whose dignity and
liuelyhood, in some part consists in the just execution of that wherein he is
trusted, cannot yet escape their slanders, deal he never so sincerely.

Need not I therefore to To be subject to a double censure, requires care of a
man's carriage.
be careful of my carriage, being subject to a double censure? If I come short
of mine expected duty, I may be taxed at home; if I perform it truly, I am
condemned abroad: and, to arbitrate mine actions, there are such, sometimes, as
for their own vain popularitie among the multitude, and to insinuate with the
Honorable wise, will rather add a sentence of rash (yea false) condemnation,
then a syllable to excuse the smallest slip (if any be) incensing so the
waspish Hidra, to a clamorous outcry, that I have abused them: who being thus
seconded, will not forbear to disgorge their malicious hearts to the uttermost
disgrace of him, that with a most sincere conscience carries his desires,
neither to lean unto the right hand, partially to please his Master; nor to
the left hand, injuriously to wrong any, whom his service concerns.

What then? Shall I Not to relinquish our calling, for false suggestions.
look back? shall I leave my plough for some rubs it meets withal in a rough
and rugged soil? No, I may not, but rather endeavor so to carry my self in my
calling, as my conscience may still (as evermore formerly it has) testify
with me mine integrity, whatsoever may be said or done against me.

I am not of my self ignorant, but do know and acknowledge, that if I should
rest either careless of* my duty on the one side, or ouer-harsh or heavy on
the other, respecting only my private salarie and extorted gain, forgetting
duty and charity, A clear conscience makes bold.
I should carry a greater charge of conscience (not questioned) then all the
unjust calumniations and Pro. 28. 1.
slanders of malicious men could cast upon me; I will therefore with patience
go on, and undergo the burden of what^oeuer crimination.

MEDIT. XIX.
Objection.
SOme man may say, To what end is all thi^ Discourse, touching the crosses
falling upon him in his private profession and calling? What is his case to
other men? It concerns none but himself, and therefore a relation needless
and unprofitable.

If it concern none but All men are subject to evil toungs.
my self; as it profits none else, it little hurts any else: yet this may any
man learn hereby, that all possessions and employments are not free from
censure; nor any man so just, and sincere in his calling in this life, but is
subject to back-byting tongues: yea, such as think this my relation to
concern them nothing at all, shall find it a necessary prevention of their
too much security; for I yet never knew the man, of whatsoever Calling, Trade,
Mystery, Profession, or Employment, whom neither his own conscience in some
Is none so just, but conscience or wicked men will tax for injustice.
things could, or malicious men would not slander, backe-bite, or accuse: let
him be of what eminent place soever, in Church, or Commonwealth; especially,
where he is to handle matter of difference between men; he shall hardly
escape, either temptation by reward, or condemnation for injustice, deal he
never so iudiciously and justly.

Does this concern none Objection
but my self? yes, but what then? why should I untimely discover these common
abuses offered to the good by the bad? It is the mean to bring men into
suspicion of doing evil, that are free: and to put men in mind to slander,
that thought not of it.

It were a happy forgetfulness. But the World is not so sleepie, but the
least occasion awakes it, to the unjust reproach of iustest men; men of all
degrees and qualities. And therefore I think fit to let all A slanderer wounds
himself.
such abusing tongues to know, that their malice is in vain toward them they
aim to hit, but they wound themselves, and defile the cares that hear them:
therefore I fear them not, but will go on, in my lawful calling, to day and
to morrow, and while it pleases God, and leave them and their tongues, either
to repent, or to perish in their time.

I find the surest and safest Best, not to regard what the wicked say
defense against these dogged natur'de tongues that bite them, that hear not
their barking, not to regard what they say, or Esa. 51. 7, 8
to whom, or what they report. For if I should fear to go on in my calling,
because I am subject to the mis-conceiuings and misreports of common
Detractors, I should seem to fear more their slanders, then the breach of
Gods Precept, who approoueth Pro. 12. 11.
not, but condemns the life that is idle.

The World esteems The idle are least at leisure to do good.
them happiest men, that in wealth, pleasure and idleness, live without
labor, who have most leisure to hear, observe and publish the defects of
other men; and yet have no time to look into, or reform their own far more
gross Errors, or to serve him that will teach them better things.

The Holy Ghost approves the^ happiest, that live of the mean profit of their
labors: Thou shall be blessed, says David, when thou ^atest the fru^^s of the
labors of thine own hands: though it be no dainty fare, by common
experience, that a man justly may get, by the mere labor of his own hands
(excluding high Offices) yet competent, Handie trade lawfully used, can hardly
purchase much Land: Officers may. Act. 18. 3.
blessed by God.

How then can this poor industry attain the means to purchase Patrimonies
for Posterities? Paul by his Tent-making, nor Peter by his fishing, Mat. 4. 18.
could grow great in the World; but Matthew an Mar. 2. 14. Col. 4. 14.
Officer, and Luke a Phisician, were in the way of far more profit: Such are
the different estates of men in this World, some poor, some rich, some base,
some in honor, not one without his crosses; therefore not one without All have
need to pray.
necessary occasion, to pray for a contented mind, ever prepared for the time
of death; never looking for true peace with, or in the World: and happy is he
that has wars with it, and peace with God.

But here is the misery The cause of household troubles.
of miseries; hence is grief, hence often vpbraydings; especially domesticke:
the want of dainty fare, gay, and fashionable garments, and the want of means
to prefer and advance Posterities, is the Household Breake-peace: and to avoid
Some to avoid worldly misery, fall into mischief.
this misery, some run into a mischief, using sinister and unlawful means
to satisfy the World and worldly minds, displeasing God, to please vain
fantasies: yet, for a time, it is sweet and pleasant, yielding a kind of
content and carnal comfort: such as CHRIST foretold, that Worldlings should
have in this life; as the Rich man in the Gospel had: but GODS own Children
should have contrary enentertainme^t in the world: they should want, weep,
and lament as Lazarus Luke 16. 20.
did: and as their estates of wealth and want, pleasure and pain, faith and
infidelity do differ; so do their ends; for fulness and want, mirth and
mourning, joy and sorrow, idleness and labor, stand not together in this
life, neither yield they like comfort, or calamity after death.

There are but two extremes Two extremes of poverty andriches.
in riches and poverty, but their degrees are infinite: so are there of
pleasure and pain after this life: The true use of riches, and the patient
acceptance of a mean estate are equal, and receive eequall proportion of
reward.

So the abuse of riches, and the impatient undergoing of a poor estate, shall
be equally punished: whether therefore I be poor or rich, I am in neither
happy, but so far, as I walk in either of them, in the fear and love of
God, that gives both; for the good of the good; and to the reproof of them
that abuse either.

O, happy is that heart, He is happiest, that seeks to be filled with
heavenly things.
that harbors the hope of heavenly things! it is contentedly satisfied with
the smallest portion the world does yield, and yet rests not idle in
well-doing, but carefully indeuoreth so to live, as willingly not to be
chargeabe to any, desiring rather to be able to help the needy, and to owe
nothing but good will to any.

Naked came I into the World: poor and in a mean estate I live, and naked I
must go hence: as touching my spiritual part, I shall be clothed with the
Robe of my Redeemers merits, in the Heavens, until my body shall be raised
again, and then reunited unto my soul, and both become one body clothed with
eternal glory. And therefore, Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly, and finish
these days of sin, that I may partake of thy glory.

THE HVSBANDS Christian counsel to his Wife and Children, left poor after his
death.
PART. 1.
Death certain, his coming uncertain.

BY the former Discourse, ye may perceive, that Death will certainly come upon
me and you, as upon all men; but when, where or how, no man knows; and that
after death, all shall come to Judgment, and yield account for whatsoever they
have done in this life, and therefore we all should prepare us against the
time, by continual watchsulnesse in well-doing.

You may also conceive, and I know, you have too well experimented my poor
estate to be such, as I cannot leave behind me such testimonies, of my
worldly happiness as many other men do to them they leave behind them, that
may challenge some remembrance by their worldly substance. And therefore, in
stead of such commemorations, I desire, before I go hence, and be no more
seen, to leave such token of my love toward you, as I can; that you may
likewise remember me in Christian imitation, after my death, wishing you to
take that in good part at my hands, that I shall give you in counsel, though
words, I know, make none wealthy.

In stead therefore of The love of God in poverty, is greatest portion.
Possessions, and Pecuniary Portions, I wish you ever to esteem the favor,
love, and providence of God, your chiefest riches, who as he has been ever
mine: so will he be assuredly yours, if in faith ye serve him and seek him.
Be ye therefore patient in that, which in this life necessity inforceth to
be undergone, howsoever hard and unsavory it be to flesh and blood: and make
of that necessity a virtue; which if be taken with grudging, turns into
sin.

The time will not be long, which will give end Death gives equal portions to
poor and rich.
to the greatest miseries, then what difference can there be observed,
between them that have abundance, and them that have least; they shall carry
equal portions to their graves, only nakedness, which both the rich and
poor, the glorious and the base brought into the World with them: yet their
future portions may differ, as did the Rich man's Mat. 16. 21
and Lazarus.

Let us therefore, as long as we live together, couple and comfort our hearts
together in the Lord, whose pleasure it is (and that in God keeps them low,
whom he loves.
love) to keep us low in this World, to the end we should not be transported
from the love of heavenly, to earthly things; the best whereof is our body,
which yet is compared to a Flower, that fades and comes to nothing.

If therefore poverty and afflictions continually possess us, and press us
down, even unto our lives ends: Let us rest ever faithful, cleaving
constantly unto God, for he cares for us; so shall we 1. Pet. 5. 7
be the less careful for worldly things.

Care not for your lives (says Christ) namely, what Luke 12. 22.
ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, nor for your bodies, what ye shall
put on: Mat. 6. 26.
for the body is more worth then meat, and of more value then raiment, be it
never so precious: yet shall it naturally rot as the Garment does: but so much
the more precious is the body, though it perish, by how much it shall be
futurely glorified. But the bodies of the disobedient and wicked, are so much
the more base and vile then is a garment, by how much it shall not so totally
perish as the garment does, but be reserved and raised to endless torments.

The fowls of the air Mat. 6. 26.
are brought in by Christ, to teach man to cast his care upon God, Who cares
The very brute beasts and fowls must travail for their food, how much more
man?
for the very fowls, though they sow not, nor reap, nor carry into barnes,
yet they are fed and nourished by God: but they are not idle: for as God has
ordained food for them, so are they to fly to and fro to seek it; teaching as
not to rest careless of lawful labors, though Christ say, Care not for to
morrow: but rather that we should be so much the more industrious every where,
by all means and at all times, in our lawful callings, omitting no
opportunity lawfully to increase our store.

Christ likewise by way Ma^s beauty far short of the flowers
of comparison, brings in the Lillyes of the field, setting their glory to the
glory of our corrupt bodies; showing, that although we labor and toil, and
carke and care, Matt. 6. 28.
and busy our bodies and brains about superfluous and vanishing things, we
can never be comparable to the glory of the Lilly, and other glorious and
beautiful flowers; no not Solomon in his most glorious robes: yet as glorious
as these beautiful flowers are, they quickly fade and fall away.

Whereby we are taught, Man's estate like a flower here.
that how gawdily or gloriously soever we covet to beautify our bodies, we
make them never the more permanent, but, as these Esa. 40. 6.
flowers wither and fall, leaf after leaf, through the defect of the sap,
that first caused them to flourish: 1. Pet. 1. 24
so man, live he never so long, and never so full of glory, when the sap of
nature begins to wax dry in him, his most glorious leaves begin to fade and
fail, one after another; the strong men (his legs) begin to weaken and falter;
the grinders (his teeth) fall out of the head; the lookers, (the eyes) wax dim,
and one part after another decays, till the body totally comes to dust in the
grave.

This is the glory of the most glorious; he buds, blossoms, ripes, and rots,
as does the flower in the Psalm. 78. 39.
garden, the grass of the field, and as a shadow, a dream, and as a fancy
flies to his end; and live he never so long, his life is but as a tale that is
told.

Do we not daily see The fragilitie of man.
the youngest and strongest among humane creatures, lively, full of agilitie,
and corporal actiuitie in the morning; who yet before night are either
naturally or accide^tally oftentimes cut down, and in their graves?

Why therefore should Why we should not be too careful of worldly things.
I, or you, that shall perchance survive me, be so sollicitous, and
ouercarefull of worldly things? especially seeintg he longest liver cannot
enjoy what he desires, with any true contentment, above forty or fifty
years: for till he be twenty, he is under government, not at his own will:
after that, he is wearied with labors, and cares of the world; and when he
comes to sixty or seventy years, he be comes decrepit, unapt, and unable to
follow his own occasions.

To be in league with As no man ca^ put off death, so can he not prolong life.
death, as hoping he will forbear the execution of his warrant upon us, or by
art to endeavor to put off old age, though many desire it, none can do it;
the richest by his gifts, the strongest by his valor, the wisest by his
policy, nor the most cunning by any artificial device or stratagem he can
contriue.

Who can free himself of a fever? who can rid himself of the gout, of the
stone, or of any other inherent infirmity of the body? Surely none but death:
death is the Phisician Death cures all diseases.
that cures all the diseases present in the body: yet we like not his physic,
we are contented to use art, money we willingly give to avoid it; and yet it
is commonly seen, that he that seeks and desires most to prolong his life,
is most suddenly taken by death: and he that seeks most to fly from it, him
it follows even at the heels: and he that couets most to save his life,
soonest loses it.

I think it therefore How far to covet long life.
greatest wisdom, so far to covet long life, as it may stand a blessing of
God; during which life, we are to meditate necessarily Exo. 23. 26.
two especial points, namely, how to lead our lives, and how to entertain
death when it comes.

As touching the first, First point to live godly.
we are enjoined, and therefore bound to live godly; which comprehends all
the duties of a Christian life, which duties although All duties performed by
holy obedience
they be many, are all performed by holy obedience to God, which consists in
a perfect observing of his divine Precepts, namely, 1. Sam. 15. 22, 23. Hos. 6.
6.
in doing that which is good, and avoiding that which is evil.

The good commanded, All good is of God, evil of ourselves.
cannot be done by nature, which is corrupt; but by grace, freely given: the
evil, which is forbidden, comes, and is done by nature. The effects of good
and ill affections, consist in action, by several operations: the good which
we do, God works both in us and by us; the evil which we do, is of and by
our selves: The like in suffering; the good suffer evil with patience, not the
evil of doing, but the bearing of evils and wrongs offered, without grudging:
The wicked suffer even goodness, as it were, against their wills, and commit
evils against the good wittingly, and with their wills: The good endeavor to
lead their lives unspotted in the world, not as did many Heathen Philosophers,
who had both the active and passive parts of doing good, and suffering evil,
and that in great measure of patience, wanting only divine knowledge, and
consequently, faith: which are no more ours by nature, then they were theirs.

Therefore, if I, or you Outward virtues gain but a bare name of holiness.
should only endeavor a kind of Philosophical outward and moral goodness,
without the internal working of grace through faith; we should by our such
doing and suffering, gain but that which they gained, a bare name of
holiness; although we (as some of them did) would voluntarily give our bodies
to death, we should thereby gain but the more future miseries.

In all our doings and We must have God before our eyes, both in doing and
suffering.
sufferings, we must set GOD always before the eye of our minds, taking hold
of Christ by faith, by whom he has reueiled himself unto us (to be our
loving Father) not unto them: without Christ, we are even as the former
Gentiles were, under the curse; but, by and through him, made heirs of the
Kingdom of glory: whereof (although these Philosophers were endued with
humane wisdom far above us, they had yet no understanding of, nor were
partakers of that true glory which is by Christ.

Therefore must we, that live in the light of Truth, strive to be partakers of
We must strive to do better things, then the Philosophers did.
better things then they, that lived in the darkness of ignorance: for us to
come short of their care (of doing the good they supposed good) in doing that
we know to be good, were most palpable idleness, and severely punishable.

We must therefore, while it is to day, study, and practice to be holy in
deed, not in show, like the Pharisees, whose seeming sanctitic was all
external, and internally were profane hypocrites.

As touching the second point of Meditation, namely, Second point, to prepare
us for death.
of the uncertain coming, and to be prepared for death: cast your eye upon
the forepart of the former treaty, where you may peradventure find matter of
Meditation touching this point. In brief, Remember your ends, namely, death;
and if you have any grace, it will prevent sin in you: so walk in health, as
if you should presently die: ye shall find it a remedy against the vanities of
this life.

Who can think of present death, and yet delight himself in the uncertain
things of this world? He that is still dying, begins his eternal life here,
and remembers that he has here no continuing City; No continuing City here
and therefore thinks of, and seeks that which is to come; not living as the
secure conetous man in the Gospel, flattering his soul to remain many years
in his body, not having one night to live.

Ye are poor, I confess, Needless to dissuade the poor from covetousness
I cannot enrich you, and therefore to dissuade you from covetousness, may
seem superfluous; yet I think not, but a beggar may be as covetous, and as
greedy to get and hoord up, as the richest man: fly it therefore in your
smallest means: it is the root of all other sins, it depriues men of the
sense of future good or evil; avoid it, left death steal upon you, and find
you so doing: depend To depend on God.
on Gods provision and blessing of your own lawful and laudable industries;
He is your heavenly Father, and knows whereof ye have need; seek him, he
will be found, he will supply all your occasions, if ye be faithful, though
ye were never so poor.

DAVID depending on The safest course, to cast our care upon God.
God, found by experience, that the righteous were never left destitute, nor
their faithful children to beg. Cast then your care upon God, for he cares
for you: And let not the care of the things of this life prevent your careful
preparation to a better life, which you cannot attain unto but by death: and
therefore endeavor so to live, as God may be glorified in your death, not
giving your members as weapons Romans 6. 13.
of unrighteousness, unto sin here: but give your selves unto God, as they
that are alive from the dead, and give your members as weapons of
righteousness unto GOD. Strive against your own corruption, and let Verse. 12.
not sin reign in your mortal bodies, that ye should obey it in the lusts
thereof: for, When lust has conceived, it Iam. 1. 15.
brings forth sin, and sin, when it is finished, brings forth death; not
the death of the body only, which is but a dissolution of the soul from it for
a season: but the death both of soul and body, which is eternal. Walk
therefore in Gal. 5. 16.
the Spirit (says Saint Paul) and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the
flesh. Ye have the light, walk not in darkness; for, he that walks in
darkness, Job. 12. 35.
walks he knows not whither: while ye have the light therefore, walk in it.

So walk as your hearts We ought to walk from evil to good.
may move from evil to good, from sin to sanctity; cease to do evil,
learn to do good, and practice it. Learn of David, to run the way of the
Lords Commandments: Walk not in Psalm. 1. 1.
the counsel of the wicked, stand not in the way of sinners, nor sit in the
seat of the scornful: but, delight Verse. 2.
your selves in the Law of the Lord, and thereupon meditate day and night, so
shall ye be blessed in life and death.

Yet think not to be The most godly have most troubles.
free from troubles, enemies, and crosses, how sincerely soever ye live; nay,
the more careful ye shall be to lead a holy and a godly life, so much the
more will Satan seek to pervert you: be not dismayed, cease not to walk
honestly, as in the open light, that men may see your good works, and glorify
your Father which is in heaven.

PART. II.
Gods providence toward his.

IF poverty and want oppress you, Let your Petitions be unto God, who, as he
gives seed unto the Sower, so shall he administer unto you meat, drink, and
all things necessary.

Remember the rich mercies of God, which he has ever showed to his faithful
distressed children. He sent his Prophet Abacuck to Daniel, when he was Dan.
14. 33
not only a prisoner, and out of the reach of all his friends, to relieve him,
but had for his companions, the fearful devouring Lions, Dan. 6. 16.
whose mouths that most mighty God (who will be yours) closed up, they could
not hurt his servant. God might have sustained him without food, as he did
Moses and Exodus 24. 18 1. Kin. 19. 8
Eliah; but to show his secret mercies by visible means.

Remember also the miserable estate of that poor distressed woman Hagar' Genesis
21. 19.
who was so far from any hope of worldly help in the barren wilderness,
having a most heavy heart for her poor infant, that God helps when most
need is.
with the mother was like to perish, for want of a cup of cold water,
despairing, as it were, in her self, laid away the child from her, forsook
it, as loath to see the sorrowful spectacle of its death, and looked up unto
GOD that saw her, whose mercy and compassion was such toward her, as he
opened a Well of water, and opened her eyes to see it, whereby she refreshed
her self, and relieved her child: showing thereby how careful the Lord is of
the distressed estates, even of such as are out of the covenant of grace;
Ismael.
how much more of such as take hold of him by faith in Christ, namely, of them
that truly fear him, faithfully believe in him, and unfeignedly serve him?
Judge. 15. 18, 19.


When Samson had wearied himself, combating with the Philistims, became so
weak and faint, as he was ready to perish for want of water to refresh
Nothing so dry, out of which God cannot bring water.
him: did not the same God (yea, our God, the God of the faithful) give him
drink out of the dry iawbone of an Ass? Could he bring water sufficient to
quench his great thirst, out of so small and so dry a vessel? yes, for as
long as he desired to drink, so long it yielded water; like as did the oil,
which by the power of the same God, Eliah infused into the empty vessels of
the widow of Sarepthah, it 1. Kin. 17. 9
ran so long as she had vessels to contain it. When Christ turned water
Ioh. 1. 7, 8.
into wine, it ceased not till all the vessels were filled up to the brim.

So does the same God, God feeds his faithful children, as long as they have
need.
even to this day, deal with his children, whom he never cease to fill and
feed, as long as they have faith to receive his blessings, and necessity to
have them.

He fed four thousand God can feed many with a little. Matthew. 15. 33, 34.
Mar. 6. 38. to 45. Ioh. 6. 9.
with seven loaves and a few fishes; and five thousand with five loaves and two
fishes, besides women and children: he could with the same means have fed a
more infinite number, his power is so absolute, what he will, he works, and
what he commands, is done. The hard Rock Exo. 17. 5, 6
must yield Rivers of water, showing that he can mollify the heart of the most
cruel Tyrant, and in stead of afflicting, to comfort his children. The
devouring Raven, when God will use him, contrary to his nature, shall carry
food to his distressed Eliah: 1. King. 17. 46.
so does he at this day, doubtless, work the hearts of most obdurate men, to
do good, as it were contrary to their condition, to them that fear him, and
faithfully call upon him in their distresses. Examples of Gods providence
numberless.


The examples of Gods presence, with his love unto his, and his power and
providence over his faithful children, are in the Scriptures numberless. The
like are of his judgments toward the wicked, not only particular enemies of
his, as was Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, Scnacherib, Herod, and others, but against
whole Kingdoms, Cities, and Multitudes; the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah:
where are they? Is not the Scepter departed from them, for the wickedness of
the people that dwelt in them?

Sodom, Gomorrah, Zeboim, Genesis 15. Judgments against the unjust.
Admah, and Zegor; where are they? Came not fire and brimstone from heaven upon
them? How did the same God confound Jerusalem, the slaughterhouse, as it were,
not only of his Prophets, but of his own innocent Son? and do we not see
daily GODS just judgments upon diverse Countries and People, by fire,
inundations of water, by pestilence, wars, and famine? And is not the sudden
hand of God upon such as at this day blaspheme his Name? Needs there examples
of such as have been stricken, some dumb, some blind, some dead in an instant?
Do not our own eyes? besides our own; yea, modern Histories witness the
same? Terrible is the Lord in his wrath; and who shall stand Psalm. 76. 7.
in his sight when he is angry? He is terrible, even to the Verse. 12.
Kings of the earth: Nay, unto such as seem to be, and are not truly
religious, as Ananias and Sapphira his Act. 5.
wife, who lying unto the holy Ghost, were stricken suddenly dead: It is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, especially when he is
angry.

We are all by nature the children of wrath, dead in Ephe. 2. 1, 2
trespasses and sins. So is all the world subject to the judgment of God,
being found guilty in his sight. If GOD therefore should Romans 3. 19.
mark what is done amiss, who could abide it? or expect worldly co^forts from
him?

Therefore, whether ye shall in this life receive poverty We cannot suffer
what we have deserved.
or riches, sickness or crosses, or whatsoever calamities and afflictions, and
in what measure soever, persuade your selves, that it is far short of what ye
have deserved: therefore, take his chastiseme^ts with patience, and endeavor 1.
Cor. 15. 58.
steadfastly, always to abound in the works of the Lord, assuring your selves,
your labor shall not be in vain: for, God will be ever ready to work for you
beyond that ye are able to ask or think.

PART. III.
Objection against Gods miraculous working at this day.

SOme yet will say, that the time of Gods working miracles, namely,
miraculously, and beyond the apprehension of natural understanding, is past
and ended; and there is now no experience of such supply by Gods providence, as
when God sent Eliah to the widow of Sarepthah; and food by a Raven:
extraordinary means indeed, which now are neither visibly nor actually done.

Beware of this rash censure; it is the voice of mere An unwarrantable opinion
against Gods working miraculously at this day answered.
Infidelity: for, God is God yester-day (namely, of old) and to day, and for
ever, his love is not diminished, his power is not weakened, his providence
prevented, nor his command and absolute authority over his creatures any way,
or by any means encountered, or the execution of his will opposed: but is even
the first and the last, never altering nor changing: but as he had subjects of
mercy and judgment to work upon, and means by which to work; so has he at
this day, and until the final dissolution of all things, he will still work
by means, without means, and against means.

His promises are Yea, and Amen, not to our Fathers only, but to us, and all
posterities for ever: and those he performs at this day, yet not so visibly
and apparently, as in the days of our Fathers of old.

We have not a Moses, Exodus 17. 6. and 4. 3.
I confess, to bring water out of the Rock, by striking with his rod: nor an
Aaron, to turn a Rod into a Serpent, and to devour the counterfeit Serpents
of the Inchanters. We have no Eliah, 2. King. 1. 10, 11, 12.
to pray for fire to consume Gods enemies: nor an Elisha, to divide a River 2.
Kin. 2. 14
with his cloak: No Paul, that with his word Act. 16. 16.
can dispossess a spirit of divination: nor a Peter, that Act. 3. 4.
with his word can make a cripple to go sound.

Many miracles in former Miracles to be wrought by men are ceased, but the
same power of God remaynes.
times done, are recorded both in the old and new Testament, through the power
of GOD, by the hands of men: which kind of working miracles, are ceased; but
the power of God continues the same for ever, ever working wonderful things
without the compass of humane apprehension, and sets before our eyes daily
examples of his extraordinary working in mercy, for the comfort of his
children: and (as before is said) in justice and judgment against the wicked,
according to the song of the blessed Virgin: The Lord Luke 1. 46.
shows strength with his arm, he scatters the proud in the imagination of
their hearts, he puts down the mighty from their seat, and exalts the
humble and meek, he fills the hungry with good things, and sends the rich
empty away.

Is not this a strong confirmation of the faith of Gods children, plunged in
perils, visited with afflictions, and tossed to and fro in the troublesome and
tempestuous Sea of this world? in which, are they not commanded to pray for
their delivery? And to whom pray they? not unto the same GOD as our
forefathers did? If GOD therefore were not now in his Mercy, Love, Power, If
God were not powerful and proui dent as in time past, we may pray in vain.
and Providence as he was then, as able and willing to help; we were taught
both to pray and to fear in vain, neither his Mercy, nor Justice could
appear, as with our own eyes we have seen the wicked to perish, and the
innocent delivered, even by the hand of God himself: that his Glory and Power
might, by the just punishment of the one, and marvelous deliverance of the
other, be seen and celebrated of all them that fear him.

The Holy Ghost does every where in the Scripture make us see and perceive the
great and manifold benefits, which come All know why God afflicts his.
by adversity: he declares them to all, but all have not the true
apprehension, that it is sent for their good. And unless ye be enlightened in
the spirit of your minds, and the clouds of your carnal cogitations be driven
away by the wind of divine understanding: ye cannot but mistake the good
pleasure, love and favor of God (that causes all things to work together for
the best to them that love him) and grudge at your heavenly Fathers Discipline.

Ye are poor: murmr not, nor grudge at the prosperity of others: Learn of
David the contrary, Psalm. 73. in (...).
who in his haste, and unadvisedly fretted to see the prosperity of the
wicked, that always prospered and increased in riches: And thought indeed,
that God We ought not to fret our selves at the prosperity of the wicked
made no difference between the good and the bad, the righteous and the
wicked; and therefore thought it a vain thing to be curious to live well:
considering, that notwithstanding his continual serving of God; yet was he
punished and chastened every morning, namely daily: the wicked still secure,
and in no danger; this strange course of Gods working, he (as it were)
admired, and began to consider, if he could find out the cause; but it was
too deep for his natural wisdom, Ver. 27.
but when he entered into the Sanctuary of God, when he had consulted with the
holy Spirit of God, and had learned his Word; then he understood what the end
of these flourishing men would be: he considered, that God had set them in
slipperie places, how he east them into sudden desolation, Ver. 18.
wherein they perished and were fearfully confounded. Put therefore your trust
in God, he will guide you in all your occasions by his counsel, and after your
godly life ended, he will receive you to Glory. Ver. 24.
Seek therefore neither help nor comfort, but of GOD alone; for there is none
in Heaven but he, and desire none in the Earth, but him.

If ye fall into troubles, beware as near as ye may it be not for evil
doing: for the Magistrate bears the Sword for sinners. If ye Romans 13. 4.
be troubled for well-doing, ye need not fear, ye have God on your side,
and his Minister the Magistrate, in his stead to defend you.

Troubles and adversities, of themselves, as they Troubles of the righteous to
be born with gladness.
are sent of God, are to be borne with more then patience, even with joy: they
shall cause your minds to be set on things profitable, and will make you wise
in learning good things. Therefore, says David, It is good for me that I have
been in trouble, that I might learn thy Statutes.

PART. IIII.
The benefit of adversities.

Adversities bring those that are much exercised with them, to the contempt of
earthly, and desire of heavenly things. Paul, that sanctified Vessel of God,
had many afflictions, imprisonments, whippings, scourgings, stonings,
reproaches; which he yet embraced, for the love of Christ: and they wrought in
him a hatred of worldly things, and desired only to be disselued, to be with
Christ his Master in Glory: acknowledging that Christ was his (as he is our)
life: and death was to him (as it shall be to us, if we live here in him)
advantage.

The light affliction, which Greatest afflictions cannot deserve the glory to
come.
ye shall here endure but for a moment, shall cause unto you a far most
excellent and eternal weight of Glory. Therefore look not on, with a longing
desire for the things of this life, which are seen: but for the things that
are not seen, for The things that are seen, are temporal; but the things
that are not seen, are eternal.

Who then would not Rather to long for, then to loathe death.
rather long to be clothed with that House which is from Heaven, then to
remain here in a base Cottage, full of troubles, and most uncertain?
whatsoever ye endure here, ye cannot merit by it: for it is only either in
way of a punishment for sin, or sent of God to prevent sin.

I account not (says Saint Romans 8. 18.
Paul) that the afflictions of this present time, are worthy of the glory,
which shall be futurely showed me. If Paul's afflictions could not merit the
glory to come; how much less shall yours or mine.

We must make our account beforehand, not to go to Heaven, by eating and
drinking, by getting and hoording, by pleasure Pleasure nor profit. can bring
us to Heaven.
and profit; but through hunger, nakedness, Poverty, Enemies, and many
troubles and afflictions: Therefore says the Wiseman, Refuse not the
chastening of the Lord, neither be grieved with his correction: for whom the
Lord loves, Heb. 12. 6. Revel. 3. 19.
him he corrects, even as the father does the child in whom he delights.

So that afflictions approve you the Children of God, if with patience ye
endure chastening: for by correction, God offers himself unto us, as unto
sons; and if ye be without correction, whereof all the Children of God are
partakers, then are ye bastards and no sons.

PART. V.
Great difference between the Children of GOD, and Worldlings.

THere is, in deed, great difference, between the children of God, and the
men of this World, in this life: for, Uerily, verily, (says CHRIST) I say unto
you, (unto his own) ye shall weep and lament, but the World (Worldlings)
shall rejoice, and ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy,
and your joy shall no man take from you.

Seeing the God of Truth affirms this good, Correction comprehends all
afflictions
from the seeming evil of affliction, I hold correction, which comprehends
all adversities, to be good, for that it makes prosperity the sweeter when it
comes, and to learn us how to behave our selves in both; as to be patie^t in
the one, and not to wax proud in the other; but in what estate soever ye be,
to be therewith content: as was Saint Paul, Who had learned (not of the Phil
4. 11.
World, though in the World) to know how to be abased, and how to abound:
Every where and in all things, he was instructed both to be full and to be
hungry: he was able to do all things, through Christ that strengthened him.

It is not then in our It is not in our power to be patient or thankeful.
power to bear afflictions, and to endure all things with patience, namely,
troubles, and to be thankful in prosperity, it is the gift of GOD in Christ:
wherefore, seeing ye suffer according to the will of God, commit your souls
to him in well-doing, as unto a most faithful Creator.

Ye see then, that it is Afflictions more necessary then prosperity.
necessary for you, sometimes to suffer afflictions, that ye may call to mind
your sins, the cause of your afflictions, and then the remedy of your
sins. The whole need not the Phisician, but they that are sick. The rich
need not to seek God, they have enough, but the poor that want. Therefore do
the poor and needy, and men afflicted yield him more honor, then the ^ich
and prosperous, and are ever more occupied in spiritual exercises, then they
to whom all things do so prosperously succeed, as they scarcely have leisure
to think on the calling upon God.

Trouble, no doubt, is Trouble is irksome, yet profitable.
irke some to a carnal mind, but to them that fear God, acceptable, keeping
them from security. For as long, and as often, as the Israelites enjoyed peace
and prosperity, they became secure, careless of serving of God, and to forget
his blessings. But when troubles came upon them, and Enemies beset them, then
they sought the Lord, and he delivered them out of their distress. Seek the
Lord always, and ye shall find rest for your souls.

Among all other afflictions, Poverty not the least affliction.
Poverty is one of the greatest, and by diverse means seizes upon a man. Some
active, some passive: the active, are inordinate expendings, gaming, and a
riotous, and lascivious life. The passive, are either Gods visitations, as were
Jobs, or Selfeidlenesse, the Mother of Poverty, the Stepmother of Wisdom and
Godliness: fly therefore these; Ryoting, and Idleness: as two dangerous
Vipers that devour a man ere he be aware; use therefore lawful means
commanded, honest and virtuous endeavors, in some necessary, and praiseworthy
Profession or calling. The Be Little creatures teach us industry.
and the Ant, little Creatures teach you to be industrious, who cannot abide
an idle drone or sluggard in their societies. Therefore have they ever
sufficient.

PART. VI.
The idle presume to have that they deserve not.

Idleness presupposes Presumption: for how idle soever the slothful person
is, yet he presumes to crave and have what he deserves not; never comes
good success to him that so presumes, though it succeed sometimes to satisfy
his evil desire, yet it brings with it an unsavory reward, such as commonly
befalls him that fears not God.

To live without labor, Idleness is not liberty.
cannot be held liberty: for while the body is idle, the mind is sowing the
seeds of sin, and within few days he reapes the fruits of sorrow.

Without good care and diligence, no estate can prosper: and by industry, the
meanest estate is made competent: and what is labor? It is not, as some idle
drones account it, a burden to the body: no, it is light and easy, if the
mind Labor is light to a willing mind.
be willing, to which nothing is more irksome then idleness, and corporal
ease; yet some think nothing so consonant and agreeable to their greatness as
idleness, or (which is as ill) evil and forbidden employments: and therefore
is not labor simply commendable: for there is labor in forbidden vanities;
and pain in whatsoever pleasure. But labor allowed of God and good men, is
that which is seasoned with the fear of God: for it never goes without the
blessing of GOD, which it ever finds by the success.

If therefore such an industrious The poor are rich, having Gods blessing.
man seem poor by reason of his baseness, yet is he rich, having the
blessing of God; and he that is blessed of GOD here, does even here begin
his everlasting happiness: If he be idle here, or given to carnal vanities,
be he never so worldly glorious, he even here begins his perpetual misery
and wretchedness.

Labor of it self makes Labor with the fear of God is blessed. Psalm. 128.
not rich, but the blessing of God upon our labors: Blessed are they that
fear the Lord, and walk in his ways. If therefore ye fear the Lord, and
therein labor, Ye shall eat the labors of your own hands, and, well and
happy shall ye be. Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain
that build it. It is in Psalm. 127.
vain for you to rise early, and to lie down late, and to eat the bread of
carfulness. It is God by his blessing, that prospers your labors, making
them sweet unto you and profitable.

Have also respect unto your servants that labor To take servants fearing God.
under you, that they be such, as near as you can, as fear God: for God
oftentimes blesses the Master for his servants sake; as Laban confessed that
God Genesis 30. 27.
had blessed him for Jacobs sake, in all his substance. The little that he had
before Jacobs coming, was wonderfully increased. So was Potiphars House
blessed Genesis 39. 3. 5
for Joseph's sake. If then the wicked be blessed for godly servants sake, how
much more when godly Masters have religious servants fearing God: And as there
is a blessing promised to the godly, so a curse denounced against the wicked in
their labors, They shall carry out Deuteronomy. 28. 38. to 58.
much Seed into the Fields, and shall bring in but little. They shall plant
Uineyards, and not drink the Wine. Nothing shall truly prosper with them,
what pain soever they take.

Fear ye God, therefore, be doing good, and ye shall be fed assuredly, Ye
shall be like Trees planted Psalm. 1. 3.
by the Rivers of waters, that shall bring forth fruit in due season: whose
leaf also shall not wither, and whatsoever ye do, it shall prosper. The
wicked are not so, but are as the chafe which the wind drives away and
scatters.

The poor shall not alwaye^ Psalm. 9. 18.
be forgotten: the Lord will be a refuge unto you, a God a refuge for the
poor. Psalm. 10. 17.
refuge even in your greatest dangers: for he hears the desires of the poor,
and prepares their hearts. O the wonderful deepnesse of Gods Mercies! who,
because we of our selves are ignorant of good things and dull to all goodness,
our hearts being profane by nature, he, even he himself has promised to
prepare even these dull and wicked hearts, and to make them fit for his own
service, not that he has need of any good God needs not our service
that our best works can do him, but for our comfort he does it, lest that
through our own infirmities, we should faint under the hand of his most loving
corrections, and therefore moved even of his free Mercies and tender compassion
toward the distressed, he has promised, and will assuredly perform it, that
for the oppression Psalm. 12. 5.
of the needy, and for the sighs of the poor, he will arise and set at
liberty whom the wicked has snared. O, Psalm 16. 8.
set the Lord therefore always before you, he is at your right hand,
therefore shall ye not fall.

PART. VII.
Poverty hinders not, neither does riches further true happiness.

I Would have you think that happiness consists not in riches, nor that
poverty hinders it, for riches come and go; and therefore is a man no longer
held happy then he has riches; and consequently, reputed happy according to
the proportion of his riches. But it is not so with godly poverty, or poverty
in the godly, which although it be in the extremest degree, it is but poverty;
when he wants all necessaries whatsoever, as meat, drink, clothing, lodging,
friends, and all help; yet God cares even for these poorest, fearing him, and
calling upon him.

Poverty, nor riches are Poverty nor riches of themselves good or evil.
Ier. 17. 7.
of themselves good, or ill, neither make they a man happy or unhappy; but he
is happy, who trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is. And blessed are
Psalm. 119. 2.
they that ke^pe his Testimonies, and seek him with their whole heart. This is
true happiness, and none besides. Poverty and riches do neither help nor
hinder, but according to the use or abuse.


Let poverty or riches fall to a man, that knows not how to use either, and
he will be the worse for either: but let either befall a good man, and he
will be no worse for neither. But commonly where men are honored for their
wealth, poor men are despised for their poverty, without respect of vice, or
virtue: so that not the persons, but the portions of either are honored or
despised. If the richest wax poor, contempt increases, as his greatness
diminishes: if the poor grow rich, his honor grows, as does his wealth.

Is not this respect of Respect of persons.
persons? is there not great partiality in reuerencing I am. 2. 1.
the glorious, though vicious? and disgracing the poor, be he never so
virtuous? God indgeth according to every man's work, not according to his
worth. God is indifferently 1. Pet. 1. 17
rich in love to all, as well to the rich as to the poor, being Lord over all:
but a father to them only that love him in Christ, whom he will never Romans 10.
12
fail nor forsake unto the end.

Let not then poverty Trust in God, makes poverty and reproaches easy to ^e
borne.
move you to distrust the Lord, though the world despise you, and say of you as
they did of David (yea of my self also) that there was no help for him in
God: a grievous temptation, I acknowledge, but not to the faithful, that has
learned to be patient, and to depend on God, who is never nearer, then when
carnal men think he has forsaken his children: be not deceived, nor dismayed
at their reproaches; for the poor shall not be always Psalm. 9. 18.
forgotten, neither shall the hope of the afflicted perish for ever. Though
worldlings make a mock at the counsel of the poor, because their trust is in
God. Remember they are the men Psalm. 14. 6.
of the world, who have their portion in this life, whose bellies God fills
with his hid treasure, their children have enough, and leave the rest of their
substance unto Psalm. 17. 14.
their childrens children. But behold ye the face of the LORD in
righteousness, live godly and ye shall be timely satisfied with every thing
necessary: he will send Psalm. 18. 16.
down from heaven and take you; and bring you out of all your troubles.

God chooses to himself God chooses godly men, and blesses them.
the man that is godly, and when he calls upon him, he will hear him. He
blesses the righteous, and with favor compasses him about on every side, as
with a shield: therefore fear not your poverty, nor be afraid of man, that
may despise you, and reproach you for your afflictions sake. Remember the
afflictions of David, and the reproaches that Shemei cast upon him, railing on
him and reuiling of him; yet did not David rail upon, or revile him again,
neither would he permit any revenge to be inflicted upon him, but with patience
endured it, imputing his malicious speeches (though they proceeded from his
own envious heart) to be sent from God, to try him, and to put him in mind of
his murder and other sins, that he peradventure had forgotten; conceiving
the cause to be (as indeed it was) that God had bidden this wicked Shemei to
rail on David, even for David's good.

God powers contempt God makes disobedient Princes contemptible.
even upon Princes. Though David were a King, he was not yet free from base
and malicious enemies: much less think ye to be, especially if ye be
virtuous. But let it not trouble you, the praise remains for you: for it is a
righteous thing with God, to render unto you that are troubled, rest with the
Saints, but to them that trouble you, tribulation.

If your enemies lay They that lay snares for others, fall into the same.
snares to trappe you, or dig pits for you, sear them not; for they
themselves shall be snared, and fall into the pits that they prepared for
you. As the Gallows that Haman set Ester 7. 10.
up to hang guiltless Mordecai, was his own destruction: as was the fire,
prepared for the co^suming of the three children, and the Lions for Daniel, the
Dan. 6. 24.
confusion of the false accusers: so shall all the evils that the wicked
practice and intend against you, fall upon themselves. They may travail with
wickedness, having conceived mischief, but the fruit of their breath shall be
their own confusion.

Salvation belongs unto Experience of Gods deliueries, an encouragement to
the godly.
the Lord, and his blessing is upon all them that trust in him. And that
encouraged David, having had experience of the love and power of God, to say,
that if ten thousand of the people should rise against him, and compass him
round (as Pharaoh and the Egyptians Exo. 14. 28.
did Moses and the Israelites) he would not be afraid. Such was his confidence
in Gods ready defense, who delivered him at all times, in all places, and from
all dangers plotted against him by Saul. Even so he delivered Genesis 31. 24 and
32. 4. Genesis 22. 9. and 39.
Jacob from Laban his Uncle; and Esau his brother; Isaac from being sacrificed
by Abraham; Joseph from his brethren, and from the malice of Potiphars wife;
and Job from the power and malice of Satan: and think not ye, that God was
David's God, and Jacobs God, and Isaacs, and Joseph's, and Jobs God? only a God
of our godly Fathers? and not our God, and the God of all the faithful, to the
end of the world.

Trust ye in him, be doing God is God of the godly for ever.
good, shun to do evil, and ye shall find him likewise your God, and to
work for you and your children, as great things for your defense, and
according to yours and their necessities, as ever he has formerly done: for,
He was, He is, and for evermore will be a refuge for the poor, and that in
due time, even in greatest affliction: yea, even in the very moment of need
he will be near you; though he may seem sometimes to tarry long, and ye
may think he has forgotten you: be patient, wait his leisure: for coming,
he will surely come, and will deliver you in time most convenient.

He knows what ye God knows whereof we have need.
want, and the time fit to give it you; and therefore whatsoever, and
whenever he gives you, think it is the thing fittest for you, and the time
most convenient to give it you in: He is a Father of the fatherless, and a
Judge of the widows cause: he knows what is fit for them all, and will
administer it in due time.

PART. VIII.
Hypocritical lowliness to deceive.

IT is the nature of the wicked, hypocritically to dissemble lowliness and
love to the poor and needy, to cause them to fall into their nets by heaps,
and so to suck from them (as is daily seen by experience) their lands and
goods, as Achab did Naboths vineyard: 1. King. 21. 2. 14.
and to draw you into their societies, to the end you should follow their
evil course of life. A matter too frequent in our days.

Beware therefore of these kinds of fawnes and Flattery, dangerous.
flatteries, and flatterers: for, when they smile most upon you, they practice
most to deceive you, and to betray you. As David complained in his time of the
flatterers in SAVLS Court; who (though they hated him without a cause) spoke
deceitfully unto him and with lying lips and flattering tongues.

How did Absaloms by 2. Sam. 15. 1. to 6.
flattery insinuate into, and gained the hearts of the people, David's subjects,
to supplant his Father, and to gain the Kingdom to himself? Tertullus the
Orator, Act 24. 2, 3.
by flattering Foelix, moved him against Paul. He that slattereth a man, Pro.
29. 5.
spreads a net for his steps. How did the Jews flatter Christ, when they
went about to betray him, about the giving of tribute to Matthew. 22. 16, 17.
Casar? examples are infinite.

Take heed, there are Counterfeit kindness deceiuesmany.
some, that when they intend most mischief, will be then most humble, bowing
themselves in a counterfeit courtesy before him they purpose to deceive; Pro.
27. 6.
yet before he perceive it, they will be upon him, and hurt him: and although
Eccles. 7. 7.
such flatterers be so weak as they can do you no harm by violence, yet will
they seek, and when they find opportunity, they will do you mischief.

As ye would therefore avoid flatterers, not to be Good neither to flatter,
nor be flattered.
deceived by them: so, flatter neither your selves, to think, ye be what
indeed ye are not, nor others, to make them believe what ye mean not: for,
none flatter but wieked men and harlots, for Judge. 14.
the word can never be taken but in the ill part, and therefore David calls
flattery, deceit. They speak deceitfully (says he) every one to his
Neighbor, flattering with their lips speaking with a double heart; and so
under color of comfort, they seek to confound the poor, making a mock of the
confidence and trust that the poor have in GOD, having them in dirision, in
regard of their baseness, boasting themselves of their own pride, and of
their own hearts desire; blessing themselves in their abundance, insomuch as
they show themselves contemners even of God himself, flattering him yet with
Psalm. 78. 36
their mouth, and dissembling with him with their tongue: and in their pride
do flatter themselves, to have no Job 34. 9.
cause to seek God: nay, they think, indeed, there is no God, and so declare
Psalm. 36. 2.
they by their actions.

My familiar friend A dissembling friend worse then an open enemy. Pro. 27. 5.
(says David) whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, has lifted up his
heel against me. It is better for you to be rebuked of Act. 12. 22.
your friends, then to be flattered of your secret enemies; therefore admit no
flatteries, or flatterers. Be ye the same ye seem to be, neither to flatter
nor be flattered; Speak ever as ye think, and think as ye speak, and
never speak or think but that which is good, and truly profitable.

And vex not your selves to see the wicked prosper, by their crouching and
flattering, though they become rich; desire not to be like them that fear not
God, howsoever glorious they seem: neither desire Evil company, dangerous.
their societies; it is a dangerous thing to accompany such as live viciously
and inordinately: for of them ye shall but learn to be vicious, and so to
perish with them through GODS just judgment: therefore, if ye have any
fellowship with such, come from among them, return to GOD, that he may
return to you; trust in him, that he may protect you, and direct you: let
your wills be guided and governed by his reueiled will, and so with patience
possess your souls: be not led by your own wisdom: but apply your minds
and wills to his will, who is wisdom it self: Ask of him, and he will give
you wisdom; yea, such wisdom, as (like Wisdom, a defense against evil and
flattery.
as the Serpent which Aaron made of the rod, did eat up the Serpents of the
Sorcerers) shall prevent the circumuenting practices and policies of the
hypocritical flatterers, and bring their counsels, plotted against you, to the
like end, as he brought Achitophels* 2. Sam. 17. 23.
He will suppress them that oppress you, and will laugh them to scorn, that
have you in derision; therefore yet a little while wait, and the wicked shall
not appear, and your insolent enemies, whatsoever they be, shall be put to
silence: and if ye be meek, Matt. 5. 5.
ye shall possess a competent portion in the earth, and shall have your delight
in the multitude of peace, as worldlings have in the multitude of plenty, whose
riches are seen, and felt, and gotten, and lost: but the riches that ye shall
possess are great, yet not seen, nor felt of any, but of such as enjoy them;
they are not gotten, but freely given, and cannot be lost; for, he that gives
them, shall continue them in you, to you, and for you.

What are riches of the Many things which worldlings seek after, are but
shadows.
world? honor of the person? liberty of the body, or pleasure of the mind?
they seem to be something, for, all the wise men of the world seek after them:
but being duly considered, they are found but shadows, which we see do
oftentimes suddenly vanish; and he that enjoys them most and longest, is
nothing the better; and he that has of them least, and but a moment, is
nothing the worse. And what is poverty, ignominy, captivity, misery, but
(seeming) not necessary causes of grief? under all which, the mind of the
sanctified man passes the course of this life, with far more inward
alacrity and true consolation, then the worldly man, that passes his life in all carnal contentment; and is more willing and ready to die, having his
conscience clear through faith in Christ, then the carnal man can be.

The godly poor have The godly rich account their wealth not their own.
their dependence on Gods providence, for the supply of their wants; and the
godly rich accounts his wealth not his, but Gods that gave them, and is ready
to restore them, and so to dispose them as GOD requires him: but the rich,
that have their hope in earthly things, have no willing mind to leave them,
but here to possess them, rather then to go they know not whither, Miserable
riches, that make the possessors ignorant of better things.
after death. Miserable riches, that tie the minds of the possessors of them,
to the love of this uncertain life, and to an uncertain knowledge of the life
to come.

The defense of the poor and needy, abused, The defense of the poor, and of
the rich.
slandered, oppressed, and wronged, by the worldlings, consists in their
faith in GOD through Christ. I will up, says the Lord, and will set them at
Psalm.
liberty whom the wicked have snared. If worldly men be wronged, they will up
in their own defense, they will bring forth the weapons of their might, their
gold and silver, and be therewith revenged, against such as rise up against
them: therefore is their pride as a chain of gold about their necks, at whose
glory the poor must bow: and though he be content to become the rich man's
footstool, yet many times the rich do with the poor, as Aesops Aesops Wolf.
Wolf did with the Lamb, who although he drank of the current below the
Wolf, yet the Wolf checked him for troubling the water. So oftentimes the rich
pick causeless quarrels against the poor, when they cannot have a co^fining
Vineyard, house, or adjacent field, that they desire of them.

I intimate this unto you, To give place unto the wrath of the wicked
to the end that, as much as in you shall be, you give place to the wrath of
wicked men, not reco^pensing unto them evil for evil, but rather good for
evil, knowing it is the will of your heavenly Father, so to heap coals of
fire upon such wicked men, among whom, I know, may also be numbered many poor
men, that have not in them faith, and the fear of God: for, as it is not
riches, that of themselves do make a man evil; so it is not poverty of it
self makes a man good.

PART. IX.
More evil then good men in the world.

TO consider duly the estate of the world, as common experience at this death
finds it: It may be observed, that the world is more fraught with wicked 1.
Ioh. 3. 19.
then with men fearing God; so that it follows, that there are more men apt
and ready to hurt, then able or willing to help the distressed: and as the
multitude is great, so their actions and conditions are many and diverse. Some
men seem only hurtful unto themselves (according to a foolish proverb, He
is no man's foe, but his own) as the drunkard and speudthrift, who yet are not
only foes to themselves, but to others (notwithstanding the proverb) drawing
them into their companies and wicked societies, and by their examples, many
take the same most ungodly course with them following likewise forbidden
excess and riot.

Some are apparently Men apparently hurtful to themselves and others.
hurtful to themselves and others; as the envious and malicious man: who,
howsoever he aims to hurt another, he may miss of his purpose, but never of
wounding himself, for his will to do the evil he intended, is imputed to him
in divine Justice, as the deed done; God in his providence preventing the act,
for his sake to whom it was intended: and howsoever God permit a wicked man, to
hurt one that fears GOD, in body, goods, or reputation, the hurt that he gives
is only outward, and may work to the good of him that is hurt; but he that
hurts, receives a deadly wound within, and so much the more grievous, by how
much it is little felt; for an envious man hurts with desire, and rejoices in
To bear all evils with patience, that men offer us.
his wicked deed.

If therefore there come a Shemei, to rail causeless upon you, a Judas to
betray 2. Sam. 16. (...), 6. Mat. 26. 47 Genesis 4. 8. Dan. 13. 1, 2 1. King. 21.
14.
you; a Cain, causeless to kill you; false witnesses, to accuse you, as the
wieked Judges did Susanna; or an Achab, or a lezabel, to wrest from you both
life and living: or whatsoever cross or calamity soever befall you, through
the malice of men, grudge not thereat, nor seek despitefull revenge; but
examine your consciences, whether ye be guilty of that which is laid to your
charge; if so, confess it, and repent it: or whether ye have secretly offended
GOD in some thing, whereof ye were never accused, or for which ye were never
punished. Think (if ye find any such thing in your selves, though no man else
knows it) that God understands it: and there is no man, but upon true and
serious examination of his own (peradventure slumbering) conscience, but shall
find matter enough to provoke God to anger, wherein he may (though in love)
stir up some Shemei, a Judas, a Cain, to rail on you, to betray you, to rob
or to wound you to death: all to rowse you out of your security (wherein the
best man sometimes slumbers, as David did) and cannot be awaked, unless GOD
send some severe messenger to tell you, that thou art the man.

Seeing therefore ye We ought to be circumspect in our ways.
shall be subject, and that of necessity, to so many dangerous enemies; it
behoues you ever to look about you, and to have an eye even to heaven, while
ye live in the earth: and remember how watchfully ye ought to live over your
own ways, and what manner people ye are to show your selves, in holy and
heavenly conversation, preparing your selves beforehand, for any of these
things, that when they come, ye knowing wherefore, and by whom they are sent,
may make true use of them; and in the mean time to walk so much the more
warily, watchfully, and soberly.

An unwise man knows All men know not why God sends them enemies.
not this, and a fool understands it not: but if ye have learned, or will
learn and practice it aright, ye shall be happy in the worlds unhappiness. If
ye be ignorant, look into, and search the Word of God, hear it, read it,
lay it up in your hearts, make true use of it: leave off to sin, and live
righteously: if ye have sinned, sin no more: The Lord Psalm. 103. 8.
is full of compassion, slow to anger, and of great kindness and truth. He will
forgive all your sins, and heal you of all your infirmities. It is he that
has redeemed you, by the precious blood of his own and only Son. And if you
believe in him and obey him, he will finally crown you with mercy and loving
kindness, and shall from time to time fill you full of every good thing: fear
him and love him, and then be afraid of no mortal creature: for, if God be on
Romans 8. 31.
your side, who can be against you? If ye continue unto the end, ye shall
assuredly be saved. Therefore, I say, grudge not, though ye be left behind me
poor, and much destitute of the superfluous things of this world, God is your
portion, in whom ye have a far greater treasure, then the world can yield
you.

If I could have left you riches in abundance, ye had been, indeed, never
truly the better, but in common reputation, which is as variable as are
uncertain riches: and being left poor, ye are never the worse, but in
opinion, which many times allows of the worst, and condemns the better: it is
the virtue of your mind, that shines within, that is allowed of God, and gives
light unto men without.

PART. X.
Ignorance, a shame for men or women of years.

TO teach you now the Principles of true Religion, in this Exhortation, were to
argue your ignorance; and your ignorance, your shame and mine: ye are not
Infants, who are to be otherwise taught, then I hope you have need, ye have
Moses and the Prophets, ye have Christ and his Gospel, ye have the comfort of
the Apostles, ye live in a time wherein (God have the praise) ye may freely
read, ye may freely hear, as freely practice what ye learn: they teach you
spiritual knowledge, and the way of salvation.

Endeavor to learn, Prayer obtayneth knowledge, how to live godly.
pray for the Spirit, in the Spirit; without the Spirit ye cannot pray; and
that Spirit is the gift of God, which prays in you; and he that gives you
the Spirit to pray, will also give you knowledge for what to pray, and how to
live; he will fill you with Divine understanding, and will make you wise in all
heavenly knowledge, and show you the same through good works, in a godly
conversation before men, in faith glorifying God. So in what manner soever ye
pass your days, whether in prosperity or adversity, ye shall be blessed,
for it is not the outward appearance that approoueth, or disprooueth man, as
glory or baseness, but a holy or profane life.

Christ's own Apostles suffered hunger, cold, nakedness, All Gods Children
have suffered afflictions.
wants, and persecutions; Lazarus, sores and extreme poverty; Job, deepest
afflictions; Joseph, slander and wrongful imprisonment. Were they the worse?
no, but so much the more approved the children of the most highest, and far
the more noble. And these Examples does the Spirit of Truth recommend unto you
for your imitation, that ye should follow them in their Virtues, Faith,
Patience, and Integrity.

If therefore it fall out, that ye lose that little ye have, say with Job,
Naked Job. 1. 21.
I came into the World, and naked must I return: blessed be the Name of the
Lord. If ye be slandered, remember the words of our Savior: Cursed are they
of whom all men speak well: therefore, Rejoice and be glad, when men speak
evil of you for well-doing.

If it come to pass, that ye Banishment.
be banished from your own native country and friends for the Truths sake,
and to travail from place to place for succor: remember that ye have here
no continuing City, but ye seek one to come.

If ye have neither house Comfort in whatsoever cala mitie.
nor home, remember that Christ our Savior had no house to put his head in. If
ye fall into sickness or any infirmity of body, limbs or senses, remember
that though your outward man perish, your inner man shall be renewed daily:
for God is your Father, and the rock of your salvation: he will increase his
Graces toward you, even toward you, and your children.

PART. XI.
A guilty Conscience for a most grievous affliction, and the remedy.

TO come now to the most grievous things, that can befall you in this life:
namely, the committing of such sins, as do oppress your consciences, and
which do cast down your souls as it were into despair, think with your
selves, and believe, that your Father whom ye have offended, is merciful, and
that ye have a most loving and most prevailing Mediator with him, even Jesus
Christ the righteous, who is a propitiation for your sins, in and through
whom (although God be angry with Sinners) he becomes a most loving and kind
Father to them that are truly sorry for their sins, and intend to lead a
new life.

He is the Father of Mercies, and God of all Gods goodness and mercy.
Consolation, long suffering and patient, great in Mercy and Goodness, He
forgi^eth the iniquity of his Psalm. 85. 2.
people, and covers all their sins: He withdraws all his anger, and
turns from the fierceness of his wrath: and his Salvation is near to them
that fear him.

Forsake and bewail To turn unto God.
your sins, and cleave again unto Righteousness, and turn unto him in Faith:
then shall he cleanse your hearts, and the blood of Jesus Christ shall wash you
from all your sins; he shall deliver your souls from death, your eyes from
tears, and your feet from falling.

He has promised to be your Father, whom, although of weakness, not of
presumption, ye daily offend, if ye be truly sorry for it, he will not
cast you off, but will receive you as his sons and daughters.

Mary Magdalen was Mark. 16. 9.
a woman of a defiled conversation; Peter, weak, and Ioh. 18. 17
for fear denied his Master. David committed two 2. Sam. 11. 4. 7. Act. 26. 9,
10.
great sins, Whoredom, and Murder; Paul persecuted Gods people: yet upon
Repentance they all received pardon.

Ye may not therefore We may not imitate sinners, but their Repentance. Romans
6. 1.
imitate them as they were sinners, but imitate their Repentance, and lie not
in your sins: God indeed is gracious, but ye may not sin, that grace may
the more abound: God for bid: for although God be merciful, As God is
merciful, he is just.
he is not totally mercy, but is also just: and in his justice he might
condemn all humane creatures, for no man is righteous in his fight. And
therefore none (without Christ, in whom all that shall be saved) are saved. Take
theresore hold of him and his mercies, and mediation through Faith: so, were
your sins as red as blood, they shall be made as white as snow, and were they as
Purple, be made as white as wool, by the sheading of his blood upon the
Cross.

Cast off all fear and We may not sin, after pardon obtained.
despair, therefore, only beware of relapses, fall not back again; be not
like the Dog and the Sow, and take heed of presumptuous sinning: as to
sin, persuading your selves, ye will, and can repent when ye list, and so
much the more boldly, because ye have learned, that God is merciful. This is
to quench his Mercy, and to incense his Justice, and to harden your hearts, in
the custom of sinning: so should ye have Judgment without Mercy.

Such as thus sin against Wilful sinners. Phil. 3. 18.
God, are enemies to the Cross of Christ, and contemners of the Mercy of God:
who shall melt away as Wax at the fire, and perish at the presence of God: But
the Righteous shall be glad and rejoice, yea, they shall leap for joy: not
the Righteous in their own opinion; or the Righteous in show, but the truly
Righteous to whom the Righteousness of Christ is freely imputed.

Take heed therefore, Not to assume selferighteousnesse.
that ye assume not unto your selves to be righteous, for before God there is
none, no, not one righteous in the Earth: ye may object, and say, How then
shall any man rejoice, seeing there is none righteous? none, in or by their
own inherent Righteousness? for the best man's actions are, in, and of
themselves, evil evermore without Christ. He therefore that is truly
righteous, is righteous by imputation, not by actual perfection. Not one of
our godliest Forefathers were without sin, much le^e we.


Abraham, nor Isaak nor Jacob, nor Job, nor David, nor Daniel, no, not Enoch or
Elias, nor Peter, nor Paul, nor that Divine Apostle John, were of themselves
by nature so perfect, holy, or righteous, as that any of them durst to stand
upon their own merits, by them to be saved: no, the Blessed Virgin
acknowledged Christ to be her Savior.

Beware therefore of Iusticiaries to be avoided.
that generation of Vipers, Iusticiaries, who assume unto themselves that
purity, and power, as they do; and are able to fulfill all the Commandments,
and whole Law of God, which the most righteous man (Christ excepted) could
never do; Christ came to save Sinners, confessing their own unworthiness,
not such as need no other works of Redemption, but their own works of
perfection, by which works they shall be judged, without the imputation of
the worthiness of Christ's Merits: unless they repent, their judgment is
pronounced already.

O, fly from the hearing of any bewitching tongue whatsoever, that shall
endeavor to make you believe, that ye may live without sin. They are Liars,
the children of the father of Lies, and would make you Liars like unto
themselves, who though they be men in shape, yet are they Monsters indeed;
they would seem Dcified, and, alas, they are Devils incarnate: have no
conversation with such men, yet strive and Though we cannot be, yet we ought to
strive to be perfect.
study to be perfect, namely, to attain unto such perfection, as the dearest
children of God can have in this life.

Stand not at a stay, but We must go on in goodness.
endeavor to proceed from faith to faith, from one divine virtue to another,
until ye become perfect in Christ, in whom, and not in your selves, your
absolute perfection consists: and when ye have done all that ye can,
acknowledge your selves far imperfect, and unprofitable servants; for the way
to glory is by humility: and he that exalts himself, shall be brought low.

The humble man thinks The ppoperties of the humble man.
every man better then himself, and thinks his best actions worthy rather to
be reproved then rewarded: And upon due consideration of his deserts, is so
far from justifying himself, as he is ashamed of his own unworthiness: he
casts himself down, and the Lord lifts him up. But he that iustifies
himself, lifts himself up, and makes himself equal with God, and God does
cast him down, to have his portion with Lucifer.

Remember the reiection of the proud Pharisees The Pharise and Publican.
justification, and the acceptance of the Publicans humiliation: your
humility consists in your voluntary subjection unto the Ordinances of God,
who reuealeth unto the poor in spirit, the knowledge of his will, and hides it
from them, that assume unto themselves knowledge, sufficient without the
Doctrine of his Word.

Ye can in nothing be Meekness makes men likest unto Christ.
more like unto Christ, then in meekness and humility; two adjuncts of Christ,
not much unlike in operation. The first, namely, Meekness, is most properly
showed in your conversation among men. The second, which is humility, shows
it self, in patient submitting your selves, without any inward discontent to
what it pleases God to do with you, or against you: against you never, though
your carnal understanding may so conceive it.

Job was contented with We must be humble whatsoever befall us.
all his afflictions, resolving himself, that though GOD would kill him, yet
would he trust in him. And should you professing humility, grudge when any
thing befalls you for your good? far be it from you: rather praise God, exalt
his Name, fall down before his footstool, embrace his Discipline; for he is
holy, and to be loved and feared: loved, in that he is your God who has
created you, and preserved you: to be feared, in that he is just, and may
justly condemn you, in the strictness of his Justice.

Enter therefore into his gates with praise, and into We ought to praise God.
his Courts with rejoicing: praise him and bless his Name; for he is good,
his Mercy is everlasting, and his Truth, namely, the performance of his
promises, endures from generation to generation: Serve him with gladness, and
come before him ever with ioyfulnesse: for though he be in the Heavens, yet
looks he down from his holy Sanctuary, to hear the mournings of the
Prisoners, and to deliver them that are appointed to death.

Let your souls therefore Hearty, not verbal praises are acceptable to God.
evermore praise the Lord, not your tongues and lips only, which are outward,
and oftentimes, Organs of Hypocricie. Remember, and keep in mind all his
benefits, for they are more toward you, then ye are able to number: he for
gives all your sins, he heals all your infirmities, he gives you all good
things, he preserves you in troubles, supplyeth your wants, redeemeth your
lives from the Grave, and has provided for you a Crown of Glory.

And, Wife, although I Wife and children are to be recommended to God.
your poor Husband shall leave you a penurious and desolate Widow, he will
be unto you a providing Husband, cleave unto him. And though I shall leave
you, poor fatherless children, cast your care upon him, he will care for you,
he will be your Father: and as a most loving and helping Father obey him, as
most dutiful and faithful Children.

And when the time of my dissolution shall come, which cannot be long, I must
obey: and I am ready. I shall go a little before you, and ye shall shortly
follow, (if ye go not before me, which is in God) even to the place of mine
assured happiness, if with faith ye embrace and obey the will of him that calls
you, while ye yet live, as becomes the Children of so Gracious a Father.

In the mean time, the same God bless you all with his true Fear, continual
Peace, and competent Plenty.

A brief collection of Divine comfort, for mine own, and the encouragement of
every Christian to dye willingly.

FOr as much as death is the end of this life, and this life duly considered, an
unpleasant passage to a better; and whether it shall be long or short, it
behooves us to undergo with patience in hope, whatsoever entertainment this
World shall afford us.

Job had as an inheritance, the months of vanity, and Job 7. 3.
painful nights were appointed unto him. The days of Genesis 49. 7.
Jacobs pilgrimage were few, and evil; yet some think their pleasantest days
are here in the earth, and therefore desire no better: not so with me, knowing
that after this life, there is laid 2. Tim. 4. 8.
up for me a crown of righteousness, and not for me only, but for all them that
love the appearing of the Lord Jesus.

There is little reason therefore, that I, or any other, that have tasted and
do daily taste of the bitter cup of this lives vanities and miseries, should
desire longer to be pressed or oppressed there with: but rather to comfort my
self in a godly and patient expectation of the time when Job 14. 14.
my dissolution may come, desiring to be dissolved, and Phil. 1.
to be with Christ: to whom no man comes, but he must remove out of this
house of clay; and that cannot be by any other means but by death, that is,
by the destruction or change of this earthly Tabernacle, either leaving it in
the earth for a season, or to be taken up suddenly at Christ's second coming;
but howsoever, I know, and am assured, that both soul and body shall be
together, and for ever be glorified in the end, and be clothed with a house,
not 2. Cor. 5.
made with hands, eternal in the heavens.

Who then can but sigh in desire, to be an inhabitant in that house, which is
perpetual and glorious? I look for it, in hope confidently assuring my self,
that Christ shall be then magnified in my body, whether it be by life or
death: for, whether I live, I live Romans 14. 8.
unto him; or whether I die, I die unto him; whether therefore I live or die, I
am the LORDS: for, I know that he whom I have believed, is able to keep that
which I have committed unto him, against that day, wherein my mortal body
shall be quickened and made like unto Phil. 3. 21.
his glorious body: therefore will I willingly lay down my life, and commit
my soul unto God, as unto my most faithful Creator.

A comfortable Meditation and Prayer, to be considered and said by every
Christian, being near the time of his dissolution.
NOw, O Lord, now draw near unto my soul, and redeem it, for the time is at
hand, wherein I shall taste of the cup of death: Now therefore is the
acceptable time for thee to receive my soul, in the multitude of thy mercies,
which are wonderful: therefore do I trust under the shadow of thy wings: my
soul cleaves unto thee, for thy right hand vpholdeth me. My soul thirsts
for thee, my flesh longs greatly after thee, whose loving kindness is better
to me then life: for, from thee comes my salvation.

Have mercy upon me, O God, have mercy upon me, for my soul trusts in thee,
and under the shadow of thy wings will I trust, till this my final affliction
be ouer-past.

My heart is prepared, O God, my heart is prepared to come unto thee, make it
constant in thee; because, I know, that although this body, for a time shall
wither, yet it shall be in the house of my God, as a green Olive tree, ever to
flourish, and be blessed.

Thou, Lord, thou have chosen me, and have caused me to come unto thee; my
salvation is of thine own free mercy, and of thy free and Fatherly election. I
shall dwell in thy Courts for ever, and shall be satisfied with the pleasures
of thine house, even of thy Kingdom of glory. I shall drink of the Rivers of
thy pleasures: for, with thee is the Well of life, and in thy Light I shall see
light.

Let thy good Spirit lead me in the Land of Righteousness, and bring me by
thy strength, to thy holy and heavenly habitation; plant me in the Mountain
of thine inheritance, even in the place which thou have prepared, and in thy
sacred Sanctuary which thou have established, that I may see thy goodness in
the Land of the living: Let me behold thy face in righteousness; and let me
be satisfied with the fullness of the glory of thy Countenance: for, in thy
face is the fullness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore.

Into thy hands, oh Lord, I commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed me, O
Lord God of truth; show a token of thy goodness and favor toward me, that
they which wish evil unto my soul, may see it and be ashamed; and they that
love thy Name, observe it, and be confirmed in thee, who have evermore helped
me and comforted me.

Increase my faith, and prepare my soul to come unto thee.

AMEN.
To thee, O Lord God, only wise, and only merciful, be ascribed all praise and
thanks, dominion and glory; for to thee it only belongs.
Private Prayers for Morning and Evening.
A Morning Prayer for private Families.
Almighty LORD GOD, most merciful and loving FATHER, Maker and Preserver of
all thy creatures, but especially the Savior and Sanctifier of all them that
believe in thee, by the merit and virtue of the blood of Jesus Christ; Receive
at the hands of us, thine unworthy servants, in the Name of Jesus Christ, this
our morning sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, for all thy mercies from time
to time bestowed upon us; for electing us of thine own free favor, before the
world was made; for creating us of nothing, in humane, and not in the shape of
brute creatures; for redeeming us with the most precious death of thine own
Son, when we were captives and slaves unto Satan; for calling us by the
preaching of thy blessed Word, and free Spirit, when we were strangers unto
thee; for justifying us by the Resurrection of thy Son, when we were worthy
to be condemned; for sanctifying us by the Holy Ghost, being by nature vile;
for preserving us hitherto, and that in safety by thy providence; and for thy
fatherly providing for us all things necessary, to this present morning; and
for that thine assured and most comfortable promise, that thou will glorify us
in the heavens with thee, after this mortal and miserable life ended: And we
praise thy great and gracious goodness, for so mercifully preserving us this
night past, from all dangers; and for that thou have given us comfortable rest
and sleep in the same, whereby our weak bodies are refreshed, and have
received the more strength and power to enter into this day, and to undertake
the works of our callings: and because by reason of the corruption of our
natures, we are pressed down with dullness, and beclouded with ignorance, so
as we cannot rightly understand, nor truly perform our duties, either in thy
service, or our own worldly functions, without thy blessing, we here upon the
knees of our hearts do humbly and heartily pray thee for Jesus Christ thy
beloved Sons sake, to assist us with thy Holy Spirit, that these our praises
and prayers may be accepted of thee; and that our ignorance may be banished by
the light of thy holy Spirit, that we may plainly see and perceive our own
errors and wants, and the detestablenesse of our sins, and through his blood
obtain pardon of all our imperfections and defects, with lively and effectual
renewing of our obedience to thee, in all our works, words, and duties, this
day. Remember not, O Lord, the sins we have committed, nor our neglect of the
duties we have omitted: call not to mind the transgressions of our youth,
which we have forgotten, nor look upon the wickedness of our riper years,
which do press us down through the sense of thy severe judgments, threatened
against us for them: and let thy grace (we humbly beseech thee) from henceforth
ever beeextended toward us: vouchsafe thy holy Spirit unto us, evermore to
direct us, that neither the weakness, dullness, and perverseness of our own
natures, in doing that which is good, nor the strength of our natural
inclinations to do that which is evil, be any hinderance to the work of thy
grace in us. But so much the more, good Father, watch ever us, that neither
Sin nor Satan prevail against us: that we obtaining at thy hands this great
mercy, may the more freely, cheerfully, and prosperously pass this day: and
that our labors, being taken in hand in thy fear, may through thy blessing
succeed to thine own glory, our comfort, and to the good of them whom they
may concern. And forasmuch as the passing through this world, is many ways
and every where dangerous, and full of perils, by reason not only of Satan's
malice, but also by reason of the practices of our corporal enemies, our own
infirmities, crosses, losses, troubles, and many miseries. Assist us, gracious
God, and leuing Father, that we may escape all these inconveniences, and not to
fall into any sin or corporal danger this day; but rest secure, and safely
protected under thy power and providence, and carry our selves upright in all
our actions, through Christ our Lord.

Amen.
O Lord, increase our faith.
A Prayer in the Evening for private Families.
O Gracious Lord God, and most leuing Father in Jesus Christ, we thy most
unworthy servants, do humbly entreat thee to accept from us, in his Name, our
unfeigned thanks, for the manifold pledges of thy love toward us. Thou have
made us, and not we our selves: and where thou might have made us beasts,
thou have formed and shaped us men and women, and furnished us with many
spiritual blessings, besides infinite corporal comforts, which not only this
day, now presently past, but all the days of our lives, do witness: for, day
unto day utters thy goodness toward us: and night unto night approves thy
providence over us. The day is now past, darkness is gone over our heads,
resembling rightly our ignorance; for, without the light and knowledge of thy
saving Truth, we live in darkness, in the strongest and most glorious light of
the Sun. The eye of the body may be light, when the understanding, as
touching heavenly things, may be so dark, as not able to apprehend our own
wants and imperfections. Thus, O Lord, do we acknowledge our hearts to be
eclipsed, with the dullness and blindness of our natural reason and
understanding, whereby we yet are able, and do only seek, and search, and
find, and follow the forbidden vanities of this wretched life, tasting and
using them with carnal pleasure and forbidden delight, as the sins which we
have committed this day, and the good duties we have omitted, do testify
against us, to our shame this evening: and yet such is thy great goodness and
mercy toward us, as thou this day in our ignorance have instructed us, in our
blindness have guided us, in our necessities relieved us, in our weariness
refreshed us, and now brought us to the evening of this last day wherein we
have lived, and that in safety: so that we cannot but acknowledge, this day
to have been a day added by thy blessing, to thy former manifold favors,
which we have daily received at thy hands; possible it is not for us, to number
up the benefits and blessings, which thou have bestowed upon us through all our
life; they are numberless: yet, wretches that we are, we have (as it were)
striued to equalize; nay rather, to exceed thy blessing in the number of our
transgressions. Our natural corruption, the sin of Adam, cleaves unto us
(his posterity) so fast, as it has filled us, even from our conception, with
the seeds of all evil, so that we brought that into the world with us, which
without thy grace and free pardon in Christ, cannot but confound us: But thou
have given thy Son Jesus Christ, a means of propitiation, in whom thou
reconcilest all that believe in him, unto thy self. Therefore, have we
boldness through him, to entreat thee of pardon for all the sins we have,
every one of us, committed this day, as our evil thoughts, idle words, and
wicked actions, whereby thou have been, even this day, justly provoked against
us; besides our former abusing of thy patience, and despising of thy Word,
whereby thou threatnest to punish sinners, and whereby thou have promised to
bless and comfort them that serve thee in truth. Thou may justly condemn us
also for our unthankfulness for thy mercies, especially for our
unfaithfulness in not believing thy promises. But now, Lord, we beseech thee,
that the old man (our corruption) by the new man (thy Spirit) sin may be
abandoned and cast out, that sin no longer have dominion over us, mortify in
us the whole body of sin, and so cleanse us, that we carry not unto our beds
this night, any dregs of the same, but may be fully washed, through thy Sons
blood, from every spot and stayne, that yet remaynes in our corrupt hearts:
that we, being thus washed in the Lauer of perfect regeneration, the precious
blood of that slain Lamb by faith, we may not fear the assaults of Satan, nor
any malicious instrument of his, this night, but may be safely kept and
preserved by thy providence, and receive such rest and sleep, as may only
refresh us; let thy Angels guard us, and our souls and bodies, and all that we
have, that we and it may be kept and preserved safe until the morning, and
for ever.

Amen.
O Lord, increase our faith.
A Confession of sin, a Prayer for pardon, and for a godly and sanctified
life.
O God and Father of all Goodness, and Fountain of Mercy, the Guide of the
Righteous, the Giver of all perfect gifts, and the Sanctifier of the hearts of
all that shall be saved; show thy self unto me, who am a defiled and deformed
wretch, whom original corruption and actual sins have so polluted, as I am
not worthy to stand in thy sight, or that thou should dwell in me by thy
holy Spirit: And therefore I cannot without fear and astonishment, without
trembling and shame, approach into thy presence; seeing mine own filthiness,
and considering thy great Majesty, Integrity and Purity: yet am I embeldened
to come unto thee, compassed with many infirmities, especially with (...) and
corruption, which if I would endeavor to conceal, I cannot, they are so open
and manifest to thine All-seeing eye, that the more I labor to hide them, so
much the more they break forth and show themselves unto thee. O, look not
upon them as a Judge to condemn me for them, but as a loving and merciful
Father, and Phisician to cure me of them: so shall I not only willingly
discover unto thee all the sores and pollutions of my corrupt heart and pro
phane life (which by search I shall be able to find in my self) but entreat
thee also, with the Lancet of thy Love, to cut, searifie, rip up and find out
all the hidden filthiness that lurketh in my soul, in my mind, in my will,
and in mine affections, and apply the Plaster of the saving Blood of Jesus
Christ, to heal me throughout, that there remain no more gross corruption
in me: and learn me so to search and know the wickedness of my heart, that
I may not spare my dearest and most familiar sin, but may ^ast it out, as the
chiefest worker of my misery. Lord, let it become bitter, loathsome, and
merely hateful unto my soul, as a most deadly infection, howsoever it has
been heretofore seeming sweet, pleasing, and delightful unto my carnal part.
Let me abhor all iniquity, and truly abstain from all occasions to sin
again.

Give me strength, O Lord, to overcome my sinful lusts, and what wants in
my power, supply by thy grace, that I may at least still strive against every
sin, through the power of thy Spirit, that I may be approved a member of thy
Militant Church here, where yet I am a stranger, and where I continually feel
the wearisome warfare between the flesh and the Spirit, wherein I have never
the victory, but by thine only power, but the f^yle ever by mine own
weakness.

O subdue my flesh and fleshly mind to thine obedience, that I never make ship
wrack of a good conscience, by yielding unto the motions of my corrupt heart,
which I daily feel in my self to rebel against thy reueiled will: and make
me lightly to esteem of the vain and deceiving things of this World, that I
may truly show my self to take no thought for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts
thereof: but by a constant denial of mine own will, approve my self to live
by Faith, after thy will: And give me grace, that in nothing I may offend thy
Majesty, and let me never give way to mine own corrupt will and affections,
to commit the least sin, whereby I may quench, that spark of that Spirit and
Grace thou have begun in me.

Enlighten my heart, that I may know thy will aright, and rightly behave my
self according unto the same, not for a day, and then fall to the works of
mine own perverse will again, but that my Righteousness may shine more and
more, through a constant perseverance, until it come to that perfection, as
may truly testify unto my conscience, that I am the same, that I desire to
seem to be, not according to the opinion that others have of me: but
according to that measure o^ holiness thou requirest to be in me: let my
outward integrity be in all holy simplicity, and godly pureness among men,
as in thy sight. And the more that Satan by his means and ministers,
endeavors to withdraw mine obedience from thee, so much the more let me
strive to maintain that duty and obedience which I owe unto thee: And let thy
love toward me, draw me to love thee, as well when thou touchest me with
aduersttie, as when thou give me prosperity: and fail me not in my
greatest need.

Teach me, O Father, to seek and obtain all things at thy hands, by the
means and merits of Jesus Christ, in whose name I humbly offer unto thee, this
my weak and imperfect Sacrifice. Accept it yet in him; he is thine only Son
in whom thou art ever well pleased, he is my Redeemer, and has paid the
ransom for me, which for my sins was laid upon me: and he sits now a
Mediator, at thy right hand even for me. Scatter therefore, O Lord, my sins
as a mist, and mine iniquities, as a Cloud, and let my Righteousness appear
as the Sun, and mine Integrity before men, as the noone day; that my heart
may always behold thee. And let thy face of favor and love spread its beams
so over me, that I being enlightened by thee, may walk as in the clear Light
of saving Truth, and be ever led by the hand of thy Grace, that neither sin,
Satan, the World, nor mine own corruptions cause me to stumble and fall.

Give me, good Father, the Spirit of perfect Prayer: And although through the
coldness of my Zeal, and weakness of Faith, I cannot cry vocally unto thee
always alike; yet, accept the will, and the sighs and groans of my heart,
which cannot be expressed, yet known to thee. Thou know the meaning of the
heart; and he that inwardly mourns for his sins, though he outwardly cry
not for Mercy, thou hear him: it is thy Grace that works sighs in the
sorrowful heart, and which inkindleth the fire of Zeal, whereby the tongue is
moved from the believing heart, even in often enforced silence, to pierce at
length even the Heavens with the loudness of its cry: And thou again
graciously grantest the faithful hearts desire, by outward relief or inward
comfort: so that nothing wants to him that seeks thee, but he is filled
with all joy and spiritual consolation. In this joy let all worldly joys be
swallowed up in me, and let me prefer the peace of a good conscience,
before all carnal peace and prosperity.

Teach me, good Father, how to keep a diligent account of all the benefits
and blessings I here receive of thee, and what use I from time to time make of
them; knowing that there will come a day, when I shall be called to answer
the same.

Grant therefore that I may so gourrne my self, that I may be able with
boldness and truth, to give account of my time spent, and my talents, how I
have disposed them, that I may be found faithful in my little, and be made
partaker of the greatness of thy Glory in the Heavens.

Though I be a Stranger and a Soiourner here in Earth, yet grant, Lord, that I
may have my conversation in Heaven. Give me Wisdom, that I may finish this my
Pilgrimage in thy favor: and for that I cannot so number my days, that I can
know how long I have to live, let the residue of my life be a preparation to
Death, and the meditation of Death, cause in me continual watchfulness, for
the coming of thy Son. O God, forsake me not unto the end, so shall I never
fall from, or forsake thee. Enable me here so to walk as becomes thy
son, though in great weakness I have finished my course to this day. Grant,
Lord, that I may bring forth better fruits, from this day to the end of my
days, through thy Grace, and in the end be received to eternal Glory,
through the merits of my alone Savior and Redeemer, Jesus Christ: to whom with
thee, O God the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be evermore ascribed all Power and
Glory.

Amen.
O, Lord, evermore increase my faith.
FINIS.
LONDON Printed by W. Stansby for Richard Meighen, and are to be sold at his
Shops at Saint Clements Church over against Essex house, and at Westminster
Hall.

1619.


