ACOLASTVS HIS AFTER-WITTE. By S. N.

Semel insaniuimus omnes. AT LONDON Imprinted for John Baylie, and are to be
sold at his shop, near the little North-doore of Paul's Church. 1600.

To his dear Achates, Master Richard Warburton.
Marvel you may, at the bold approach of these my vnblushing lines, the
first borne of my barren invention, who begotten in my anticke age, now steps
into the world to seek some worthy Godfather: but certes if you weigh the
inducing motives, whose all-iust (respect) persuading oratorie, tempted my
triuiall muse to this presumption: I dare before hand, seal my self a pardon,
and promise gracious acceptance, to this my poor Orphant in your bosom. I
hope you shall find him ready to acknowledge you before the world, not for his
own sake alone, but for mine also, who confess my self so much indebted to
your love, as me thinks I can never declare it sufficiently, till thus the
world be witness to it.

Your due, Samuel Nicholson.

ACOLASTVS HIS AFTER-WIT.
Eubulus. Acolastus. Eub. GRase on dear Flocks, and tend your blessed feeding,
While your sad Master woeful and forlorn,
In his poor Lambs a pensive lesson reading,
With Sin-bred sorrow hayles the weeping morn;
The morn, who sampling men their sins to rue,
Has washed earths motley face in weeping dew.
Fair Queen Aurora, Beauty of the East,
What uncouth chance thy wonted cheer has blent?
Whose blithsome vp-rise makes Nights prisoners blessed,
And greets their waking hearts with sweet content:
What spite has robbed thee of thy golden rays,
The mild forerunners of our Summer days?
O may it be the Heauen-threatning deeds,
Of Earth-bred Giants, Adams sinful brood,
Thus gars thee mask in mal-contented weeds,
Drowning the days light in a mistie mood?
What makes Heavens weep, thee lowre and earth to groan?
It Is men have sinned, oh let them learn to moan.
O bottomless benignity of God,
In schooling his poor sheep from wanton gates;
Stead of Revenge, he does but show the rod,
He loves our saftie while our sins he hates.
See, see, (O man) thine everlasting shame,
All creatures rue the rigor of thy blame.
The brazen heavens conspire against our good,
Wreathing their watery brows in clouds of rain:
The earth denies to nurse her wicked brood,
Wishing all flesh within her womb again.
All creatures cry upon us for offending,
And will not cease till we profess amending.
The servants rating should rebuke the son,
A wise man schools himself by others folly,
With the dumb creatures Justice has begun;
Gods fire is fierce, yet with the flame we dally:
Our turn is next, Wrath beats on our shoares,
Death and destruction linger at our doors.
Our neighbor countries burn in civil fire,
And Nero-like warm us by the flame,
Security that false-suggesting lier,
So maskes our eyes, we do not fear our game,
Till we have proved with too dear a price,
That to our chance, their Fortune casts the dice.
We of all people once that were the pelf,
Thrust in a frozen corner of the North,
Almighty Jove has chosen to himself,
And made us famous over all the earth;
Crowning our Land with Plenty and with peace,
For nothing hinders when the Lord will bless.
Frost-bitten snakes, the Lord took pity on us,
Warming our Clymat with his Sun of grace,
And more to power his blessings down upon us,
Makes us triumphant in our foes disgrace:
That all our Neighbors in amazement stand,
To see heavens rain down graces on our Land.
But O friend-losing, base ingratitude,
Black loathsome ditch where all desert is drowned;
What does Gods deep benignity allude,
But that we should be thankful to the ground?
The ground, the root, the fountain of our bliss*
For God the founder of each blessing is.
But Serpent-like, we sting his blessed name,
And stain Gods honor by the filth of sinning;
Our wicked lives are now the very same
They were when as our light was young beginning:
Our lives (said I) oh it is my sins O God,
That merit beating with thine yron-rod.
In the May month of my blooming years,
Living in pleasures, ease, and hearts content,
Now am I forced to lament with tears,
Contempt of duty and my time misspent:
O thou from whom repentant humors grow,
Raise in mine eyes an everlasting flow.
Thou broughtest fountains forth a stony rock,
Manna from Heaven, Quails came with a wind:
O teach me how to seek, to ask, to knock;
Let frailty favor, sorrows succor find:
Teach me to spend the remnant of my days
In sins rebuke, and thine eternal praise.
Although the April of my days be spent,
In service of the world, flesh and devil;
And though my antick-age was freely lent
To the committing of accursed evil:
Yet let, oh let an old man's sacrifize
Obtain some favor in thy gracious eyes.
Thou call some at morning, some at noone,
These bear the heat and burden of the day;
And some thou call'st, when toyling time is done,
Yet give them all an equal parted pay:
Bidding them rest contented with their lot,
Since not desert, but Mercy paies the shot.
Thou gave Repentance to the dying Thief,
Pronouncing him true heir of Paradise:
His tears obtained pardon through belief,
Of frozen Conscience for to thawe the ice:
Thou badst him laugh at death, though it did pain him,
Abraham's sweet bosom straight should entertain him.
Upon these presidents though not presuming,
With prostrate heart, and elevated hands,
The heavy burden of my hearts grief tuning,
Before thy throne, where Truth and Mercy stands,
I boldly come to beg my souls release,
And reconcilement to thy blessed peace.
Forget (my God) the folly of my youth,
How I misled, have led my doting days,
How spitefully I spurned at thy truth;
And skorn'd to set my footing in thy ways;
In this thy Mercy shall appear much greater,
For pardoning him that was so deep a debtor.
Thou that did once remove so many devils
From Magdalen the penitent offender;
Root out of me a legion of evils,
And I proportionable praise will render.
Work in me Lord, and hear my poor request;
Then will I dare the most, and vow the best.
And for (O Lord) one right-conceiued thought
Comes not in compass of my poor election,
But that my words and works, and all are naught,
Safe Conduct me this day by thy direction,
That for my youth-bred follies gone and past,
My Tears may make atonement now at last.

Acolast. Come pining Cares betrothed to Discontent,
Heart-killing griefs, sad sighs come dwell with me,
Help with your tears my fountains of lament,
Least ere my sorrows cease, they dried be:
If weeping dew be wanting to my woe,
My heart will bleed, even to supply their flow,
Affections Thrall, Afflictions Slave I am,
O cursed life led captive in this sort,
Dame Fancies fool, and Fortunes chiefest game,
Which unto each assault yield Reasons fort.
O unadvised, Treason-working eyes,
You are the cause my life in passion dies.
So long I warmed my self by Beauties fire,
Deeming it dead, much like a painted flame,
Till secretly I burnd in hot desire,
And grew to be a Cock of Venus game:
My martyrd mind was cast in Cupids iayle,
And none but one my prisoned thoughts can bail.
Vt vidi, vt perij now I duly sing,
Moaning my skant foresight with wealaday:
For at mine eyes my heart did suck the sting,
That works my ruin and my lives decay.
No marvel men enjoy a seldom rest,
Nestling such Traitor foes within their breast.
O passing privilege that blind men have,
In wanting sight, they want a thousand sins;
And never any yet was Venus Slave,
But in his eye the venom first begins.
Blind are not poisoned with the baits of Beauty,
Which Syren-like, tise men from God and duty.
Poor foolish Blinkard, Beads-man unto Christ,
For restitution of long lacked sight,
I marvel what they fancy so inticte,
To be desirous of this loathsome light?
Alas, what profit have we by our eyes,
Save sins attaint in viewing Vanities?
Lament O Heavens, sight robs thee of Saints,
And mourn poor souls, sight spoyleth you of grace:
Yet sight deserves not these hard complaints,
Lust is the thief, Sight but his entering place.
Yet must I say Sight is not free from sin,
Since thief he is, that thief receives in.
Why rage I thus against my retchles eyes?
No sense but trained me to my Tragedy,
And cowardly consorted to devise?
My living death, past hope or remedy:
Yea all my parts took part to do me wrong,
And I alone must battle with my tongue.
Poor helples help, that wronged lovers have,
When hearts deep wound is veng'd with shallow words;
The Prisoner railing, yet is made a slave,
Grief fights with shadows, while it feels swords:
So pecks the Dove, whilst Ravens pierst her breast,
So fares the Wren, when Children rob her nest.
Finding my senses foes, I made appeal
To the right-deeming censure of my heart;
Hoping that Reason would become my bail,
And rid me from this inward pining smart:
But long ere this, the Senses insurrection
Brought Reason, Heart and all in foul subjection.
Where should a man go seek for silver streams,
When springs are poysned, fountains turned to mud?
What brightness can arise from borrowed beams,
When Phoebus fleets, the sovereign of our good?
Or where is the souls Attorney, when the heart,
Being once corrupted, takes the worser part?
Misguided heart, made alyen from the form
Of thy pure Makers glorious Creation;
Coward, why did thou yield to Fancies storm,
And stoop to Lust that foul abomination?
Had thou with Reasons bit, checked raging will,
A small foresight might have forestald this ill.
O where was Prayer the Souls Ambassador,
To muster heavenly troops of powerful aid,
When Sin and Hell first labored to defloure
Thy bodies Temple, Gods unspotted Maid?
Christ bids thee knock for help and thou shall have it,
Then let him helples dye that will not crave it.
Thou should have sommond Hope and Charity,
Mount-mouing Faith, hot Zeal, and perfect Love,
Free-giuen Grace, true Courage, Constancy,
With such like gifts descending from above:
The smallest handful of this holy band,
Had kept the devil from seazing on thy land.
Look as the Chafe dispersed before the wind,
Or as the dew exhaled by the Sun,
Or as a dream which waking none can find,
Or as a thought ended ere well begun:
So fancies dye, so soon we stifle evil,
If we resist the motives of the devil.
O hartles heart, false slave to false delight,
Why did thou tremble ere the Trumpet sounded,
Yielding thy self to sin before the fight,
And dastardly depart the field unwounded?
When Guides misguide themselves, the simple sort
By their ill-sample render up the Fort.
Fie foolish man, why stormst thou at the heart?
When Eyes and Sense are muffled up in blindness,
He steps on Stage, and this is all his part,
To welcome Beauty with a world of kindness:
As is the sympathy twixt flax and fire,
Such is the heart compared to hot desire.
Poor Heart, I wrong thee with my wrong exclames,
Seeking to cross my foe, I kill my friend,
Extremity still urges such extremes,
And sorrow smites at him that next does stand:
Much like a Curre, who smitten with a stone,
Bites the poor peble, lets the Man alone.
Much like a Curre (said I) nay not so wise;
For why I know my griefs unhappy ground,
I see the root from whence my passions rise,
And view the lure, that did my life confound:
O blab-tongue Tantalus, why do not eat?
Fondling, it is I must pine in sight of meat.
Then let me learn at last to level right,
See where Contempt sits laughing at my fall;
Ye hel-borne Furies help to frame a flight
To kill Disdain, that holds my life in thrall:
That words with woes may some fit measure keep,
Help me to rage, to curse, and then to weep.
O fair and kind (O filthy monstrous lie)
I cry you mercy Madame for mistaking,
The blind man colors hardly can discrye,
And my poor reasons light is now but waking: (jest;
What heart once thought, now tongue bewraies in
Thou foul Apostata, notorious beast.
Can I report her foul impiety,
When as my tongue did tremble once to name her?
Feign would I speak, but when I speak, I die;
My joints apall'd with fear, refuse to shame her.
Courage my Heart, for love she left thee grief,
Make change a robbry; and so call her thief.
O shallow-braind invention, course discourse,
In this high task I do her merits wrong,
The spring is dry it seems by the sourse,
When naught but New gate terms can store ye tongue.
I Will fetch from hell, stern words to shake the Center,
And with mine action make them fiercely rent her.
O proud, presuming, foul, abominable,
Sins shop, friends shame, hels bait, and natures mole,
Worse then the offall of Augias stable,
Ill thrive the beast that brought us such a foale,
And let fell crosses all her joys deprive,
Through whom my faithful heart thus dies alive.
O wooluish heart wrapped in a woman's hyde,
That spurnst at profferd duty, lendest love
To Lads that seek a Lemmon, not a Bryde,
Whom neither time has tried, nor service proved.
In men (it is said) their wills must stand for pay,
But Lust-breathd fury guides a woman's way.
If love be hated, hate be blessed with love,
If Merit merit standing next the door,
If haile-shot win when Cannons cannot move,
If Truth and Promise soiourne from our shore,
If weaker vessels wear the crest on high,
While men's best hope, is hopeles for to die*
Why are not Natures works in general,
Prone to like crosses and to like confusion,
The greater seeking still to hurt the small,
The mighty wrong the weak by fell intrusion?
Why shines not Phoebus in the fulsome night,
While Luna lends the day her duskie light?
Why fall not Stars as thick as winters hail?
Why is not Summer cold, and Winter warm?
Or why does not the earths foundation fail?
Sinking in seas, that long have sought his harm?
Why do not all things that on earth remain,
To their rude-formed chaos turn again?
O excrement of all exceeding ill!
How could thou wrong my true affection so?
I gave in pawn my heart, my hand, my will;
Yet did thou from thy plighted promise go;
Vowing, if all were dead save I alone,
Thou would forsake me, and be wife to none.
Were I deformed (though I am not fair)
Ill-nurturd, Naturd, churlish and unkind;
Did any member Monster-like appear,
Or did I fail in faculties of mind;
Then had thou some pretense of reason, why
Thus all askaunce thou holdst me in thine eye.
But these are false, then whence deriues this hate,
Ungrateful guerdon of my zealous love?
Perchance thou see my shallow-ebd estate,
The thought whereof thy liking does remove:
It Is so: I know it by too true a token;
For why, thy self the same have often spoken.
O Virtues blemish and thy sexes blot,
Base dunghill bird, nere sprung of Gentle blood;
Vile is thy mind, but viler be thy lot,
That make earths dross the sovereign of thy good;
To cause men curse thee, and to pity me,
Thus do I rate thy god if gold be he.
Heauen-skorned mould, base skin of barren earth,
Springing in Caves, where death and darkness dwell,
A monstrous metal proved by thy birth,
Since men diue for thee half way down to hell.
O cursed engine of light hating evil,
Favored of men, but found out by the devil.
O sacred thirst of gold what can thou not,
Sins chiefest agent, enemy to good:
Thou, thou art sought to pay fond Pleasures shot,
Yet often found with loss of dearest blood.
Some terms thee gylt, that every soul might reed
Even in thy name, thy guilt is great indeed.
Guilty thou art of Murder, Rape, and Theft,
Guilty of Briberie and subornation,
Guilty of Treason, Perjury, and shift,
An accessarie by thy sly temptation,
To all sins past, and all that are to come,
From Adams downfall to the day of doom.
Misshapen metal, smooth-faced Hypocrite,
Whose golden splendoure masketh mortal eyes,
Moth of the mind, false slave to false delight,
A devil lurking in a strange disguise:
What is thy luster when it shines most bright,
But Satan clothed in an Angels light?
The want of thee is cause I want my bliss;
For whither fly the Gnats but to the Sun?
The Swallow still repaires where Summer is,
And women's hearts with heaps of gifts are won.
So dunghill worms must catch the finest fish,
Else man shall never train him to his dish.
Through thee one kingdom swells against another,
The Father butcherd often by his Son;
The Daughter gives a pasport to the Mother,
Fearing that else her days would nere be done.
Through thee each murthring Roscius is appointed,
To act strange scenes of death on Gods anointed.
For thee the Merchant leaves his countries shore,
Wife, Children, Parents, and what else is dear,
His heart presaging nere to see them more,
Such are the circumstances of his fear;
The waves, the winds, the rocks, the cruel foe,
Consort in one to work his overthrow.
But all the dangers of his wills obtaining,
Fright not this fondling from the sweets of gain,
Nor weake-built hopes persuade him to abstaining,
When gold's proposd the guerdon of his pain.
Thus Syren-like thou trainst him to the deep;
Where waves often lull him in his latest sleep.
It Is thou false hell-hound, right corrupting coin,
That makst poor Soldiers, needy, bare, disgraced,
While greedy guides their stipends do purloyne,
And martial discipline stands quite defaced.
O manners, times, O world-declyning days!
Where might is right, and men do what they please.
When spend-thrift John, that goodly gentleman,
Has swallowed Lordships down his dainty throat,
And brought his Fathers fortunes in the wane,
By gadding Cities in a silken Coat;
Then to some friend does Lusty-blood complain him,
His Bank-rupt birthright ca^ no more maintain him.
A man he is, and Hector was no more,
Then why not Captain too as Hector was:
Besides, it is not as in times before,
When men's deserts were viewd in Virtues glass.
A man may compass wonders with a gift,
Then why not this? Distress will have a shift.
Thus, plotts he means, to get a pretty train,
Pretending honor, and his Countries cause;
And then he musters up each simple Swain,
Himself not knowing Arms, nor Martial laws.
He stalks the streets, as who say, This is he,
(I mean that first will teach his men to flee.)
Unto this Captain flock both young and old,
He buies his servant out, and he his son,
O monstrous times when men are bought and sold,
Who go vnransom'd thinks himself undone.
For what great hope or comfort can he find,
That makes one where blind do lead the blind.
The rascal remnant of these silly men,
Are summond speedily by sound of dromme,
And Skapt-thrift wishes every one were ten,
Of greater number, greater gains will come:
Well on they march, and still he steals a bite,
To feed his auaritious appetite.
This tuch and go sets all his teeth on edge,
He Will be no Tantalus amid such treasure:
A thousand laws the Lion can allege,
To pray upon poor Asses at his pleasure:
Yet policy persuades him to forbear them,
Till far from home, the Wolf may boldly tear them
No sooner are their travails at an end,
But fresh afflictions full as fast beginning,
Yet silly Lambs they deem the Fox a friend,
They shrink no dog until they see him grinning:
They little think the end of his conduction,
Is wealth and honor bought with their destruction.
This Judas set in Council with himself,
Not how to foil his foe and win the field,
No, no, he gapes for gain and rusting pelf,
No palm he seeks, but that does profit yield:
Says, When the yron's hot is chiefest striking,
Time serves my turn and bids me do my liking.
What long before was plotted in his head,
The Monster prosecutes to this effect,
He purseth all the pay of those are dead,
The devil needs no council to direct:
He that could bring himself to beggars plight,
Knows how to rob another of his right.
This done he monthly minceth small their pay,
Sings Nunc dimittimus to half his Band,
The rest must live on pillage and on pray,
Such as they seize from Boores upon the land.
Who best bestirres him for his Princes pay,
Takes half in hand, the rest at latter day.
O spightfull spectacle, who could behold thee?
That frightst my senses in the imagination:
While to my self my self do thus unfold thee,
How am I ravished with indignation;
Those that to mount by others fall have sought,
O might their heads mount higher the^ their thought
As he that travails in an uncouth wood,
Fraught with those Fortunes which his father left,
Is suddenly surpised by Robin Hood,
And in a thieves name there receives his shrift:
So stand these silly soldiers at a bay,
Robbed of their hire and basely sent away.
Poor playning Prodigalls, now must they wend,
Back to their country with remorse and shame,
But where is the feasting Father, or a friend,
To welcome home his son, forgive his blame?
Alas our iron age will not afford it;
What? help the poor? the Devil still abhorrd it.
Yet some there be that of a holy motion,
To harbor strangers, lodge them in the Cage:
And some because that fasting helps devotion,
Deny them food their hunger to assuage:
Some whip them for their sins and former swaruing,
More of their courtesy then the Poores deserving.
Who right conceits the miseries of Job,
His children, servants, goods, and cattle lost,
His body botched, basest rags his robe,
His mind with millions of temptations tossed:
Can fittest deem their griefs true quality,
And sympathize poor Soldiers misery.
Hell-damning dross, thou art the fountain cause
Of this injustice, raven, and confusion,
No man would spurn at duty, God, or laws,
Had not his heart to thee a false allusion.
O wrack of souls, the devils adamant,
Devouring numbers both by wealth and want.
The Infant-childe delights to play with gold,
The young man seeks it to maintain his pleasure,
It is the life and Gods-good of the old,
All ages deem it as their dearest treasure.
Who gives a Rose to gain a worthles weed?
We sell for good in show our good indeed.
Witness my Mistress, now no Mistress mine,
Who though no Queen has made King Midas choice,
For none must pluck the Redrose of her prime,
But he that gains her with a golden voice.
So young and covetous, a ten days wonder,
The devil ioynes and I Will not put a sunder.
Say shameless Betresse, have I made thee blush,
Rating the saint, whom thou do rate so dear?
Or is thine impudency grown so flush,
Thou waighst no credit, or thou will not hear?
O if thou bear a part of woman kind,
Let some relenting pity pierce thy mind.
The senseles marble moved with my plaining,
Wets his pale cheeks and seems to weep with me;
The showers which daily from mine eyes are raining,
Draw the dum creatures to a sympathy:
Poor Philomele that sings of rauishment,
Forgets her tune to listen my complaint.
If in the woods I breath abroad my woes,
Each bow does bend to steal away my tale;
And still as I her injuries disclose,
Great trees for sorrow seem their tops to veil.
Let me but sigh and say, She is unkind,
Echo replies aloude, She is unkind.
The struggling flood that still for passage groans,
Pausing his course, and wrapped in admiration
Of my laments, hart-breaking sighs and mones,
Sobs out the deskant of my desolation:
And runs no more, till rivers growing rank,
Cause him depart or ouerflowe the bank.
The valleys, rocks, and hollow caves resound,
Bearing the burden to my woeful dittie;
My plaints have power to pierce the stony ground,
And move the savage Brutes to manly pity.
If Rocks, and Earth, and Beasts bewail my state,
O look on me, and be compassionate.
The heavens as grieved lock up the lightsome day,
And Phoebus fleeting fayles the world of light;
Stars change their course and wander all astray,
The Maiden Moon forgets to shine by night,
Shamed, that a Maid so shameless should be found,
Fiercer then Beasts, harder then stony ground.
The heauen-died flowers, sweet of spring of the prime,
That gilde the meadows with their summers pride,
Fading as in the frostie winters time,
Pitying my passions hold their heads aside:
The Siluan-Satyres in their green-wood-songs,
Tell how disdain sits laughing at my wrongs.
O learn of these (slint hearted) how to grieve,
Dumme shows they are, yet show to thee thy duty,
They weep to see thee laughing in thy sleeue,
Thou laughst to see me snared in thy Beawtie:
Think thy affections dull, thy trespass deep,
When trees, and stones must teach thee how to weep,
If so my sorrows cannot pierce thy heart,
Yet force a tear, and feign to make a plaster,
Breath sighs, as if thou deeply feltst my smart,
And kiss me to as Judas kissed his Master:
And when I rage, seem thou withal to tremble;
It Is hard when I must teach thee to dissemble.
So shall my self enjoy thee in conceit,
And what is Love, but a conceited pleasure;
Small fishes are content to see the bait,
While greater suck the sweet and gain the treasure.
Love in conceit's a cony-catching play,
While I feed thoughts, he steals the wench away.
O woe beset, unhappiest man alive,
Seeking to wreake my self, my self am wounded;
Poor snared Byrd, for liberty I strive,
Yet in the trappe, still more and more confounded,
As one that wipes his wound, yet still does bleed,
So more I speak the worse alas I speed.
He that with oil the wilde-fire seeks to quench,
Or bound a river in with banks of sand;
He that has loved a stony-harted Wench,
And now with brawling thinks to quench the brand;
Learn this of me, late proved to my pain,
It Is hard to bail imprisoned thoughts again.
When I sat down to ease my griefs with plaining,
I thought my chiefest remedy to rate her,
Hard words seemd swords to murder love remaining.
And deep love skornd, would make me deadly hate her:
But while I seek to quench loves hot desire,
My wind of words has blown a greater fire.
My time-bred troubles are but now beginning,
I love, I loath; I hate, I wish withal,
My thread is cut, and yet the Sisters spinning,
I live, I dye, I stand, and now I fall:
I laughing weep, I hope and yet despair,
I say she is foul, and straight I call her fair.
Hence idle words, servants to shallow brains,
Unfruitful sounds, wind-wasting arbitrators,
Your endless prattle, lessens not my pains,
His suite is cold, that makes you mediators.
Since fates have made me bankrupt of my bliss,
My dying life a very torment is.
In vain I cavil at her cruelty,
At gold, at eyes, at senses, and the heart,
In vain I spurn against my destiny,
In vain I seek to ease an endless smart;
No antidote at all can do me good,
But the effusion of my harmeles blood.
Poor heart why tremblest thou at this decree?
Thy self art easd by ending of this life,
For sorrow killed, thou gainest liberty,
But if I live, thou live still in strife:
Tell life, I Will not a minutes respite give,
Since that is lost for which I sought to live.
O wretched life, what is thy benefit?
Whose chiefest sportings are calamity,
Whose days are spent in troubles, care, and spite,
Whose pleasures, sin, whose all is vanity:
Whose last is short, whose strength is but a breath,
Whose date unknown, whose end is sudden death.
O wished death, come kill all murdring greeues,
My soul suruiues in never dying fears,
Which round ingirt me like as many thieves,
And load my heart with pangues, mine eyes with tears.
If on the earth there may be found a Hell,
Within my soul, her several torments dwell.
Yet dye I will not till my Testament,
The brief contents of discontented mind,
Writ with my blood into the world be sent,
Bearing true witness to my faire-vnkind,
That as her love might once have made me biest,
Her skorne has sheathed this dagger in my breast.
My spotted soul to him do commend,
In whose compare the heavens are most impure,
On whose free promises my hopes depend,
To share the joys that ever shall endure:
My body I bequeath unto the earth,
The common Mother that first brought it forth.
My blessing I bequeath unto the blade,
That makes the breach for grisly death to enter,
She shall not ride my patience like a jade,
If death-wrought resolution may prevent her.
O welcome engine of my cares releasing,
That kill'st Despair to make my hopes increasing.
My sorrows, cares, hart-breaking sighs, and crosses,
Woes, lamentations, pining and despaires,
My tears, complaints, foul injuries and losses,
Griefs, shame, misfortune, and my daily fears,
I give to her that now gives me this fall,
The sole efficient of my Funeral.
Let her have time to rent her Amber hair,
Lether have time to think on me and rave,
Let her have time of favor to despair,
And skorn'd of all to live Affections slave;
Let her have time to beg and none relieve her,
And every day bring crosses, more to grieve her.
Let her have time to prove her friends her foes,
And see her old acquaintance all forsake her,
Let her have time her honest name to lose,
Abhorred of men, and cursed of her Maker.
And every minute let her find a time
To rue my death her vnrecalling crime.
My Halcyon days of bliss and happiness,
The mild forerunners of this fearful storm,
I give to those whom better stars do bless,
Which never felt the sting of woman's skorne;
What ever else is mine, disbursed be
To those that live and think no harm of me.
Come gentle knife, why lingrest thou so long?
Come ease my sorrows with thy fatal stroke;
My heart is resolute, my hand is strong,
My lingering life more torment does provoke.
O King of graves, why killst thou them abhor thee.
And turnst from me that now am ready for thee?
Auaunt thou viper, I thy spite defy,
Where life is loved thou ready art to kill,
But never once thy weapons wilt apply,
To the redressing of a wretches ill.
Come trusty hand for thou must do the deed,
Since other friends are fled in time of need.
The Star that first made entrance in mine eye,
And thence departing struck my senses blind,
Then led my heart in base captivity,
Yet to her prisoner proves most unkind:
Witness fair heavens she, she, it is only she,
That guides this hand to give this wound to me.

Eub. Stay, stay thy hand (O Natures prodigy)
If blood and death must expiate thy rage,
Pity thy self (foul beast) and murder me,
My life for thine, my self will be thy gage.
Ten thousand deaths my soul indures to see
Gods image wronged in thy mortality.
In massak'ring thy self, whom do thou kill,
But with thy body that immortal soul,
For whose redemption Christ vouchsaft to spill
Those purple drops to quench the living coal
Of his dear Fathers deepe-deserued hate,
And to the heavens promote thy poor estate.
Think thou by dying to prevent the pain,
That seems to pinch thee in this brittle life?
Alas this death begets thee life again,
When with thy self, thy self shall be at strife,
When thou will think all pains consort in one,
And that thy self sustain'st them all alone.
O Acolastus, what foul fiend of Hell,
Would glut his fury with thy harmeles blood?
Watching thy death here in some shady cell,
To pray upon thy soul, thy sovereign good:
Look, study, sigh for grace, and fly from evil,
Grace and resistance drives away the devil.

Acolast. Art thou a God, a Man, or else a Ghost?
Come thou from heaven where bliss and solace dwell?
Or from the ayrie could-ingendring coast?
Or from the darkesome dungeon-hole of hell?
Or from the secret chambers of the deep?
Or from the graves where breathles bodies sleep?
Art thou a Hermit in this wilderness?
Or else some Satyr maskt in ages weeds?
Or (by the heavens I charge thee to confess)
Art thou her shape for whom my poor heart bleeds?
I, I, it is so, thou art that cruel she,
That wrought my death, now fain'st to pity me.
What bloody scene has cruelty to act?
Death is the worst thy malice can inflict,
And thou had seen my souls poor city sacked,
But thy deep policy did contradict,
Knowing by death my troubles should have end,
Which to prolong thou mainly do intend.
O be content with robbing me of life,
Why do thou triumph over fortunes wrack?
The death of men determinates their strife,
And wars are finished with the Cities sack.
The Elephant and Dragon, mortal foes,
Bury their hate in mutual overthrows.
By life my soul was pind in little ease,
By death I seek my thraldom to release,
Then let my life thy brutish heart appease,
And give me leave at least to dye in peace.
O let it not be said in time to come,
A woman's hate suruiues till day of doom.

Eub. Fondling I am no God, nor tempting friend,
Nor yet the woman that could wish thee dead;
Know me for Eubulus thy ancient friend,
Witness this snow-white fleece upon my head:
Mark my complexion, habit, tongue and years,
How every thing in quondam sort appears.
I am no flint-hart female, bloody minded;
Mocking thy senses with a borrowed shape,
But one that sees thy sense through passion blinded,
And sighs, and seeks away for thine escape:
Then charm this mad infection, that does reign
In beldam fury of thy witles brain.
Be not as sottish as the simple sort,
That wrack their wits upon misfortunes shelfe,
Nor yield thy reasons, beauty-battred fort,
Crying God help, yet never help thy self:
Thy crazed Shipp's not so far run on shore,
But thou may escape and flourish as before.

Acolast. Et tu Brute, will thou stab Caesar too?
Thou art my friend and wilt not see me wronged,
I pray thee leave me without more adoo,
For with my life my sorrows are prolonged:
I know thou pleasurst not in my distress,
Then rob me not of deaths true happiness.
Yet since in sunshine of my better days,
Thou wast a Father to my headstrong youth;
Training my rash-braind thoughts in reasons ways,
Whose words I ever found the glass of Truth;
My cares shall take a truce with death so long,
Till I have made thee privy to my wrong.
Lo here at hand, a circle-braunching tree,
Whose leauie bosom makes a summer seat,
Nature has raisd this arbor purposely
To shroude our bodies from the parching heat:
Here while we sit within this gloomy shade,
I Will tell my Love, and how it did invade.

Eub. Then yield me up this irefull instrument,
The destined engine of thy tragedy:
It Is wisdoms rule, occasions to prevent,
And give no ground to Satan's treachery.
Well now begin, and give thy sorrows vent,
I Will sit and mourn with thee till day be spent.

Mcolast. To show the poison of my endless pining,
The task is long and tedious to express,
Bright Phoebus to the Western deep declining,
And repetition never made thing less:
Who rippes the rancour of old-wounded flesh,
In steed of healing, makes it bleed a fresh.
Yet since the heavens are so propitious,
To make my friend eyewitness to my fall;
Lysten kind Father what I shall disclose,
How Love became Disdaines unhappy thrall:
And as I story my flint-mouing wrong,
Weep thou, to bear the burden to my song.
Sic incipit Stultorum tragicomedia.
THree months ago, when Phoebus in his pride
Had scaled hot Cancers sunny-parched cell;
And Ceres cast her summers green aside;
And flowers had changed their color, form, and smell;
When days were long'st and nights were waxen short;
And yonglings met to wanton and to sport.
About this time I singled out a day,
With merry consorts to delight my self;
I thought my ship might sometime roue astray,
And yet not run her self on every shelfe.
What Siren played, but I durst dance her measure?
Thinking to master Venus son at pleasure.
Fortune, who long had owed my hap a grudge,
Summond wild younglings to a summers drinking,
To which my merry mates and I did trudge,
Of such an accident full little thinking:
Where revels reign, and dancing holds a day,
I'ts hard if Acolastus keep away.
Well, there was I, and there was Fortune too,
Who had prepared bait to work my bane;
There did I pass a pleasant hour or two,
In dancing for the gloves and other gain:
There did I gaze against that glorious Sun,
By which my heart was fired, my sight was done.
O give me leave to sigh a little while,
Before my hell of foul mishap break loose;
But let not Fortune see me least she smile,
And say, his mountain thoughts end in a mouse,
Oh, it is a burden that will break the back,
To see ones foe triumphing in his wrack.
Scarce had the Sun attained his noontide prick,
Gracing our pastimes with a summers day,
A train of Ladies trouping very thick,
Directly toward us made their speedy way:
For want of worse our Music drew them on,
Pans pype plays sweet, Apollo being gone.
Look how astonished in a qualmy trance,
The man that meets a lothsome-visag'd Bear,
Struck with amazement of this sudden chance,
Falls to the ground half slain with very fear,
Within his heart and senses are at strife,
Past fear of death, and yet past hope of life.
So was I daunted at mine eyes first gazing,
Sweeping they came, and seemd to brush the ground,
Their tipto-tripping pace bred double mazing,
Their rattling silks my senses did confound:
It seemed, Dianas Nymphs had left her Queen,
To sport themselves a while upon this green.
Or loue-sicke Venus in a huntresse weed,
Meaning to seek Adonis in the wood,
Mounted upon a snow-white colored Steed,
From Pegasus proud race vaunting his blood,
Came marching onward with a mayden-pace,
A thousand Nymphs attending on her grace.
My mates all ravished with admiration,
Stood like the men which once Jove's golden son,
By his spears wonder-working Transformation,
Turned into semblance of a senseless stone,
Or as Actaeon standing at a Bay,
Finding Diana naked in his way.
Fortune and Love chose me amongst the rest,
As sweetest linguist of persuading wit,
With modest motives kindly to request,
These sinful Saints a little while to sit,
And see how shepherds spend the holy day,
In youth-bred sports, and casting Care away.
Twixt hope and fear I marched on to meet them,
My rustic blush forbad me to dissemble,
Met face to face, when I was meant to greet them,
My words were done, and every joint did tremble:
Till my poor heart rebuking much my blame,
Untied my tongue, and bad me speak for shame.
More fair and beautiful, then were those three,
That found the golden fruit on Idas plain;
Gods, Angels, Saints, or whatsoever you be,
Accept the proffer of a simple swain;
Draw near, and till the heat of day be spent
Look on, and laugh at Shepherds meriment.
We have no thing of worth for to present,
We plead for pardon ere our sport begin,
Our boldness springs from a true intent,
Which makes an error oftentimes no sin:
We boast of naught, save that it shall go hard,
But our good wills shall purchase your regard.
These words scarce past the limits of my lips,
Sounding a parley to their modest ears;
A wanton youngling from her fellows skippes,
Which like a Comet in my sight appears,
Causing my silly wits and me to sunder,
Infusing me with prophesies of wonder.
For by this cross aspect I gathered well,
(And yet not well, because I could not shun it)
In her fair face my joys defaced to spell,
My battle lost before her words begin it:
For from her eyes, a kind look did she dart,
Which through mine eyes diu'd down into my heart.
A pretty while this pretty creature stood,
Before the engine of her thoughts began,
Seeming to sympathize my heavy mood,
Pitying my prone looks, and my color wan:
Till blushing forth a pure vermilion dye,
With low-tun'd voice she made me this reply.
Shepherd we see you are disposde to flatter,
That frumpe us with a false-supposed fair;
Men's words are Metaphors, it makes no matter,
You know poor women, sir, are made to bear:
But since you made so plausible a motion,
This day we consecrate to your devotion.
Mistress (quoth I) if any take offense,
My heart makes good the trespass of my tongue;
Humanity full easily can dispense,
Where love and zeal are authors of the wrong.
Good wine desires no bush to set it forth,
And I too mean to blaze your beauties worth.
But (Lady) if a swain may be so bold,
To crave admittance mong'st your other men,
My self will bring you where you shall behold
Our rusticke revels at your ease, and when
In Thetis lap the Sun shall drown the day,
I Will set you forward in your former way.
As fares the man convict of Heresy,
Whose Judgment doomes him death by cruel flame,
The world eyewitness of his infamy,
Bearing a faggot for his further shame,
Full faintly wending onward to the fire,
Where self opinion shall receive his hire:
So marched I before this mayden-trayne,
Love swore, excuses should not serve my turn,
Quoth he, Thou think me by Reason slain,
Thou holdst a false point, now recant and burn:
I cried retire, and he inioynd this smart,
To bear fond fancies faggot in my heart.
Who so has seen the tender Mary-gold,
Spreading her pride against the worlds fair eye,
But when the sun his glory does infold,
This pretty Creature shuts and seems to die:
So did I love to gaze upon my Sun,
But when she turned away, my life was done.
Thus while my sight was surfeiting on Beauty,
We suddenly surpised the bashful Swaynes,
Who showed their harts-ioy by their homely duty,
Kissing these lovely Ladies for their pains;
Seeking all means to farther their delight,
While thus I ruminate on Fortunes spite.
Inconstant minion, mother of mischance,
True Virtues cross, delighting still in chang,
When most thou fawn'st thy fauour's but a glance,
Thy naughty nature loves still to range:
Great pity is it, were there remedy,
That men are tide to thine extremity.
Thou art a stepdame to each honest thing,
Training up vices like a loving Nurse,
Crowning the beggar, pulling down the king,
What ever Nature made thou make worse:
Thou helpst a man a while to cast his dice,
And turn'st thy wheel upon him in a trice.
Thou do usurp the worlds round circled stage,
Acting thereon thy variable scenes,
Where often inspired with a bedlam rage,
Thou plaguest the innocent with endless pains:
And those that seem to day but lookers on,
Thou makst thine actors ere tomorrow gone.
O hateful Hag! thou have betrayed my life,
In giving weapons unto Cupids wrath;
Perceiving Love and Reason were at strife,
Thou falsely train'dst me on to Errors path;
Where taking vantage on my hard distress,
Love forced my heart his valor to confess.
For Love had labored long to work my fall,
Battring the bulwark of my naked breast;
But Reason gave his force no ground at all,
Bidding the blind Boy set his heart at rest:
For more he sought to try this fond conclusion,
The more my courage shined in his confusion.
Till thou to spit the venom of thy spite,
Subornedst Cupid how he soon might slay me,
Abandoning his bow and arrows quite,
You laid this privy complot to betray me;
When Fortune first had brought me to the bay,
A Maidens eyes should steal my heart away.
Immortal heavens, and ye great powers above,
From whose fair influence all justice flows,
Work your revenge on Fortune and on Love,
From whom the title of my trouble grows:
That men beholding it may safely say,
No sin can escape unpunished past his day.
While thus I prosecute my fruitles playning,
Two Shepherds summoned me to see their sport,
Whose sudden sight soon moved me to abstaining,
Least they might hear my tragical report:
Clearing my face from clouds of discontent,
With these two loving swains away I went.
Like as the soft and tender leaued flower,
Whose drouping color shows his life is done,
Being lately drenched in some dismal shower,
Till he attract refreshing from the sun:
So I whose hopes but lately seemed to die,
Was now revived by beauties fresh supply.
For now in Tropicke of false Fortunes height,
My nest was built by sweetest Beauties side,
Loves yoke was easy now I felt no weight,
My ship was carried with a gentle tide:
I sat too hot, yet still I did desire,
To live a Salamander in the fire.
Now did I wish the day would never be done,
So loath I was to leave this Paradise,
Or that our revels were but new begun,
But swift-wing'd Pleasure passes with a trise:
For Love had sworn when ere I did depart,
I should perchance go home without a heart.
Now while I court the Loadstarre of my life,
And with her pretty parley feed mine ears;
O sugared words, yet sharper then a knife,
Distilling Nectar-droppes on all that hears;
The merry swains broke of our private pleasure,
And music summond us to dance a Measure.
Taking this Lady by the lilly hand,
I taught her quickly tread the shepherds round:
Lo now blows up the secret-smoking brand,
Which did my reason and my sense confound,
For Love is nine-liu'd kill him never so much,
The wanton Boy reuiueth with a tutch.
Look as a man stung by the noisome Aspe,
Whose hony-poyson tickles with delight,
Sucks in the venom of this mortal waspe,
Wholly suspecties of the serpents spite;
So I so mad, that reason could not turn me,
Bathed in the flame, which afterward did burn me.
Often did I strive to take her in mine arms,
And tell my hearts grief by some silent motion,
She was too young to level at my harms,
Or pick a meaning from my dum devotion.
Often would my dotage make me dance amiss,
And then begin new measure with a kiss.
She bad me dance true, but I loved my faining,
(Hang him that loves and has no mother-wit)
I said our music erred in ouer-straining,
No marvel then my footing could not hit;
And to prevent the iarres that came by this,
Our lips made music where our feet did miss.
Our country Round by this was almost done,
When wanton weary suddenly she grew;
Nay then (quoth I) would we had never begun,
Fair Nymph cheer up thy self and dance a new:
For if thou droope, our hearts will fall as fast,
As Autumn leaves before the Winters blast.
Behold the sunne-beames for thy Beauties sake,
Dancing Lauoltoes on the liquid floare;
The whistling winds unwonted music make,
Whiles Sirens sit and sing upon the shore:
Yea the fierce Wolf is come to see thee play,
And for thy sake our Lambs keep holyday.
See, see fair Flora decked in summers pride,
Burning in emulation of thy beauty;
And Venus nestled by Adonis side,
Seeking to do his love peculiar duty:
Fair heavens Queen sits dallying with her Jove,
Least he should see thee, and so change his Love.
If then the treasure of thy supreme fair,
Breed jealousy in gods, wonder in men;
O do not thus thy beauties worth impair,
Quitting our kindness with unkind disdain:
Gentilitie should bear a gentle mind,
And perfect Beauty never proves unkind.
This said, I trained her friendly from the rest,
Into a sweet and solitary place,
Where Love himself might daigne to build his nest,
All things consorted with so great a grace:
Had Mars played double here with Loves fair queen.
Their double-dealing Phoebus never had seen.
For why such was the shadow of this grove,
All thick beset with circle-branching trees,
It gave no passage to the sun above,
Whose piercing light our actions ouersees:
But here and there small day-holes did appear,
To light the ground, and let in cooling air.
Amidst this Thicket with a silent gliding,
A Crystal brook ran in a flowrie brim,
Where laboring Swans trained up by natures guiding,
Record a thousand sweet notes as they swim:
Sweet notes they were, tuned with a sweeter voice,
That charmed the trees, and made the stones rejoice.
Here summers Queen had made her flowery bed
Of the white Lilly, and the crimson Rose,
With thousand other kinds of white and red,
Whose heavenly hew her art did so dispose,
As bred amazement in the dazzled sight,
And cloyed the senses with a worlds delight.
The chirping Birds to shun the heat of June,
Fled to the shelter of this shadie ground,
Where praising Nature in a siluerie tune,
The hollow caves and valleys made resound:
In brief, this plot contained the perfect sum
Of all the sweetes in fair Elisium.
While toward this Paradise we made our way,
We were incountred by the glorious sun,
Who purposely to force this fair Nymph stay,
Some hotter now then when his course begun;
That he might feed his false eye with her sight,
Whose beauty dimmed the glory of his light.
My Love was faint, and forste to set her down,
Whose Angels face distilled pearly sweat;
Love bad me give her there a grasse-greene gown,
In spite of Phoebus, and his forced heat,
But while my lingering thoughts stood to devise,
I saw God Morpheus seazing on my prize.
Whereat I fell into a jealous trance,
Sleep eyes (quoth I) see not my Love profaned,
Or if heavens power have power to help mischance,
Let not the Rose of beauty thus be stained:
Fie, fie (quoth Reason) where is thy wits in keepe^
Disturb her not, thy Love is but a sleep.
I laughed to think hart-burning jealousy
Should build a stage for Puppets in my brain,
Presenting visions to my fantasy,
That nothing were, nor could return again:
Self-biting Curre, a bold unbidden guest,
Whose foul disturbance marres true Lovers feast.
Me thought her sleeping proved sleep divine,
Me thought the winds for pity would not blow,
Shut were the casements of her crystal eyes,
Which waking, like two silver Moons did show;
Shut were the day-bright eyes, where all might see
Fair Beauty linckt in love with Chastity.
Sleep on (quoth I) sweet Saint of purity,
Yet sleeping, smile thy beauty on the air,
That every creature humbled at thy knee,
May offer homage to thy supreme fair:
But turn from Phoebus, least his fond desire
Cause him descend and set the world on fire.
I Will charm the brazen doors of fearful dreams,
And bind the stern God Morpheus in a chain,
Least he molest thy mind with idle theames,
Which in the fancies of the night do reign,
And guard thy person with as dear a price,
As if I kept the gates of Paradise.
For thy sake Acol shall perfume the winds
With costly Myrre, and curious Ambergreece:
I Will venture more then Jason did to find
The happy fortune of a golden fleece,
Which I my self full safely mean to keep,
And wrap thee in it, when thou g'ins to sleep.
And you sweet birds, whose nimble-relisht notes,
Ravish the soul of man, and cheer the day,
Stay the shrill descant of your siluery throtes,
Till Beauty wake and bid your music play:
Or if you needs will sing, some tune devise,
Whose Angel-sound may charm all Argus eyes.
Thus did I greet the Idol of my heart,
Offering up tears before her sleeping shrine.
And was beginning to bewray my smart,
When lo, as if her spirit could divine,
Opening the closet of her lockt-vp eyes,
She did prevent me in this cunning wise:
Shepherd, I glory in the happy chance,
That made me Mistress of so kind a man,
And one so well my praises can advance;
Good Lord, how long since you the whetstone wan?
Your high-pitcht words are like the torch by night,
That wastes it self in giving others light.
Tell me whose person did you passionate?
Expressing motions of internate woe,
Grieuing your self to guess at others fate?
You were to blame, that would not let me know,
Nor seek my help to play some tragic part;
For I can sigh too, yet never rent my heart.
Belike your Swains intend a Comedy,
To be presented in some solemn place;
And loue-sicke you these passions must descrie:
Which to adorn with action and with grace,
You daily thus make trial of your part,
With sighs and tears that never pierce the heart.
Ah would to God flint-harted wench (thought I)
Thou feltst the cross which love has laid upon me;
Or that my woes gave not thy words the lie,
And my poor heart had power henceforth to shun thee.
Thy Mother (wanton) was not half so old,
Yet knew she when a suitors tale was told.
Love brought me in to act this wooing scene,
The argument was written in thy face.
The words were such as might express my pain,
The end to win thee to a liking grace:
And every period had his sense made plain,
With tears, which Chorus-like mine eyes did rain.
Thou did not sleep, yet hearing could not move thee,
(A cold presage for him that means to woo)
My wanton gesture seemed to say, I love thee,
But all was labor lost that I could do:
My suite was sleeueles, thy regard so cold,
As if that I another tale had told.
This said my heart, but this I durst not say,
So loud the regent of my heart might hear me,
The place unfit my fancy to bewray,
The time and other circumstance did fear me:
Her scene performed, my tongue thus acts his part,
Hiding the Love, that reuel'd in my heart.
Fair Saint, if Love have forste me to offending*
With yrksome prattle, crossing thy repose;
O blame the beauty on thy face depending,
That gives a tongue of praises to thy foes.
Then grant me leave, how ever others deem,
To give thy Beauty excellent esteem.
But please thee (Sweeting) finish out our walk,
(The pleasure great, the labor is but small)
And in yond Eden see how every stalk,
Brags the sweet blossoms he is blessed withal,
I Will load thy lap with Floras tender pride,
And bring thee homeward in the Euen-tide.
Thus said, I brought her to this shadie rest,
This green-dy'd grove, this summers Paradise,
Where Love by pleading hard might make me blessed,
Where I was bent to cast my Fortunes dice,
And in a minute ease or end the strife,
Or win my Love, or else to lose my life.
Now while the Damsel wondering Natures store,
Seaz'd on the flowery treasure of the spring,
And more she gatherd, still desiring more,
(The last is best, and new sels every thing)
I madly tossed between Despair and Joy,
Prayed for success to the blind-seeing Boy.
Great Prince of Love, to whose victorious hand
My frozen heart was forste perforce to yield,
And in my bosom entertain the brand,
Against which weak Reason never man could sheeld:
O be propitious to an humble Swain,
And give my love success, to quite my pain.
Thou art so little (else our Poets miss)
That thou can hide thee in a wanton eye,
So subtle thou can enter with a kiss,
So crafty thou can counterfaite to dye,
Or being dead, thy quality is such,
To live again by virtue of a tuch.
O lend me thy insinuating power,
Words steeped in syrop of Ambrosia,
To force my Danae with their golden shower,
That she may bless me with a yielding nay:
Each sentence be a sweet enchanting charm,
Upon her hart-strings playing loves alarm.
So shall thy glory be immortal still,
The conquest won to set thy captives free,
And cure their wounds, whom thou mighst justly kill*
O exercise thy pity then in me;
That finding her to ease my heavy bands,
May bless the time I fell into thy hands.
By this her bosom stored, her lap was full,
And wanton weary, quickly set her down,
No pretty flower there was, but she did pull;
No color set in Ariadnes crown,
Or in the compass of fair Iris Bow,
She did not gather to enrich her show.
Now powrefull Love that reuel'd in my heart,
Contrould my silence, hating to be mute,
Still rubs the soar that made my wound to smart,
And strongly urged me to commence my suit:
Till fancy grown too headstrong to retire,
Thus in a word I told her my desire.
Goddess (quoth I) for less thou can not be,
God lieue thou could, or that my birth were better,
My love, my life, both consecrate to thee,
I offer as an insufficient debtor:
O stand propitious to an humble Swain,
That craves but love to answer love again.
I call to record Venus and her Son,
No means unsought, no art unwrought by me,
To quench this flame when first it was begun,
Foreseeing still this foul extremity;
But wisdom weak, my Reasons force was small,
To conquer love, which conquers wit and all.
I know no bastard Hawk can soar so high,
As does the Hobbie towering high by kind;
Nor Aegle-like behold the worlds fair eye,
But with his beams their sight is stricken blind.
I know against Nature actions are in vain,
And high-pitcht thoughts reap nothing but disdain.
Yet Phoebus shining, little Gnats may play,
Small flies may perch them by the Aegles side,
It lies in compass of thy yea, or nay,
To be my bane, or to become my Bride:
Love strikes a match t'wixt mortal men and Gods,
Sweet love me then, can be no greater odds.
O be remembered, was not Vulcan lame?
Yet was he Lord of lovely Venus bed;
Or if he were not, more his wife to blame,
That ruled the raynes to make him bear the head.
Such Vulcanes now are ours, who doting old,
Marry young Maids to keep them from co-colde.
Divine Aurora full as fair as she,
Whose heauen-di'de face the Graces still admire,
Loved gray-beard Tython, as ill fac'te as he,
And in her choice so pleased her chaste desire,
That often she said, when Beauties dowre is spent,
Mine old-mans love shall yield me sweet content.
I will not muffle up a mean estate,
As smoth-tongu'd suitors daily use to do,
Bragging of Birth, of Friends, of this and that,
Of money, lands, yea and of Virtue too,
Breathing vain boasts of many a golden shower,
And things (God wot) were never in their power.
A shame to boast of bloods antiquity,
Wherein no honor nor true Virtue lies;
Each Brute may brag hereof as well as we,
One still succeeding as another dies:
It Is Virtue (Minion) does nobilitate,
And makes a Monarch of a mean estate.
Let others promise Mountains if they list,
Intrapping fools by false insinuations,
Till women's hopes do end in Had I wist,
And make them say, Men's words are but temptations.
I hate all shifts, plain dealing still is blessed,
I like the mean, and here set down my rest.
My dwelling is within a country Farm,
My table richly furnished with Content,
My robes are such as keep my body warm,
My pleasures rate sits at an easy rent,
My cheer is great, my charge is very small,
My fruits, my flocks; my foes are none at all.
My life is nothing but a world of Love,
I love my God, and next I love my King,
I love my Caesar's friends that sit above,
I honor Virtue above any thing:
I love my country and my dearest kin,
Briefly I nothing hate but mizers sin.
I spend the day time on these pleasant Plains,
And while my Lambs grow wanton with the spring,
Upon an oaten pype I cheer my pains,
And being weary, straight I fall to sing:
This done, I laugh again, and shake my crown,
To see the world of late turned vpside down.
Our Fathers plained in their weary days,
How much the world was changed from that of yore:
We say of late, it is turned many ways,
Yet will not stand as Adams did before:
Each side is turned, and yet it stands wrong;
And will do still, I Will tell thee wench how long.
While Kings do thirst for Countries and for Crowns,
And Princes pray upon their Neighbor Lands,
Might treads down right, and Treason sells Towns,
Justice lies fetterd in oppressions bands,
So long the righteous gods will surely frown,
And we shall find the world turned vpside down.
While Nobles vainly vaunting of their blood,
Do sell themselves to sensual appetite,
Neglecting time to do their Country good,
To punish wrongs, aid the poore-mans right;
So long the righteous gods will surely frown,
And we shall find the world turned vpside down.
While cities swim in Lucre, Lust, and Pride,
No art but craft, no gainefull trade but sin,
While velvet breeches is allowed to ride,
And aged Wisdom walks bare and thin;
So long the righteous gods will surely frown,
And we shall find the world turned vpside down.
While Leacherie and Lucar strike a match,
Making a compound of two deadly sins;
And over th'Hesperian fruit like dragons watch,
Or as the Eden-keeping Cherubims;
So long the righteous gods will surely frown,
And we shall find the world turned vpside down.
While poor are pincht by grunting Avarice,
And Gentiles forste their ioyntures for to sell
To Father Gravity, whose biting vice
Will send his soul for handsill unto hell;
So long the righteous gods will surely frown,
And we shall find the world turned vpside down.
While younglings choose their Lovers by their coin,
Seeking to graft upon a golden tree,
Goods make the choice, the devil he must join,
But ware their souls, the Priest will have his fee;
So long the righteous gods will surely frown,
And we shall find the world turned vpside down.
Briefly while Vices mask in Virtues weed,
And Reason made a Baude to each abuse;
While Beasts are fatted, good men suffer need,
And all things altered from their proper use;
So long the righteous gods will surely frown,
And we shall find the world turned vpside down.
Thus while the world in sin is madly tossed,
Some bear the purse, but Judas loves no poor,
The rest in pleasures Labyrinth are lost,
And would return, but Custom keeps the door;
I sit aloof and laugh the world to scorn,
Happy in this, to be a Shepherd borne.
I am a King, my Conscience is my Crown,
My Court is thoughts, enriched with Content,
My mind to me is as a walled Town,
My Treasure, Grace which never can be spent;
The want of worldly things is very small,
To him whose heart desires them not at all.
I make my power the limits to my will,
And count well doing sum of all my wealth,
My wishes few, and easy to fulfill,
My care is none but soul and bodies health;
In Heaven my hap, on God my hopes rely;
Lo thus I live, and thus I mean to dye.
Say me then (Sweeting) do thou like mine offer,
My love, my life, and all at thy command?
Say, can thou stoop unto a poor man's proffer?
Thou art my Judge, here I hold up my hand;
Now pass the speedy doom of life or death,
Or cure my bane, or kill me with a breath.
I had no sooner said, but straight began
The clouds appear that menaced a storm,
Her face fair sky being turned pale and wan,
What might I hope but tempest every hour?
The cursed Fates have cloud-ecclipst my Sun,
Whose light once lost, of force my life is done.
First darts her amiable brow coy frowns,
And cruel hate inserted in disdain
Inthrones her self, then scorn and wrath abounds,
And where before Loue-tempting looks did reign,
There proud Contempt armed with disdainful ire,
Scornd proffered service of my poor desire.
Heart-slaine with looks, I fell upon the ground,
Her meaning struck me ere her words were done,
As weapons met before they make a sound,
Or as the deadly bullet of a gunne:
Yet all my passions had no power to move her,
But thus she rates me, that so much did love her?
Presumptuous Swain, proud selfe-conceited groom,
Whose climing thoughts at last will break their neck,
God lieue my hate might help to build thy tomb,
And I survive to triumph on thy wrack;
That when the world shall see thy love disgraced.
Men may beware of love too highly placed.
What wanton mark of loose immodestie
Could thou decipher in me all this while?
Dare thou presume to touch a deity,
Before she grace thee with a yielding smile? (thought,
Poor fool, what stars bewitch thy wretched
To fancy her, that sets thee so at naught?
Thou see my body straight as Cedar tree,
That fames the woods of rich Arabia:
My brows embost with heavens rich Heraldree,
Tables containing Beauties perfect law:
Mine eyes two twinkling stars, whose piercing rays,
Have power to dim the brightest summer days.
My face the Sunne-enlightning beauties sky,
Whose charmefull spells the proudest can control,
Loves Adamant to every wandering eye,
That like a Siren can inchant the soul;
The shop where Nature sets her art to show,
Where crimson Roses sleep in beds of snow.
Poor foolish fly, why plaist thou with the flame?
Look not on beauty for it soon will burn thee:
Shun, shun the thought which may procure thy shame;
The fire once kindled, it is too late to turn thee.
I am mild Venus among gentilitie,
But fierce Medusa to thy baser eye.
Thy birth too base for me to bear thy name,
Thy person nothing has that may commend thee,
Thy living will not let thee play such game,
Thy threed-bare love full little can befriend thee;
Renounce thy suite, root out these fancies straight,
Thou art no Atlas for so great a weight.
Or else in sight of heaven, I here protest,
I love thee so, to live thy foe till death,
For could one kind look ever make thee blessed,
First would I forced be to yield my breath.
The more thy love, the greater is thy pain;
I will not stay to hear thee speak again.
With this she left the Melancholy place,
This fatal grove, the bed of mine unrest;
And back unto her fellows hies a pace,
Leaving me prostrate, heavily distressed:
Look how a bright star shoots in the night,
So fast she fled, and vanished from my sight.
Farewell (quoth I) sweet Saint of purity,
Wonder of women, and the worlds admire;
More was I speaking, but it would not be,
Grief stopped my dumb tongue with too much desire;
That I was forste to sigh insteede of speaking,
As if my swollen heart were already breaking.
Then brake th'vnchannel'd issue of mine eyes,
My tears gave vent unto my tired soul,
Who breathed hot sighs like lightning from the sky,
Such is Desire, which no man can control;
And pining grief still thinks it treble wrong,
When heart is barred the aydance of the tongue.
Thus as a man laid speechles in a trance,
Or one resembling deaths anatomy,
The birds in silence wondering at my chance,
Abruptly ceast their busy harmony:
Till some propitious power to ease my pain
Restored my sense, and thus I cried amain;
O quis te nostris oculis, pulcherrima Virgo,
Obiecit Deus, and visam te protinus idem
Eripuit nobis, saeuo vt consumerer igni?
Illa meo nunquam facies de pectore abibit;
Illam vos etiam mecum discetis amare
Intonsi montes, vos vmbriferae conualles.
Sieve greges inter captabo frigus and auram,
Flumina seu propter salices in valle putabo,
Aut agitans instabo aliud quodcunque, tibi ante
Carmina pauca canam, and te pectore suspirabo,
Toto vnam te cord; prius (dediscet amare
Gramina ouis, nemora alta ferae, vaga flumina pisces,)
Quam tua de nostris vellatur cura medullis,
O decus, atque animi nostri pergrata voluptas!
I looked about if any would reply,
(Grief best is pleased with partners in his plaining)
The Damsel gone, I saw no creature nigh,
Save trees and stones which could not know my meaning:
To whom shrill Echo in pity of my pain,
Records my woes, and tells them over again.
And now the night with darkness ouer-spred,
Had drawn her sable curtains ore the earth,
And from her cole-blacke melancholy bed,
Sent foggie mists and filthy vapors forth;
When home I went poor, haples, and forlorn,
Cursing the day that ever I was borne.
O black Despair, foul lot of faithful Love,
Blasting our hopes, ere they begin to bud,
Whose dogged nature pity cannot move,
Nor ought can pacify but humane blood:
A thousand times thou end'st a wretched life,
Which lives again to pine in further strife.
The Nymphs and Satyrs in their ayrie bowres,
Dansed their Chorus, but it would not please me,
No pastures, walks, nor wreath of sweetest flowers,
No flocks, no friends, nor no delight could ease me;
Her doom is past, entreaty could not stay it;
I owe Despair a death, and I must pay it.
This plot, this place, this melancholy grove,
I singled out to lay my Cares to sleep,
To end my life, and with my life my love;
Pity not me (sweet friend) forbear to weep:
Death changed to life I never shall repent,
That life is dead, that lives in discontent.

Eub* The weary Sun now settles in the West,
And time permits not speak what I was meant,
This night I purpose thou shall be my guest,
I Will tell thee things perhaps to thy content;
And e're our Lambs lie down to rest to morrow,
I Will find a salve to counterpoise thy sorrow.


