AN ORDER OF HOVSHOLD INSTRVCTION: By which every master of a Family, may
easily and in short space, make his whole household to understand the principal
and chief points of Christian religion: without the knowledge whereof, no man
can be saved.

Deuteronomy. 6. verse. 6.7. And these words which I command thee this day, shall be in
thine heart, and thou shall rehearse them continually unto thy children, and
shall talk of them when thou tariest in thine house, and as thou walk by
the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up, etc.

2. Tim. 3.15. Thou have known the holy Scriptures of a child, which are
able to make thee wise unto salvation, thorough the faith which is in Christ
Jesus.

AT LONON Printed by the VVidowe Orwin, for Thomas Man, dwelling in
Paternoster row, at the sign of the Talbot. 1595.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE LORD ROBERT DEVOREVX, Earl of Essex and Ewe,
Vicount Hereford, and Bourchier, Lord Ferrers and Chartly, Lord Bourchier, and
Louaine, Knight of the noble Order of the Garter, Master of her Majesty's
Horse, and one of her Majesty's most Honorable privy Council: grace and peace
be multiplied.
IT is a matter of great weight, and necessary duty, Right Honorable, to
consider wisely, and to judge rightly of the works of God, in the event of
things which happen unto men. For as it is written in the Psalms: Psalm.
145.17.
The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works. And
again: 107.43.
Who is wise that he may observe these things? for they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord. And again: 92.6.
An unwise man knows it not, and a fool does not understand this. And seeing
Romans 11.36.
all things are of him, and through him, and for him, and 1. Sam. 2.9.
in his own might no man shall be strong: but Psalm. 75.7. and 33.11.
God is Judge, he makes low, he makes high; and that the counsel of the
Lord shall stand for ever, and the thoughts of his heart, Gods providence in
all things is to be observed.
thoroughout all ages: every man ought carefully to regard the providence of
God, in the things befalling to himself and others, which I find very
fruitfully observed by the holy servant of GOD in the Scriptures. As Joseph,
when he saw his Fathers house, in the time of the great famine, to come into
Egypt to buy food, comfort his brethren, who of envy had sold him
thither, with this observation, saying: Genesis 45.5.
Be not sad, neither grieved with your selves, that ye sold me hither: for God
did send me before you, for your preservation. And David comfort himself,
and stays the rage of his servant, against the cursing of Shimei, by this
consideration, saying, 2. Sam. 16.12
It may be that God will look upon mine affliction, and do me good for his
cursing this day. So Mordecai encourages Ester, to make supplication to the
king (though it were contrary to law, and in hazard of her life) in the
behalf of the Jews, who were appointed to die by wicked Haman: by such a wise
collectio^ among other words, saying: Ester. 4.14.
Who knows whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time? In like
sort, when I think upon your honor, remembering what I have heard of your
noble Father, that good Earl, in the time of his last sickness, and of his godly
care over his children: comparing thereunto how God has preserved you unto
this time, what special favor you have attained before so gracious a Prince,
in what an high and weigh tie place you are set, and in what years of your age
these things are befallen you, together with the blessed gifts by which you
are fitted thereunto: mine heart is touched with a comfortable hope, that the
Lords grace working effectually in you, and his heavenly spirit directing you:
you might be a worthy instrument, in faithful and wise service to her majesty
for the good of this commonwealth, and the churches of Jesus Christ among us.
For if 1. King. 18.4.
Obadiah under wicked Ahab, could keep from Iezebel, and feed an hundredth
Prophets: and Iere. 38.8.9.
Ebedmelech could obtain of that evil king Zedekiah, to deliver Jeremy out
of the dungeon, into which he was cast by the Princes with the kings consent:
and Nehem. 2.
Nehemiah could apply the favor he had with that heathenish King Artashasht,
to the building of the walls of Jerusalem: who can tell? but that much more,
such a noble man of Christian knowledge, advanced by God into the favor of so
Christian and religious a princess, may likewise perform some service of
great importance, to the Church of God and his country.

And verily if God Pr^u. 18.4.
made all for himself, Every man ought to serve God, according to his place
and gifts.
and his elect Ephe 1, 6.
for the glory of his grace, Act. 17.26.
assigning the times, which were ordained before, and the bounds of men's
habitation, that they should seek the Lord: and if he have Math. 25.14.
given every man a talent, whereof he must render an account; then ought
every man 1. Cor. 7.17.24
so to walk, as God has distributed to every man, as the Lord has called
every one, and therein to abide with God. Therefore 1. Sam. 15.
Saul, without reserving of any spoil, by any pretense, must be obedient to
the voice of the Lord, in the utter destroying of Amalecke; because God had
anointed him to be king, and called him thereunto. And David, 2. Sam. 12.
though he were a man after Gods heart: yet because he forgate his advancement
by God, and his great benefits, and by deflowring his neighbors wife, etc.
disobeied God, and caused the enemies of God to blaspheme: was reproved sharply
and punished severely. And thou O meek Number. 30.12
Moses, what kept thee out of the land of promise? And thou O wise 1. King. 11.
Solomon, what made thy latter days troublesome, and a breach in thy kingdom?
And thou O good 1. King. 22.
Iehoshaphat, what brought thy life in hazard? was it not, that God, who
exalted you in honor, Who so honor not God are plagued.
was not sanctified by your service? If God thus deal with his own 1. Pet.
4.17.
house, where shall the ungodly and sinners appear? Philip. 3.19.
whose God is their belly, who Haback. 1.16.
sacrifice to the net of their own policies, and honor the Luke 16.13.
God riches, but Exodus 5.2.
know not the Lord, who gives them all things abundantly to enjoy? Romans 1.24.
God gives them over to their own lusts, Job. 5.14.
they meet with darkness in the day time, and grope at noone day as in the
night, some by 2. Sam. 17.23
their policy make an halter to hang themselves, some in the Dan 5.
midst of their iolitie, have the joints of their loins loosed and their
knees smitten one against another, and some are Psalm 53.5. Proverb. 28.1.
afeard where there is no fear, and fly when no man pursues them. And Esaias
5.24.
as the flame of fire deuoureth the stubble, and as the chafe is consumed of
the flame; so their root shall be rottennes, and their bud shall rise up as
dust, because they have cast off the law of the Lord of hosts, etc. that it
might stand as an unchangeable decree of the hie God, the possessor of heaven
and earth; concerning the wicked and the true servants of God: 1 Samuel 2.30. The
fear of God rewarded
Them that honor me, I will honor, and they that despise me, shall be despised.
So did the Lord advance virtuous Genesis 45.
Joseph, before all his brethren, he Exodus 1.21.
made houses to the widows, who feared God in Egypt, and delivered Iere. 39.16.
Ebedmelech in the day of evil. Therefore, for the comfort of all them, that
walk according to their gifts and callings with God, it is written: Psalm.
33.18.
Behold the eye of the Lord is upon the^ that fear him, and upon them that
trust in his mercy, to deliver their souls from death, and to preserve them
in famine. For this cause (right Honorable) have I presumed to dedicate this
small book to your Honor, not only because I am persuaded of your favorable
acceptance, but also that by me being one among many, you might know what
hope and expectation there is, among her Majesty's most faithful subjects
concerning you: that your young years being sanctified, and ( 1. Ioh. 2.14.
as S. John says) being strong and the word of God abiding in you, and having
overcome the wicked, you might amongst other grave and wise counselors, be a
joyful labourer in all good causes, and a prosperous furtherer of things
concerning God, to the great joy, peace and honor, of her most excellent
majesty, and that by the mouths of many her loving subjects, praises may
redound to the glory of God, and that you may glory in his praise. And here I
humbly crave your Christian favor, to give me leave to tell you, what the
Lord speaks unto you. For me thinks I hear him speak unto you, as he did
unto Ioshuah and Abraham: Ioshu. 1.
Be thou strong and of a most valiant courage, that thou may observe and do
according to all the law, which Moses my servant has commanded thee: thou shall
not turn away from it, to the right hand, nor to the left, that thou may
prosper whither soever thou go. I will be with thee, J will not leave thee,
nor forsake thee. Genesis 15.1. and cap. 17.1.
Fear not, J am thy buckler and thine exceeding great reward. J am God
alsufficient, walk before me and be upright. Now this little book of
household instruction, I tender unto your Honors protection; nothing comparable
to the profound works set forth by rare and singular men, but as a little
candle to be placed in the midst of the house, to give light to all them that
are therein. And as in the work of the material Temple under Solomon, 2.
Chron. 2.2.
hewers of stones had a necessary use: so this little book may be some good
help, to prepare the several members of the family, for the skillful
builders, that is, the 1 Pet. 2.5.
faithful ministers, to be joined as lively stons in the spiritual temple of
God. For as the Psalmist does testify: Psalm. 119.130
The entrance into Gods words shows light, and gives understanding unto the
simple. And our Savior teaches, that there is a secret working in his
kingdom, like the growing of the Mat. 13.3^.
small grain of mustard seed, and as a little leaue^ hid in three pecks of
meal: So 1. Cor. 1.27.
God has chosen foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and God
has chosen weak things of the world to confound the mighty, etc. And to whom
should I offer the book of teaching the family? but even to him, whose
household being well instructed, ordered, and guided, may diverse ways do good
unto many of all estates and degrees: yea even to him, who knows very well,
how needful a thing it is in regard of the Commonwealth: which in troublesome
times does find, that a Christian Prince cannot be sure of such a peoples
faithfulness, in days of trial: whose bellies being fed with the fat of
the earth, have minds unsettled; and for lack of the knowledge of Christ, and
the fear of God, are apt to go after the sway of time, and to be led as
beasts by the belly, where most ease, gain, and pleasure shall draw them.
Therefore nothing doubting, but that your godly wisdom, and good knowledge of
Christ Jesus, will graciously receive any thing, that may be helpful to
Christian religion and godliness: I present this little book unto your Honor,
with all humblenes and good will in the Lord; leaving the success unto him, in
whose hands are the Psalm. 31.15.
times of all things, and 1. Cor. 3.7.
who only gives increase. Most meekely praying his divine goodness to make you
honorable in this world, in all piety and Christian virtues, to the glory of
his name, the honor of your Prince and country, and to the rejoicing of all
good christians: and in the world to come, to be partaker of his glory: who
shall be glorified in his Saints, and made marvelous in all that believe.
Amen. At Eastwell in Kent this 26. of February. Anno 1596.

Your Honors always to command in Christ Jesus: JOSIAS NICHOLS.

To all governors of Families, grace and peace, etc.
I Very well remember, my well-beloved country me^, ye that are governors of
families, that he was a wise Preacher, that said: Eccles. 12.12.
There is no end in making many books. And that many very good and excellent
Catechismes are published in our English tongue: being not only very
profitable for Christians, to exercise themselves in: but also most notable
tokens of the Christian care and love, of diverse learned and godly minded men,
toward their neighbors and country. Yet have I some good reasons (as I think)
to put forth this little book of mine as a mite, in comparison of the
greatest gifts of other men, who by their excellent works, have greatly
replenished the Lords treasury. First, because that I find that the Lord in
the building of his Church uses the diverse gifts of his servants, to express
his manifold wisdom. And as unto men of diverse complexio^s and affections, he
has given choice of meat and variety of apparel: so, many books to one end
are set forth in diverse fashions and with a diverse gift, order and facility:
that he whom one book sauoureth not, might yet like the taste of another. So
it may be, that I striving to enter into the lowest place of the Church, which
is the family; and applying my self to the meaner sort, may happily find a
place to do good unto some, where books of greater excellency, peradventure
are not entertained: and joining hands with my good brethren, who have sorted
themselves to the same standing place, may by joint working with them,
peradventure further their joy, as they do mine. Secondly, because I have some
experience in this order, that it may prepare them, which are hereby
instructed, to have their eyes open to other men's labors. And I am in great
hope, that a discreet teacher shall find by trial, that a child of very
tender years may be made able, through Gods blessing, with understanding to
give a good reckoning of his faith, by the Scriptures. Moreover, my purpose was
not, curiously to set down all points of doctrine, but especially those, which
do most nearly teach these two: Act. 20.21.
Repentance toward God and faith in Jesus Christ. And my desire was that these
might be made to appear easy and familiar by the Scriptures.

But above all other this moved me most, that I might have occasion to speak
some things to the governors of the families, which do very greatly affect my
mind. Which is not to prove it their duties, to catechize their families, or
to describe the household government, and diverse such things which I know to be
very excellently penned down by others: but only to lay before them, the
great necessity of this duty, and the great and honorable service, which a
private man may do, to God and his people, by this means. In doing whereof, I
thought no better mean, then the setting forth of an easy way, to do the
thing, to which I desire earnestly to persuade them.

The necessity will be seen, Necessity to teach housholdes.
if they observe with me two things, the time present, and the time likely to
ensue. In the first they shall find, that although we have had the Gospel,
by the mercy and long suffering of God seven and thirty years, under the
happy reign of our most dear and gracious Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth,
(who, I heartily pray our good God, may yet reign many years over us) there
are to be found so many that know not how they shall be saved, or how they
are justified, why they are called Christians, what is Christ in his person,
and such like (which Hebr. 6.1.2. Psalm. 49.20.
every beginner and yongling in Christ ought to be skillful in; Lamentable
ignorance among us.
and without the knowledge whereof a man is like a bruit beast) that I do
tremble to think, and am ashamed to utter, and dare not commit to writing my
knowledge herein. I have had conference in some parishes with 400. some, 1000.
some less, and have made trial, and do make trial every day, that I speak
to any man, whom I know not, that I am astonished to think, that so many
Christians in name, and baptized, should be so ignorant and brutish, and so
far from being indeed, that which they delight to be called. For I take it,
that Galat. 3.26.
faith makes the being of a Christian, and these Romans 10.14.
who have no knowledge cannot have faith, which will then appear, 2 Thessalonians 1.8.
when Christ shall come in flaming fire, to render vengeance to them that do
not know God. Therefore there is a great fault, whether it be in us Ministers,
or in you the masters of families, or in both, the Lord be merciful unto us,
our danger is very great: for it is written, Romans 1.23.
As they regarded not to know God, so God delivered them up unto a reprobate
mind, etc. Therefore it is a thing of necessity, that such as keep houses,
should train up their people committed to their charge, Many Ministers teach
not.
in the knowledge of the Gospel. Again, we that are Ministers, for the most
part, are very vntidie for these works, which might prevent this mischief. 7.
Tim. 4.10.
Some embracing this present world, and some being Math. 15.14.
blind leaders of the blind. Therefore the masters of families looking not
unto this matter, the case is become lamentable. The time likely to ensue may
be very much judged by the present. Coldness in religion.
Notwithstanding that God has warned us, to make more reverent regard of his
Gospel, by winds and unseasonable weather, by diverse sicknesses, by the
plague and dearth and fear of the sword, not once nor twice within these few
years: yet the great carelesnes and coldness (that I say not contempt) of
religion, may hereby appear, that Atheism, dronkennes, and other very great
sins, are waxen bold and shameless, and he that fears an oath, and takes
great pains to be instructed in Christ Jesus, suffers no small molestation.
What may we then look for? but as these former corrections, have brought us no
one jot nearer to repentance, or love of Gods word, so the Lord will yet
stretch out his hand against us. And what can we tell, that if other temporal
plagues move us not, but that he will take away his word from an unthankful
nation, We may sear the loss of the gospel.
and give it to another that will bring forth better fruits? If we that be
Ministers ouerstip these things, how can they be repaired, but by the
instruction of families. And many times when we take great pains, the
backwardnes of the masters does pull down all that we build. Therefore it is
of great necessity, that the governors of households should stir up
themselves to this duty.

Now the honorable service, which a private man may do to God and his Church,
Teaching the family honorable service to God.
appears in this; that such as train their families in these good grounds,
bring forth an holy generation to the Church, and a civil nation to the
Commonwealth; which does not a little show it self to Gods glory, and the
praise of the Gospel, in our own experience. Whereof the example of Joshua
and his family, Cornelius and his soldiers, Abraham and his three hundred and
eighteen, brought up in his house, are as sufficient testimonies. How are the
names of many private men and women for their service in the Church, commended
by Saint Paul, and registered to immortal fame and example of all professors,
Private men and women may greatly further the Church.
Romans 16. So that among many he acknowledges, that all the Churches of the
Gentiles were to be thankful to one Aquila and Priscilla his wife. And God
does so far honor the house of Ierem. 35.
Rechab, that he poynteth it out, and sets it forth, to be an everlasting
pattern, of the notable fruit of good governors of families. And as Exodus
35.25.
women did work diverse things for the tabernacle, in the days of Moses: and
as the 1. King. 5.
temple was not built, but by men of all sorts in the time of Solomon: and the
Nehem. 3.
walls of Jerusalem under the guiding of Nehemiah: So may private men very
much further the building of the spiritual temple, which is the congregation
of Christ. The Churches spring out of instructed families.
And as out of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacobs house, sprang forth the Churches of
the Jews: so the glorious congregations of the Gentiles, began in the
families: For if servants well nurtured Tit. 2.10.
may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things: and 1. Pet. 3.1.
husbands obeying not the word, may without the word be won, by the
conversation of the wives: how much more may the master of the family do unto
God and his Church honorable service? not only by sanctifying his house by the
word of faith; but also by having always in a readiness, very notable matter to
further the building of Gods dwelling place. Which thing is avouched to thee by
2. Tim. 1.5. and 3.15. with Act. 16.1.
young Timotheus, who being brought up in the holy Scriptures from a child,
under his faithful grandmother Lois, and his mother Eunice, when he was yet a
very young man, became a companion of the Apostle Saint Paul, in that great and
weighty work of planting Churches. And Act. 18.24.
Apollos confirms the same, who being an eloquent man and mighty in the
Scriptures, was yet more perfectly instructed in the way of God, by the house
of a craftsman: by whom not only they which believed through grace, were very
much helped; but also the adversaries of Christ were mightily confuted by the
Scriptures.

Moreover, I pray you to mark diligently, how that the disorder of one private
family, One family well or ill ordered, may save or destroy both Church and
Commonwealth.
namely, of one Judge. 17. and 18.
Micah of Ephraim, was an occasion that Idolatry did spread through the whole
tribe of Dan: and so continued many years. And so contrarily, cap. 6. and 7.
and 8.
Gideon being stirred up by the goodness of God, to the reformation of one mean
family in Manasseh, was the cause of a very great deliverance to the whole
nation, from most mighty and cruel enemies, and most abominable Idolatry,
for the space of 40. years. Where were those 1 King 14.14.18.
7000. in the days of Eliah, that had not bowed the knee to Baal: when he
thought there were none left in Israel that feared God? were they not in the
well instructed families? Whence came it that Genesis 37. and 38. and 39. etc.
Joseph in his youth being sold unto strangers, passed through so great
temptations, the comfortles prison, the stocks and iron, to be so worthy a
father of the Commonwealth of Egypt, and so good a nurse to the people of God?
Ica name no other outward means, but his good education in the family of the
faithful. Hence is it written: Eccles. 4.13.
Better is a poor and wise child, then an old and foolish king, which will no
more be admonished: for out of the prison he comes for to reign, when he
that is borne in his kingdom is made poor. Therefore God comma^deth his
people, Deuteronomy. 11.18.
to lay up his words in their hearts, and in their souls, etc. and to teach
them their children, speaking of them when they sit in their house, and when
they walk by the way, and when they lie down, and when they rise up, etc.
that their days may be multiplied and the days of their children, etc. Behold
then what good may come out of a well instructed family, namely, that it may
be the preserving of the country and Church, in the time of extreme danger
and darkness, the seedplot against the time of reformation, and a means by
which God does multiply his people and peace in a country: and that by the
contrary, an whole country may fall into Idolatry and destruction. Whereby
every man may see what honorable service I wish him unto, when I exhort him to
the instructing of his family.

Therefore I heartily pray and earnestly entreat all governors of families, A
request to the masters of families.
that they would set such wise order, in the disposing of all their worldly
affairs, that they may have convenient leisure and quiet time for the use of
this duty: taking heed of all vain excuses, Vain excuses.
which the devil and our corrupt nature will set before us, as blocks and
hindrances, that we should not once meddle with such Luke 10.42.
necessary matters. First, The Lords day
the Lords day being an ordinary rest and time of liberty, does call unto you
from the king of heaven, to do this service. After morning and evening prayer,
when you have tried your people what they have learned at the Church by their
pastor, and called to mind the chief heads of his teaching: then is it good
to make it a drink offering, upon the pastors lessons; to teach them a point
or two of the principles of Religion. Two hours once in the week.
And if it be possible, I would beg for these poor souls, in the name of
Jesus Christ, (who shed his precious blood for you and them) that you would
bestow some two hours every week, in some one of the working days, (as
every man shall be able to find best and fittest leisure) to instruct your
children and servants, according to the order of this book, or some such like:
and that you would continue therein with all care and constancy. And I do not
doubt but you shall see great gain by this little labor, even a blessing from
the Lord our God, Hebr. 6.10.
who will not forget any man's faithful labor and love, which is in Christ
Jesus. There are four sorts of people, Four sorts of people have most fit
oppotunity to teach the younger. 1. Noble men, and Gentlemen.
whom I would especially move unto this most virtuous and laudable work, for
that they have most fit opportunity, to do greatest service herein to God
and their country. First al noble men and Gentlemen, and all Masters of great
households. Whose families as they are the most in number, so most commonly they
stand under the most reverend and humble submission of their superiors.
Therefore in regard of the one they may profit most; and in regard of the other
with most easines and conueniencie; Vain pretense.
For although the greatest part pretend it, a very hard thing in these days,
to bring their family to Christian knowledge and soberness: yet the not
having them so, consists not in the hardness of the work, or unruliness of the
people; but in the common neglect of many governors. Who passing over this
duty, Liberty the spoil of the family.
as a matter either not much to be regarded, or not pertaining unto the^: have
so hardeened the necks of children and servants, with the loose raines of
liberty and licentiousnes: that very few can abide this wholesome yoke of
Christian nurture, the gracious and godly comfort of the knowledge of
salvation. Great masters, rulers, princes, captains, and kings may instruct
their private families.
For if one man could command to fear God, and to instruct 318. able men,
beside all other servants women and children: as is spoken of Abraham, Gene.
14.14. and cap. 18.19. and that a chief ruler over 120000 people, could so
govern his private family, that he could say, I and mine house will serve the
Lord, as we read of Ioshuah, cap. 24.15. And an other great Prince had his
servants so guided in the fear of God, that he and they were examples, in
lending money and corn to the poor of the land: as did Nehemiah, cap. 5.10.
And if a Centurion could make both servant and soldiers ready and obedient
to every good work, as appears, Matthew. 8.9. yea if a King could protest unto
God, to banish deceitful and lying persons out of his house, and to entertain
the faithful, and him that walks in a perfect way: as you may see, Psalm.
101.5.6. I verily think that no man endowed with a good conscience, fearing
God and loving the Lord of life Jesus Christ, can have any just excuse or
reasonable pretense, to keep about him a family untaught in the sweet words
of the Gospel, and the wholesome paths of our blessed Savior. Except they will
say, that it is more behoofull for their children and servants to serve them,
and to reverence them; then to serve and reverence the Lord of glory.

Instructing of groat families, furthereth both Church and commonwealth.
But why should I use many words unto men of such excellent wits and great
gifts, in a matter so necessarily depending upon them, that the least mention
should suffice every wise and truly noble Gentleman to so glorious a work. For
by the good order and Christian instruction of one such great family, many
souls are brought to God, there is great encourageme^t by ensample unto others
out of the family, and a marvelous power for the bringing forth and
confirmation of al good things, both for the commonwealth, and also for the
Church of God. For hence do all other sorts of people take their light, and
the lives of noble and worshipful men, are many times more of force, then
either the law of God or man. For they are like the great pillars in a
building, that if they stand steadie in faith and good life, with their
families, many are vpholden by them in the ways of godliness: but if they
swerve and become careless and dissolute; they draw many with them, as by a
mighty sway, into the woeful downfall of infidelity and destruction. Therefore
above al men, it behooves them to take heed to themselves, and the good
instruction and government of their households.

The second sort are tutors in the Universities, to whom I join also the third
sort, Second and third sort, Tutors and Schoolmasters.
Schoolmasters in town and country. Which two have a great resemblance in
their opportunity to do good, when many men's children of all callings, are
committed to their conscience: to the one, They may do unspeakable good.
in the first and more tender years: to the other, in the years of most
danger. If these two sorts of men would be painful to wring out the juice of
this heavenly erudition, as a necessary sauce, to give a pure verdure, to their
other literature, or as a sauoury salt to season al other learning: it is not
to be spoken how much good they may do. For as young plants, being straightned
while they be tender, and trimmed with pruning and other parts of husbandry,
will grow very goodly to behold in their greatness, which being neglected, are
many times very crooked and unfit for diverse uses: So do young men for the
most part prove as they are nurtured in their youth. And the good instruction
of Schoolemasters and Tutors (in my knowledge) has very well straightned such
young impes, (who otherwise were very rough and unfruitful) that many receive
comfort by their worthy example. Therefore I do most instantly beseech all
Tutors and Schoolemasters to practice this book: or, because you are learned,
some better form of your own.

Lastly, Fourthly, women, as Ladies and Gentlewomen, honorable by instructing
their children.
I do heartily and humbly entreat all sorts of women, to watch carefully to
do this duty: and first all Ladies and Gentlewomen, that they may be
honored by the spirit of Jesus Christ, as was that 2. Ioh. Ger. 1.4
elect Lady, whose children did walk in the truth. And all other women like
Romans 16.12.
Persis, who labored much in the Lord. And as 1. Sam. 2.19.
Hannah made coats for her son Samuel, who served in the house of God: so
these would array their servants and children with the Proverb. 4.9.
goodly ornaments of wisdom and knowledge, which is from above. A woman,
Women being at hand may instruct their children.
being the Psalm 128 3.
fruitful vine on the house sides, in whose sight the Proverb. 4.3.
children are tender and dear: can by no means show their natural love
better, then being always at hand with their children and maids, to give them
every day in mild and pleasant manner some of these Prou. 25.12.
golden apples: wherewith the young babes will take such delight, that by the
nourishment and exercise thereof, they will be made Psalm. 8.2.
strong to confound the enemies of God and their country; when they have
learned to 1. Ioh. 2.12.14.
know the father, and that their sins are forgiven them for Christ's names
sake. It is exceeding great the profit you may do in the family, if as
Solomon says of a virtuous woman, you Prou. 31.26.28.
open your mouths in wisdom, and the law of grace be in your lips: For your
children shall rise up and call you blessed, and your husbands shall praise
you. Whereas chap. 29.15.
children set at liberty, make their mother ashamed.

And generally, Instruction of youth brings joy to the instructor.
as a man will sow his ground with the best seed, and plant his orchard with
the best fruit; because he looks for the greater and more gainefull increase
in the time of gathering: so if men, loving their children as well as they do
other commodities, would also train them up in the best things, which are
found in the discipline, knowledge and faith of Christ: they should not only
escape many a secret grief and bitter mischief; but also bless the Lord with
great toyfulnes, when they find this fruit of their education in knowledge of
these good things: namely, their children to be a comfort refreshing and
honor to their gray hairs; and their servants necessary helps, before them,
in all good causes and matters of honesty, truth, justice and mercy. For it
is written as a thing that faith not, Galat. 6.7.
Whatsoever a man sows, that shall he reap. Hoping therefore that such as
be wise in heart, will earnestly follow my counsel, and carefully stir up
others to the same; I will hasten to the matter it self, by which, every one
may be (as I hope) greatly guided in the performance of the same. I beseech
almighty God, of his infinite mercy in Jesus Christ, to prosper this our godly
purpose, to his glory and comfort of his people. His glorious name be praised
for ever. Amen.

Your faithful servant in Christ Jesus, Josias Nichols.

The Book to the Householder.
COme buy me, but pass not by me,
for by me thou shall win,
To light thy people, by my light:
to travel light, from sin.
The word, with words of truth and joy,
does show his word by me:
A way (which if thou way) it ways
thee to felicity.
Two hours, each week, six months, to stay
with thee, no more, I beg:
To stay thy people, on that stay,
which hell gates cannot wagge.
Then try, how try my trial is:
if God do help with grace;
Both man and child, as wit does grow,
shall see the heavenly place.
Yet know, that knowledge and no more,
by thee, to thine I give:
The spirit of Christ (pray thou therefore)
works faith; that thou may live:
And as by proof, thou proves me true,
to prove the thing I say:
So double time, for double gain,
and grant me longer stay.
An order of household instruction, by which every master of a family, may
easily and in short space, make his whole household understand the principal
and chief points of Christian religion: without the knowledge whereof no man
can be saved.
The first book.
CAP. 1. The first order of instruction.
IN this order, some things are for the young and tender years, and some for
years of greater capacity, for confirmation and helps: till they may be
grounded in the principles, with good understanding, to give a reckoning of
their faith by the holy Scriptures. First, from the time that children speak,
it is good to drop in this good licour of heavenly doctrine. For as Solomon
says: Prou. 22.6.
Teach a child the trade of his way, and when he is old he shall not
depart from it. The first order from the time that children can speak.
Therefore from that time, it shall be good to teach them (as the manner of
all christians is) to say without book distinctly: The Lords prayer, the Creed
and the ten Commandments. And as he perceives their capacity to grow, to
drop into them by familiar words, the name of God, how he made us: the name
of Christ, how he shed his blood for us: the name of the holy Ghost, who
sanctifies us; and that there is but one God and three persons, etc. Also the
name of death, that for sin all men die: and the name of the resurrection,
that through Christ we shall live again in heaven: always applying himself
with terms to their capacity: and alluring the child, to the feeling and
love of God, of Christ, and of eternal life; and to the hatred of sin: as by
saying and causing the child to say: God loves us, for he made us, and gives
us all things, as our meat, drink, apparel, etc. God loves us, for he gave
Christ to die for our souls. God loves us, for he gives us life after we he
dead, in heaven. We must not do sin and Wickedness, for it brings pain,
sickness, death, etc. Then the capacity increasing, make them pronounce, how
many petitions in the Lords prayer, and which they be: how many commandments
and which they be, til they can tell you every one, being asked suddenly out
of order, as the tenth, the fourth, the seventh, etc. After that they have been
thus trained a while, and can answer as children, readily to these: then let
them learn that short Catechism without book, which begins after this
sort. Who made thee? God. What is God? he is almighty, etc. Wherefore did he
make thee? to serve him, etc. Which may be bought for the value of a penny in
the bookesellers shops.

After all this, teach them some short stories and sentences of holy Scripture:
stories such as these, Genesis 4. verse. 2. the trade, sacrifice and death of Abel,
Genesis 11.1. the building and overthrow of Babel. Mark. 10.13. Christ receives
children and blesses them. Now some stories may be taught them word for
word, as in the text, such is that of Elisha, 2. King. 2. verse. 23.24. only
adding the Prophets name, which is verse 22. and in the end of this story
teach them the use. Children may not mock. Some stories must be gathered more
short, then the text, as that of Dinah, Genesis 34. Dinah the daughter of Jacob,
went out to see the maids of the country; and one Shechem, son of Hamor
Lord of that country, saw her, and defiled her, and for this cause Simeon and
Leui, slew Shechem and all the town with the edge of the sword. The use,
Maids must not wander or go a gadding. The sentences may be such as these
are, Proverbs 29.15. The rod and correction give wisdom, but a child set at
liberty, makes his mother ashamed, Mark. 8.36. What shall it profit a man,
though he should win the whole world, if he loose his own soul, Luke 9.10.
The son of man is come to seek and to save that which is lost.

Then teach them an ensample of every commandment to the sense of this
following.

The first commandment brake Ahab, taking Baal for his God, 1. King. 18.21.
or 1. King. 16.31.

The second, Jeroboam that worshipped golden calves, 1. King. 12.28.

The third, an Israelitish woman's son, striving with a man of Israel,
blasphemed the name of the Lord and cursed, Leuit. 24.10.11.

The fourth, one that gathered sticks on the Sabbath day, Numb. 15.32.

The fifth, Absalom, who rebelled against his father, 2. Sam. 15.

The sixth, Cain, who slew Abel, Genesis 4.8.

The seventh, a Levites Concubine, who played the whore, Judge. 19.1.2.

The eight, the Shabeans took away Jobs oxen and asses, Job. 1.14.15.

Ninth, Potiphars wife falsely accused Joseph, Genesis 39.17.

Tenth, Ahab lusts for Naboths vineyard, 1. King. 21.2.

And in all these it will not be amiss to cause the learner to repeat
without book, the places where all the stories and sentences are written: and
herein the teacher may use his discretion, to teach them more or less of like
sort and easines: so that he ouercharge them not at any one time: but let them
as it were creep upon them by often repeating: and he shall find that a
little child will bear very much more, then a man that has not tried would
believe. And if he cause them to learn without book, the 1.15.112.127. and
128. Psalms, or some of them, they will no doubt work very godly impressions
in the tender minds. And it is a good recreation to quicken them, to teach the^
to sing some short psalms, as the 117. the 131.133. and such like, as they are
in English meter.

CAP. 2. The second order of instruction, for the opening of the understanding.
This order is best, from six year old and upwards, and in some capacities
before, and for such as are ignorant of what age so ever.

AFter that they can handsomely do these things; then this catechism following
will be most necessary for the opening of their understanding: where the
master of the house must not bind the learner to the very words (as before)
here set down: but so teach, as every time he repeateth any question, there
may be some little difference in his words. And for that cause I will show
him diverse forms of speaking, (in some of the most needful points) teaching
the meaning of one point, which a child or young man will quickelie conceive,
and by the variation be able to understand and bear away, and to answer with
his own words, in diverse sorts, at diverse times and all to one sense.

The Catechism for the second order.
Or thus: How many Gods are there?

But one only and three persons, etc.


What think thou of God?

I believe there is one God, and three persons, God the Father, God the Son
and God the holy Ghost.

Was there not a time, when there was neither heaven nor earth? etc.

Yea: How did they begin?

God created them by his word, etc.


How came the World?

God made all things, of nothing in six days.

In what day made he man?

The sixth day.

Was the woman made the same day?

Both man and woman were made in one day.

How were they made?

God made man of the dust of the ground, and breathed in his face the breath
of life, and the man was a living soul, that is, a lively creature having
body and soul. After God cast Adam into an heavy sleep, and took out one
of his ribs, and closed up the flesh, and of that rib, he made the woman, so
there was man and woman: the man's name was Adam, and the woman's Eve.

Was man made any whit more excellent then other creatures?

Yes, in two things: he was made after Gods image, and clothed with happiness.

What was that image of God?

Knowledge, holiness, and righteousness.

What was the happiness?

He was made Lord over the creatures, and being naked, was not ashamed.

What did God with man after he had thus made him?

He set him in a most pleasant place of the world, called the garden of Eden,
appointed him to keep and dress the garden, gave him leave to eat of all the
trees in the garden, saving one, called The tree of knowledge of good and
evil: and if he eat of that tree, he should die the death.

What death?

Of body and soul.

Was there not another tree of special name?

Yes, the tree of life which was a Sacramental sign, that if man continued in
his vprightnes, he should live for ever.

If Ada^ were made good and happy: how came wickedne^ and punishments?

By eating the forbidden fruit, sin, shame, damnation and all other miseries
came upon mankind.


Did man continue in his vprightnes?

No, for the devil abusing the body of a serpent, tempted the woman Eve, and
she did eat of the forbidden fruit, and she gave Adam, and he did eat, and
then they were ashamed. And so Adam and Eve, and all mankind were dead in
sin, and under damnation of body and soul.

How shall we (...) delivered, (...)
How shall we escape sin and damnation?

Only by Jesus Christ.

(...) ^^leefe in (...) was he (...) Of God (...) ^^man? Of ^^ngin Ma(...) If
Mary (...) this Mo^er, who was (...)? He as ^uching his Godhead, and she
touching his manhood.
What is Christ?

He is the eternal son of God made man, that is, perfect God and perfect man.

What did he for us to save our souls?

He died and shed his most precious blood to redeem us from our sins.

Is it not possible for a man to live so justly and uprightly, that he may
Deserve or merit.
obtain his own salvation, by well doing?

No man has such a gift or power.

Why?

Because no man can keep all the commandments of God: if we break any one we
be guilty of all.

How shall we do then?

If we believe in Jesus Christ, we shall be saved.

All?

All do not believe.

What need we then care to do To live honestly or godly
good works?

We must do good works, because they are commanded by God; and it is our
duty to obey him that made and saved us: we ought to be thankful and to
glorify him, and to declare our faith by our works, for the good ensample of
others, and for many other necessary uses.

How are we saved by Christ, seeing we die daily?

This bodily death, is but the parting of the soul from the body for a time,
but the body shall rise again, even as Christ rose the third day, for at the
last day, when Christ shall come again to judge the quick and the dead, all
that believe in him shall rise again unto everlasting life, and all other to
everlasting damnation.

How come we to know these things?

God sends his word to be preached unto us.

Do all believe who hear the word?

None but they, whose hearts are opened, by his holy spirit.

Are there no other helps of Beleese.
faith?

Many: as the experience of all Gods doings according to his word, and namely
in tribulation; the exercise of all good works: and especially the right use of
the seals of the promise, which are commonly called Sacraments.

Which be they?

Baptism and the Lords Supper.

What is to be seen in them?

The outward sign as water, bread, and wine, and the signification which is
the The death or promise of Christ, the benefits of Christ's death.
grace of Christ.

Wherefore be children baptized with water?

In token that their sins are washed away by the blood of Christ.

Why do men receive the bread and wine in the Communion?

In token that Christ gave his body and blood for our redemption.

Are they only tokens or bare signs?

No: they are also as seals to assure us of the grace of Christ, and his last
will.

How do Baptism and the Lords supper differ?

Baptism is outwardly with water, and the Lords Supper with bread and wine:
secondly, Baptism signifies the washing of our sins, to enter us into the
Church: the Lords Supper is for the strengthening of our faith: thirdly,
Baptism is once, signifying that we which are by nature, the children of
wrath are once borne in Christ, to be Gods children: but the Lords Supper is
often, signifying by eating bread and drinking wine, the davly nourishing of
our faith in and by Christ, that we may continually grow stronger and stronger
unto eternal life.

What is eternal life?

To live with God, and to be partakers of his glory for ever.

CAP. 3. The third order of teaching.
HEre follows diverse Catechismes for confirmation of knowledge, This order is
for all that can conceive well of the former, how young or old soever they be:
but in common and meaner capacities from 8. years and upwards.
drawn out of the words of some place of holy Scripture. Where I must admonish
ye Master or teacher in the family, to follow this order. First, to teach his
people, perfectly and distinctly to say the place of Scripture without book:
which being perfect to show them the brief meaning; and then the several
points of doctrine, and how they be gathered out of the text. For which cause
he shall find, the addition of other textes and notes in the margin, for his
help and direction, which he must keep to himself, and give them the meaning
or substance only. Yet if he once get his family to conceive deeper, he may
acquainte them with all; but he must take heed he oppress not their
memories, with over much at once, but give them more or less, as he
perceives them able to conceive and bear away, and to remember at the next
time; for it is very needful to repeat that which was first learned, before
he begin any more. Therefore for a while, after they can say the place without
book, and show where it is written, what chapter, what verse and the meaning,
let them have only some two or three points: but after a while, he shall
perceive, that by use they will be able to take a great deal more, even an
whole Catechism at once; yea and by often practice to gather some points of
themselves: yet must he not cease going forward, because that the Philip. 3.1.
oftener, the safer it is, and happier for them to be grounded. Now as often as
they have learned any one Catechism thorough out, cause them to repeat all
that whole Catechism together, as the place of Scripture, the meaning, all the
points of doctrine, and how they are gathered out of the text; and after (but
not before) begin the next Catechism.

The first Catechism for confirmation of knowledge, is drawn out of this text
or place of Scripture.
Genesis 3.15. I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy
seed and her seed; he shall break thine head, and thou shall Heb. break.
bruise his heel. The interpretation or meaning.
THe Master must consider out of the text, This is for the masters help.
that the devil abused the body of the serpent to deceive Euah: and therefore
the punishment is pronounced upon the serpent, which partly and especially is
in the words going before: but although he speak to the serpent, yet these As
these places expound, Esaias. 27.1. Micah. 7.17. Psalm. 91.13. Luke 10.18.19.
Romans 16.20. and Revel. 12.7.8.9.10.
words are properly to be applied against the devil himself, whose
instrument the serpent was, (although they have accomplishment, even against
the beast it self, in that he is hated naturally of all mankind) therefore
the Master having wayed the places in the margin, may give his family this
interpretation following.

By the serpent and his seed, This is for the family.
is meant Satan and his members, wicked men: by the seed of the woman, is meant
Christ and his members; by breaking of head and heel, is meant that either
shall wound each other, but the devil shall be vanquished. The meaning is
then, that God will have this to be a punishment of the devil; that he should
have continual war with Christ and his Saints, and finally be overcome, and
all that take his part:

Out of which interpretation arise these points of Catechism.

The points of doctrine.
1. This appears in the circumsta^ce of the text, which inclusiuely
condemns Ada^ for his sin, to have an enemy to him and his seed for ever.
By the temptation of the serpent the devil and Satanas, man became a great
sinner, and subject to great misery.

2. This follows of the former, and is showed, cap. 1. and 2.
Man was made good, without sin and misery, before this temptation.

3. Because the words are the indivial sentence of God to that purpose, and is
to expounded, John 8.44.47. Acts. 13.10. 2. Cor. 4.3.4. cap. 11.13.14. Ephesians 2 1.
1. Ioh. 3.10.
God has decreed, what shall be the estate of Satan and mankind, namely,
that some men shall be the seed of Satan and the children of perdition: and
some with Christ conquerers of them both.

4. So expounded, Gal. 4.4.
Here the person of Christ is declared, that he is, as all other men, the seed
of the woman, that is, the son of God made man.

5. Expressed in the meaning, and is seen in Caine, and all of like sort
following.
There shall be always enmity of Satan and his members, against Christ and his
members.

6. This is the breaking of the heel, as appears Esaias. 53.2. Cor. 4.8. chap.
6.4.5. Ioh. 15.19 20. 2. Tim. 3.12. 1. Pet. 5.8.9.
Great sorrows, temptations and persecutions, in body, goods, name and life
come unto Christ and his members by Satan and his members.

7. This is the breaking of the serpents head, and is expounded, Act. 26.18.
Hebr. 2.14. Romans 8.31.32. Mat. 5.10.11. and 19.28. Phil. 3.21.
By the death of Christ and all the parts of his mediation, he for us and we
through him do overcome the devil: to the restoring of the body in the
resurrection of life, and endowing with immortal riches both body and soul,
in the salvation of all believers.

8. Plain in the words, and is expounded, 2. Corint. 6.14. Iam. 4.7. Ephesians. 6.10
and 5.6 7. Psalm. 15.4.
The duty of all Christian believers is to resist the devil and his members,
and to have no fellowship with the works of wickedness.

CAP. 4. The second Catechism for confirmation.
The Text.
Genesis 12.3. In thee shall all families of the earth be blessed. The
Interpretation.
For the master
THese words contain Gods promise touching the blessed seed made unto
Abraham, when he called him to be his child and father of the faithful, which
Genesis 3.15.
before was spoken in general hard to be known, but here is showed more
plain and easy to be found by the particular, namely, that it must be in
Abraham's stock and lineage.

This clause, For the family.
in thee, is to be understood of Abraham's Genesis 22.17. and Gal. 3.16.
seed which is Christ (who after a sort was in him, that is, in his loins.)
By all families, is meant Act 3.25. and Galat. 3.6.
all nations as well Jews as Gentiles. And by blessed, is meant the Gal
3.13.14. Romans 5.12.13. 1. Tim. 1.1.
deliverance from the cursed and damnable estate, wherein we were by Adams
fall. The sum is: God does promise that both Jews and Gentiles shall have
salvation, in none other but in Christ, who as touching his manhood was
Abraham's seed.

This teaches especially two sorts of points: What we are of ourselves. What
we are made by Christ.


The doctrines.
1. Otherwise there needed not the promise. Ephesians. 2.1.2
Of ourselves we are sinners, and therefore accursed to damnation, by Adams
fall.

2. This is in a manner the text.
By Christ we are made blessed, that is, heirs of eternal life.

3. Expounded Heb. 2.16.
Here is taught what Christ is touching his person (as in the former
Catechism) Christ is God and man of the seed of Abraham.

4. These two are gathered out of this text. Gal. 3.6.8. Romans 4.11.12.23.24.
There is but one way of salvation which is common to Jew and Gentill.

5. These two are gathered out of this text. Gal. 3.6.8. Romans 4.11.12.23.24.
Christ is applied unto us for justification by no means but faith only.

6. So gathered, Gal. 3.17.18.
Our salvation comes not of works in our doing, or will in our choosing, but
of Gods free promise.

7. Under this word blessed, Gal. 3.29. 1. Cor. 1.30. Revel. 20.6.
are contained all Gods graces and gifts, which thorough Christ he gives to
his Church, and his protection in this life, with the resurrection unto life
eternal.

8. One part of this blessedness is, So applied Luke 1.73. Act. 3.25.26.
that Christ turns us from our sins, and leads us by the promise to walk
in godliness and honesty.

9. For this promise is exclusive, as Act. 4.12. Gal. 1.8. Ioh. 3.18.
There is no other means of salvation but Christ, and therefore all other
professions and religions, which teach not the true belief in Christ, are the
synagogues of Satan, and seminaries of hell fire.

10. Ancienter by 430 years then the law of works, Gal. 3.17. Tit. 1.1. Heb.
13.8.9.
That we are justified and saved by faith only, is the most ancient doctrine,
being taught by God unto Abraham, long before ever there was any Church of Rome.

Here the master of the family, may apply unto every particular person, how
his faith should agree with these points by the example of Job, whose Creed
thus follows.

Job. 19.25. I am sure my redeemer lives, etc. Where thou may see his faith,
in that he says, I am sure; his acknowledgement of sins, and expectation of
Christ in the word Redeemer, and in the word, lives, he shows that Christ
is always the only So expounded. Heb. 7.24.25.
sufficient fauiour; his hope of the resurrection is plain in the rest, and
the description of eternal life in this, So defined, Psalm. 16.11. and 17.15.
he shall see God.

CAP. 5. The third Catechism for confirmation in knowledge.
The place of Scripture.
Esaias. 53.11. By his knowledge shall my righteous servant, justify many: whose
iniquities he shall bear. The Interpretation.
THese words are evidently a prophecy of Christ Jesus, wherein the master must
teach his family to consider the persons. First he that speaks is God: then
the persons of whom he speaks are two, 1. Christ who^ he calls his
righteous servant: 2. all believers, which are many men and women whose sins
he bears.

The Doctrine.
1. In the first person. 2. Tim. 1.9.
God decrees the salvation of many by Christ.

2. Man's works, free will, This follows of the first.
merit and satisfaction are excluded, by the undesired and undeserved good
pleasure of GOD in so decreeing.

3. In Christ we see two things, This appears in the two following
what he is in himself, and what to us: the first we call his person, and the
second his office, adjoined to his person.

4. In his person he is called: a servant, In the second person.
Gods servant, and a just servant. A servant, because being God he became a
man, which is called the Philip. 2.6.7.
form of a servant: Gods servant; because he came to do Heb. 10.7.
Gods will. Just or righteous, because it behooved, that he being 1. Pet. 3.18.
just should die for us, who are unjust: so that he being Heb. 4.14.15.
GOD, was also man in all thing saving sin.

5. In that God assigns and accepts him to justify us, etc. 1. Tim. 2.5.6.
His office is here generally to be a mediator between God and man.

6. The parts of his office, This is showed in the two following. Psalm. 110.
are his Kingdom. his Priesthood.


7. He being King of his Church, gives gifts, that is, Ministers to teach
remission of sins, and so as the righteous King he justifies all believers.
In these words by his knowledge shall, etc. Act. 2.33. Ephesians. 4.8.9.10.11


8. He being Priest, bears our sins, So expounded. Heb. 9.11.12.
when he made himself a lively sacrifice to his father for us.

9. This expounds the former two, and in them is contained: read 2. Cor.
5.19.20.21. and Romans 4.25. and cap. 10.4.14.
By his Priesthood he performs the work of our righteousness, and by his
Kingly office he applies it unto us. For being Priest he dies for our sins,
and rises to make us righteous: but yet till by hearing this kings Ambassadors
we do believe, we are not justified.

10. In the third person: Many, etc. Romans 3.23.24.25.
We are of our own nature sinners, and al our justification and redemption
comes only by the free will of God, through belief in Jesus Christ.

11. Read Romans 8.30. Tit. 3.7.
Under justification is contained glorification or everlasting life, for these
necessarily follow each other.

12. Gal. 1.4.
If Christ justify us by bearing our sins, then we must know, that above
all things we ought to fly sin.

Here the Master of the family may apply to his people in a short sum, the
substance of this Catechism, by the words of Habbakuck. cap. 2. ver. 4. The
just shall live by his faith.

In regard of justification thus, So expounded, Romans 1.17 Galat. 3.11.
a good man finds in himself, no wisdom, righteousness, power, will or
works to lean unto: but looks for his justification and salvation only by
faith in Christ.

In regard of sanctification thus: So opened, Heb. 10.38.39 1. Pet. 4.19. Gal.
2.19.20.
A good man forsakes all his own earthly devises, and all wicked works, in
the maintaining of his estate and life, believing that his life shall be
maintained without any evil devises or shifts, and therefore commits his
soul, life, and all he has into Gods hands, in weldooing, depending upon the
mercy and promise of God in Christ.

CAP. 6. The fourth Catechism, for confirmation of knowledge.
The place of holy Scripture.
Psalm. 130.3. If thou O Lord straightly markest iniquities: O Lord who
shall stand.

4. But mercy is with thee that thou may be feared.

The Interpretation.
THis text is a confession of faith, agreeing in substance with the former,
wherein the faithful soul, applies the doctrine of justification unto a
special use in prayer, containing two parts, what we are without Christ, (for
he is the Ephesians. 2.7.
mercy seat) and what we are by Christ.

The Doctrine.
1. Mark straightly.
No man can stand before God to be justified, if God should judge him after his
sins.

2. Mercy.
It is his mercy applied unto us by faith in Christ Jesus, by which we stand
justified before him.

3. Fear thee.
No man can fear God, that is to say, serve God, as his child, unless he
be set free by his mercy.

4. Stand. Romans 5.1.2.
To stand, is to be in state of grace, under the hope of the glory of God.

And here the Master of the family may do well to show unto his folk, how
the Scriptures of Luk 24.44.
Moses, the Prophets and Psalms, do agree in one sweet harmony, teaching
one and the same doctrine of salvation and godlynes, even 1. Tim. 1.14.
faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.

CAP. 7.
Now here follow a few more, for confirmation of their knowledge and faith, out
of the new testament.

The fifth Catechism for cleerenes of understanding.
The Text.
Matthew. 17.5. This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased: hear him.
The interpretation.
THese words are the voice, For the master, read 2. Pet. 1.17.
which Peter James and John heard in the mount, to come from heaven, where
Christ received of God the father, honor and glory, when there came such a
voice unto him, from the excellent glory. Which thing if the Master tell his
family, and demand of them, first the meaning, as they have learned by other
places; secondly, what points of doctrine they perceive in it; it may be they
will be found by means of the former to do much in this, being very easy.
For the family.
How be it to understand it three things must be found out: first, who spoke
the words, that is, God the father, testifying of his son, teaches the sum
of the Gospel: secondly, what is meant by this clause, In whom, whom signifies
Christ; and In, signifies such as by belief are So is the clause used, Colos.
2.6. and Romans 8.1. and 5.1.
in him: thirdly, what is meant by this clause, I am well pleased which I take
to be, that God has Ephe. 1.5. and Ioh. 1.12.13.
decreede in himself to engraft all his elect into Christ by faith, and so to
be well pleased with them, being planted by belief in Christ. The substance
then is, that God would have all men know, this man Christ, who was now in the
mount with Peter, James, and John, to be his beloved son, and that he has
purposed to accept of every soul that should believe in him, and therefore
commands all to hear and obey him.

The Doctrine or Catechism.
1. This is all the text, and is proved, 1. Cor. 2.2. Coloss. 2.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.
The Gospel consists in the true knowledge of the person and office of
Christ.

2. The doctrine of his person is clear, in that the father calls this man
Christ his son: so that he is the son of God and man. Where this word
Son, is not to be understood in regard of creation, as was Luke 3.38.
Adam, or of adoption, as the Romans 8.15.16.
elect: but by Ioh. 1.18.
nature and generation.

3. Observe: the distinct person of the father, acknowledges the distinct
person of the son: to which add out of Matthew. 3.17. the distinct person of
the holy Ghost.

4. Proverb. 8.30.31. Ephesians. 1.6 Ioh. 1.14.16.
This son is called beloved, to show, that in the love, the father has to
the son, there flow the joyful streams of love unto his elect: so that he
is the fountain of grace unto us.

5. Unto these two points of his person are joined two of his office,
answering unto them: First, in the beloved he is well pleased: this shows the
mediation of his Priesthood to GOD for us: Secondly, him being son he would
have heard: this shows the mediation of his sovereign kingdom, from the
father, over us.

6. Expounded 2. Cor. 5.19.21.
The mediation of his Priesthood: that God will have him come between us and
himself; that our sins whereof we are guilty in our selves, being pardoned
through him, we might have his everlasting favor unto salvation.

7. This mediation is to be understood in the parts: first, that Christ died
for our sins, Romans 4.25.
and rose again to make us righteous: secondly, 1. Pet. 3.18.
by this means he brings us to God: thirdly, sets us at peace with him,
Romans 5.1.2.
that we may have access through him to his grace, wherein we stand rejoicing
under the hope of the glory of God: fourthly, Ioh. 14.2.
he is gone up into heaven to prepare a place for us: fifthly, 1. Ioh. 2.1.
he sits there as our advocate.

8. Iam. 1.8. Galat. 1.4. Mat. 11.25.
In that he decrees to please himself with Christ: this shows our free
election, adoption, justification, and salvation, to exclude all man's merits,
free will, works foreseen, and all the reprobate: and to establish an
unspeakable comfort to the man, who finds that God has given him faith,
that he may know, that GOD has Ioh. 6.40.
predestined him unto salvation in his beloved son.

9. In him, God spoke this, and he will reprove them that put any thing to his
word. Prou. 30.5.6. 1. Cor. 3.11.
excludes unbelievers from this mediation, it condemns all other saviors
and additaments whatsoever, as stubble for the fire.

10. The second part of his office is his sovereignty, in this, Hear him,
which shows his sovereign authority over Psalm. 2.8.9.
all nations: which is, that he is the chief Deuteronomy. 18.
Prophet over all: chief or Heb. 3.1.
hye Priest: and especially Phil. 2.8. Ephesians. 1.21.22. Matthew. 28.18. Revel. 19.16.
King over all Kings, powers, and principalizies, and in all things head to his
Church.

11. This so taught Luke 8.15. 1. Cor. 1^.1.2. Romans 16.26. and 15.18.
Under this word, Hear, is commanded our obedience, that we should hear him,
which is with our ears, hearts, and deeds, that is, by learning his word, by
acknowledging it, by faith, and practicing it by works.

12. Ephesians. 2.20.21. Revel. 3.7. Matthew. 23.8. 1. Pet. 5.4. Heb. 10.9.10. etc. and
cap. 9.24.25.
This word, him, is spoken exclusiuely, that is: there is no other head of the
Church to rule and make laws, but Christ: no other master to teach and
prescribe doctrine; no other priest to offer, or satisfy by sacrifice.

CAP. 8. The sixth Catechism, for increase of understanding.
The place of Scripture.
John. 3.16. God so loved the world, that he has given his only begotten
son; that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting
life. The Interpretation.
IN this verse, Let the master show all this interpretation to his family,
and cause the^ to show it him again.
Christ teaches Nichodemus after many other arguments, to understand the
doctrine of regeneration, spoken of verse. 3. by the cause, namely, by the first
and principal cause, which is God.
God: in whom there is rehearsed no So loved.
outward cause to move him, but only that of his own goodness his singular
love did this work, namely, he loved The world.
the world, which by no means had deserved it. The greatness of which love is
showed by the He gave.
work, that he gave his son, not purchased by any prayers, merits, or
reward of ours, but of his free gift. And His son.
what gave he? the earth, the heaven, cattle, infinite treasures, heavenly
spirits? Nothing so: yea rather, that which excels al these things, even his
son. And what Only begotten.
son? an adopted son, or counterfeit son? No: but his only begotten
son. And Not perish, but have eternal life.
why did he give him? that we should bestow any thing upon him, or that we
can do any thing for him? Least of all: but that he might deliver us from
everlasting perdition, and give us eternal life. Upon what Whosoever believes
in l.im.
condition? that we should do all his law, and satisfy by contrition,
pilgrimage, or works of condignitie, or supererrogation? No such thing: but
whosoever believes in him. So that we with Nichodemus may learn, that God
giving his son of his singular love does work this new birth, when by the
preaching of the Gospel, the spirit frames in us faith in Christ, and when by
faith he makes us partakers of everlasting salvation, then do we enter into
the kingdom of heaven. And so it is expounded by the Tit. 3.5.6.7.
Apostle: God of his mercy saves us by the new birth, which is shed upon us
through Christ, that being justified by his grace, we may be made heirs
through hope of eternal life.

Now there are in these words certain things to be further explaned: that
seeing their meaning more clearly, we may more fitly gather out the several
branches of doctrine. First in this word Loved, what.
loved, I understand the goodness of God according to his eternal decree, which
is called Ephesians. 1.5.
The good pleasure of his will. As the Esaias. 53.10.
Prophet also says: The Lord would break him, etc. Secondly, I understand
this word World, what.
world, for the universal and whole mankind, according to the covenant of God
made unto Genesis 12.3. which is expounded before.
Abraham, namely, that he loved both Jews and Gentiles, as is plainly taught,
Romans 3.29.30. Yet Read Deuteronomy. 10.14.15. Romans 9.7.8. Acts. 10.34.35.43.
every particular and singular person is not meant thereby: as Christ
expounds himself, when he adds this limitation, that whosoever believes,
etc. Thirdly, this word Perish, what.
perish, signifies the miserable condition of mankind in himself by sin:
yet when he says, should not perish, he means not that in this world we
should not dye for a time, but that Ioh. 11 25.26
although we be dead, we should be quickened and rise again unto eternal
life. Neither do I think, that this bodily death is that death which was
threatened to Genesis 2.17.
Adam, which is properly the death Ephesians. 2.1.
in sin, and to be banished from the presence of God, as was Adam, Genesis 3.
Therefore this is our life to be 1. Pet. 3.18.
brought by Christ unto GOD, to Psalm. 16.11.
enjoy whose presence is everlasting life it self. The sum then is this: The
free good will of God has given his only begotten son unto all mankind,
that, whomsoever he by his spirit, through hearing the Gospel, does
regenerate and make to believe; should be delivered from eternal death in
sin, and obtain the everlasting glory of God.

As I have been somewhat longer in opening this most worthy place: Direction
to the governor of the house.
so I find here a most large field of Catechism. Where I will observe this
order, for the direction of the governor of the house, (whom I persuade my
self, by that time he has beaten the former Catechismes into his peoples
heads, shall perceive them better able to receive stronger meat) I will show
the manifest beauty of this sentence, as a most goodly tree, where the master
shall guide his folk to gather very many kinds of fruits, to the comfortable
feeding and nourishing of the soul: and how to discern by the good fruit,
that which is evil. First therefore, the doctrines shall offer themselves, out
of this sentence, with most sweet comforts annexed unto them: and in the
second place mine hand shall point out unto him, how he may descrie unto his
family, the errors contrary unto the same. Unto every doctrine I will add
some one place of Scripture, for the further enlightening of their understanding.

The doctrines.
1. This is showed out of the whole sway of the text, especially in the words,
loved, gave, and the end of giving, which show his lively working toward his
creatures preservation, etc. and so would he be known. Exodus 34.6. Malac.
1.2. 1. Ioh. 4.16. Psalm. 9.16.
God is everliving, the most holy creator and wise governor and Savior of the
world.

2. This is expressed, saving of the holy Ghost, which is showed by the
effect, believe, which is set for his cause, verse. 5.1. Ioh 5.7.
In this one God, are three distinct persons, God the Father, God the Son,
and God the holy Ghost.

Here he must begin to show the distinction of the persons thus.

3. This is in a manner expressed, saving of the holy Ghost, read Ioh 15.16.
The Father begets, the Son begotten, the holy Ghost proceeds from the^
both.

4. The beginning of the father to love and send, etc. the dispensation, it is
done by the Son: the perfection, the holy Ghost works faith, etc. the like,
Genesis 1.1. Tit. 3.6.7. Heb. 1.2. 1. Cor. 12.11.
The beginning of every action is given to the Father; the dispensation to the
Son; the perfection or consummation to the holy Ghost.

5. Made man is in the word gave: for by incarnation he was given, Ioh. 1.14.
Mat. 1. all the rest is clecre enough.
The person and office of Christ: person, Christ is the only begotten son of
GOD made man: his office, he is our Savior.

6. 1. Pet. 2.9.10.
The estate of mankind by Adams fall is here showed: for unless God had given
his only begotten son, we had perished.

7. Ephesians 1.5.6.7.8.9.10 and cap. 4.11.12.
The causes of our salvation and their concurrence and proceeding, first, the
good pleasure of Gods will, who freely loves us, the first cause: secondly,
the matter or means he uses. Christ by his incarnation, suffering, etc.
thirdly, the joining of these causes into his form, that is, faith
apprehending Christ, wrought by preaching, through the spirit. Lastly, the
thing for men, everlasting life.

8. Here is taught, who are saved: This Christ so expounds in the next
verses, and cap. 6.40.53.
those only who believe, which is not to believe there is a God, or that God
made the world, etc. which yet are necessary: but to believe in him, that is,
in Jesus Christ the only begotten son of God.

9. Our salvation is most free and certain. It depends upon Gods love. Ioh.
13.1. Tit 1.2.


10. In the word give. Ephesians 2.8.
Our salvation is of the free grace of God, without our deserving.

11. This is seen in his person above all sacrificers, Heb. 10.11.12.13.
Our Salvation is perfectly wrought by Christ alone.

12. 1. Pet. 2.6 7.8. Mat. 7.13. and Mar. 16.16.
There are two ways of men's life, by the decree of God: some by belief in
Christ shall be saved: some for unbelief shall perish.

13. There is a double life, Heb. 9.27. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. Matthew. 25.
and a double death, one of the body only, and the other of body and soul.

14. Matt. 16.18. Mark 16.16. 1. Ioh. 1.3. Ephesians. 4.15.16.
Here is the catholic Church, the communion of Saints, remission of sins,
resurrection of the body and life everlasting, taught. For the catholic
Church is of all that believe in Christ, the communion is our fellowship with
God in Christ, through the spirit, in the use of all his gifts; or there is one
God, one Christ, one faith, and one salvation to all. Remission of sins, and
the resurrection of the body, are part of those gifts, which are shadowed is
this eternal life, for by forgiveness of sins, and the resurrection of the
body, we come to eternal life.

15. 1. Ioh. 4.11.19. 1. Cor. 6.11.20.
This place is most strong to teach men to live godly, soberly, and
righteously in this present world: for what may more move, then the free love
of God: the great price of our salvation the only begotten son of God; the
order of our calling, by the spirit to be regenerate unto faith, and lastly
the salvation it self, which is to be delivered from sin?

16. This is taught, Romans 4 11. cap 6 2 3. 1. Cor. 10.16.
You may join unto these, though not expressed in the text, as the rest: That
the Sacraments are signs to teach us; as seals to apply unto us this
doctrine.

Comforts out of this doctrine.
HEre is the place to explain the sweet comfortes of this doctrine, which I
may term the pleasant taste of these good fruits: which I desire that every
Master would carefully and painefully drop into his family, that they may
taste how good the Lord is, and feel that they know, for this will mightelie
work toward faith: so that his labor shall be joyful in the end. The
comforts are gathered, by the consideration of the persons. meditation of the
things.


Comforts by the consideration of the persons.
1. Psalm. 23.1. Romans 8.31.32. Ephesians. 1.13.14.
Behold here the great love of the almighty and glorious God, the love of
Christ his son, and of the holy Ghost. What was greater in God then his
son? That he gave for and to us. What is greater in the son then himself?
That he bestowed upon us. What is more precious then the power and goodness of
the spirit? that he powers into us, renewing and endowing us with faith and
sanctification. O how unspeakable is the goodness of God for the assurance of
our salvation, so that no man can doubt, but every soul that knows and
feels these things, must needs rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious.

2. Romans 5 6.7 8.9.10. 1. Ioh. 4.9.10.
Mark who they be upon whom this glorious God bestows this great gift: upon
the world, even us men, who having offended him by sin are his enemies by
evil minds, and are weak, being able to do nothing to recompense him, or to
comfort or help our selves: but he chooses us, he redeemeth us, he
sanctifies us, he glorifieth us. Must not this, being well wayed make us burst
out, with the blessed virgin? Luke 1.46.
My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my savior.

Comfort by the meditation of the things.
3. Ephesians. 2.1.2.3.4.5.6. 1. Pet. 2.9.10. cap. 1.3.4.5. Coloss. 1.12.13 Revel. 1
5.6. Philip. 3.20. 2. Tim. 4.8.
Call to mind in what misery, danger, and woeful condition, we be of
ourselves: into what happiness, freedom, and blessed estate we be brought by
Gods love in Christ: from sin, from death, from hell, from the curse of the
law, from the power of Satan, from the wrath of God and eternal corruption,
anguish and searefull sorrow: into the glorious liberty of the sons of God,
to immortality and in corruption, to the crown of righteousness, and to be the
sons and daughters of God, heirs of the kingdom of Heaven, to the fulness of
joys in the presence of God for evermore. Mine heart cannot conceive, my pen
cannot write the unsearchable riches of Christ: the price of this pearl, for
which a man would sell all that he has. And this is freely given us, perfectly
wrought for us, assuredly kept for us; how may we triumph and glory in our
God? Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice.

When the soul is thus seasoned with the taste of this heavenly doctrine,
Admonition to the householder.
then may the Master of the family boldly descrie unto them, the errors which
are contrary to these trueths. And this he shall find a perfect rule: that
the true doctrine being once uprightly taught; whatsoever is not agreeing
thereunto, is falsehood and to be avoided: as Epist. 2. ver. 9
John teaches, Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of
Christ, has not God. Now the errors are infinite, as there are many by-waies,
and but one true way: So Eccles. 7.31.
God made man righteous, but they have found out many inventions. I will name
but a few in comparison, yet so many as I would the Master of the house,
should use discretion in rehearsing of them to his family, namely some few at
once: and so it will much further them; even as by all contraries, every good
thing is the more perceived, felt and esteemed. In repeating of these, he must
rehearse the true doctrine, and so compare them together, that they may
perceive this to be contrary to that: as light unto darkness. And therefore by
figures, answering to the doctrines, I will show him, which are contrary to
each other, and with a little heed taking and attention he shall find it
easy.

The errors and heresies contrary to the good doctrine.
1. THe first doctrine condemns all these, i. the Atheists of whom Psalm.
14.1. Secondly, the Philosophers who make God, to be idle, and not to have
care of the world: thirdly, the gentiles, who turned ye glory of the
incorruptible God, into the image of a corruptible man, and of birds, etc.
Romans 1.23. Fourthly, they Saturnians.
who make one God of the Jews, and another of the gentiles, and either
contrary to other, read Romans 3.29. Fifthly, Symonians.
they who affirm, that the devil has free power over all things, Job.
1.8.9. Sixthly, some ascribe overmuch to phificke, policy strength and
witches, read 1. Sam. 2.3.8.9. Psalm. 36.6. Prou. 21.30.31. Seventhly,
Priscillianists.
some make stars and planets to govern men's actions, Hier. 10.1. Eyghtly,
some ascribe the event of things to fortune, some the being and continuance of
things to nature, read Esaias. 45.5, 6, 7. Romans 11.36. Revel. 4.11.

2.3.4. To these three of the Trinity, are contrary, three heretics: first,
Montanists.
who say there is but one person in the trinity, which is called by diverse
names, of father, son, and holy Ghost. Secondly, Aetians.
who say the three persons to be only three qualities: Thirdly, Triformians.
who affirm the three persons to be three diverse and separable Gods, 1. Corinthians. 8.4. 1. John 5.7.

Fifthly, against the person of Christ, the devil has fought by many
heretics. Some Nestorians,
make one person of his divinity, and another of his humanity: some Arrians.
make Christ to be God, not by nature but by grace, and to be less then his
father. Some Bonosians.
call Christ an adopted son, some Marcellians.
say he was not begotten of the father: some Carpocratians.
say Christ was conceived after the manner of other men. Apollinaris.
Some will have his body to be heavenly, and not of the Virgin Marie.
Eunomians.
Some deny Christ a mind. Eutyches.
Some avouch the humane nature to be swallowed up of the divine. Timotheans.
Some confound the two natures of Christ, and make him a mixed third thing.

The doctrine of the office of Christ does condemn the Symonians, Sethians,
Menander, and all that show any other savior or means of salvation or
additament, more then Christ only and the faith and doctrine of him. Such as
are the Papists, who join man's works, merits, satisfactions, pardons,
pilgrimages, prayers, purgatory, and I cannot tell what trumperie, as
additaments to Christ, Acts 4.11. John 10.1, 2, 3. and 14.6. Gal. 6.14.15.
Revel. 22.18. some Manichies.
say the soul only to be saved, and Paternians.
some the upper parts of the body, Romans 8.1. Philip. 3.21.

6. The doctrine of the estate of man without Christ, condemns them Pelagians.
who deny children to be corrupted with original sin, and that without the
grace of God a man may do all the commandments of God, and Papists.
they who dream of certain pure naturals, by which they imagine they can
prepare themselves to grace, and work with grace the merit to salvation, 2.
Cor. 3.5. Philip. 2.13. Heb. 12.2. There be also some among us, who through
ignorance, do very lightly feel their misery, and how wickedly soever they
live, they yet fancy to themselves an happy estate, they say they will do
well, or pray, or ask pardon: but not feeling the deep wound of sin, they
little fear the sore and grievous punishment which hangs over their heads,
for neglecting so great salvation by Christ. Heb. 2.1.2.3. and 12.25.

7. The doctrine of the causes of our salvation first in the good pleasure of
Gods will condemns them, Pelagians.
who do utterly deny predestination to establish free will. And the^ Papists.
who tie it to works foreseen. Romans 9.11. Concerning Christ, the means, it
condemns them Heracleans.
who put in his room ointments and ceremonies. And the Papists as before in
the 5. Heb. 1.5. The doctrine of faith applying Christ, is against the Papists,
who would join works. Romans 3.28.

8. This overthrows all Atheists, Deists, Sophisters, and ignorant brablers,
who frame to themselves a God, or salvation, without faith in Christ. 1. Tim.
3.16. Gal. 3.26.

9. The doctrine of certainty, confuteth the Papists, who would have men to
doubt of their salvation. Heb. 10.19.20.21.23.

10. Free salvation excludes merit. Tit. 3.4.

11. Perfect salvation overthrows the sacrifice of the Mass, and much popish
trash. 2. Pet. 1.3.

12. This overthrows Purgatory, which is made a third place, contrary to 1.
John. 1.7.

13. This refelleth them, Cerdonians.
who deny the resurrection, or Hymineus and Philetus.
say it is past already, or Epicures.
make their happiness in this life. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. 1. Ioh. 3.1.

14. This reprooueth them, Gnostici.
who make faith a naked knowledge of the Gospel, without the fruits of good
works: or Libertines.
make good works contrary to faith, or Antitactae.
will men to be free from Gods commandments Ephesians. 4.24. Gal. 5.6. Ephesians. 2.10.

15. Concerning the Sacraments in another place, only here if it can be
taught, the difference of the outward sign and the thing signified, and that
these are not to be confounded, neither that which is proper to the one, to
be given to the other; it shall give clear sight against many errors. As 1.
Pet. 3.31.
Peter speaks of Baptism, that it saves us, opens his meaning, saying,
not the washing away of the filth of the flesh, which is the outward sign: but
the inward working of the spirit, which is in the answer to God, and by the
resurrection of Christ. So 22.19.
Christ calling the bread his body, does yet teach us to follow this rule;
when he bids us do all that actio^ of receiving it, in remembrance of him.
So that the outward action is as the sign and seal, but the power of working
is in the thing signified, which is Christ by his spirit, applying through
faith, that heavenly washing, and food unto our souls.

CAP. 9. The seventh Catechism, for establishing of judgment.
HEre I will choose two places of holy scripture, because mine especial
purpose is to teach the doctrine of the Sacraments, and handle them both
together: and because they are seals of the covenant of grace, the covenant
also is therewithal to be declared, that the one may show the use of the
other, and each take light and strength from other: which I can hardly do out
of any one text.

The first Text.
Tit. 3. verse. 3. We our selves were in times past unwise, disobedient,
deceived, serving the lusts and diverse pleasures, living in maliciousnes and
envy, hateful, and hating one another.

4. But when the bountifulnes and love of God our Savior, toward man appeared:

5. Not by the works of righteousness, which we had done, but according to his
mercy he saved us, by the washing of the new birth, and renewing of the holy
Ghost.

6. Which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Lord.

7. That we being justified by his grace, should be made heirs according to
hope of eternal life.

The second Text.
1. Cor. 11.23. I have received of the Lord, that which I also have delivered
unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same night he was betrayed, took bread:

Verse. 24. And when he had given thanks he brake it and said, Take, eat, this
is my body, which is broken for you, do this in remembrance of me.

25. After the same manner also he took the cup when he had supped, saying,
This cup is the new Testament in my blood, do this as often as you drink it in
remembrance of me.

26. For as often as you eat this bread, or drink this cup, ye show the Lords
death till he come.

The Interpretation.
THese two places have one end, Both texts to one end.
namely, to teach good order and good behavior amongst Gods people: the first
touching all duties, and the latter in the service of God, as namely in the
use of the Sacraments.

The first is by a comparison of the estate of Christians before their calling,
The first text.
with that wherein they are after they be called: the Were in times past. verse.
3.
first estate is verse 3. in these words, were in time past: where he
describes the nature of the unregenerate, in the We our selves.
person of the Christian in these words, we our selves, first the corruption of
the Unwise, Disobedient, Deceived.
mind, unwise in the understanding part, disobedient in will, and deceived in
judgment. Secondly, in the Serving the lusts and diverse pleasures.
affections, serving the lusts and pleasures. Thirdly, in Living in
maliciousnes and envy.
conversation, living in all wickedness to the hurt of others: and this is set
forth by the Hateful and hating. verse. 4.
effect, that one hated the other. By which he emptieth man of all
righteousness, and strippeth him naked, that he may be seen, to be nothing but
filthiness. Then the other estate is showed in the rest. First, by the
Bountifulnes and (...) of God.
fundamental cause, the secret bou^tifulnes and love of God. And because God
is Our S^^^our.
author of christian happiness wholly and soly, he is entitled Our Savior, this
bountifulnes is set forth, by the When appeared. verse. 5.
time when it was known and effectual, when it appeared and this is verse 4.
Then verse 5. he shows According to his mercy.
how it is wrought, namely by mercy, that is, compassion on our infirmities
and miseries, being such desperate sinners, which is opened by his Not by the
works of righteousness which we had done.
contrary, that it was not by our works of righteousness. Then he shows He
saved us.
what God did, he saved us, namely from that miserable estate of sin: and
this is declared by the instrument, which is double, one Washing.
outward of less power, which is washing, that is Baptism: the other Holy
ghost.
inward which is effectual, and makes the washing effectual, this is the
holy Spirit: and that by two New birth and renewing.
effects, the new birth or regeneration unto faith, and renewing of us in
sanctification unto holiness. And verse 6. Jesus Christ.
conduit or means, by which they are powered down upon us, which is
abundantly by Christ: and then verse 7. Justified and made heirs, etc.
effects, that we should be justified by his grace, (that is Romans 3.24.
freely reconciled unto God by faith in Christ's blood) and made heirs of
eternal life. This latter effect is declared by his Hope.
instrument, Hope. The sum is then, that seeing by nature we are so corrupt
in mind, in will, affections and works, and that God of his bountifulnes
without our works, moved only by his mercy, has begotten us a new, and
sanctified us with his spirit, whereof Baptism is a Sacrament, and all this by
Christ, etc. We ought to be subject to principalities and powers, obedient and
ready to every good work.

The other place, The second text opened.
is by a rehearsal of the institution of Christ, that by it as by a rule or
law, the Corinthian abuses and disorders might be reformed, where firs is the
I have received of the Lord, etc.
preface to make it a rule, because he deliuerad to them that he received from
the Lord: insinuating that he durst not teach them any thing else, and
therefore they did ill to corrupt that order, by their abuses: then for the
thing it self, he first simply and truly shows the very story, and after
he expounds the use of it. In the story he begins with the The night he
was betrayed.
time that it was ordained, The same night he was betrayed: namely the Colos.
2.16.17 Heb. 10.1.2.9.
time of the old testament in the shadows, having in him an end, he erecteth
ordinances for the new: then secondly he shows the He took ^read and
brake, etc. verse. 24.
things. First, that he took bread, then that he blessed it by 1. Cor. 10.16.
giving thanks, that is, he separated it to some special use, to that end
follows the breaking the bread, and bidding them to take and eat it: then he
shows the This is my body.
use of these ceremonies in these words: this is my body, which is
sacramentally spoken (as Exodus 12.11.12. 1. Cor. 10.3.4.
that of the Passover, and of Manna, and the rock, etc.) that that breaking
of bread was a sign of his body to be broken, which he expounds himself in
the This do ye in remembrance of me.
next words: which are a commandment, by virtue whereof, the Church ought to
use this Sacrament, namely, that the Church should do as he did, and when
they so do, they should do it in remembrance of him. Then verse 25. After the
same manner, etc.
like of the cup, where the words of the This cup is the new Testament, etc.
use, are spoken by a borrowed speech, the cup for the wine in the cup: and
alluding to the Exodus 4.8.
right of the sacrifices, he calls it the testament in his blood: meaning
that it was a sacramental sign of the covenant of God, sealed with his blood:
which least we should dream of any Transubstantiation, or consubstantiation,
he likewise expounds himself, in a This do as often as ye, etc.
commandment to the Church, that when they drink it, they should do as he
did in remembrance of him. Now the Apostle having the same spirit of Christ, in
that very meaning does teach us the As often as ye. etc. verse. 26.
use, verse 26. calling the creatures, in the eating bread; and in the drinking
wine: and that the same bread and wine, so separated by thanksgiving, are not
changed in their substance, but in their use, namely that it is not now as
common bread to feed our bodies only, but it has a sacramental and holy use
annexed, for the feeding of our souls, that is, We show the Lords death
herein till he come.

The sum then is: seeing he delivered unto them, only that he received, and
that in this order and to this use: they must not profane this holy Sacrament,
by their disorder or additaments what so ever to do in any other order, or to
any other use, more or less, then it was ordained. Whereupon he proceeds in
the rest of the chapter, to give them certain canons or precepts, out of the
premises: namely, how they should reform themselves, and do it orderly and
profitablie.

The Doctrine of the Catechism.
1. Out of both places.
These two places open unto us the covenant of God, touching the salvation of
his elect, by two things. First, by doctrine as a writing declaratorie.
Secondly, by Sacraments as seals of that writing, confirmatory.

2. The doctrine is in the description of the persons, couenanting one with
another, and the covenant it self.

3. In the first place, verse. 4.5.6.
The first person is he who offers the covenant, namely God: who is
described, by the special work which he does in the covenant, he makes his
bountifulnes appear, and is therefore entitled a Savior, as one that seeks
us, and not we him.

4. The second, man, Verse. 3. shutting out pure naturals, free will, etc.
who receives the covenants, who is described void of all goodness, in mind,
will, affections, and works: for so Ezech. 16.4.5.8.
God finds us in our filthiness before the covenant.

5. In the second place. verse. 24.25.
The third person is the mediator of the covenant, Christ: who gives his body
and blood for the confirmation of the covenant.

6. This is out of both places.
The covenant it self is first called the new Testament, that is, Ierem. 31.31.
not of the law of works, but of mercy and grace. Therefore on the party
that offers it is thus described. First, God propounds himself to be our
God and Savior: then he receives us to himself by mercy in Christ, and not
by our works. Thirdly, he shows the effect of the covenant, that we should
be justified by his grace, and made heirs through hope of eternal life. On our
part the condition is no more, but to receive all this by faith in Christ,
which is given us in the new birth, and therefore Romans 8.15.
called the spirit of Adoption, by which we call God, Father. And so the
covenant is made on our part, as it is Gal. 3.26.
written, Ye are all the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus. Where you may
see that Christ is the mediator Ephesians. 2.18.
to bring us to God, namely, by belief in him. Which covenant God will have
declared before men, by the use of his service, as profession, Sacraments, etc.
and by obedience unto every good work.

7. In beholding which covenant, we may see all merit and rejoicing in man,
utterly excluded. For before the covenant, we are altogether void of all
goodness: in the covenant we are received and saved by mercy without works:
Christ is a mediator to God for us, paying the ransom of our sins: by him is
powered upon us the new birth, and renewing of the holy Ghost: by him we are
justified, and made heirs of everlasting life. If we have faith or hope, they
are all the gifts of God through Christ: so that we have every way, cause of
abasing our selves, and only to 1. Cor. 1.30.
rejoice in him. Wherefore the Church ascribing nothing to her self, makes
this joyful confession. Esaias. 61.10.
I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, and my soul shall be joyful in my God:
for he has clothed me with the garments of salvation, and covered me with the
robe of righteousness, etc.

Now not minding to show every particular point which these two places afford,
An observation to the teacher.
we will come to the second part of the Sacraments. In handling whereof, if
any thing be not in one of these two texts (for it were much all to be) I will
set in the margin some other place, as a supply to their wants: and this
doctrine is in two things. 1. How many Sacraments. 2. What they be.

8. There are but two Sacraments of the I say covenant, because the word
sacrament is used diversely: this shuts of improper uses.
covenant, that is to say, Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

The other point, What they be, will appear easy, if we learn how they
agree between themselves, and how they differ both between themselves, and
also from others.

9. Two Sacraments agree in four things.
These two Sacraments agree in these things. 1. In a general definition: A
Sacrament is a sign and seal of the covenant of grace. First, they are
signs, In a general definition.
as water and washing in Baptism; bread and wine, eating and drinking in the
Lords Supper. They are both signs of the covenant: for Baptism signifies
Christ's blood in the covenant, and so does the Lords Supper: and they be both
more the^ bare signs, even seals of assurance. For as the seal is set to a
will or deed, to confirm the writing: so are these two appointed by Christ, to
assure us of the thing they signify. Therefore the one is called his body, and
the other the washing of the new birth: not because they be changed in
nature, but by such a near speech to assure us of the thing sealed or signed.
They both herein assure us of our justification and sanctification. Secondly,
They be as badges.
they be both outward badges of our profession, as by the one we show the
Lords death, and by the other that we are Gods children by a new birth.
Thirdly, Both commanded, Mat. 28.18.19.
they both have a commandment from Christ. Fourthly, Both have a form of
administration. Acts. 2.14.37.38. Mar. 16.15.16
they both have a prescribed form of administration, in regard of the Minister
and people. The Minister is appointed to preach and declare the covenant, and
to administer the Sacraments; the people to hear and to receive the
Sacraments. In Baptism the Minister must wash with water, in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: the person to be admitted
into the Church, is to submit himself to such a washing. In the Lords Supper,
the Minister by thanksgiving is to set apart, to this holy use, the bread and
wine severally, to break the bread, and to give afterward severally, first
bread, and then wine, to the people, bidding them to eat and drink, etc. and
the people ought to receive them both severally, first bread, and then wine,
and to eat the bread and drink the wine: not as common bread and wine, but as
sanctified to the holy use by Christ prescribed.

10. The first disagreement with others.
The five forged Sacraments of the Church of Rome, cannot be reckoned with
these; because they are not pertaining to the covenant, nor commanded by God,
with outward signs to the uses here described: but either have no outward
signs, as Penance: or else other significations and uses: As Matrimony has no
sign ordained of God to this use, but sometime is made an Hoseah. 2.19. Ephesians.
5.23.
allegory, or metaphor, and sometime is taught by comparison, from Christ and
his Church. Orders have imposition of hands, but not commanded by God for the
grace of this covenant, or to be badges of our profession, but for the 1. Tim.
4.14.
grace of the office of the Ministry. So the annoynting of the sick in the
Gospel is not taught, as the Papists use it: but only to be an Iam. 5.14.
outward sign, in healing the body: but a Sacrament is for the comfort of the
soul. The like may be said of the other.

11. The second difference in themselves.
The differences between these two Sacraments of the covenant in themselves,
are these. 1. In the sign, Baptism has water and washing: the Lords Supper
has bread and wine, eating and drinking, etc. 2. In the manner of signifying;
because they apply the covenant to us in diverse sorts. Baptism applies it, as
our first entering into covenant, and there it signifies our new birth and
renewing, etc. and therefore all that are Act. 10.47. with the places before
quoted.
first received into the Church are admitted by Baptism; and a man is but once
baptized, because he is but once to be borne again. The Lords Supper
applies the covenant, in regard of the everlasting continuance of favor
between God and us in Christ, therefore we eat bread and drink wine, as
lively signs of our growing and increasing in Christ, in faith and good life,
and in all assurednes of eternal life: And therefore it is often used, that
we may continually be strengthened and confirmed in his grace, from faith to
faith.

12. The third difference from others.
In all this declaration, agreeing to holy Scripture, and so in all the Bible
beside, you shall never sinde that the Sacraments by the outward work wrought,
do give grace: or that the sign leeseth his nature to be turned into the
thing signified: or that there is a real, local and corporal presence of the
thing, in the outward sign: or that in Baptism, exorcisme, cream, spettle,
salt, or any other thing is to be mingled, or used, but only water: or that in
the Lords Supper there should be an unbloody sacrifice, the bread adored,
reserved or carried about, or the wine should be kept from the common people.
Therefore all these, and whatsoever other additaments and abuses of the holy
Sacraments, are altogether to be rejected and condemned, by the rule
Apostolical, because they are not received of the Lord.

Here the master of the family may apply the substance of the former
Catechism to his folk, by this place.

1. Cor. 12. verse. 13. By one spirit we are all baptized into one body,
whether we be Jews or Grecians, whether we be bond or free, and have been
all made to drink into one spirit.

1. One body, one spirit.
Where one body and one spirit to Jew and Gentill, etc. show the covenant in
grace and communion of God with all nations and sorts of people through Christ,
by his spirit in one body.

2. Both Sacraments teach, Baptized into. Drink into.
there is one holy communion between GOD and his Church.

3. Baptism, our regeneration and incorporation into the same communion: the
Lords Supper, our daily nourishment from our head Christ, growing together in
the same covenant.

CAP. 10. The fourth order of Catechism.
NOw for the masters further help, To the householder.
I will commend unto him these four places: namely, Ephesians. 2.8.9.10. 2 Thessalonians.
2.13.14. Tit. 2.11.12.13.14. Iam. 1.18. whereof he shall see every one fit to
bring into his remembrance the doctrines of the former Catechismes. And I hope
both he and his family, may easily gather the same of themselves, being made
ripe thereunto by their former practice: rejoicing in the plentiful and sweet
consent of so many places of Gods word, and admiring the goodness of God, that
so abundantly and liberally bestows upon us his rich treasures of wisdom and
understanding. And if in them he find something not easy, let the master
repair to his pastor, and seek the law at his mouth: For Malac. 2.7.
his lips should preserve knowledge, being the messenger of the Lord of
hosts: and (...) 4.1.
steward of the secrets of GOD. Howbeit, in so weighty and needful provision,
I would have this householder to be well stored, that he may feed his
family with more joy and plenty, to make them strong and well liking in the
house of our God, children, that boldly will answer the enemy in the gates,
and sight valiantly the battles of the Lord. Therefore I will here add two
Catechismes more for his help: where the first will show him in a notable
order Jacobs Ladder: namely, by what steps God brings all his children into
the everlasting kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the heavenly mansions of
his divine palace. And this is in one scripture most orderly compact together,
by the heavenly spirit. The other is Therefore I make it a book by itself, and
^^uide it into chapters.
a more perfect body of Christirn doctrine, of many and diverse places of
scripture: as a shining light unto the feet of all Gods children, in the days
of their pilgrimage, till they shall come into the land of their celestial
inheritance.

The eight Catechism for help of the householder.
The text.
Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be God, even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ: which
has blessed us with all spiritual blessings, in heavenly things in Christ.

4. As he has chosen us, in him, before the foundation of the world: that we
should be holy and without blame before him in love.

5. Who has predestined us, to be adopted through Jesus Christ, unto
himself: according to the good pleasure of his will.

6. To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherewith he has made us
accepted in his beloved.

7. By whom we have redemption through his blood: even the forgiveness of
sins, according to his rich grace.

8. Whereby he has been abundant toward us, in all wisdom and understanding.

9. And opened unto us the mystery of his will, according to the good
pleasure, which he had purposed in him.

10. That in the dispensation of the fulness of times; he might gather together
in one, all things, both which are in heaven, and which are in earth.

In showing the Catechism out of this text, I will follow this order. In the
middle, by interpretation I will point out the golden steps of this heavenly
Genesis 28.12.
ladder, by which the elect do walk up into heaven: and in the margin the
particular points of doctrine, as the goodly 1. King. 10.18.
Lions on both side of the steps of Salomons throne, which with little marking,
thou may perceive to offer themselves, The points of doctrine.
in the meaning of the words.

The interpretation or ladder.
Ver. 3. HEre is the top of Salomons throne: for he shows in this verse, the
state of all faithful Christians in this life, after their effectual calling:
that they have, as it were, livery and sesin of that heavenly kingdom. Where
the blessing is that of Abraham Genesis 22. communicated unto them by the The
trinity.
spirit: and it is described by the author The trinity.
God the Christ in his person, Gods son, in office Lord Jesus and Christ. i
anointed Savior, king, priest, and prophet.
Father, of our The trinity.
Lord Jesus Christ: and by the nature of it, which is heavenly, which may be
translated, as chap. 2.6. heavenly places. because the The state of believers:
to be heirs of heaven.
blessing is to make us heirs of heaven by hope, as is expounded verse 13.14.
and Titus. 3.7. and it is set forth by the means which is Christ the means.
Christ, namely, that being in Christ, we have this blessing, Gal. 3.14. and it
is said, all spiritual blessings, because The Spirit the worker.
by the spirit all gifts necessary to eternal life, are given us, 1. Pet.
1.3. and he teaches them to praise God the author.
God as the author, saying. Blessed be God, etc.

Having showed that the faithful, are set by Christ, through the spirit, in the
state of salvation, as it were translated from death to life: now in the rest
he shows the proceeding of the causes, as the steps by which GOD brings
us unto this, and so in the accomplishment of all the elect, unto the
perfection of joy, in the life to come.

Verse 4. He shows the first step: The first cause of salvation, chosen
before the world was.
God does choose them: this is declared by the time, that is, before all time:
and by the God in chosing looked not on work or faith foreseen, but on his
son.
moving cause in Christ, and by the Godly life an effect, not a cause of
salvation.
end, that we should be holy, etc.

Verse 5. He shows here a second cause or degree; which is, The second cause
of salvation, adoption through Christ
Adoption, that is, God would take us to be his children, which is set forth,
by the repetition of the first cause, They that are adopted, were first
predestined.
predestination, which is general to election and reprobation, namely, that
out of it came adoption, that is, God set down by decree, whom he would make
his children through Christ, which is called the sure foundation of God, 2. Tim.
2.19. and this illustrated by another The good pleasure of Gods will, the
moving cause of predestination to adoption.
moving cause, which is the good pleasure of his will.

Verse. 6. The former cause is here amplified by the last The glory of God the
final cause.
final: the glory of Gods grace. Which The grace of God a third cause.
grace is made a third and special working cause, bringing forth a fourth,
which is our Justification a fourth cause.
justification, for he says that with If it be of grace, it is not now of
works. Romans 11.6.
grace he makes them accepted; and to be accepted, is alone with justified,
and his grace being the cause thereof, shows that we are freely justified by
his grace, Romans 3.24. And lastly, that we may know this justifying to be We are
justified by grace through faith in Christ.
by faith in Christ, he adds him, as the material cause in all these causes,
terming him beloved, by excellency, because for his sake God does these things.

Verse 7. The Redemption by Christ's blood, a fifth cause.
fifth cause of our salvation is redemption by Christ's blood, and this is
declared by the Forgiveness of sins, part of redemption. His blood shows
Christ a natural man.
effect, forgiveness of sins, which shows how Christ is the means of our
justification, namely in that he paid the ransom for our sins: and so we
being forgiven, are accounted just for his sake, as is opened, 2. Cor.
5.17.20.21. which is amplified by repetition of the working cause, his grace:
Rich is the grace of God in forgiveness of sins.
which for the exceeding greatness is called rich.

Verse 8.9. Here he shows a The preaching of the Gospel, a sixth cause.
sixth cause, even the instrument, by which he applies all these causes unto
us: which is the preaching of the Gospel called here, The Gospel is the
opening of the mystery of Gods will, in all wisdom and understanding.
The opening of the mystery of his will: So expounded, cap. 3.4, 5, 6. Coloss.
1.25.26. Which thing is set forth, first, by the cause: whereby, that is his
grace: secondly, by the order of it, that it was abundant in all wisdom and
understanding: thirdly, the The preaching of the gospel, comes of Gods grace
and good pleasure.
repetition of one moving cause, The good pleasure of his will: and lastly, by
the first cause, his Preaching of the gospel, ordained of Gods purpose.
purpose: wherein he regarded nothing but Christ, wherefore he says in him:
that is, as God purposed in his good pleasure to elect and adopt these happy
souls in Christ: so did he in that purpose appoint the means; which is the
preaching of the Gosspell.

Verse 10. The Our effectual calling, the seventh cause.
last cause, which is the effectual calling, named the All the faithful
gathered into one.
gathering into one. The greek word signifies the gathering of dispersed
things, into one entire or sum, namely, that where we be in all ages, as
sheep going astray, we are called by the gospel, and gathered by faith unto
Christ our shepherd; into one fellowship or body: which then shall be There is
a certain number of the elect, which shall be made full up in Christ.
perfected, when the whole number of the elect, being accomplished, we shall
all meet with Christ, and he made meruellous in all that believe, Ephesians.
4.12, 13. which calling is set forth by two arguments. First, by the times,
wherein there is a The faithful called in all times and ages.
dispensation of times, and a In the end of time all the elect shall be one
with Christ.
fulness of times: which shows that God calls and gathers his elect, in
many times, as before the law and under the law, and in the time of the
Gospel, wherein the whole world shall be gathered And therefore is called by
excellency the fulness of times: Gal. 4.4. and when all shall be gathered, then
the times shall be full, Romans 11.25.26. There is but one Christ to save all of
all times and nations.
Secondly, by a distribution of the things to be gathered, which are the
elect: some in If out of heaven and earth, then there is no Limbus patrum, nor
Purgatory.
heaven, some still found on the earth, till the whole sum be called and
gathered. Now The Catholic Church is the company of believers in Christ in
heanenand earth.
all these some at one time and some at another being gathered, shall be
united unto Christ, and then being perfect, they shall all be partakers of his
glory, and he shall give up his kingdom to his father. 2 Thessalonians. 2.14. 1.
Cor. 15.24.

Now here the master may learn to set all these causes in their right order of
place, out of Romans 8.30. Whom he predestined, them also he called: and whom
he called, them also he justified: and whom he justified, them also he
glorified. Where under predestined be contained, his purpose, the good
pleasure of his will and election before the foundation of the world. All the
rest is the performance of that predestination: As first the calling, by which
is not meant the outward calling only: but also the inward calling, which
Christ shows in this posie: Matthew. 22.14
Many are called, but few are chosen. For there is a general calling by
preaching to many, and an effectual calling (accompanying preaching) by the
spirit, in a few. Under this calling are contained, the sending of Christ, the
preaching of Christ's Gospel, the work of the spirit, making us to believe in
him sent and preached, the new birth and renewing of the holy Ghost: For none
are truly called, but they in whom all these meet. The second work of
performance, is in this word instified: under which is contained our
redemption, forginenes of sins, and imputation of righteousness, which is the
accepting of us in Christ; the peace with God, adoption, the companion of
justification which is sanctification, and his daughters joy in the holy
Ghost, standing in grace, etc. Lastly, is glorified, by which is meant the
final gathering into one of all the elect unto salvation, with Christ; when it
shall be no small part of happiness, to be holy and without blame before God:
(having no need of earthly garments to cover our shame) and to praise God for
the glory of his grace, reigning with him in fulness of joy for ever and ever.
1 Thessalonians. 3 13 Revel. 22.1.2.3.4.7. and 22.1.2 etc. and 20.6. Even so Lord
Jesus come quickly. Amen.

The second book, containing the last order of instruction.
COncerning this last and largest Catechism, An obsernation to the householder.
I am to admonish the master of the family: First, that I set down in
several places and chapters, several and particular places of Scripture, for
the teaching of the several parts of doctrine. The text is always set before
the doctrine not in the words, as in the former Catechismes, but only the name
of the book, chapter, verse, or verses, where the words are written: which he
is to peruse and to compare with the parts of doctrine which I set down; and
then to read it to his family, and out of it being read, to show them so much
as I set down out of it. Secondly, he shall find in some points, that they
are not so direct, or expressed in the text, but are gathered by circumsta^ce
or consequence. Such as Christ Matthew. 22.31
used, to prove the resurrection, if God call himself the God of Abraham,
etc. and that he be God of the living and not of the dead: then verily there
is a resurrection appointed for the dead. Again, we find that God has
Ephesians. 1.4.11
elected some unto salvation before the foundation of the world, and that he
does thoroughly bring to pass whatsoever he has purposed. And again we find
that Luke. 13.23, 24, 25. 26.
some shall not be saved: then it follows, that God never purposed their
salvation, and by consequent he purposed the contrary: except we will make
God, as a Luke 14.28.
foolish builder, that does not forecast what he will do with every part of
that he builds: or else imagine some Eccles. 7.15.16.
other power to take order in his ouerslippes, or else Esaias 40.12, 13, 14, 15.
give him some counselors or helpers; which is as the foolish has said in his
heart, Psalm. 14.1. Now because he should not stumble at a thing that seems so
bare, I will add in every such place, some one or two plain places of holy
scripture, to prove the matter of such a collection agreeing to faith: and
these shall be always in the end, or behind every such point. Also some one
point by reason of the order of his place, may not be contained in the text by
any collection, and some may be directly in the text, but not so clear and
plain. Here I will also help the master with some other place direct and
plain, and by some one word guide him to discern when any thing is not in the
text. Lastly, in teaching this Catechism, he may sometimes give them some one
chapter: sometimes two for their easines; sometimes but a part of one, for
length or hardness; and in all things to use good discretion. Al which rules
being observed, he shall find I hope good use of this Catechism.

The last Catechism, containing the sum of the doctrine of Christ: by many
places of Scripture.
CAP. 1. Of the doctrine of Christ. What.
Titus. 1.1.2. The doctrine of Christ is the knowledge of the truth, according
to godliness: under the hope of eternal life, teaching the nature and actions
of God.

CAP. 2. Of the nature of God.
Ioh. 4.24. Exodus 3.14. Revel. 1.8. God is a spirit, being of himself, for
ever.

Ioh. 15.26. There are three persons in the Godhead, equal in substance. The
Father of whom are the rest, in these words, sent from the father. The Son
begotten of the Father from everlasting. Ioh. 1.18. and 17.5. The holy Ghost
proceeds from them both, in these words, I will send, and proceeds from the
father. 2. The Father works of himself by the Son, and through the holy
Ghost: the Son works from the Father through the holy Ghost: the holy Ghost
works from the Father and the Son. Tit. 3.4.5.6.

CAP. 3. Of the actions of God. Gods decree.
Ephesians. 1.11. Here the actions of God are declared: which are of two sorts. 1.
The decree, which is, that he foreappoynted all things, in these words; purpose
and counsel of his will, after which he works all things. 2. The execution
of the decree, which is, that he performs all things according to his
purpose, in these words, works all things.

Here in regard of man this decree is called predestination, which is the
foreordaining of some men to salvation, expressly: and some to damnation, by
consequent. Iud verse. 4. Pro. 16.4. 1. Pet. 2.8. The performance of this
predestination, is by election in Christ, expressly, and by reprobation from
Christ, by consequent; such as refuse Christ. Ioh. 8.42.43.47.

CAP. 4. Of the execution of Gods decree.
Psalm. 33.6.7.8.9.10.11. The execution of Gods decree is, that he performs
his eternal purpose, by creating all things, verse. 6.7.8. By governing all
things in their times and seasons. verse. 10.11.

CAP. 5. Of the creation.
Genesis chap. 1. and chap. 2. These two chapters teach us. 1. God made all things
by his word of nothing. 2. In six days. 3. Man in the sixth day. 4. God made
man and woman, that is, male and female in one day, cap. 1.26.27. 5. God made
man of the dust of the earth, touching his body, and breathed in him his soul:
so he had both body and soul. cap. 2.7 6. The woman was made of the man: God
cast him in a deep sleep, took out one of his ribs and closed up the flesh,
and of the ribbe made the woman: the man's name was Adam, the woman's, Eve: chap.
2.21.22. chap. 3.20. 7. The excellency of man above other earthly creatures,
is in two things. 1. They were created after the image of God, which shines
principally in the soul, chap. 1.27. which is in knowledge, Coloss. 3.10. and
practice of holiness and righteousness, Ephesians. 4.24. 2. They were created in most
perfect happiness, where unto the image of God these things were joined; they
had authority and Lordship over the creatures, chap. 1.28. they were so
beautiful, that being naked they were not ashamed. cap. 2.25.

CAP. 6. Government before the fall.
Genesis cap. 2. God placed man in a most pleasant place of the world, called the
garden of Eden. verse. 15.

2. He gave him commandment to keep and to dress the garden. verse. 15.

3. He gave him the tree of life in the midst of the garden, as a Sacrament,
that if he continued in well doing, he should live for ever. verse. 9. cap.
3.22.

4. He gave him this order: he might take of all the trees in the garden,
except the tree of knowledge of good and evil, and in that day he should eat
thereof he should dye the death. verse. 16.17.

5. He instituted marriage, to be of one man and one woman: that they two
should be one flesh. verse. 24.

CAP. 7. The fall of man.
Genesis 3. In this chapter, the story of the fall of man is set forth, in these
points.

1. The devil abusing the tongue of a serpent, entised the woman Eve, and she
did eat of the forbidden fruit, and she gave to her husband Adam, and he did
eat: and so the commandment of God was broken. ver. 1.2.3. etc.

2. By this disobedience, Adam and Eve, and all mankind were dead in finne, and
under damnation of body and soul, that is, he lost his excellency, and
became ashamed of himself, verse. 7.8.9.10. expounded Ephesians. 2.1.2.3. Romans
5.12.13.14.

3. To make man to see his own misery: God cursed the earth for his sake,
that it should bring forth briers, thistles and thorns; made the man to get his
living with toil and pain, till he dyed: the woman with sorrow and grief
to bring forth and bring up her children: and banished them both out of the
garden of Eden, verse. 16.17. etc.

CAP. 8. Government after the fall: The restoring of man: The two covenants.
Iere. 31.31.32.33.34. This place teaches: 1. For the restoring of man, from
the death of sin and damnation: God made two covenants: the covenant of
works, and the covenant of mercy. 2. The covenant of works is, that God will
be our God, if we keep all his commandments, verse. 31.32. 3. The covenant
of mercy is, God will be our God, by forgiveness of sins through Christ, and
write his laws in our hearts, verse. 33.34. Heb. 10.12.13.15.16. 4. We are not
saved by the covenant of works, that is, by keeping of Gods commandments: for
no man can do them, verse. 32. But we are saved by the covenant of mercy, that
is, by belief in Jesus Christ, by whom our sins are forgiven, verse. 33.34.
Romans 8.3. Ephesians. 2.8.9.

CAP. 9. Of the first covenant, which is of works, and the true force and
perpetual use of the law.
Romans 3.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. The law bewrays
sinfulnes; pronounces us guilty, makes us unable to open our mouths, to
claim any things at Gods hand, for our own righteousness or well doing: that
we might run unto Christ in the covenant of mercy, to be justified, and saved
by belief in him, Gal. 3.21.22.

Ephesians. 2.8, 9, 10. Although we cannot be saved or justified by our works or
well-dooing: yet God has ordained, the good works commanded in his law, for
those, who shall be saved by the covenant of mercy, to walk in: as a
perpetual rule of right living to all believers, 1 Thessalonians. 4.2.3.4. with 1.
Ioh. 3.6, 7, 8

Here the ten Commandments are to be expounded.

CAP. 10. Of the covenant of mercy, and the mediator thereof.
2. Cor. 5.19. This teaches the order of the covenant of mercy: namely thus.
God calls us by his Gospel unto his mercy through Christ, and offers to
reconcile us unto himself, through him, by forgiveness of sins: and we are in
covenant with him, when he gives us faith in Christ's blood, Romans 3.25. Gal.
4.4.5. This place shows the mediator Christ; by his person, and office. His
person: that he is the son of God, made man: that is to say: perfect GOD and
perfect man, in one person: man, to be like his brethren, as Heb. 2.17. God,
to be holy, harmeles, etc. as Heb. 7.26. His office, to be the mediator of the
covenant of mercy, in that by his death, he redeemeth us from under the law,
to be made the children of God.

Psalm. 110.1, 2, 3, 4. This text shows the parts of Christ's office of
mediatorship, namely, that he should be King, verse 1.2.3. and Priest. verse
4.

CAP. 11. Of the Priesthood of Christ.
1. Pet. 3.18.19. This declares that Christ's Priesthood is fulfilled in two
points: 1. in his perfect obedience, as a just and holy man unto death, and all
other priestly actions thereunto adjoined, verse 18. Secondly, in his
prophetical function, verse 19.

Romans 8.33.34. This declares the priestlie actions of Christ, to be of two
sorts: 1. the sacrifice of his death, and his resurrection, to put away our
sins, and to make us righteous, Romans 4.25. 2. sitting at the right hand of
God to make intercession for us.

CAP. 12. Of the Kingdom of Christ, and namely before, and until the last
judgment.
Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Here is the kingly office of Christ
described. 1. He is head of his church, who nourishes it, and furnishes it
in all things, verse. 16.

2. This furniture is in the applying of the works of his priesthood, both
before, and until the last judgment, and at the judgment, verse 11.12.13.

3. Before the judgment, in two things: first, the outward policy and
administration of his Church, verse. 11.12. Secondly, the inward work of his
spirit, verse. 11.16.

4. The outward policy is administered, by officers; who are men furnished
with gifts, to work in the building of the Church, verse 11.12. and these are
of two sorts: first, such as teach knowledge, unto which are most commonly
joined the administration of public prayers and Sacraments, as Act. 6.4.
Matthew. 28.19. And these I find to be either extraordinary, as Apostles, the
founders of the church, Ephe. 2.20. and their assistants, prophets and
Evangelists, Colos. 1.1.2. Tim. 4.5. or else ordinary, as pastors to teach by
exhortation, and teachers, to utter doctrine, Romans 12.2.8. Secondly, such as
are for practice of life, namely, elders to be governors, 1. Cor. 12.28. and
Deacons to look to the poor, Act. 6.1, 2, 3. and for this cause he has
ordained the eldership, Matthew. 18.17. 1. Tim. 4.14.

5. The inward work of his spirit, is faith unfeigned, and knowledge, verse 13.
and the fruits of faith, which be our growing into Christ; increasing by his
grace; love to edify each other, verse. 15.16.

Romans 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Here we be taught further fruits of faith, wrought by
the spirit: first, that we be justified, to have peace toward God, ver. 1.
Secondly, adopted, to have access to God, ver. 2. so opened, Romans 8.14. and of
this comes joy unspeakable, verse. 2. with patience, verse. 3. and hope by the
feeling of Gods love, to make us bold, verse 4, 5.

CAP. 13. Of the seals of the covenant or Sacraments.
Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. and 1. Cor. 10.17. These two places teach ye doctrine of
the sacraments.

1. A sacrament is a sign to represent, and a seal to apply unto all
believers, the covenant of mercy: out of both, and is expounded, Romans 4.11.

2. There be two, Baptism and the Lords supper.

3. Baptism is a sign and seal of our admission into the covenant, by the
new birth and renewing of the holy ghost, this is in the first place, to which
agrees, Tit. 3.5.

The Lords supper, is a sign and seal for the continual confirming of us in
the same covenant, this is in the latter place.

CAP. 14. Of the last judgment.
Matthew. 25.31, 32. etc. This shadoweth out the second part of the
administration of Christ's kingdom, which is the last judgment. Where we may
learn two things.

1. The manner of Christ's coming unto judgment, namely in glory with all his
holy Angels, verse. 31.

2. The judgment it self which is in two points: 1. The wonderful meeting;
first of the judge Christ sitting in the throne of his glory, verse. 31. Then of
the persons to be judged; All nations, verse. 32. That is, all the dead raised
in their bodies, and all the living changed, 1. Corm. 15.52. 2. In the
Sentence Judicial, which is general or common, that euerly one shall be
rewarded according to his works, verse. 35.42. with 2. Cor 5.10. and also
special or peculiar, for some are pronounced, Blessed, to inherit everlasting
life; ver. 34.46. and some cursed, to go into eternal pain, verse. 41.46,

1 Cor. 15.24.25.26.27.28. This text teaches, 1. Thereshall be an end when all
rule, authority, and power is put down, verse. 24.

2. Christ kingdom lasts, till all enemies to him and his Church be
destroyed, ver. 25.

3. The last enemy is death, which shall be swallowed up of life, verse. 26.

4. At the end he shall give up his kingdom to God his father, and so (touching
his manhood) he shall be subject himself, that God may be all in all, verse.
24.27.28.

A short and plain opening of the ten Commandments.
THe ten Commandments teach and command all duties belonging to God and
man, in two tables. The first table is of our duty to God, in four precepts,
showing what we must do to his person, and in his outward worship.

1. The first precept teaches, that we owe unto the person of God, to set him
only up as the true God, first in our hearts, by true knowledge of his divine
nature, attributes, Trinity, Gal. 4.8. and by a sure confidence in him, to
hope, love, delight, reverence and fear him above things, Phil. 3.19. Ephesians.
5.5. and secondly, by our outward profession, as Ion. 1.9. and in all our
works. Pro. 3.6. His outward worship is in two things: 1. The means. 2. The
right applying of the means.

2. The second precept teaches the means, which being negative and naming but
one thing of man's devise, forbids all man's inventions, in the outward
worship of God: and commands only that which God prescribes, which is
either ordinary means: as divine adoration, Psalm. 95.6. The use of his name
either simply, Psalm. 68.4. or in an oath, Exodus 22 11. meditation on his
creatures, Psalm. 145.1. prayer and thanksgiving, Psalm. 50.15. the Sacraments,
Mat. 28.19. and his order in his church, Coloss. 2.5. or extraordinary, as
fasting, Joel. 2. feasting, Ester 9. vowing, Genesis 28.20. and in a lot, Prouer.
16.33.

The right applying of the means of Gods worship, is either in the right use
every day, or else in the use of one day in seven.

3. The third precept, commands us every day to use reverently the outward
means of Gods worship, putting a part which is his name, for the whole being
of the sam^ kind, and by forbidding the evil commanding the good, which is to
be observed before and in the action, and after the action with profit.
Leuit. 24.11. 1. Cor. 11.28.34. Ezech. 33.30.31.32.

4. The fourth precept teaches the use of one day in seven, to be put apart
from all our own works, to be dedicated to the worship of God. In the
congregation by the work of the ministry, and at home in applying the same to
the family. Act. 20.7. Deuteronomy. 6.6.

The second table is of our duty to man, in six precepts, which either regard
the outward action with consent of will in 5. or else of desire only in the
last.

The 5. are either special duties, or else general.

5. The fifth precept teaches special duties; by a part for the whole, and by
proportion, commanding all duties of superiors to inferiors and contrary, and
of equals, where this any special bond or respect, requiring a special duty.
2. Sam. 15. 1. Pet. 3.1.7.8. Love as brethren. General duties belong either to
a ma^s person, or the things pertaining to him.

6. The sixth precept teaches duties to our neighbors person: commanding by a
negative of evil, to procure the safety of our neighbors ^erson. Genesis 4.8.
Romans 16.4.

The things belonging to his person, are either in him, or without him.

7. The seventh precept, teaches our duty to the things in our neighbor, as
his body, 1. Cor. 6.18. by a negative of ill commands the pure and undefiled
using of our neighbors body. 2. Sam. 11.2.3.4. Genesis 39.8.9. Without a man, are
his goods and name.

8 The eight precept teaches by a negative, that we ought to preserve our
neighbors goods. Exodus 23.4.5.

9. The ninth precept teaches by a negative, to tender our neighbors good
name. Genesis 39.17. Psalm. 15.3.

10. The tenth precept teaches, that we ought to do all the former special
and general duties, with all our thoughts and desires. 1. King. 21.12. Iam.
4.1. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.

A brief and easy opening of the sense of the Lords prayer, which pertains
to the second Commandment, and is to be learned after the ten Commandments.
THe Lords Prayer contains six petitio^s, teaching us to ask three requests
pertaining to Gods glory: and three for our own necessities.

Concerning Gods glory we ask two things: that God be honored; and the
means.

1. The first petition teaches us to ^^ay that God may be honored in all
things, Psa^ 19.1. 1. Cor. 10.31.

The means of Gods honor are in regard of his kingdom and will.

2. The second petition teaches us to pray for the advancement of Gods kingly
regiment in all things, and specially in his Church. Psalm. 93.1.2.3. and Psalm.
145.

3. The third petition teaches us to pray for the advancement of Gods royal
will in his decree in all things, and his word in his Church. Psalm. 147.15.19.

Concerning our selves, we ask things for the body and for the soul.

4. The fourth petition under the name bread, teaches us to ask whatsoever is
necessary for this bodily life, as health, wealth, liberty, etc. Esaias. (...).
For the soul we need forgiveness of ^innes, and protection against Satan.
(...) of a^^ 5. The fifth petition te^^earne of them to (...) the letter ^innes
then in eight days they have all the ^^^ings but it must be in this order
(...), to know them wheresoever (...) be, in the book, which therall our
ghostly ein a quarter (...) 26.41. Ephesians. 6.18.

The conclusion of the last order.
AFter you have passed through all these Catershismes, then is to be continued
the daily rea^ing of holy ^cripture in order: beginning at the first chapter of
Genesis and of Matthew: one chapter every day of the old Testament, and
another of the new. In reading whereof mark two things. First, what words are
for the confirmation of any point of doctrine before learned. And secondly, if
any thing be hard to understand, dispute not about it, but ask your pastors
help, or else some other godly minister of grave judgment and grounded
knowledge: so shall you increase with great ease and joy, and avoid the 2.
Pet. 3.16.
rock, of perverting the Scriptures, to your own destruction. And as leisure
will serve, direct them to read some other Catechismes and godly books. But
above all things you must (...) family to go to the public preaching: for
that has the (...) the (...) (...)
promise and blessing. And as often as a (...) every day till three ^^meth into
(...) family, if (...) through; and last of all the is to (...) six, or eight
lines at (...) g^ea keep the (...)

Now last of (...) quest to all governors of (...) holders of all sorts, poor
and rich, that they would cause al their household, me^, women and children, to
be able to read the English tung. For this is a worthy means to (...) much
good in this so weighty a cause, and G^d has given a marvelous blessing of
printing to further his Gospel: and we are very foolish, if we let slip any
blessing or comfort, which is given us of our loving and gracious father. First
therefore such as be able I would entreat, that they would also help their
servants in this knowledge, and rich men shall make it a laudable and holy
usury, An holy usury.
to lay out some hundredth part of their superfluities toward the helping of
poor servants, and poor men's children to learn to read, and God will pay
them again a double and treble Pro 28.27. An order for poor men and servants
to learn to read without loss of time, pain or cost.
interest. But to such as have no other help or means, I thought good to
teach an order, how they might learn with ease, because I would not willingly
leave out any thing that might further this holy purpose. If they can find
either (...) be, in the book. which (...) shall easily do in a quarter of an
hour, and I would not have them (...) any more. Then after they know the
letters, ^^t them bestow the like time, in like order to learn three several
words, to spell th^^ distinctly, to read them, and to point to every
syllable, and to know them in any other place, being showed by the teacher, now
one and then another, and this to continue at the least three weeks, or a
month: and herein not to covet any more but three several and new words at
one time, and that in this manner: if his first lesson be, In the name, and the
next words be of the father, he must count the word, the, to be learned in his
first lesson, therefore the second lesson must be, of father and: and where the
next words are, of the holy Ghost, Amen, he must account, he has learned the
two first words, of the, in his former lessons, therefore his third lesson must
be, holy Ghost, Amen. so keeping in mind what he has learned, and learning
new, he should quickly learn to read. Now after three weeks or a month,
let him learn, in (...) and to keep the points, (...) and by this time he
(...) teacher, only let him (...) make himself perfect, by (...) when he
meets with a (...) out of himself by spelli^^ (...) and ask some one th^^
(...) cher. And whosoever (...) ently follow, and cons^a^^^ (...) himself to
this order, (...) time attain to reade^^ (...) nes, or any toil to (...) or
other, (...) any great cost. Then has he ^iewell, which once in his life may
be move comfort to him, then all he has, or all he trauaileth for beside.
And so I commend you to the Lord our God, whom I beseech to make this my
labor profitable and acceptable to his church for Jesus Christ's sake: and that
we may be fulfilled with knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding; that we may walk worthy of the Lord, and please him in all
things, and increasing in the knowledge of God. To whom be all honor, praise
and glory for ever and ever, Amen,

FINIS.

