THE FATHERS LEGACY.

With precepts Moral, and prayers Divine*

Fitted for all sorts, both young and old, times and seasons: Morning, Noone,
and Night.


LONDON, Printed for John Marriot, in Saint Dunstans Churchyard in Fleetstreet.
1625.

The Fathers Receipt to cure the Sons souls sickness.
TAke early in the morning of thy life a Quart of true and unfeigned Repentance
of Niniuie, and put to it both your hands full of fervent Faith in Christ's
blood, which was shed for you; with as much Hope and Charity of the purest that
you can purchase with tears unfeigned, from the Garden of Gods Word, of each of
these a like quantity, and put them into the vessel of a clear and unspotted
conscience, and let them boil well in the fiery flames of true and hearty
love, till you see by the perfect eye of your faith, and feel by your zeal
illuminated, the black foam of the love of the world to stink in your
stomach. Then scumme it off with the spoone of faithful prayer: that done,
take the immaculate cloth of Christ's pure innocence, and cover you warm with
as many clothes of the Amendment of life as God shall strengthen you to bear:
And then lie down on your bed, joined with the peace of God, and sweat out all
the vile poison of covetousness, Idolatry, and the participation thereof, with
alkind of pride, oppression, extortion, deceit, sedition, sects, envy,
swearing, adultery, theft, drunkenness, sloth, and the like, let this be
distilled through the limbeck of a clean heart: then apply the sweet ointment
of a good conversation, and lay it to your nose, for fear you smell after your
neighbors goods: And when you feel your self cleansed from all these
forenamed diseases, then take the powder of Say-well, and lay it on your
tongue to savor your mouth, and the ears of the hearers; but drink three
times as much Doe-well. And anoint your hands with the oil of gladness, to
do good works, that they may be supple and ready to minister to the poor
distressed members of Christ as you see good occasion and are able: but beware
of taking the wind of vainglory in the giving, lest the daily gusts thereof do
you much harm, let these be incorporated all into one body with the juice of
the Herb of Grace, of which if thou fail, all the rest will do thee little
pleasure, neither can they be operative to either soul or body. And then
arise from sin willingly, and walk out your course worthily: and take up
Christ's cross patiently and bear it thankfully: observe these precepts
carefully, and be mindful of them daily, and pray these prayers following
zealously, and God will bless thee continually, and so shall thou live
everlastingly: which God grant, Amen say I.

Probatum est, By thy Father.
The Fathers Legacy.
In certain Moral precepts for the better ordering of his life. Concerning
thy self.
1 BEgin the day in the service of God, continue it in his fear, that thou
may end it in his favor.

2 When thou can not spend the day in honorable actions, thou may in
virtuous Contemplations, but be sure to put thy knowledge into practice.

3 In all things show a noble mind, and above all things avoid baseness; if
thy birth be noble shame it not, if mean, let thy virtues raise it.

4 Never strive to please all men, or indeed any man whom thou needst not
fear, since whateuer thou do will displease some body, if thou can please
thy self and not offend God, it is no matter whether others be pleased or no.

5 Be neither servile, nor officious to any (though greater then thy self)
from whom thou neither regardest favor, nor fear wrath: give them no
occasion of offense, nor take injury at their hands.

6 With thy superior in degree show thy self neither too awful nor familiar,
with thy equal be both courteous and familiar, with thy inferior though
courteous yet not too familiar.

7 Be sparing to praise or dispraise thy self in any quality: the first
savor of vainglory, the other of folly, neither meddle with others actions
either in way of approbation, or contumely; for as the one will get thee never
the more love, so the other, will will get thee much more hatred.

8 Avoid rather those that flatter thee, then those that reprove thee: one
loves thy purse, the other thy person.

Intrude not thy self into any company where the place is private, nor enter
into counsel unrequired, and let thy advice savor rather of wisdom, then
wit, for so thou shall save thy credit and thy friends.

10 Let thy company where thou may have welcome be ways of the best sort,
but shun all those that shall entice thee to any base action.

11 Marry not till thou be thy own man, to dispose of thy estate thy self,
neither marry till thou have a competent estate to defray that charge which
marriage of necessity brings with it.

12 If thou be poor marry late and far off, if rich, quickly and near home,
let thy wife be either virtuous, noble, rich, or fair, for without these or
one of these, there can be no love. Nobility and riches may be a means to
advance posterity, virtue and beauty will add to thy self pleasure and
content, but never marry for beauty only, lest time or sickness show thee thy
folly.

13 As near as thou can chose one better qualified in mind then body, whose
soul is fair as her face, hansome and neat in her apparel, not gay, nor
sluttish; silent, yet not dumb when occasion serves to speak, with a blushing
cheek, rather then a brazen forehead, mild and gentle spirited, and one that
cannot be angry, free-hearted, yet not lavish, loving to all, familiar to few,
always merry, seldom wanton.

14 If thou have children bring them up in all noble qualities, to make them
worthy instruments either for Church or Commonwealth: but constrain none of
them to apply themselves to any thing against nature, and win them rather by
love and gentleness, then harsh severity.

15 Let thy house be rather necessary and neat, then large and rude, yet if thy
estate and calling be great, let thy house be answerable without and within.

16 Let thy housekeeping be always bountiful, never prodigal, rather
abounding then wanting, but never to win credit stretch thy purse beyond its
bounds, nor let thy charge be greater then thy revenues, and take heed of
paying vse-mony.

17 Let all thy house funiture be of the best, not only to show but for use
also, so shall thou not only content but pleasure thy friends, whose love if
thou will gain, let thy house be to him always as his own, freely, without
grudging, the sign of a base nature.

18 Inuit not any man, especially great men) to thy house, unless thou have
exercise to recreate them abroad as well as within, hunting, hawking, bowling,
etc. for without these he will quickly be weary; and let me advise thee, if
thou be able, always to keep a stable of good horses, excellent for some
quality, which will not only please all men, but shall get thee the name of
generous.

19 Let thy servants be so many as thou may employ in honest offices, such
as will neither be idle nor ill imployd: for thy house affairs choose aged and
well experienced men, rather profitable then hansome, but such as wait on thy
person or thy friends, gentlemen-like in body or mind, neither let drudges, as
horse-keepers or laborers, or such like come near thy person, or thy table,
for either their rude behavior or ill smell will be offensive. For thy
maidseruants take this rule, let thy house be well decked with them (such I
mean as be hansome) for they grace a house more then all thy other furniture,
and let thy wife have always a couple of Gentlewomen to attend her person at
the least, and remember that sluts and foul sowes will have always sluttish
conditions.

20 Finally, banish from thy house all rude and ruffian-like fellows, with
ignorant and hypocritical puritans.

A Morning Prayer.
O LORD God, our most gracious, loving and merciful FATHER in Christ Jesus, we
thy poor and most unworthy servants do here prostrate our selves, both souls
and bodies, before the Throne of thy heavenly Majesty, humbly acknowledging and
confessing from the bottom of our hearts, that we are most vile, miserable, and
sinful wretches, conceived in sin, brought forth in iniquity, and so have
continued all our life time: Not worthy O Lord, of the least of all thy
blessings, but deserve justly for our sins eternal death and damnation, and
to be cast for ever from thy presence. Heavenly Father, we confess freely
against our own souls, that our sins are more in number then the hairs of our
heads, or the sands of the sea, or the stars of heaven; and that we have broken
and transgressed al thy holy Commandments, both in thought, word, and deed,
from our infancy to our youth, from our youth to our riper age, from the day of
our birth to this present day. The evil, O Lord, which we should not do, we
have done, and the good which we should have done, we have omitted. We have
made no conscience of our ways, no regard of thy promises, no fear of thy
threatenings. We have made us other gods in thy sight, a god of our gold, a god
of our belly, a god of every affection: we have blasphemed thy holy name: we
have profaned thy Sabbaths: we have polluted thy Sanctuary: we have despised
thy Word: we have done all manner of evil in thy sight, and the fear of thy
Majesty has not been before us. Thy mercy has not allured us, thy judgments
have not terrified us; but with a high hand we have heaped sin upon sin,
and gone on still in all manner of wickedness, until we have made it too
heavy a burden for us to bear.

What then belongs unto us thou just Judge of all the world, but eternal
confusion both of soul and body. Nevertheless, appealing from thy justice,
we implore thy mercy, and entreat thee in Jesus Christ to be reconciled unto
us; for his sake to pardon and forgive us all our sins, to nail them on his
Cross, to bury them in his grave, and to warn them away in his most precious
blood. Wash us O Lord, and we shall be clean: cleanse us, and we shall pass
the snow in witness: Good Lord be merciful unto us, pardon and forgive us
all that is past, and give us grace to lead a more holy life then we have done
hitherto. And to this end, O blessed Lord God, because our hearts are the
sinkes of all our sins, and the fountains of all our uncleanness, sanctify
our unclean hearts, mortify our sinful affections, pacify our impure
thoughts, cleanse our wicked cogitations: O Lord renew a right spirit within us,
O Lord give us grace to conceive aright of the wonderful things of thy Law,
and to practice the things that concern thy glory.

And because O Lord we should be the more unworthy to receive any good thing
from thee, if we should not be truly thankful for those many good things which
we have already received, we render unto thy divine Majesty all possible praise
and thanks for all those blessings which thou have so mercifully from time to
time bestowed upon us. We thank thee O Lord for our election before we were:
for our creation and what we are: for our redemption when we were lost: for our
justification, and sanctification in this life, and for our assured hope of
glorification in the life to come.

We thank thee dear Father, for whatsoever good concerns either soul or
body: for our lives, and for our liberty: for our peace, and for our plenty:
for our health, and our prosperity: and above all, for the sweet and
inestimable jewel of thy holy Word. Thou have been more gracious to us, then
to other Nations. O Lord we were a people that sat in darkness and in the
shadow of death, but thou have opened our eyes, and given us a lantern for our
feet, and a light for our paths: let not our sins we beseech thee, remove this
candle-sticke from us.

We thank thee O Lord, that thou have sealed unto our consciences the free,
and full remission of all our sins in Christ Jesus.

We thank thee that thou have kept us from many sins which our frail
nature might have committed, and for saving us from many dangers whereinto we
might have fallen: Lord keep us both from sin and danger.

And because both of the weakness of our nature, and the number of our
enemies, how busy they are to tempt, and how ready we are to yield, Lord
shield us with thy grace, and protect us with thy Spirit against all the
assaults and temptations both of the world, the flesh, and the devil. Let not
the flesh allure us, let not the world bewitch us, let not the devil vanquish
us; but grant good God, that by the mediation of Christ, and the assistance of
thy blessed Spirit, against all these we may be more then conquerours.

We thank thee O Lord that thou have preserved us to this present hour; and
because the time of our pilgrimage here on earth is but short, Lord give us
grace to spend it in thy fear: teach us to number our days, and that little
time we have to live to bestow it wisely. And for as much as thy Kingdom O
Christ is not of this world, neither consists in meat, or drink, but in
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, grant O heavenly Father,
that we renouncing this world, and crucifying the lusts of this sinful life,
and being borne anew by thy Word and holy Spirit, setting our affections upon
things above, and having our conversation in heaven, may after this life ended
obtain the inheritance of eternal life, and rest with thee and thy Son
Christ in the Kingdom of Heaven for ever and ever. Amen.

Our Father which art etc.
An Evening Prayer.
OH eternal and everliving God; most holy, and just; most omnipotent,
gracious, merciful, and loving Father, and my only Lord and Savior; I a
wretched and sinful creature, thy unworthy servant, yea, rather the servant of
sin, and bondslaue of iniquity, the son of Adam, yet through Christ my
Savior and his righteousness, thy adopted child, and a member of his
mystical body: Do here humbly prostrate my soul, and cast down my self
before thy footstool and mercy-seate (oh everliving Redeemer) acknowledging
and confessing from the bottom of my heart mine own unrighteousness, and
manifold sins and transgressions, my disobedience and rebellion this day
committed against thy holy and sacred Majesty, my contempt of thy Word and
Commandments, my vain conversation and corrupt affections, my continual
breach of thy most holy and revealed Will, in thought, word, and deed, whereby
I have deserved thy just judgments and wrathful indignation to be poured
down upon me, vile and wretched sinner, and utterly to be cast out of thy
sight, and to be delivered to Satan my deadly enemy, who daily and hourly
labors to win me from thee, and to cast me into utter darkness, where there
is nothing but weeping and gnashing of teeth. O Lord my deseruings do astonish
my heart, and dazell mine eyes, that I dare not look up to heaven; my sins
do press me down to the depth and bottomless pit of hell; my conscience
does challenge me a thousand ways, for offending thee so good and so gracious
a God: My ghostly enemy is a roareing and a ramping Lion, ready every minute
to devour me, is busy with me day and night, he casts a mist before mine
eyes, that I cannot see thy holy Will revealed in thy Word, and still urges my
sins unto my conscience, driving me into despair of thy mercy in Christ Jesus,
and feeds my fantasy with manifold visions, he troubles my mind with
dangerous assaults, deludeth my senses, and strives to draw me aside from
every good exercise, and from the fellowship of thy Saints here militant upon
earth. Oh Lord my God, just are thy judgments, great are my sins, but thy
mercy is far above all thy works: for thou desire not the death of a sinner,
nor take pleasure in the damnation of Souls; thou have ordained life, and
health, and all salvation is from thee. Oh God most high, thou have given us
thy dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ, that who soever believes in him,
should not perish, but have life everlasting. And how can it be, but with him
thou should give us all things necessary for this life, and the life to
come? In him, and for his sake, I thy poor afflicted creature groaning under
the burden of my sins, and altogether tired through the manifold temptations
of Satan and this wicked world, do most humbly entreat thee to forgive and
pardon all my iniquities and sins whatsoever, committed against thy divine
Majesty; Most merciful Father, for Christ's sake, lay them no longer to my
charge; for I am not able to bear thy threatening hand against me. Suffer not
Satan to delude me any longer, nor abuse my weakness, not to deceive my
senses and fantasy; suffer him not (O Lord) to devour my soul. Oh sweet
Savior Christ, thou fountain of living waters, and that true brazen Serpent
that healest all infirmities, and the sting of that fiery Serpent that has
wounded my conscience: thou which call unto thee all those that travel and
are heavy laden with the burden of their sins and feeling of their
infirmities, promising them ease in Conscience, and Rest unto their souls: I
most wretched and vile sinner, meekely beseech thee, even for thy promise sake,
that thou will receive me, and ease my burden which is too heavy upon me day
and night. Oh thou sweet Samaritan, pour thy Wine and Oil of gladness into
my wounded heart; give me to drink of the water of life, that whosoever drinks
freely shall never thirst again, even of the fountain of everliving waters.
(Oh sweet Jesus) thou Lion of the Tribe of Judah, preserve my soul, and deliver
it from the mouth of the rouring Lion. Oh holy Spirit, proceeding from the
Father and the Son; thou Comforter of Gods Elect, work in my heart a true
and liualy faith, whereby I may quench all the fiery darts of the devil, and
may with-stand all his assaults. (Oh Lord) I do confess it is my weakness
that makes him so strong; my cowardlinesse that makes him so ventrous; my
bashfulnesse that makes him bold. And therefore (O Lord) I humbly pour out my
soul before thee this night, praying thee to increase my faith, to strengthen
me in the inward man, to arm me with thy spiritual armor; give me strength
and power I beseech thee most blessed Trinity, to fight valiantly against
Satan, and wisely to prevent all his practices against me. And here (O Lord)
according as I am bound, I render unto thee all possible praise and thanks for
all those blessings and benefits which thou so graciously and plentifully have
bestowed on my soul and body, for this life, and that which is to come;
namely, for my Election, Creation, Redemption, Vocation, Justification,
Sanctification, and continual preservation until this present day and hour,
and for the firm hope of Glorification; and likewise, for my health, wealth,
food, raiment and prosperity: more especially, for that thou have defended me
this day now past from all dangers both of soul and body; defend me, O Lord,
this night, and likewise all the rest of my days and nights, I have to live in
the pilgrimage of this sinful world, that so having victory through Christ I
may sing unto thee the blessed Trinity, All Honor, Praise, Glory, Power,
Might and Majesty, be to the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, both now
and for ever. Amen.

Our father which art in heaven, etc.

And so my soul, this night, into thy hands I commit.

The Fathers Repentant tears.
1
IF that a sinners sighs
be Angels food,
Or that repentant tears
be Angels wine:
Accept O Lord in this
most pensive mood,
These hearty sighs
and faithful tears of mine,
That went with Peter forth
most sinfully.
But not as Peter wept
most bitterly.
2
If I had David's Crown
to me betide,
Or all his purpled clothes
that I might wear.
I would lay then such honor
all aside.
And only seek a sackcloth
weed to bear:
His Palace would I leave
that I might show
With him in cell
for such offense my woe.
3
There should these hands
beat on my pensive breast,
And sad to death for sorrow
rent my hair.
My voice to call on thee
should never rest,
Whose grace I seek,
whose judgments I do fear:
Upon the ground all groueling
on my face.
I would beseech thy favor,
and thy grace.
4
But since I have no mean
to make the show
Of my repentant mind,
and yet I see,
My sins to greater heaps
then his do grow,
Whereby the danger more
it is to me;
I put my trust in his most
precious blood,
Whose life was sold to purchase
all our good.
5
Thy mercy greater is
then any sin:
Thy greatness none can
ever comprehend:
Wherefore O Lord let me
thy mercies win,
Whose glorious name no time
shall ever end.
Wherefore I say, all praise
belongs to thee:
Whom I beseech
be merciful to me.
FINIS.

