GODS NEW-yeeres gift sent unto England: Or, The sum of the Gospel,
contained in these words; God so loved the world, that he has given his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but should
have life everlasting, John 3.16.

The first part.

Written by Samuel Nicholson, M. of Arts.

Imprinted at London, by Simon Stafford, dwelling in Hosier lane near
Smithfield. 1602.

Gods New-yeeres gift, sent unto England: Or, The sum of the Gospel,
contained in these words: GOD so loved the world, that he has given his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but should
have life everlasting, John 3.16.
HE that writes himself, Alpha and Omega: the first and the last, signified
thereby, yt he is not only the eternal Word, but also, the beginning, middle,
and end of the written word, yea, the scope of all the Scriptures. Search the
Scriptures (says Christ:) for it is they that witness of me. Every line in
them cries out like John Baptist, Behold the Lamb of God. The Scriptures are a
Circle, and Christ the Center, wherein all their prophecies meet. They are
like the Image of Ianus, which looked forward and backward. So the old
Testament beheld Christ to comes as Abraham saw his day, and rejoiced. The new
sees him already come, as says good father Simeon, For mine eyes have seen
thy salvation.

And as Christ is the contents of the scripture: so the whole scripture seems
to be contained in this verse of my text. As all Joseph's brethren were feasted
with variety, but Beniamins mess exceeded them all: so al scripture is
profitable; but this most precious: all scripture is tried gold; but this is
orient pearl: so that here the Evangelist seems to propound all the word in
a word. If thy memory be short, here is a lesson as short as sweet: so that it
is doubtful, whether the quantity of the words, or their quality and worth, be
more admirable.

These words are like precious Jewels, containing great riches in a little
room. Before we unlock the casket wherein this treasure is contained, let us
look back to the happy occasion ye cast this wealth on our shores.

The occasion of this comfortable scripture, was a conflict between Verity and
Vanity, light and darkness, Christ and Nicodemus: for our Savior being that
summum bonum, that loves to communicate his goodness with his creature; that
Light that would lighten every man that comes into ye world; that Sun that
makes all things increase and multiply; the Physicion that seeks out them that
are sick; the Shepherd sent to the lost sheep of Israel: his meat and
drink was, to infuse grace into men, and reduce souls unto God. When did he
eat, but he brake the bread of Life? When did he drink, but he opened the
fountaynes of Grace? When did he walk, but he taught the ways of GOD? When did
he rest, but he preached an everlasting Sabbath, and happy Iubilee to the
penitent? Witness so many Iourneyes, so many Sermon, so many Miracles: and
witness this present conserence with Nicodemus.

This Nicodemus being a better Lawper the^ a Gospeller, one ye with Paul was
brought up at Gamaliels feet, but never sat al Christ's feet with Marie,
seeking for light in darkness, comes unto Christ by night.

What might induce this great Doctor to come unto Christ, is as full of
supposes, as far from certaynty. Some think, Nicodemus came to tempt Christ,
and therefore cunningly extols him, as the Wrestler lifts up his adversary,
that he may cast him down: Or as the Hyaena, who counterfayting a man's voice,
seeks to destroy him. Some think it was a sinister influence of (...) glory,
that drew this fantastic to Christ, as the Athenians into their excha^ge,
only to hear news. Some think Derision came to catch our Savior in a trap,
that so rash judgment might condemn him. Others presume, that being affected
with Christ's doctrine, he came to gratulate our Savior, as the best sort of
our bad hearers, turn their own profiting, into the praise of ye teacher. But
I think, this lukewarm lover coming so by night, was more afraid of the
world, then affected with the Word, which he so praised: for Verus admirator
virtutis, non borret Aristidis exilium, non Socratis condemnationem. etc.
Howsoever, this Spider coming to suck poison from Christ's wholesome doctrine,
was at the length caught in his own net: for this plausible Doctor, as if he
had ye Art of flattery, tips his insinuating tongue with a triple praise, whose
Syre^-voyce, above above al pernicious sweets in the world, tickles the very
heart strings of man: therefore S. Jerome cries out, Happy is that soul, which
is neither subject to flatteries nor flatterings. And in Epist. ad Greg he
says, Nos ad patriam festinantes, mortiferos Syrenaris cantus surda aure
transire debemus. And Alanus says, Quid ergo Adulationis vnctio, nisi domerum
emunctio? quid commendationis allusio, (...) Prelatorum delusio? What is the
oil of Flattery, but the foil of families? what the poison of praise, but the
infection of Prelates? But our Savior being thus assaulted by this Siren,
shows himself like the Psylli in Afric, or the Marsij in Italy; who are not
only themselves safe from all venomous serpents, but have alse power to suck
the poison from others infected. So Christ, who knew, that Laudari a laudato,
was vera laus, would not applaud his vain praise: for our Savior having got
the substance, scorned the shadow; having in perfect action the possession of
all virtues, refused the imperfect affection of vain glory. Therefore
Nicodemus was a fool, to buckle the light bladder of idle praise on his back,
which was ordaind to bear the Cross of humility: he that loves virtue for
praise, his mind is mercenary. We never read, that Christ ever admitted in him
self this poison of humane praise, though she often offered him her painted
garland to adorn his virtues: whose perfection gave a tongue of praises to his
very foes; and out of the mouth of envy, have haled his commendations: but
finding in this blind Doctor, fit matter for his mercy to work upon, like a
(...) Musician, he casts not away this iarring Iustrument; but after the
correction of his folly, gives him instruction in the faith: as the Physicion
first lets out the hurtful blood, and then ministers wholesome sood. For
though the Bull be offended with red, and the best sometimes are not mended
with roughness: yet Christ knew, a sharp rebuke was a sovereign remedy for
Nicodemus. A child will easily grow with cherishing: but an old tree
transplanted, will hardly prosper without pruning. Honey is street, yet it is
sharp where it finds a sore. Though the budding Rose perish with a man's
breath, yet the Camomile must be trod on, to make it grow. He that is stung of
the Aspe, must have the infected member cut off. The Ape kills her young ones
with too much cherishing: and the Iuie choketh her supporter with too much
embracing. If Apelles should see his Venus blemished, or Protogenes his
Hialysus broken, surely the one would turn away his eyes, and the other throw
away his Pensill. Then, shall we not allow Christ to be sorry, seeing his own
Image so defaced through ignorance, and so spotted with error? Yet Christ in
his correction is like a kind Nurse, that whippes her crying Babe on the
coat, not on the carcass: (...) though he knittes his brow, he knittes in it
a blessing: as the father holds an Apple in one hand, and a rod in the other.
But let us first hear how Christ shakes his rod at Nicodemus, roundly
rebuking him for his blindness in a chief point of Religion, the mystery of
Regeneration.

O Nicodemus, art thou a Doctor in Israel, and know not these things? Art
thou a Teacher in Christ's school, and have not yet learned Christs-Crosse? How
art thou accounted a wise man in Israel, being a fool in Religion? There is no
Wisdom but the Truth, in qua tenetur and cernitur summum bonum. Solomon my
servant, in stead of riches, desired of GOD the Spirit of Rule. If this was his
prayer, much more should it be thy wish, since he was but King of their
bodies, but thou art a corrector of souls. How can thou teach men to shun
the second death, which art so ignorant of ye second birth? A teacher should be
Organo^ veritatis, the right hand of Truth, to minister to every one, their
food in due season. Thou art an ouerseer in Israel, and art shamefully
ouerseene thy self. Now age has snown down Winter on thy head, those hairs,
which should be Heralds of wisdom, show thee to be twice a child. I would have
thee as a newborn babe, and thou art a babe, not knowing new birth. I would
have my Disciples to shine as lights, but thou art a counterfeit Diamond, made
precious by ye foil of Moses chair, where thou art falsely set. O Nicodemus,
he must needs be the devils Doctor, that was never yet Gods Disciple. I appeal
to thy self, Is not a small blemish in the face, more ugly then a great blot
in the rest of the body? He that combs himself, where should he look but in a
glass? And he that corrects himself, on who^ should he look but on his
elders? Though the Moon be dark, it shows no great danger: but when the Sun
is eclipsed, it signifies death. If the blind lead the blind, how can they
but fall? Where the ship-master sleeps, who fears not sinking? And where the
shepherd watches not, the sheep go round to the shambles. Thou being a Doctor
in Israel, thy lips should preserve knowledge, and thy life should be the
Lay-mans book. If thy salt be vnsanory, how will thou season the simple? If
thy rule be crooked, how can thou either direct the weak, or correct the
wicked? Finally, if thy light be darkness, how great is that darkness it
self? Thou resemblest the heard Empetron, which the nearer it grows to the
sea, the less salt it is: so thou, being a teacher in Israel, art a stranger
in Israel. But why do I reprove thy folly, and not rehearse thy fault? Do
thou not know, Ad veram sapientiam peruenire non possunt, qui falsae suae
sapientiae fiducia desipiunt. They shall never attain heavenly wisdom, which
hunt after it with humane wit. The Heart brags in vain of his bra^ched horns,
because he wants courage: and in vain do thou vaunt of Templum Domini,
because thou wa^tst knowledge. They which would see perfectly, wink on one
eye. So, if thou will see the mysteries of God, thou must shut the eye of
natural reason. But no marvel thou art so dull: for as Cyclops exoculatus,
manus quoque ver sum porrigebat nullo certo scopo: so thy eye of faith being
out, thy blind reason gropes in the dark, being too shallow a Pilote to guide
thee into the mystery of Regeneration. I commend thee for thy skill in the
law, but condemn thee for thy blindness in the Gospel. The seaman that
escapes all syrtes and shelues, yet in the sight of ye Haven suffers ship
wrack, is counted no less foolish, then unfortunate: and thou passing all the
Labyrinthes of humane learning, yet coming short of the knowledge of New
birth, art to be pitied for thy fortune, and derided for thy folly. Thou
know I never allowed him that had all manner of knowledge, yet had not the
mean of knowing. He that seeks knowledge, must note three things, Quo ordine,
quo studio, quo fine quaeque nosseoporteat. The order of knowledge is to know
that first, which brings soonest to the way of salvation: the desire in
knowledge must be to love that knowledge chiefly, which most enforces us to
love: and the end of our knowledge, is not to win the praise of thy self, but
to work the profit of others. But alas, that which should be ye first in thy
conscience, is the farthest from thy care: that which should have possessed thy
love, is diuorst from thy liking: and that which should have been the end of
thy knowledge, is the beginning of thy shame. Qui Episcopatum desiderat, bonum
opus desider at. It seems thou defirest bonum, not opus; the worship, not the
work: the goods of the fleece, not the good of the flock: else would thou not
be ignorant in the very rudiments of Religion, and foolishly build without a
foundation. Thy coming to me, shows in part thy love; yet thy coming in the
night says thy love is but little: but I know, the flame when it kindles, is
mixed with smoke: and so is thy little knowledge with the smoke of ignorance:
yet I will not quench this smoking flax, nor break this bruised reed: though you
came to me without business, thou shall not depart without a blessing. As
Abraham sent his servant with gifts in his hand, so I will send thee hence with
grace in thy heart: and for thy 3. idle praises, I will repay thee 3. endless
profits: hear therefore the nature of Faith, the depth of Gods love, and the
mystery of Regeneration.

Thus did our Savior shake up this foolish shadow of a Prophet, this idle echo
of his praises, this empty vessel containing nothing but the bare name of a
Doctor in Israel: whose example if we moralize, it teaches us, That (in Gods
matters) the greatest Clarks are not ye wisest men. Philosophers have great
wits, but they are enemies to Grace. and the world has her wisdom, but it
is enmity with God. Learning is a Loadstarre, and the knowledge of tongues is
the key of truth: but if profane learning turn Lucifer, and think to usurp
Moses chair, she must be thrust (with the Parret) out of Jupiters Parliament.
If Ismael mock Isaac, though he be the son of Abraham, he must be bauished:
And if Learning mar Religion, though it be the gift of God, it must be
abandoned. The Stars give some light, but the Moon must be mistress of the
night. As the poor Israelites borrowed of the Egyptians all their jewels, but
to adorn themselves: so we must borrow from profane Arts all their ornaments,
and with their spoils adorn the Temple of God. So doing, Learning and
Religion, like two twins, will live and love together. And thus much touching
the occasion of these words.

Having found out ye Hiue, let us search for the honey, contained in this
heavenly verse: GOD so loved the world, that he has given his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but should have life
everlasting, John 3.16.

THese words contain a Deed of gist: which, for our better light, I branch
into these six parts. First, the giver, GOD. Second, the cause moving him to
this exceeding hounty, which is here said to be Love. Third, the gift: his
only begotten Son. Fourth, the party to whom this Legacy or gift is
bequeathed: the World. Fifth, the fruit following this Gift, which is
twofold: first, a ransom, in these words, should not perish: Secondly, a
reward, in these words, should have life everlasting. Sixth, the hand where
with we receive this Gift, (namely Faith) whosoever believes in him.

CHAP. I. Of GOD, the giver.
FIrst, The giver, GOD. The wealth of a Gift appears in the worth of the
giver: and if the giver be base, the Gift is contemned: but if the giver be
gracious in our heart, the Gift is as precious in our eye. While our ships ride
in our harbors, We regard them not: but when they return from the farthest
Ocean, we look for great riches. If a Messenger come to us from a mean
person, we give him mean entertaynement: but if a Prince send his worst
servant unto us, we give him princely regard. Well, God is richer then the
Ocean, his bosom is full of blessings: God is greater then a Prince, his
kingdom is everlasting: And as his thoughts are not as ma^s thoughts, so his
Gifts are not as man's gifts: for as he gives without merit, so he gives without
measure: he is excellent in all his works. If he love, it is without repentance:
if he hate, his anger endures forever: if he give, he powers down his
blessings: if he take, non habenti, etiam quod habet, auferetur, he takes away
al: He loves a cheareful giver, and shall we think him a fearful giver? A
poor man on a time begging a groate of a King, ye King snipt him with this
answer, Non est Regium. If an earthly Prince thus stood on his gift, shall not
the heavenly King regard what he gives? Christ telieth us, that Beatius est
dare, quam accipere: it is a part of his Fathers blessedness to give. And S.
Augustine says, Beneficium est beneuola actio tribuens, captansque gaudium
tribuendo, A benefit or gift, is a work of good will, that pleasures as much
in the giving, as the receyuer does in the gift. So then, if Gods gift be a
work of good will toward man, we may measure out his been ficence by his
benevolence, his work by his will, and his gift by ye joy that he takes in
giving. When Gods love intends a largess, the gift must needs be great. The
lower the vale, the more rain it receives: and the vnworthyer man is, the
greater Gods love is, and the richer his gift, In a word, the excellency of
this gift appears in the excellency of the giver, whose persection is such, as
only silence must show it, while cencept and reason lie in a trance through
endless admiration. A Philosopher being commanded to tell the King what God
was, he asked a days respit: and when the day was done, and the King expected
his promise, he asked two days: which being ended, he asked four days, and
after, eight. The King admiring his slacknesse, demanded why he so abiourned
his promise? Because (quoth he) the more I think of him, the less I know of
him. S. Bernard says, Quid est Deus? Longitudo, Latitudo, sublimitas,
profundum: longitudo, propter aeternitatem: latitudo, propter charitatem:
sublimitas, propter maiestatem: profundum, propter sapientiam: and therefore as
God is wonderful, so are his gifts,

Amongst men indeed, the giver may he wicked, and the gift too. In the 22. of
Numb. Balak was a wicked giver, and so was his gift which he offced to curse ye
Israelites. So in Acts 8. Simon Magus is a giver, but a cursed giver: for he
thought with gifts, to buy the gifts of Gods spirit. And such giuers were the
Pharisees: for they gave 30. pence to betray the Lord of life. But as Judas
received the earnest penny of his perdition, so they betrayed their own
posterity to endless misery. In a word, the Devil himself is a giver, but a
wicked giver: for he offered Christ all ye world for an hours worship: as the
Pope gave all the Newfound world to the Spaniards, because they should worship
him. But David tells us, Domini est terra. How shall the Devil give the world
to Christ, that cannot give himself an hours respit from torment? His thorn
yields no such Grapes; his thistle bears no such Figs, howsoever, like a
bragging suitor, he boasts of his riches: Though he promise an Angel of Light,
he pays with light Angels, and shall have his portion with lewd Angels in
hell fire.

But God, as he made all things good, so does he give all things that are
good. James says, Omne bonum est Dei donum: Every good gift, is Gods Gift. In
Jeremy GOD says, There is not an evil in the City, which I have not
created. If God create Evil for a correction, much more does he create Good
for our comfort. He is like the good father, that spends himself in providing
for his son: or the kind mother, which no sooner has a sweet thing, but she
gives it her child: or ye cunning Artificer, who cares not what cost he bestows
on his work, to make it more beautiful. So God is affected toward his
creature: as he made all exceeding good, so he desires ye good of all,
especially man, whom he made for ye glass of his glory, and the Image of
himself, to be his Son on earth, and his Heir in heaven: and though here
man is but tenant at will, yet he sits at an easy rent, ye bare debt of
tha^kfulnes.

The sum of this discourse is, seeing God is the giver of all good, we must
look for all good things at his hands, and desire nothing that is good, farther
then it is Gods gift: for ye which is snatched from others, is the devils bayte,
not Gods blessing. The world is full of such snatching Nimrods, mighty hunters:
for some hunt after Honor, some after Pleasure, and some after profit: And
these three Hunters have almost hunted all Religion and Virtue out of our
borders. But let them know, that, Quaedam dat Deus misericorditer, quaedam
finit habere iratus: Whatsoever comes by oppression, tyranny, bribery, simony,
or usury, is not Gods gift, and therefore no good gift, but a pledge of his
anger. Therefore whatsoever thou possessest or desire, let conscience be thy
Cater, and the word thy warrant: so shall the transitories of this life, be
unto thee a handsel of heaven, and an earnest penny of that bliss, which ye
world never dreams of.

CHAP. II. Of GODS Love.
THus having brought thee to the waters of life, namely, GOD the giver, I will
show thee the Welspring of all blessings, his love to the world, etc.

The persuading cause of this gift, is here said to be Love: God so loved. Quid
est Amor (says Aug.) nisi quaedam vita duo aliqua copulans, vel copulare
appetens, Amantem and amatu^? What is Love, but as it were one life in two
hearts, one soul in two bodies? the Fire which blesses where it burns, the
Soather which no art can sunder, the Knot which no time can untie, the Hand
which desca^ts sweet music on the heart strings, the Cause which made God
become man, and the Virtue which makes man like unto God: (I speak not of that
hellish fire which makes men slaves, but of that heavenly Flame which makes
them Saints.) As Christ was anointed with the oil of gladness above his
fellows; so this virtue is adorned with the crown of eternity above all her
fellows: for Paul says, yt Faith brings us but to the Coffin, and Hope
watches the coarse till the Resurrection. These two virtues are confined with
our life, but our love is refined by our death, and dwells with us after our
glorification.

But this our love is but a shadow of Gods Love, an Arm of his sea, a drop of
his fountain, a little flame of his living Fire; neither in quality so
precious, nor in quantity so sp^cious by infinite degrees. God loves without
cause; our love is our duty: God loves us his enemies; we love him our friend:
God loves without reward; our love inherits heaven: God loves us first; our
love pays him back his own: Gods love is fervent; our love is lukewarm:
Gods love is infinite; our love is little, like our knowledge, and low of
stature like Zacheus. Christ must dine in our house, his love must shine in our
hearts, before we can reflect our borrowed heames, and love him again. The
excellency of this Gods love can neither be expressed by our tongue, nor
impressed in our hearts: as it made the world of nothing: so the world is
nothing to it: for it co^prehendeth all, and is not comprehended of any. Our
Savior here thought best to express this Love with a sic dilexit, to show
us, that his Father is eue^ sick of love: his description is indefinite,
because his love is infinite. Either Gods love is so deep ye Christ could not
sound it, or our reason so shallow that we cannot see it. As the Paynter that
drew Agamemnon, sorrowing for ye death of his daughter, knew not how to figure
his grief in his face, and therefore drew a Veil over it, thinking it
impossible the gazers idle eye should behold what the fathers grieved heart
could not hold: (...) Christ leaves that to our admiration, which understa^ding
cannot attain. A holy Father would feign aim at the dimensions of this Love,
saying, Dilexit Tantus tantillos: He a God of infinite majesty, loved us men
of infinite misery. But this is obscurum per obscurius: for we know neither
quantus Deus, the greatness of his Majesty, nor yet quantuli nos: our grievous
misery. In a word, as we cannot see the Sun but by his own light: so we
cannot learn this Love, but by Gods own words. The Star alone must lead ye
Wisemen to Christ, and Christ alone must lead us to his Love. Now whereas he
expresses it with a Sic: So GOD loved the world, etc. a Father says, This
Aduerbe Sic, contains in it all Aduerbes of Love: as if Christ had said, My
Father loved the world so dearly, so vehemently, so fatherly, so fervently,
etc. And Bernard on the Canticles says, Deus ex se miserandi sumit materiem:
Gods own nacure is the motive of his mercy. Then he that can explain Gods
Nature, may express his Love. Whereof to affirm the one, is impious, and to
perform the other, impossible.

This is that Love, (Christian Reader) which in the zeal of God I comme^d to
thine endless admiration: this is the riches of his Grace, the chief of his
Works, the sum df his Word, the shadow of himself, the perfection of his
Glory. This teaches our Faith to stand, and our Hope to climb, and our love
to burn: This cheereth our labors, and bears our losses, and teaches our
sorrow to smile. In a word, to this exceeding Love alone, we owe our salvation.
Therefore damnable is the doctrine of the Church of Rome, that teaches us to
err both in ye manner and matter of our Faith: First, in the manner, they teach
us to doubt of our salvation. O injury intolerable, to doubt of the Promise,
where such a Love is our warrant! What more free then gift? or who more
faithful then God the Giver? Shall his Love give Christ unto me, and my
unbelief thrust him from me? Is the Truth like unto man, ye he should lie? or
is his arm shortened, that he cannot save? God forbid. This Gift is sealed
with the blood of his Son, registered in the sight of heaven, witnessed by ye
holy Angels, passed with an oath to ye world. O incredulity, ye wit of fools,
how many blessings do you bar us from! Christ could not work his miracles,
God cannot show his mercy, where this mo^ste lurketh. Again, in the matter of
our faith they soyst in most dangerously a lump of their own Leaven: for God
requires a Wedding garment to cover sin; they bring in a menstruous cloth:
he will have us build on his Love; they would have us justified by our own
Labor: he will have us trust to his Mercy; they would have us trust in our
merits. Paul's whole Epistle to the Romans shoots only at this mark, to beat
down the pride of man, who would feign be his own saiour, to depresse Nature,
and extol Grace: therefore in the end he adds this vpshot, So then, we are
saved, not of works, but of grace. And August, says, Gratia est nullo modo,
quae non est gratuita emni modo: Grace is all grace, or no grace at all. Again
be says, Quisquis tibi enumerat meritasua, quid tibi enumerat, msi munera tua?
Again, Vis excidere gratta? Iacta merita tua, Our very Faith, as it is a grace
in us, is beholding to Grace: it saues, as it is a hand to lay hold on Christ,
not, as it is a virtue and a work: for all works must humbly be cast at Christ's
seete with Marie, and there meitate on his mercy: they must not be busy with
Martha in the matter of our justification. As God said to Paul, My Grace is
sufficient for thee, so I say to all, Gods Love is sufficient for you: this
love made you, when you were nothing; and this Love must save you, now your are
worse then nothing. Let the Papists clothe themselves in the rags of their
own righteousness, and the Jews trust to their Templum Domini, and the
Heathen brag of their painted virtues, (which Augustine calls splendida
peccata) but let us only triumph in this love of God, and esteem it the
strength of our salvation.

Thus having discovered the rich treasure of Gods love, let us know our duty,
that we may be accounted worthy to win and to wear it. S. August. Lib. de
Anima and Spiritu, seems to study for this duty, saying, Miser ego, quantum
deberem diligere Deum meum, qui me fecit cum non era^, redemit, cum perieram,
etc. O sinful wretch, how shall I requite the rare love of God, who created me
of nothing, and redeemed me being worse then nothing, etc. And after, having
found this duty out, he teaches it to the world, Si non impendere, at
rependere debemus, If we will bestow no love upon God, yet let us repay his
love which he has showed first. The world cries shame upon an ungrateful
person. If thou should travel into a strange Country, and there fall into
the hands of thieves, and in mere compassion of thy misery, the King of that
Country should set thee free again, giving thee life and liberty, what would
the world think? yea, what then would thou esteem of thy self, if thou
should prove unthankful to so good a Prince? We are all strangers in the
world, and passengers from earth to heaven: now in our iourny we meet with the
world and the devil, and these rob us of all grace, these wound us and leave
us for dead: now God of his exceeding mercy finds us out, and sends his Son
that good Samaritan, to power the oil of Grace into our wounds, and to mount
us on the back of his merit, and so carry us to the Inn of our rest, the joys
of heaven, O Love, beyond all love, how much thou art! O blessed God, teach us
the depth of thy Love, that we may know the debt of our thankfulness. Thine
endless blessing has made us bankrupts, for we are not able to repay the
interest of thy love. If we proffer our goods, alas, we received them of thee:
If we offer our lives, they are redeemed by thee. Surely this shall be our
thanks, the remembrance of thy mercy: and since thy blessed Son has taught
us, that the loving of thee, is the keeping of thy Commandments, we will
labor to be all keepers: as we have spent our time in the service of the
world, the flesh, and the devil, so will we spend the remnant of our days in
the rebuke of sin, and the recording of thy Love. And since the love of so
worthy a creature as man, is too costly a cyment to join earth to earth, we
abandon all earthly desires, and freely give thee our hearts, and betroth our
love to thine.

Dear God, by the fire of thy spirit, draw up our affections to thee, divorce
us from the liking of the world, and marry us to the love of thy son: Let us
light our candle at thy Love, and learn by thy endless mercy, never to end
our thankfulness, till death translate us from this vale of tears to Mount
Sion, where our love shall join us to thee eternally.

CHAP. III. Of the Gift, CHRIST.
NOw are we come to the Gift it self, the greatest that ever was, whether we
respect ye bounty of God, or the blessing of man: for what could God give
greater then himself? or what could man receive better then his salvation? He
has given his only begotten Son. This blessed Gift is it that made Abraham
rejoice, and the Angels sing, and John Baptist dance in his mothers belly:
this is able to make the World wax young agayns, if Grace would open her eyes,
and Wisdom teach her to see her own nakedness, and the riches of this Garment
sent unto her. As the Saints in heaven follow ye Lamb wheresoever he goes: so
all the blessings of the earth follow Christ this Gift, wheresoever he goes:
for Habenti dabitur: He that has this Gift, shall have all other gifts, yea,
he shall have the Giver too: for Christ says, He that receives me, receives
him that sent me. And Ambrose says, Omnia habemus in Christo: si a vulnere
curari desideras, Medicus est: si febribus aestuas, fons est: si grauaris
imquitate, Iustitia est: si indiges auxilio, virtus est: simortem times, vita
est: si tenebras fugis, lux est: si coelum desideras, via est: si cibu^ quris,
alimentu^ est, etc.

(He has given.) God did not lend his Son, nor sell him, but he gave him to
us. Herein appears the riches of his mercy, and the greatness of our
poverty: he did not sell him; we were not able to buy him; but he gave him:
which shows us to be beggars and bankrupts, and that God must for pity give
us a Savior scanke and free, when we had neither means to deserve, nor grace
to desire him.

( His only begotten Son. He gave us not an Angel, nor a servant, nor a
creature, but his Son. The name of a son is music in the ear of a father:
and the life of a child is more precious in the parents eye, the^ their own
salety. Many parents, to save their sons life, have willingly spilt their
owns. Examples hereof we have in profane and sacred Scriptures: we will take an
handful from a heap. In Genesis 37. when good father Jacob heard of the supposed
death of his son, (his wicked children giving a false fire to his fear) he
was smitten with sorrow, rivers of tears gushed out, and his heart bled at his
eyes, for the supposed slaughter of Joseph: his affection to his son was too
hot, to admit the cold comfort of his other children: he that had wrestled with
an Angel, could not wrestle with this affection; and therefore in the grief
of a father, he sets down this resolution: Joseph my son is surely torn in
pieces, and in my son my self was torn: the claw of that beast has rent my
bleeding heart, and his cruelty has killed two in one. O my son, my life was
shut in thy looks, which now is shaken in thy loss: I made thee a coat of
many colors, to show, ye thou wast the Raynebow pledge of my peace: but lo,
the beauty of my Raynebow is rent, and in stead thereof, this bloody Meteor
appears, showing the death of my joy, ye devouring of my son. The earth is
made to cover the root, not to contain the branch: I am the withered root,
my son, and thou the branch, whom untimely death has cropped. Why should the
grave be decked with green boughs, yt was made for gray hairs? If children
predecease their parents, we are their of spring, and they none of ours. Well,
since comfort will not be my gheft, grief shall be my companion: and seeing my
son forsakes me in my life, I will overtake him in my death; for nothing but
sorrow shall bring my gray head to yt grave. Thus a good father mourned for a
gracious son: but will you hear a loving parents moan for a lewd child? In
ye 2. Sam. 18. when God purposed to chastise David, he made ye son to whip
the father: for Absolo^, that by name should have bin his fathers joy, by
nature proved a Parricide, and sought to depose his own sire: but God having
sufficiently humbled David his child, threw the rod in the fire, and brought a
judgment upon Absalom which cost him his life. Notwithstanding, David being
moved with the good affection of a father, more then the bad condition of his
son, was so far from rejoicing in Absoloms death, yt it almost cost him his
own life. O Absalom my son (quoth he) would God I had dyed for thee; O
Absalom, my son, my son. But God here is neither like Jacob lame^ting a
good son, nor David bewayling a wicked child: he resembles good Abraham, who
willingly sacrificed his son Isaak.

This was much, to give a son: yet as if this were not enough to express
Gods love, the holy Ghost adds, his only begotten son: he gave not an
adopted son, as Abraham offered a Ra^me in stead of Isaac: but his own son.
And herein appears his perfect justice, a blessed president to all
Iusticiaries. In all Gods actions this virtue swayes: though his mercy be above
all his works, yet mercy and justice must kiss together. The dearest drop of
Christ's blood must be shed, before GODS instice be left unsatisfied.

Nay, this was not enough to satissy Gods mercy; his love mounts a degree
higher, and further it cannot ascend. He gave his only begotten Son. When ye
world could not yield the price of our redemption, he searched his own bosom
for a Savior, and gave us his only son. If God had many sons, his mercy
had been meaner, and his love had seemed less: but he gave us not one son of
many, but one and all, his only Son (for whose sake, he spared not his
Angels) his delight, his bosom friend, the image of himself, for the ransom
of the world.

O love beyond all love, how much thou art! A holy father in admiration of this
love, cries, Quam dives es in misericordia, quam magnificus in iusticia, quam
munificus in gratia, Domine Deus noster! Again, Passio tua, Domine Jesus,
vltimu^ est refugium, singular remediu^: deficiente sapientia, Iustitia non
sufficient, sanctiatis succumbentibus meritis, illa succurrit: cum enim
defecerit virtus mea, non conturbor: scio quid faciam, poculum salutaris
accipiam, etc.

The instruction that we must learn from the consideration of this
unspeakable Gift Christ, is twofold: First, we are taught to return our
love again, as Aug. says, Sinon am are, saltem redam are debemus: As GOD has
given us his only Son, so we must show our reciprocal love to God, and for
his Son, give him our selves: as he has given us wealth, we must bestow our
wealth on him again: as he has given us liberty, honor, children, long life,
knowledge, wisdom, courage, etc. these must all wait on him, and do him
honor and service: Thus we must give him love for love, again.

The second use of Gods unspeakable bou^ty, is, to teach us to love our
brethren. Christ teaches us this lesson for his Love, saying, I have given you
an example how to love one another. Brethren must be united in the bond of
mutual love, like Cyrus the Sythians Faggot: for the unity of brothers is, Ecce
quam iucunda^, exceeding joy to all ye Saints. But alas, let us see what
Lovers, and what Giuers our wicked age does afford. When I study upon this
duty, I find four sorts of Giuers: The first and the worst sort, have the hand
to give, but not ye heart to grant: of whom I may say as Christ said, Better
this hand were cut off, and they were as poor as Irus, then with their rusting
riches to be cast into Hell. These are the Mammonists of our age, whose soul
lies treasured we their rusting pence, who are more vnmercyful the^ the devil,
for he would have Christ turn stones into bread: but these men turn bread
into stones, eue^ the bread of the poor, into stone walls, or else spend it
on their accursed lusts, forgetting mercy: therefore damnation attends the^.
The second fore have the heart, but not the hand; whose myts God accepts above
all ye Mines of the wealthy, and takes their love for their largess. The third
sort, are such as have neither heart nor hand in this duty; and these are poor
men every way: for he that can bring forth neither good work, nor good will, is
a dead member in Christ's Body, and shall be cut off. The fourth sort, have both
hand and heart; and these walk in brotherly love; these are they ye walk
worthy of this Gift Christ, and shall have their deeds of mercy, crowned with yt
sweet harvest song, Come ye blessed of my Father, possess the kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning of the world: for I was hungry, and ye gave
me meat, etc.

CHAP. IIII. Of the world.
Now it remaynes, that we consider, to whom this great Legacy is bequeathed.
The world. What, is the world some friend of Gods? No. What, is God indebted to
the world? No. What is the world? The world is named and taken diverse ways:
first, pro soto creato, John. 1.10. Heb. 11.3. secondly, pro mundo damnato.
Ioh. 17.9. thirdly, pro homine mundato, Romans 5.10. Col. 1.20.2. Cor. 5.19. and
so it is taken in this place: for the world here meant, is a certain small
number of the sons of Adam, which God, of his unspeakable clemency, has set
apart, to exercise his mercy upon the^; and has chosen them out of the same
lump and mass that the damned world is of, even all alike firebrands of hell,
fellows with the falling Angels; all alike Traitors, Rebels, incarnate
Devils: for Augustine says, Quod tuum est, Sathanas est: Every man is of
himself a devil. Will you hear what Gods judgment and opinion is of the
world, as men are in themselves? In the 145. Psalm, God takes a view of man,
and then says, Homo vanitati similis factus est: Man is become like vanity. As
if he had said, When I made man, I made him to mine own likeness, I had a
pleasure to look on him again and again; I held my workmanship exceeding
good, Genesis 1: But lo, man has mard what I have made, he has befaeed mine
Image, and has made himself like unto vanity: nay, he has so long delighted
in vantly, ye now he is vanity it self, Psalm, 39.5. In Job 1. It is written,
Naked I came out of my mothers wob: yea (says a holy Father) naked of all
grace and vertne. In 1. Cor. 3. it is said, The wisdom of the world is
foolishnes with God. How is it then ye God bestows this great Legacy upon
sooles? we know, no man willingly leaves his land to a fool. I answer, This
amplifyes ye mercy of God, who has chosen ye foolish things of the world, etc.
Again, 1. Cor. 2. Paul says, The carnal man understands not the things of ^od.
How then? Why surely, Ignoti nulla cupido: what a man understands not he
neither destres, nor delites in. Therefore ye world was as worthy of this great
present, as swine are of pearls; or the swinish Gergesenes were of Christ's
company, when they willed him to depart out of their coasts. Again, Job.
15.16. it is said, The heavens are unclean in Gods sight, how much more is man
abominable and filthy, which drinks iniquity like unto water? Le here, fiesh
and blood, you wretched offpring of Adam, consider here, thou unworthy world,
and tell me what thou wast, when Gods mercy found thee out. O Love, beyond all
love, how much you art! Man, abominable and filthy man, is fit matter for Gods
mercy to work on: Man yt drinks iniquity like unto water, is thought worthy
to drink of ye waters of Life. In this saying, Job does anatomize ye world,
calling it abominable and filthy. But will you see a more exact Anatomy of ye
world, lym me by lymme? Paul, to the Gal. 5. rips up the hody of the world, and
there finds in it a whole den of devils: the works of ye world (says he) are,
Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred,
debate, emulatio^s, wrath, conte^tions, seditions, heresies, envy, murders,
drunkenness, gluttony, etc Here are ye devils which God must cast out the world,
as he did the buyers and sellers out of his Temple, if he will reconcile the
world to himself. The Apostle brings the^ in by ranks, as if hell were broke
loose, or as if this later world were so wicked, yt either devils seemed to be
turned into men, or men into devils. And this signifies S. John's saying, Totus
mundus in maligno positus: the whole world is set on mischief.

To conclude this 4. point of the unworthiness of the world, to whom God has
given this Legacy. This Unworthiness shall appear most excellently, if we
consider the Jews, a chose^ part of the world, or rather, a people chosen from
the world; let us, I say, consider in the^, what ye world is, and how unworthy
of such a present. When God had sent this unspeakable Gift of his only
begotten Son to the Jews, by the hands of his servants, the Prophets, they
took his servants, and beat some, and killed some, and stoned others. God sent
again his Prophets, and they used them likewise. The loving mercy of God look
no unkindness at this; but at last, sent to the^ this Gift by the hand of his
only Son, thinking surely, Though they regard not my Gift, yet they will
reverence my Son. But how did they reverence him? This is the heir (say
they) come, let us kill him, and the inheritance shall be ours. Christ was no
soo^^ (...) ^^orne, but they sought his life: how was he entertained, reviled,
blasphemed, persecuted, contemned, hunted too and fro, haled before the
Magistrate, accused in 2. Consistories, and there reviled, smitten, condemned,
and at last most cruelly done to death? Behold here the desert of ye world,
behold here to whom God has sent his Son: consider this uprightly, and thou
will cry out with David, Lord, what is man, that thou regardest him? what is
either Jew or Gentile, ye thou respectest him? If thou will needs show such
Love, the^ show it to thy holy Angels, who honor thee; to thy goodly
creatures, the Sun, the Moon, and stars, who never did offend thee: only
man is the sinner in this world, and he alone tastes of thy goodness. I. this
is mercy, Lord, to save, where you might destroy; to salve, where thou
find sick; to help, where you find need; to forgive our sins, while we
forget our thanks; and to give us heaven, who have deserved hell. As the
stars shine clearest in ye darkest night, so thy mercy appears whitest being
compared with the blacknes of our deserts. Thou did visit us, when we were
nothing but banity: thou did clothe us in the righteousness of thy Son, when
we were al naked of grace, thou did instruct us when we were fools, and
heaie us when we were abominable and filthy: thou did seek us when we knew
thee not, and find us when we had lost our selves: thou did set thy hear^
(...) us, when our hearts were set on mischiese: thou did pray for us, when
we persscuted thee; and dyed for us, when we hated thee; and thirst our
salvation, when we thirsted thy hlood: thou have ransomed us from hell, and
rewarded us with heaven. Therefore to thee Lord, to thee, will we sing a new
song, and rejoice in the strength of our salvation.

We are taught from this 4. point, the exceeding riches of Gods mercy. And to
come home to our selves; what were we before this Gift was sent to us by the
most happy reign of our dreas Sovereign? As Abraham sent not his servant
without gifts, when he went to take a wife for Isaac; so God sent not Religion
empty-handed into our Land, but accompanied with a virtuous Prince, and
gracious Mother of this our Israel; and all, to woo and win us an unspotted
Spouse to our Isaac, Christ. But what were we, I say, to whom God has showed
such mercy, ye this Text seems to be spoken of us, So God loved England, that
he has given, etc? What were we, when his Love sought us, and his mercy found
us out? Were we not blind Idolaters, horrible back-sliders, and cruel
murderers of his Saints? For these sins he cast off his people the Jews;
and yet, with these sins has he chosen us. As a man takes his wife with all
her infirmities: so ye Lord (...) taken us with all our faults: our blind
Idolatry and horrible rebellion; our wilful ignorante and wicked resistance;
our profane lives and polinted consciences; our hate of the fruth, and love
unto lies; our following ye Pope, and forsaking of Christ; all this was but
matter for Gods mercy to work on. So that we may say with David, Lord, what is
man, that thou regardest him? Lord, what is England, that thou respectest it?
this poor frozen corner of the North, that thou art mindful of us? We are
frost-bitten Snakes, worms, and no men, whom thou have so pitifully cherished
in thy bosom. If hate deserve love, if cruelty merit kindness, if finne
purchase pardon, if murder require mercy: the^ Christ is our due, then God is
our debtor, then heaven is our own. But, Lord, our hearts tells us, that we are
this un worthy world; our lives witness, that hell is our portion, damnation
is our due: but eternal Life is the Gift of GOD in Christ: To whom with thee,
and the holy Chost, he all praise, honor, and glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

