THE IMITATION of DAVID His godly and constant resolution in bearing all his
trialls, troubles and afflictions being a King: Whose example of faith,
patience, hope, obedience and deliueries, thankfulness and prayer, is left
even for Princes, Potentates, and all true Christians to imitate.

Collected by way of Meditations and Prayers out of the 27. Psalm.

By I* N.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland, for Richard Whittakers and George Latham.
1624.

TO THE HIGH and most noble, CHARLES, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and of
York, and Earl of Chester, be here in this life truest honor, highest
happiness, and most perfect peace, and after this life eternal glory in the
Heavens.
I Know not how to excuse me (most gracious Prince) in that I have presumed to
attempt a matter of so high and divine a subject (considering what I am) and to
adventure it to your Highness (knowing who you are) but that my heart was
willing, and overcame a weak understanding, which (first) it may please your
Highness of your princely clemency to accept, namely, the will, and to pardon
the deed; for I may truly protest that I intended herein nothing less than to
be thought desirous to seem so impudent as to give your Highness the least
(or to think that you needed any other) advice or counsel in this behalf,
than that which you have so plentifully received from him that gave strength
unto David, and wisdom unto Solomon his son, together with the sweet
fructifying seed which has been so divinely sown in your Princely breasts by
the wisdom of our second Solomon, your most pious and most truly religious
Father.

Humbly beseeching your Highness to conceive no other intention in me, than an
unwillingness to let slip the Interim of my sequestered imploiments in your
Highness service (much against my will) without some exercise inwardly
comfortable, though outwardly little profitable; yet if any thing useful
(though but to the vulgar) it may pray your Princely favor being done, your
Highness service depending; beseeching the length of days to lengthen your
days to his glory, your honor, and comfort of such as fear God.

Your Highness most humble servant, John Norden.

TO THE MOST Illustrious, Religious, and most royally borne Princess,
E Eternal happiness,
Hearts true content,
L Long life in peace,
and plenty permanent;
I Internal and external
be her graces,
S Such as to which
Heavens Angels daigne embraces.
A Amids her fo^s,
Jehovah be her shield;
B By Sea and Land,
in trenches and in field:
E Engrau'd b'Elizaes
Image in her breast;
T That Queens that far
in fame surmounts the best;
H Here then shall highest
honor crown her crest.
Q Quiuers of David's arrows
may she have;
V Upon her head
Heavens helmet, her to save.
EE Earth, Air and Seas,
all Elements and Wind,
N Nourish her happiness,
the Heavens her mind.
E Estraited never
let her foes her find.
O Order her actions all,
Jehovah, right:
F Fix in her heart
the Target of thy might.
B Break thou the ranks
and Armies of her foes,
O O draw thy sword,
fight for her where she goes;
H Hem her about
with Angels of thy might,
E Embrace her, love her,
soon restore her right.
M Make great thy name
in marching on her side:
I Inthrall her foes,
and snare them in their pride.
A Assist her still,
and still be thou her guide;
As heartily wishes her Highness faithfully devoted, Io. Norden.

The Table.
A Motive to the Reader, touching Meditation and Prayer. Of Meditation. Of
Prayer. A Premeditation touching the argument of the 27. Psalm. page 1.
Meditation the first. The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I
fear? the Lord is the streng^h of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? 11 A
Prayer that God will be our light and our salvation in all our troubles and
dangers. 30 Meditation the second. When the wicked, even mine enemies and my
foes, came upon me to eat up my flesh, they stumbled and fell. If an host
pitched against me, my heart should not be afraid; though war be raised
against me, I will trust in thee. 35 A Prayer to God that he will defend us
from our enemies. 56 Meditation the third. O^e thing have I desired of the Lord
that I will ^^q^ire, even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the
days of my li^e to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to visit his Temple* 64
A (...) for spiritual knowledge and increase of our holy desires to visit the
Temple of God, to hear his Word, to pray unto him and to praise him. 92
Meditation the fourth. In the time of trouble he shall hide me in his
Tabernacle, in the secret place of his Pauilion shall he hide me, and set me
upon a rock. 99 A Prayer in whatsoever trouble. 128 Meditation the fifth. That
he will now lift up mine head above mine enemies round about me, therefore will
I offer in his Tabernacle sacrifices of joy, I will sing and praise the Lord.
136 A Prayer with thanksgiving to God for defense from enemies, in that they
have not prevailed against us. 156 Meditation the sixth. Hearken unto my voice,
O Lord, when I cry have mercy upon me and hear me. 164 A Prayer that God will
have mercy upon us and hear us. 182 Meditation the seventh. When thou said,
seek ye my face, mine heart answered unto thee, O Lord, I will seek thy face.
189 A Prayer that God will never hide his face from us. 197 Meditation the
eighth* Hide not thy face from me, nor cast thy servant away in displeasure:
thou have been my succor, leave me not nor forsake me, O God of my salvation.
206 A Prayer that God will be always near unto us in our afflictions, and
not to hide his face and favor from us. 225 Meditation the ninth. Though my
father and my mother forsake me, thou Lord wilt take me up. 232 A Prayer that
God will show himself our Father in all our troubles and afflictions when all
other help fails. 245 Meditation the tenth. Teach me thy way, O Lord, and
lead me in a right path, because of mine enemies. 254 A Prayer that God will
be pleased to direct us in his ways, and lead us uprightly because of our
enemies. 275 Meditation the eleventh. Give me not over to the lust of mine
enemies, for there are false witnesses risen up against me, and such as speak
cruelly. 282 A Prayer that God will preserve us from our enemies, that they
prevail not against us, and to prevent us of false witnesses. 297 Meditation
the twelfth. I should have fainted except I had believed to see the goodness
of the Lord in the land of the living. 305 A Prayer that God will not forsake
us in our troubles, and that our faith fail us not. 320 Medita^ion the
thirteenth. Hope in the Lord, be strong, and he shall comfort thine heart, and
trust in the Lord 328 A Prayer for strength, patience and hope in troubles. 352
A Prayer for forgiveness of sins, reformation of life, and comfort in
affliction. 359 An effectual Prayer for forgiveness of sins. 370 A Prayer
for the morning, with thanks for rest and safety. 382 A Prayer to be used
before a man goes to his rest. 387
A MOTIVE to the Reader, touching Meditation and Prayer.
First of Meditation.
MEditation is an inward action of the soul, wherein the faithful exercise
themselves, especially upon the Word and promise of God, upon Heaven and
heavenly things, arising by the attentive hearing or serious reading of the
same Word, deliberate consideration of the truth and infallibility of Gods
promises contained therein, and the assured performance of them, touching their
future blessed and glorious being after this life, whereof the faithful heart
being assured through the testimony of Gods holy Spirit, it delights in nothing
so much as continually to think and meditate of the same according to the
words of Christ; Where our treasure is, there are our hearts, and thereof we
continually think: DAVID had his heart set upon his treasure hid with Christ
above, which made him to meditate and cheerfully to sing, O, how love I the
Law of the Lord? It is my continual meditation; yea, I will meditate in thy
precepts, and consider thy ways. So did Solomon cry out, Blessed be the Lord
God of Israel, who spoke with his mouth to David my father, and with his hand
has performed it; 1 King. 8. 15, 16.

All the promises of God in Scripture do administer unto the faithful, matter
of continual meditation and serious consideration; and among many of his
promises, his promse of defense and delivery of his in the time of danger,
trouble, and affliction, is to be often considered, for that it concerns
especially the children of God that are most afflicted: who considering the
ways of God to be mercy and truth, and that what he promises he will
assuredly perform, cannot but work patience, and patience hope; and how can
he be without continual holy Meditation, whose heart is with God, from whom
he hops his help will come, but in Gods own time; and therefore though we
hope, we may not make haste; though he promise to defend us from danger, and
deliver us in trouble, he will not so answer our expectations, as if we knew
the time when, or the manner how to be relieved or defended, better than he. He
will exercise his own children awhile to prove their patience, faith and
obedience, to cause us to meditate and ponder his word and promise, till he
have sufficiently tried our constant assurance of his timely delivery, for it
is his property to come to help his, when they think he has most forgotten
them.

How suffered he David, a man chosen after his own heart, to be environed
with infinite dangers, in so much as he thought God had forsaken him
altogether, and forgotten him, and therefore cries out, How long will thou
forget me Lord, for ever? and again he confessed that God had given him his
hearts desire, and that he had not denied the request of his lips, whereby
appears that the sorce of lively faith, holy meditation, and divine prayer,
are able to make (God offended) God appeased suddenly, to remove sorrow, and so
bring joy.

God has promised to be a defense to the faithful in whatsoever dangers, yet
if we well weigh and consider the course of Gods dealing with his own children,
and duly meditate of his power, providence and wisdom; we shall find that
he does not always* come immediately at the call of his dearest children.
DAVID was banished and persecuted long, Joseph was imprisoned long, they both
prayed for delivery, yet continued in a hard estate, which was an argument in
humane reason that God cared not for them: and above them both was innocent Job
long and many ways afflicted, God saw his miseries and heard his prayers, but
he left him yet to be an example to us of like expectation of Gods timely
releeuing us, and in his good time he made David a King, and Joseph the chief
under Pharaoh in Egypt, and restored Job to his former, yea, to far greater
glory.

Thus does God try his dearest children, to occasion them to know and
acknowledge, that howsoever he seem to absent himself from them in their
deepest dangers, and to seem deaf (as it were) unto their prayers, he yet
has an eye both on them and their enemies: he was a shelter unto David, and
curbed Saul; he saw Joseph in prison, but with his liberty prepared his
advancement. He saw Jobs afflictions, but kept a hook in Satan's nosthrills,
that all that he did against Job served to his final comfort.

Though therefore it happen the faithful to be straited and environed with so
many and mighty enemies and troops of troubles, that there appears no
evasion, no delivery, by any visible means; yet there remains holy
Meditation, patient deliberation, and serious consideration of Gods wonderful
deliverances of his, in all like dangers: Consider David and all his troubles,
and you shall find he fainted not, but depended only upon the promises and
providence of God, with a godly resolution, to wait the issue of his hope,
only meditating on Gods promises, and considering his ways, and how he had
before dealt with Abraham, Izaak, Iaacob, Noah, Lot, Moses, and other faithful
fathers before him; the meditation and consideration of whose wonderful
deliueries cannot but work assurance in any believing heart in like manner,
though by unlike and hidden means, in good time to be delivered; and therefore
says David, by way of meditation and confirmation of his, and consequently our
faith in God, Our Fathers trusted in thee, they called upon thee, and were
heard, they prayed unto thee and thou deliueredst them out of all their
troubles; as if he should say in himself by way of Meditation, I find by the
Word of God, that he has delivered many before my time, that trusted in him
and called upon him, in greater dangers than I am in, why then should I doubt
or despair of like delivery? I trust in him as these fathers trusted: I call
upon, and pray unto him as they did, therefore surely he will hear me, and
help me in time convenient; thus did David meditate in his troubles.

God commanded Iaacob to return from Laban his Uncle, into his country and
Kindred (from whom and whence he fled) promising to do him good, Genesis 32. 9.
Could Iaacob do less than meditate and t^inke seriously of this command and
promise of God, considering he was to return to his desperately malicious
brother Esau, who sought to murder him? yet upon due Meditation and
consideration of Gods faithful promise of defending him and doing him good,
he overcame fear by faithful prayer, and the Lord appeased his brothers
malice toward him.

Examples of like nature are plentiful in holy Scriptures, as of Mordecay and
the Jews, Ester 7. of the Bethulians, Judith 7. and many others.

Holy meditation is most necessary, and an especial Motive to faithful
prayer, and prayer can never be so powerful as upon holy premeditation, though
short, so it be serious, for as rumination precedes digesture in clean beasts;
so holy Meditation goes before effectual prayer in Christians.

Seeing then that there is no k^nde of trouble, danger, misery or affliction
that can befall Gods children; but there are examples in the holy Book of God;
wherein may be seen Gods outward delivery or inward comfort in every kind,
what need the faithful to faint in any?

Search therefore the Scriptures, meditate in them, consider the ends and
issues, the patience and prayers, of former godly men; and let their faith,
patience and prayer, be paternes for our imitation. Then if our knowledge by
reading and hearing of the Word, our continual meditation in the Word, do
work in us through the same spirit that guided them like assurance and faith;
we cannot but add prevailing prayer, which being without doubting or wavering,
cannot but in force (as it were) at Gods hands (who is absolutely powerful)
like deliueries out of dangers and timely relief or release, in troubles. And
he that is a religious obseruer of Gods dealing for the defense of his, and
confounding his and their enemies at this day, cannot but see and approve God
to be the same God in power, will, providence, and readiness to help his, as
he was in any former age to our fathfull forefathers; Then search the Word,
meditate therein as David did day and night, pray zealously and faithfully; and
this God, even the everliving and all-sufficient God, shall effectually
perform in his good time, whatsoever he has promised and we pray for.

Of Prayer.
THough faithful prayer be powerful to prevail with God in and against all
dangers, perils, and troubles, and an armor of tried defense against sin and
Satan; yet few there be that use it, especially as they ought; some not at all.
Many there are that either say in their hearts there is no God, as Psalm. 53. 1.
or that deny the power of God, not acknowledging him to be God, and so cannot
glorify him as God, Romans 1. 21. Some also are or have been so impious, as
they absolutely have denied him, as Pharaoh, Exodus 5. 2. Senacherib, 2 King.
18. 13. to 30. Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3. and others, assuming as it were the name
of Gods unto themselves. They praid to none, but they as Gods were praid unto;
whose examples are to be detested as abominable, blasphemous, and deuilish;
whose ends may only serve to terrify such (though never so mighty, prevailing
in their tyranny awhile) as either forsake the living God, and trust in or pray
unto them, or that that are no gods: such are not to be feared of them that
truly trust in and pray unto the God of hosts, as holy David did, whose example
of faith, prayer, and holy resolution in all dangers, may encourage all
faithful in all their troubles, to imitate and practice the same.

The only and chief refuge that this most godly King had, and the principal
weapons wherewith he resisted and overcame his enemies, was fervent prayer in a
lively faith.

Faithful prayer to God is such a defense against whatsoever danger as no
enemy, be he never so mighty, malicious, or carnally politic, can prevail
against it; for howsoever a man truly fearing God be beset with (even
multitudes of) enemies, so as no visible help can have access to rescue him
or to deliver him; yet if he send this Messenger, faithful prayer unto God,
and waver not in his assurance, outward succor, or inward comfort, will
assuredly and timely appear. It was David's refuge in every danger, when his
perfidious Counselor Achitophel, whose counsel was as it were, the Oracle of
God, addressed his traitorous advice to rebellious Absalom, he only prayed to
frustrate it, and his depest wisdom turned into folly, 2 Samuel 15. 31. Hezekiah
in danger of the King of Ashur, used only prayer to God, and the Lord slew his
enemies one hundred fourscore and five thousand in one night, 2 King. 19.
Examples are infinite of the force and effect of prayer, in so much as there is
nothing that the faithful want, but Prayer, if it be faithful and fervent may
obtain, if God in his wisdom think it fit for us to receive.

Prayer is it whereby we speak unto God in a heavenly kind of familiarity,
and whereby God is, as it were, enforced to cast away his rod, and to alter his
purpose of punishing.

Great is the force and efficacy of faithful prayer, and greater is the love
of God toward us, in admitting us so freely and boldly to come unto him with
our petitions; nay, so loving he is, that he allureth us saying, Call upon me
in the day of trouble, and I will hear thee and deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me.

Here is sufficient warrant and encouragement for us to fly unto God by
prayer, in whatsoever trouble, misery, danger or affliction. And the examples
of delivery and help in every kind are so infinite, as who so is conversant
in the old and new Books of God, cannot be ignorant of the force and effect of
faithful Prayer, even of such as have been subject to like passions as we
are: Joshua prayed, and the Sun and Moon stood still, Josh. 10. 12. Elisha
prayed, and his enemies were stricken with blindness, 2 Kings 6. 18. Eliah
prayed, and fire fell from Heaven and destroyed them that came to take him, 2
King. 1. 10.

Faithful Prayer does as it were overcome God, in so much as when he has a
purpose to punish a people, or a person, he will forbid the faithful to pray
for them, lest he should be overcome with their prayer, and so be enforced to
spare them, Exodus 32. 10, 11. If the prayer of one faithful man may restrain
God, as it were, from executing his judgments upon the wicked, how much more
may faithful prayer prevail for the good of a faithful man?

What should then hinder our Prayer to God in our own necessities and dangers?
Nothing but impatience and unbelief, for if in a true and lively faith, and
holy intention, we present our humble supplications unto God through Christ,
according to his will revealed in his Word, and waver not, Christ himself
assures us to obtain what we pray for; Whatsoever ye ask (says he) the
Father in my name, he will give it you, John 16. 23.

Let us not then be cast down in our spirits, but let us lift up our hearts to
him that sees us, and takes care for us, and has both will and power to
deliver us. He has a time in his wisdom to humble us, and a time in his
mercy to help us; a time to debase us, and a time to relieve us in despite of
Satan and his most malicious instruments; he had his time to afflict Job, and
Joseph, and David; and in his time again he delivered them. Let us therefore in
all our trialls, troubles and afflictions call upon God in the Name of his
Son, and we shall find that even in our holy Meditations he will think upon
us, but before we speak, he will answer us: and while we are yet praying, he
will hear us and help us, and we shall give glory unto his name.

The faithful only have the promise to be heard and relieved, when they call
faithfully, and persevere constantly, on the true God. What true comfort then
or hope can they have in their prayers, that in stead of calling on the living
God in Christ, cry unto, and trust in, false gods? They may cry and knock their
breasts, and cut their flesh, and afflict their bodies like Baals Priests,
without profit: though they may prosper and prevail a while to the hardening of
their hearts, in the end they shall be confounded and perish at the rebuke of
the God of hosts, as were Pharaoh, that great King of Aegyt, that contemned
God, Exodus 14. 27, 28. Senacherib that blasphemed God, 2 Kings 9. 35.
Antiochus that wicked root, Mac. 1. 11. and all such wicked Tyrants, that
despising the living God, trust in their own strength, and hunt after the
children of God to shed their innocent blood; let them alone, their confusion
sleeps not.

The strength of an army is faithful prayer to the God of armies; an host of
men, munition, and military furniture, are necessary means; but without
devout and fervent prayer to God, best counsel is vain, aad strength feeble:
But where God is present in both, affording a blessing to both, there is
certain and true victory.

We are not indeed to expect miraculous deliueries, and to neglect the means;
but where ordinary means fail (of necessity) there may we safely pray and
expect extraordinary. Our own experience does approve this to be true in two
principal late deliueries, wherein neither the force nor wisdom of man can
be said to have the first place; but God alone by his own wisdom found out
the prevention, and gave such issue to the inferior execution, as is
marvelous in the eyes of all men, admired even of our enemies, against whom
God himself showed himself an enemy: which may teach and encourage us and all
posterities to be confident, constant and conversant in fervent prayer to him
that saved us, and discovered and discouraged those that rose up both openly
and secretly, to have as it were* swallowed us up quite.

And by these our deliueries, we may well see and understand that if we call
upon him, he can work for our preservation, as well without means as by
means; yea where ordinary means fail, he is able to raise extraordinary, as
he did in parting the waters for his own people to pass, and with the same
waters drowned their enemies; for he is the same God he was then, and he that
says that God neither can nor will work extraordinarily at this day, denies
him to be God at this day; but as faithful prayers were available in our
forefathers days, as when Moses prayed fervently, the Israelites prevailed;
and when he waxed cold, the Amalekites had the better, Exodus 17. 11. even so
are fervent and faithful prayers effectual at this day.

We must yet beware, lest while we pray with our tongues, that our hearts and
hope be not set upon carnal means; for then will God have no respect unto
our prayers, God will be either the whole or no object of our assurance, he
will part his own glory with none.

He may and does afford his most faithful children visible means; and if by
them we prevail, we may not attribute our good success unto the means, but
unto the sword of the Lord, not to Gideon: we may not say this man did, or
without that man we had been overcome; man may do valiantly; but the victory
is only of God who blesses the means; neither are we to neglect outward
means and so presume upon God; it is a tempting of him, and argues no true
confidence in him, neither may we contemn the means, be they never so seeming
weak, for Gods power is seen in weakness, and his wisdom in our ignorance.

Therefore whether our means seem likely or unlikely of good success, let
them neither lift us up or cast us down, neither make us presume or despair,
for God can save as well by few as by many, as appears by Gedeon, who with
three hundred men overcame a huge host of the Medianites, Judge. 7. 13 He can
supply our occasions as well by little as by much: Elijah with little food
trauelleth forty days and forty nights, 1 King. 19. 8. Many examples might be
produced, but no man conversant in holy Scripture is ignorant; and therefore
our faith should not be the more assured through the greatness, nor the more
dismayed at the weakness of visible means, but to depend only on the
providence of God in prayer, wherein we are to use all reverence, knowing that
we are in the presence of an infinite Majesty.

Our prayers also must be sincere, without hypocrisy, for he is a God that
searches the heart, he is jealous, he will not be mocked, nor can he be
deceived by outward conformity, for he can find out a counterfeit; though
Izaak could not discover Iaacob from Esau: Ahijah the Prophet, by the Spirit of
God could discover disguised Ieroboams wife, 1 King. 14. 6. Therefore must our
prayers proceed from a sincere, upright, and faithful heart, believing that
God is willing to bear and able to perform what he promises: otherwise we
make him a God without mercy, that can and will not hear; a God without truth
that can and will not perform his promise; or a God unable to do it.

Pray therefore in faith, reverence, humility, and true devotion, pray with the
whole heart without wavering or doubting, without limiting the holy one of
Israel, either in the time when, the thing what, or the manner how he should
do the thing thou desire; for he knows best what, when, and how to do
all things for thee: therefore as Moses said unto the Israelites, hold you your
peace, and see the salvation of God. Then pray and be heard, ask and receive,
seek and thou shall find favor with God at all times, in all places, and
upon all occasions, even thy God will be ready to help in greatest time of
need, which God for his Christ's sake grant, so be it.

Errata.
PAge 7. line 2. for Haman read Hamun. p. 18. l. 1. for d^m read d^uin^. p.
75. l. 17. for Maan read Maon. p. 326. for me^rly read verily. p. 134 l 9.
for equality read inequality.

THE IMITATION OF DAVID his holy resolution in all his troubles.
A Premeditation touching the argument of the 27. Psalm.
MANY worthy testimonies the holy Scriptures do afford unto us of holy David's
godly and constant resolution, in bearing his troubles and afflictions; his
admirable deliverances, and his thankfulness to God for the same; whose worthy
example may very fitly administer unto Gods faithful children, of what estate,
calling or condition soever, worthy matter of imitation, of his most godly
resolution in like dangers, troubles and afflictions, and that without
imputation of presumption, though he were a King, whose examples in some cases
is not fit for inferiors to imitate. But in matters concerning holy duties to
God, there ought to be no difference between Princes and people: for God is no
accepter of persons, but he that fears him and works righteousness (be he
high or low, rich or poor, King or vassal) is accepted of him. And he that
comes nearest in the imitation of the holy life of a godly King, he nearest
resembles the King of Kings, who is holy, and would have all men without
exception to become holy, as he is holy; and to bear all troubles, crosses
and afflictions with a godly resolution, for his sake that willingly suffered
infinite miseries and torments for ours: and he that endures most with most
resolute and godly patience, becomes likest unto Christ our Redeemer.

This consideration coming into my mind, and feeling the heavy burden of
this worlds miseries, crosses and afflictions of diverse kinds; I could not but
for mine own satisfaction and comfort search the Scriptures, the Register of
things of old, written for our learning; where finding, that all our holy
fathers, the dearest children of God, in all ages from the beginning, have
suffered and patiently undergone infinite and grievous troubles, with most
godly and constant resolution, I took counsel and courage, to imitate (as
far as by the assistance of the same grace of God, whereby they suffered, I
might) some worthy preceding pattern of faith and constancy: And among many
most worthy, I find none in general troubles and dangers, for constant
resolution, faithful prayer and patience, more fit for imitation than godly
David; whom although he were a King, and a man chosen after Gods own heart,
yet was he not without his variety of afflictions, especially enemies, both
before he came to his Kingdom, by Saul and his ungodly instruments; and after
also, not only by foreign enemies, as the Philistines, the Amonites, the
Moabites, the Amalakites, the Edomites, and others; but by his own subjects,
nay by them of his own house, as by Ahitophel his own privy Councellor, and
Absolon his own son. He was enforced to fly, and to hide himself in the
Wilderness in the time of Saul, who sought his life; and was discovered unto
Saul by faithless Doeg. He suffered hunger, and was denied to be refreshed by
sottish Nabal. His wives were taken prisoners, and with great danger he
recovered them. He was like to be stoned of his ow^e people. He was derided and
mocked by Mich^l his own wife, for praising God in a dance before the Arc.
His servants were shamefully entreated by Haman, to whom he sent them, to
congratulate him in love. He was forced to fly bare footed from Absolon his
son. He was railed on, and causlesse cursed by wicked Shemey, with many other
extremities of all kinds; yet fainted he not, but through faith he took
courage and comfort, by his prayers unto, and dependence on GOD, who never
failed him, no^ forsook him, but always and in all his perils delivered him;
and returns the praise and glory to God.

The example of this most worthy King, among many other godly forefathers, do
witness unto us, that it is no new thing to see the dearest children of God
afflicted in this life, yea most worthy Kings, and that not without the
special providence and love of God, who will consecrate his own through many
troubles, which yet deserves not the glory which shall follow.

David in all his troubles was never destitute of Gods assistance and inward
comfort; for he depended upon divine providence in faithful prayer, the
strongest armor against enemies, the safest Castle against dangers, and the
best assurance to obtain whatsoever we need. And therefore as David believed
in, and prayed unto this powerful and prevailing God, so may all Gods
afflicted children imitate his faithful and godly resolution in all their
dangers, with like patience and hope, and they shall be safe, as he plainly and
plentifully testifies in sundry most sweet and comfortable Psalms, especially
in this 27. Psalm, wherein being in the midst of his troubles, he shows
the force of his says to be such, as though he were in danger, and forsaken
of all his friends, he was as fully assured to be delivered in due time, as if
he had been even then out of all danger.

This blessed example then of a lively faith, and the success thereof laid
thus before our eyes, cannot but stir up in us, if we have any faith, a holy
desire to imitate him according to the measure of that spirit which guided this
godly King, and made him as it were the pen of a most divine Scribe, whose
Scripture has left us such heavenly learning, as may teach us all things, both
for this life and that which is to come: and happy is the man that truly
follows his worthy example.

MEDITATIONS and Prayers upon the 27. PSALM.
VERSE 1. The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord
is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid?
AS God has given us outward and corporal eyes to see and behold the works
of his hands here below, so has he given us inward and spiritual light to see
himself, and spiritually to behold the wonderful things he has done for our
souls salvation; therefore when we look upon his creatures with our corporal
eyes, we should lift up the eyes of our minds to behold him that has made,
framed, and preserved these visible things.

The Sun is a visible creature, by whose beams our bodily eyes are
enlightened, for the eye it self gives not, but receives the light which the
Sun gives, for if of it self it gave the light, we should apprehend ^no
darkness at all; but take away outward light, and the eye is dark: So the eye
of the mind, the eye of the soul cannot of it self apprehend that spiritual
light, which is Christ, that lights every man that comes into the world:
And without him the mind is dark, and runs and rusheth upon diverse
stumbling blocks of errors and dangers. But he that is guided by that light
which was David's light, sees and walks the way of safety and salvation: in
that light ( Christ) is the well of life, he is the light in whom all the Elect
so the true light and walk in it.

The ordinary means to apprehend Christ the light, is the word, which he
taught and left unto us, yet not of it self that light, but only shows it,
for every man that hears the word, sees not the light comprehended in the
same; but they only whose inward eyes the Lord opens to behold Christ the
light, and they walk in the light. Many saw Christ, but not as he was the
light and their salvation; for they delighted in darkness more than light,
working wickedness even against that light in whom, and by whom, and through
whom, they only that truly seek that light have assured salvation, neither is
there safety or salvation in any other. Therefore does David join light and
salvation together, because that without that light there is no salvation, for
light goes with or before salvation; for without the light of knowledge there
can be no faith, and without faith no salvation. David through faith was bold
to affirm that the Lord was his light, and consequently his salvation, and he
that would defend him from all his enemies, and therefore resolves not to
fear what man could do unto him.

Our own natural light, the light of our eyes is an especial blessing of
God: yet for vnruiinesse it may be compared to the tongue; for as the tongue
is an unruly evil, in setting as it were the whole world on fire, so are the
eyes extrauagant, and set the heart on fire; and therefore says David, Turn
away mine eyes from regarding vanity: for he found by woeful experience, that
the light of the eye does administer unto the mind diverse dangerous objects,
as to himself the nakedness of Bershaba, with the sight of whom he was so
enflamed with the fire of lust, which first entered by the eye, that he
committed grievous sins in the accomplishment thereof. Yet was David himself
reputed as it were the light of Israel, which he assumed not unto himself,
but attributed the true light that he had unto the light of lights; saying,
Surely thou art my light O Lord, and the Lord will lighten my darkness: And
again, the Lord is my light and my salvation.

By his own natural light he could not see his own error of adultery and
marther, until he was inwardly enlightened, then he could confess it:
neither could he see and consider how the Lord had defended him, but by that
dim light which gave him courage and strength against the ^eare and the Lion,
the ouercomming of whom gave him assurance of the victory against Goliath: his
experience of Gods favor toward him grew daily more and more, encouraging
others also to depend on the power, providence and love of God by his example,
saying, and assuring them that the Lord would be a sure refuge unto them in
their afflictions, for he fails none that faithfully seek him; and how can
we seek him but by Prayer? I will call upon the Lord, says David, who is
worthy to be praised, so shall I be safe from mine enemies: though they have
many means to hurt, yet God that is our light and our salvation, has many
more means to help and to defend us: therefore says David, whom should I
fear, the Lord is my rock and my fortress, and he that delivers me, my
God and my strength, in him will I trust, my shield, the horn also of my
salvation and my refuge, of whom shall I be afraid? If I have Jehovah on my
side, what can man do unto me? If he be my light, I shall live in light and
walk in light, for in him is no darkness at all; he offers light by his
lively Word, and enlightneth our inward parts by the bright beams of his
heavenly Spirit. Being then inwardly armed, howsoever outwardly endangered, we
need not fear, but as David did, let us cast our burden upon the Lord and he
shall defend us; and let us commend our care unto him, for he cares for us: of
whom or of what then need we to be afraid?

Salvation comes not of flesh nor by fleshly means, as the true light is not
of the world nor of worldly men. Therefore seek not thy light nor safety
through the policy or strength of the flesh, neither dream of salvation by
worldly means, but break through the walls of flesh, and mount up in true
contemplation of that saving light that shines from above; from thence comes
the strength against which no carnal force shall prevail: and beware of such
as promise unto themselves safety and salvation without this true light, as the
wise by their policies, the rich by their wealth, the mighty by their much
strength and multitudes, and as some by their own works: All which are broken
reeds and vain props, and weak means to save the outward man, much less the
inward soul. How then can they say, whom shall I fear? of whom shall I be
afraid? when indeed they cannot but be afraid even where no fear is.

Could Achitophels counsel, Nebuchadnezzars greatness, Pharaohs stoutnesse,
Goliahs strength, Senacheribs mighty army, Hasaels swiftness, or the Pharisees
works save them? yet does foolish flesh and blood account this weak and
feeble means their glory, their life, and their salvation: But as Achitophel,
whose counsel was like the Oracle of God, did hang himself; as Nebuchadnezzar
in his greatest pomp became as a beast of the field; as Pharaoh in his hot
pursuit was drowned and his army; as Senacherib was slain by his own sons; as
Goliath for all his great strength was slain with a small stone; as Hazael for
all his Roe-like swiftness, was slain in his running; and as the Pharisees,
for all their works, were condemned by Christ the light: So neither the wisest
of the world, the greatest and most glorious in the world, the strongest in
strength, nor he that justifies himself most by his best works, work not
only no salvation unto themselves as of themselves, but their own
destruction. But the Lord of Hosts is my light, my strength and my salvation,
therefore will I not be afraid.

Consider well the benefit of thy light in the Lord, embrace the Lord thy light
and thy salvation, embrace him in his Word, for God is the Word, the Word that
light, that light thy life and thy salvation.

Here then is the light that guides the blind, and happy is the soul that
has this glorious light, he needs not fear she secret practices of the
wicked, which this light discovers, nor the force of the mighty, which this
strength withstandeth, for God is his salvation.

Fear not man then, who kills but the body, fear not the fire that
consumes but the body, fear not the Sea that drowneth but the body, fear not
sickness that touches but the body, fear not the sword that pierces but the
body; fear nothing that can prevail but against the body, for the Lord is thy
light and thy salvation.

O fear this Lord and reverence this light; he sees in darkness, fear him
that can kill both body and soul, and can cast both into utter darkness;
fear this great God, fear none but him that can save and kill, that can cast
down and exalt, that can with his Word work what he will, when he will, and
as he will; fear him in love, and love him in fear, call upon him, despair
not in him, he is thy salvation.

Fear not the world nor worldly things, fear only firm in the world, and
fly from evil, which this true light hates; then fear not man, for if a
thousand assail thee, fear not, but pray and believe, and trust in the Lord
thy salvation: he will open the eyes of thy faith and thou shall see with
Elisha millions of means to defend thee; if poverty or want oppress thee as
it did sometimes David, fear not, he will relieve thee, for he preserves
with little as with much, he fed many thousands with little means, and when
they were all well filled, there was taken up in the remainder more then was
before they had eaten. He increased the Oil and Meal of the poor Widow, that
she fed her self and hers, and paid her debts with the remainder. He brought
water out of the stones, and out of the dry Jaw Bone of an Ass. He fed his
children with Bread from Heaven, and sent them Quails in the hungry
Wilderness. He sent abundance of wheat extraordinarily unto distressed Samaria
This is he, even that great God, that is the sustainer of my life, my light and
my salvation: and not mine alone, but the God of all that faithfully seek him
in their distress.

Should I then fear, though I be environed with enemies? though I were in
distress? nay, should I fear though I were in penury and want? though I were
imprisoned for the constant profession of Christ's truth? did he not break the
fetters, and opened he not the very iron gates, and cast the watchmen in a
slumber to fetch Peter out of prison? did he not give Joseph and Paul favor
with their Jailors? of whom or of what then may the faithful be afraid? what
crosses, what troubles, what afflictions, what threats of tyrants can make Gods
children afraid? though the seas rage and rose, though the world be in confused
combustion, though the mountains cleave in sunder, though the heavens melt,
though he that made all consume all, I will not fear. The Lord high and
mighty, he is the strength of my life; nay, he is to me life it self, who
then or what can without him force my death? If he take away this life, he has
provided for me a better and permanent: whom or what shall I be afraid of then?
Shall I be afraid of Hell or Satan? He my Lord in Christ, my light and my
salvation, has conquered both Satan and Hell, what need I fear?

A Prayer that God will be our light and our salvation in all our troubles and
dangers.
O Lord, who art the light that never goes out, whereby thou guidest and
gouernest those that acknowledge their own darkness; thou art the strength
that never grows weak, whereby thou sauest and defendest thine from the
hands of all that hate them. Be thou my light, O Lord, and lighten my
darkness, that I may walk in that light and never go astray, for there is no
agreement between error and thy truth; give me therefore heavenly knowledge,
and I shall not be ignorant of that which I ought to know; and assist me with
thy divine grace, and I shall practice that which thou have taught me to know:
Be thou my strength, then whom need I to fear? stand thou on my side, and then
of whom should I be afraid?

Stretch forth thy hand and hold me up, thou have a mighty arm, and strong is
thy right hand: in thee therefore I trust, and will not fear what man can do
unto me.

Be not far from me, O my God, for thou see my troubles and know my
dangers; neglect me not, but hasten to help me, give care unto me and save me,
and let not mine enemies have their desires against me, nor triumph over me:
though they be many, and in show far too mighty for me, yet in comparison of
thy strength they are weak and of no strength; they trust in their Chariots,
munition and multitudes; but I trust in thee and in thy strength alone, only
praying thee to bless unto me the ordinary and lawful means which it shall
please thee to raise up in thy wisdom for my defense. Though I do know and
do acknowledge, that as a horse of it self is a vain help to deliver his
rider by his great strength or swiftness, so are all outward, visible and
carnal means unable to defend me without thee; and unless thou bless the
use of them, and dispose and manage them in thy wisdom for my defense, they
are also vain.

Therefore come I unto thee my God, my strength, my light and my salvation, who
have promised, and art able to send even from Heaven to save me.

Thou can command an host of Angels to camp about me; though environed with
many and mighty adversaries, yet having thee on my side, I know there shall be
more with me than with them; while I am under thy protecting wings I am safe,
I will not fear.

Give thine Angels charge of me therefore, O Lord, to keep and defend me: show
thy power in my weakness, and the weakness of mine enemies by thy strength:
then though an host pitch against me, my heart shall not be afraid; though war
be raised against me, I will trust in thee, my Lord, my light, my strength, and
my salvation.

VERSE 2. and 3. 2. When the wicked, even mine enemies and my foes, came upon
me to eat up my flesh, they stumbled and fell. 3. If an host pitched against
me, my heart should not be afraid; though war be raised against me, I will
trust in thee.
IN all actions Experience is as the mother of knowledge, and knowledge the
ground of Assurance, which made David strong in his resolution to encounter
Goliath, having formerly found that God assisted him in two several dangers,
the one in killing a Bear, the other in ouercomming a Lion; two strong,
fierce, and devouring beasts, and that when he was but young and a Shepherd;
yet it seems he had learned to fear God and to trust in him, for that he
acknowledged that he overcame them, not by his own proper power, but by the
power of God, which two conquests wrought in him-assurance, that by the same
aid he should vanquish that monster of men Goliath: though his ugly presence
and furniture of arms amazed the whole host of Israel, David yet not daunted,
having a strong faith in God, undertook the combat and prevailed, though that
monster scorned him, and threatening that he would give his flesh to be
devoured of the Fowls of the air, and wild beasts of the field, which by the
aid of him in whom David trusted, came contrarily to pass, for David took off
his head and disarmed him, and left his carcass to the Fowls of the air,
whereby he more and more increased in faith, strength and courage, and bold to
assure himself, that as this monster stumbled and fell at his flying stone
that would have eaten up his flesh; so should all his wicked enemies and foes
when they should come upon him to eat up his flesh, namely, to take away his
life, they should even so stumble and fall, as by experience he after found
that God still defended him, so that to the praise of God he sung, When the
wicked, even mine enemies and my foes, came upon me to eat up my flesh, they
stumbled and fell.

When Saul a mighty King sought David's life to destroy it, first by his own
hand with a spear, purposing to have nailed him to the wall suddenly (which by
Gods providence he avoided) and after commanded Jonathan his son, and other
his servants to murder him: but God stirred up the heart of Jonathan to affect
David so entirely, that he revealed unto him his fathers malicious intention
against the life of David, showing thereby the wonderful providence of God in
preserving his from most imminent dangers.

David not yet secure, for fear fled from Saul, as not willing to tempt God by
presuming upon Gods delivery, and not to use lawful means to provide for
himself; hid himself in the Mountains where Saul his enemy with a great
power pursued him, suborning intelligencers to discover David's abode
wheresoever he hid himself: where may be noted the heat of the malice of an
enemy, and how ready some wicked wretches are to show themselves officious to
betray the innocent, to please a Tyrant.

But note further the providence of God, in finding secret and unexpected
means to preserve the innocent, for when Saul was in his most furious pursuit
to kill David, his abode being discovered, God found a means to put a Ring in
Saul's nose (in favor of David, and for his own glory) enforcing him to retire
from further following that innocent man; and to hasten the rescue and relief
of his own Territories which the Philistines had even then by Gods providence
invaded: and being sore beset with his enemies, he desperately fell on his own
sword and died. So it came to pass, that when the wicked, even David's enemies
and his foes, came upon him to eat up his flesh, namely to take away his lise,
they stumbled and fell.

God was ever with David; for David always depended on God, which who so does,
shall never stumble nor fall. But even his faith and integrity shall make his
very enem^^s to fear him: As Saul feared David, because God was with him,
whose chief armor and weapons were his fear and trust, in the name and
assistance of Jehovah, wherewith he fought diverse battles, and slew with great
slaughter many Philistines his enemies; not only before, but after he was
anointed King, none prevailed against him, but they that came upon him stumbled
and fell.

Seeing then that Faith, and the fear of God and prayer be approved of force,
so far to prevail with God, as to obtain his help and defense against wicked
enemies and foes, that when they assail us, he causes them to stumble and
fall; let us imitate the faith, and fight with that assurance that David did:
for he is the same God still, of the same power, of the same providence and
love. And we are not without like enemies as David in his time had, though
without cause.

To relate all David's dangers, troubles, and deliueries, battles and victories,
though profitable for our encouragement: yet might seem tedious, not
altogether impertinent, because by them is the love, the power, and providence
of God seen in defending and releeuing the faithful; and his just judgments
against wicked enemies of their stumbling and falls. Yet let his faith and
constancy move all faithful men to imitate his virtues; not in that he was a
King, but in that he was a godly King, of whom God gives testimony, that he
was a man according to Gods own heart; not that he was so conformable by
nature, but so framed by the grace and good will of God: For, by nature he was
no better in Gods acceptance than Saul, who was also a King: But God so
seasoned David's heart (of his own free mercy) that he obeyed and conformed his
actions, according as God had wrought in his heart, and left Saul to the
corruption of his own heart: yet did not David glory in any merit of his own,
but gave the praise to God, saying, Blessed is he whom thou choosest and
causest to come unto thee. And again, The wicked are strangers from the womb,
even from the belly have they erred: Yet Saul after he was anointed King by
Samuel, was turned into another man, and was numbered among the Prophets; but no
otherwise than Judas among the Apostles.

God is the God of all that faithfully and constantly fly unto him for succor;
For, salvation belongs unto him alone; not unto the power of Kings, be they
never so strong in multitudes of armed men, with shipping, or whatsoever
military and warlike furniture; but where Gods continual blessing does
accompany a few, they prevail against many; though sometimes God may suffer
his own dearest children to be encountered and beaten by his own and their
enemies: Especially when they presume to stand too much upon their own
strength, as upon allies, friends, and multitudes: prevailing with these, God
is not so glorified, as when he by few overcomes a multitude: As when David
by a few slew two and twenty thousand Aramites: And Joshua five combined
Kings, wherein yet he would not have the whole victory to be ascribed to
Ioshuahs forces, but was himself the principal in the overthrow, not only in
aiding and directing Ioshuah, but in pouring down haile-stones from heaven
upon his enemies, whereby he slew more men than Ioshuahs Army did by the sword.
And sometimes he takes to himself the whole praise of the victory; as when
Senacherib came against good Hezekiah, with a most invincible supposed Army,
under the conduct of Tartan Rabsaris, and Rabsakeh, railing upon, and
threatening Hezekiah, and blaspheming God, stiling himself the Great King of
Ashur, whom he thought God himself was not able to withstand, flattering
himself as proud Tyrants use to do (as we have seen) that he in despite
of Hezekiahs God, would deprive him of his Kingdom* pretending that he came in
the name of the Lord (as some of late have done) Are we come (says he) or do
we this without the Lord? Whereat Hezekiah, in deed, according to humane
frailty was afraid: But asking counsel of the Lord by faithful prayer (the
best refuge and defense in danger) he became assured of Gods assistance and
banished fear. And that night, that God (which that Tyrant blasphemed, as not
of power to resist him) sent his destroying Angel and slew Senacheribs army,
one hundred four* score and five thousand men. We may not forget our like
deliueries fresh in our memories, even by the mere hand of God.

It is not superfluous to recount other famous Histories, recorded in the Book
of God, which for further confirmation of our Faith in God, in like danger are
plentiful. Benadab, that mighty King of Aram, threatened Ahab King of Israel
to deprive him, not only of his Kingdom, but of all that he had, of his
Silver and Gold, of his Women and fair children: She wing hereby the
insolency, pride, and security of Tyrants, who by reason of their carnal
strength, force and multitudes, will dispose of the lands, and share the
possessions of them, whose Territories they thirst after, and that before their
arrival, as though the victory were theirs before the encounter. As we with
our ears have heard that our enemies have boasted, through the false and
forged benediction of him that is a deceiuer, and yet takes the falsely
conceived authority from heaven. But our God laughed their pride, insolency,
and security to scorn; taking our cause into his own hand, confounded their
devices, daunted their hearts, weakened their arms, abandoned their Nauies by
his own power; even as he gave proud Benadab into Ahabs power, though a wicked
King and an Idolater, therefore not for Ahabs sake, but for his own Names
seek, and his own peoples safety. And to show his Omnipotent power in
defending his own, and confounding his and their enemies. So that the truly
faithful in God being threatened, beset and besieged by wicked multitudes, need
not to be afraid: for though war be raised against them; that God that defended
David, Hezekias, and all that have truly called upon him in like danger, will
as he has ever hitherunto, defend us.

They that have the God of Hosts on their side, need not to fear though Kings
combine, and people rage, as if they would eat up their flesh. Only let them
live godly, pray faithfully; and use ordinary means lawfully: then if an Host
pitch against them, their hearts need not be afraid though war be raised
against them, let them trust in him, and they shall see the salvation of God.

They that fight against Gods people, fight even against God himself: as Paul
persecuting his children, persecuted Christ. If therefore a mighty Host invade
us, we may boldly, though in seeming weakness, encounter them; for there are
more with the children of God, though not seen, than with the wicked. God
never fails nor forsakes his, unless they forsake him: he leaves them not,
unless they leave him.

Infinite are the examples hereof in holy Scriptures, which might be also
produced, further to confirm our assurance: And were it needful, there might
be inserted not a few examples of Gods like deliueries, recorded in our own
Chronicles, and in our own remembrances. But where Gods Spirit speaks by the
pens of Gods own Secretaries, there need no humane testimonies, but only to
show that God is still the same. He is Alpha and Omega, the same, yesterday, to
day, and for ever; therefore may the man that is godly, assure himself with
holy David: If an Host of enemies pitch against him, his heart need not be
afraid, though war be raised against him he may trust in this; That when the
wicked, even his enemies and his foes come upon him to eat up his flesh, they
shall stumble and fall.

A Prayer to God; that he will defend us from our Enemies.
O Holy and most mighty God of Hosts, who dwell in the heavens, and yet art
thou absolute also in the earth, governing; guiding, directing, and protecting,
those that fear thy name, so that they need not fear the power or malice of
whatsoever adversaries; for salvation belongs unto thee alone, and thy
blessing is evermore upon them that faithfully depend upon thee: Therefore
(Lord) though we be weak in power, ignorant in carnal policies, destitute of
humane aid, and beset with enemies, who raise deadly war against us, confirm
our faith in thee, and we shall be strong; yea, stronger than our enemies, and
wiser than our most politic and subtle adversaries; and shall be either able
to withstand their violence, or escape their mischiefs: though we have no
other defense but thy providence, no other armor but thy love; no other
weapons but true faith, and a holy fear of thy name; yet in this defense will
we trust, and in this salvation will we rejoice.

In this confidence, Lord, come we unto thee, pouring out our hearts before
thee; not because thou know them not, but because thou know them;
therefore come we unto thee, that thou may be pleased to remove our fear,
and ease our grief; and to be strengthened and confirmed in a lively, assurance
of our safety and salvation in thee, and of thy defense against these our
enemies, for there is none besides thee that can deliver us.

Remember Lord thy goodness, which thou vouchsafedst to our faithful
forefathers of old, how thou deliueredst them from their enemies when they
cried unto thee. Hear us we pray thee, O Lord, and help us, for vain is the
help of man.

Turn our fear into assurance of thy favor and help; our mourning into
rejoicing in thee. Loose our sorrows, and gird us again with gladness: let
not our sins hinder thy mercies, wherein we pray thee to turn the counsel
of our wicked adversaries into foolishness, their strength into weakness, and
their hope into despair.

Thou art the Lord of hosts, high and mighty, loving unto those that fear
thee, helpful unto those that trust in thee, and a terrible God unto them that
despise thee or thine; What Tyrant can stand before thee? What King can
encounter thee, or take thy children out of thy hands? Pharaoh could not
detain Israel, when thou would transplant them: Saul could not hurt David,
thou defending him. Senacherib could not have his desire against Hez^kias, thou
fighting for him; our enemies could not hurt us, thou curbing them. O show thy
self now as thou have ever done, our defender.

With speed, O'Lord, reform all our imperfections, cover the multitude of our
gross and fearful sins, which call for enemies, and other punishments in thy
justice to be inflicted upon us: Turn thou unto us, and we shall return unto
thee: Let our repentance appear by the mortification of our sinful desires:
Humble us, and we shall be humbled, then shall thou in compassion pardon us,
and in thy favor compass us about, as with* a shield: Thou shall be our
refuge in our greatest danger; for there is no God besides thee, no help but of
thee: Thou alone art able to command an Host of Angels from heaven, to attend
and guard us: Twenty thousand thousand Angels can thou send from heaven to
defend us, thy self the chief Leader of that celestial army: whereof one of
them is sufficient to confound a million of thine and our wicked enemies when
they assail us to cat up our flesh; thou in a moment can make them to
stumble and fall.

What then is man? Or what is the force of Princes, when thou take part
against them in the behalf of them whom thou will defend? Therefore cast we
our burden and care upon thee, for thou have promised to care for us.

O send therefore from heaven and save us; have mercy upon us, O God, have
mercy upon us, for we trust in thee: And under the shadow of thy wings will we
shelter our selves, until our enemies be either converted or confounded. Then
shall we praise thy name, O Lord, for that thou have not left us as a prey unto
the will of our enemies: and though we walk in the midst of troubles, yet we
know and are assured that thou will take a convenient time to finish the work
of our absolute delivery: For thy mercy, and thy truth, and thy power, endure
from generation to generation. Preserve us therefore, O God, from these cruel
men, and the praise and glory shall be thine, the comfort ours. And the
example of thy so fatherly protecting us, shall be a motive to others in like
danger to call upon thee. So be it.

VERSE 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord that I will require, even that I
may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the
beauty of the Lord, and to visit his temple.
GReat is the difference between the worldling and the true Christian;
between a carnal and a spiritual minded man: The one coueteth to dwell and
to have his continual abode here below, the other soareth and aspireth upward:
the one resembles the Swine, the other the Eagle: the one is never satisfied
with earthly and carnal things, for he has as many desires as he has
senses, and every pleasing thing that offers it self to any of them he
coueteth, for every sense has its particular delights: as many senses so many
fantasies numberless, yet neither of them can be satisfied, for the heart of a
carual man ingrosseth them all, and the more vanities it apprehends, the more
desire increases; for, the eye is never satisfied with seeing, nor the care
with hearing pleasing things. But the spiritual minded desires only one
thing, namely, to be assured of his salvation and the glory to come. And
therefore holy David desired (as all true Christians ought) this one thing, for
this only one thing is necessary.

Bershaba the wife of David, and mother of Solomon, desired but one thing of
her son, and he promised her fair, but performed it not according to her
desire. But David the father of Solomon, desired one thing which he longed
for, of a King greater than Solomon, and a matter of far greater moment than
was Bershabaes, and his Petition was accepted: both their Petitions seemed to
proceed of love, but the difference of their issues was great; the one procured
hatred and death, the other a most blessed success. She made her request to
man, in whom to put confidence is vain. He made his request to God, the holy
one of Israel, in whom there is mercy and truth. To whom also Solomon made one
especial request, only for wisdom, and obtained it, and with it many earthly
blessings which he asked not. So bountiful is God, as if we ask that one
thing necessary, namely the Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, he
will also add blessing upon blessing, though we ask them not.

David's only Petition was, yt he might dwell in the house of the Lord all the
days of his life: A blessed (yet a strange) request of a King in the opinion
of worldly men, who might think David not to be so wise as some ambitious and
carnal politicians are at this day, who had rather be in Kings Courts to take
their pleasures, than to be restrained in a Temple for a day. And David being
a King, might have retired himself in his Palace, and have taken what pleasure
and delight he would; having a Kingdom to supply whatsoever might have
pleased any of his senses. But these delights he found not answerable to his
affection, which was seasoned from above, having tasted so sweetly of the love
of Jehovah, who of a Shepherd made him a King, and who had so often delivered
him from his enemies; he had rather be conversant with him in his house one
day, than a thousand in the Court of Saul, or in his own Court among his
Gallants. Nay, he would choose rather to be a doorekeeper in the house of God,
than to command an earthly kingdom, and to be deprived of his heavenly
exercises in the house of God.

It is a most glorious estate indeed to be a King, but far more glorious to
be a godly King. He is Gods Uice-gerent in that part of the earth wherein God
in his providence has set him; yet must he look to have some discontents mixed
with his greatness, and necessary too; otherwise greatness might cause
forgetfulness, that he is a man, as former examples have discovered. And
therefore did God visit David (chosen after his own heart) with many troubles,
to the end he should not be unmindful what he was, and whence, and from what
estate God had raised him to that place of eminence: and that he should serve
the Lord, and maintain his laws, and defend his people, cherishing the good,
and chastising the evil. And therefore was David to forward in calling his
people to serve the Lord, and himself to be the leader of them to the Temple
of God, to which he had so sincere a desire, that he requested of the Lord
that he might dwell therein all the days of his life, or at least have free
liberty often to visit it, to the praise of God and exercise of prayer.

This desire is commonly the last and least in great men, for the most part
though no doubt they desire (as Balaam did) to die (when necessity requires)
the death of the righteous, and greater glory would it be unto them if they
would practice (while they have time) the life of the righteous as they seldom
do; yet few or none, of whatsoever quality are so irreligious in show, but
they will look into the house of God, peradventure once, it may be twice in a
Sabbath. And peradventure think it long, as loath to spare their pleasures,
delights or profits to live a whole day in the Temple of God with fasting and
prayer. Some would think it as hard a task as the bondage of Egypt, or the
captivity of Babylon. But blessed be God, some there are that have David's
desire, though not to dwell really in the Temple, yet to be comfortably
conversant among Gods people, in hearing God speak unto them, and they to
speak unto God.

This is that that great men should principally desire for their example in
well doing much moves inferiors to imitation, for it is commonly observed,
that example does draw more to good or evil, than documents or dehortations.
The godly life of a great man is as a Tower seen a far, and many especially
his followers will imitate his steps, at least in show, and even that show of a
godly life is a good motive to others to live godly indeed: and as a good life
gives comfort and encouragement to others to be good, so the president of evil
makes many evil. If greatness and goodness go together, it is the sweetest
consort yt a mortal man can make in this life, (...) the contrary as harsh and
hellish.

This holy desire of David was not for a day, for he speaks of the time past.
I desired, which implies a continual inward Petition; and argues his constancy
in desiring, though he were often in such straits and distresses as he could
not visit the material temple as he desired; yet, wheresoever he was driven by
the malice and rage of his enemies, he even there found Bethel, the house of
God; in the Wilderness of Ziph, in the holds of Engedy, in Maan and Gath,
uncouth and solitary places: he found the Lord his God even in his holy Temple,
for where God is present there is his Temple. In the Lions den Daniel found
him; in the Furnace the three children; in the Dungeon Jeremy; in the Prison
Peter; under the stones Stephen; in Sodom Lot; in the flood Noah: God is every
where, where he is called upon faithfully.

Every faithful child of God is always in Gods house, where David desired so
earnestly to dwell: yet though he found God every where where he called upon
him, he had an earnest desire to be conversant, even in that material temple
where the children of God did assemble, to celebrate the praises of God, and to
hear his Word: and though he were their King, thought it no disparagement, but
the greatest part of his duty to accompany his subjects (according to
conueniencie) in the holy exercises of Religion: whereof being prevented by
means of his enemies, he complains that he was as a Pelican in the
Wilderness, and as an Owl in the Desert: And deemed the Sparrow more happy
than he, because that silly Bird could at all times resort unto that holy place
to which he could not come.

Lord (says David) who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? and who shall rest in
thy holy Mountain? that is, who shall worthily enter into thy holy Temple and
behold thy beauty? he answers, He that works righteousness, etc. for God
is holy and requires holiness of life, walking uprightly in a lively faith.
And therefore though it be the duty of all men to frequent the material Temple
of God, to accompany the congregation in prayer, praising of God and hearing
his Word: yet all come not with that holy desire that David did, nor qualified
as David was: yet he that is unprepared to day may be fit to morrow, for the
Word of God is as a Net, and often times catches men ere they be aware:
therefore ought all men to desire as David did, to visit Gods Temple, where
this Net of the Word is spread; for being once taken, he will then with David
require that one thing: namely, to dwell in the house of the Lord all the days
of his life, and often to visit his Temple.

David did not only make a bare request unto God, but did even press him, he
required him as if he had been familiar with him, (as the faithful may use a
holy familiarity with God in their prayers) praying God to afford him that
blessing of blessings, as to admit him into his holy presence, wherein is the
fullness of joy, and at his right hand are pleasures for evermore; not for a
day a month or a year, as worldlings have, and then perish, but begun here
and shall never have end.

To dwell in the house of Jehovah, is to dwell and abide in his favor, to be
partaker of his sanctifying grace, to have the true knowledge of his divine
will, and to practice it by faith, obedience, zeal, prayer; and to bear about
us the marks of the Lord Jesus, in patient undergoing the burden of the
Cross, and in continual exercise of holiness and righteousness: whosoever
is in this case is safe in the holy Temple of God as in a safe Sanctuary, and
is a true member of the mystical body of our conquering Christ, the head of
that Church which is the true Temple, neither made with hands, and which hands
cannot pull down: Out of which are barred all such as trust in lying miracles,
and works that cannot profit such as steal, commit idolatry, adultery; such
as swear falsely, and such as fall down and worship false gods, or the true
God after a false and idolatrous manner.

Though these stand in the material Temple, or seclude themselves in
Cloisters, in seeming devotion to sequester themselves from the world to God,
and yet commit many barbarous sins and gross impieties, thinking themselves
safe, and to be reconciled to God by a confessory penance, God will not only
not hear them but reject them and their prayers, for they seem religious and
are not, obedient to God and are not, faithful and are not: but are mere
Hypocrites, who resorting to the Temple of God, commit rather sacrilege than
offer sacrifice acceptable to God. These visit not the Temple, but rather
defile if with their counterfeit holiness, who would seem in show Saints, but
in heart enemies to Christ and Christians; yet cry they, the Church, the
Church; and yet far from being members of it. So many seeming-good Christians
cry out, Preach, Preach, and seem never satisfied with Sermons; this desire is
good, if their hearts desire it to profit and practice the word: but if it be
but to seem religious, and inwardly retain their corrupt desires, if they
amend not their ways and their works, seem they never so holy they are but
Hypocrites: for this is to be in the Temple of God by his Word preached, to
learn and to execute judgment, not to oppress the poor nor the stranger,
the fatherless nor the Widow, not to deceive nor to walk after other gods,
after riches and pleasures. If this fruit of hearing appear in them, they are
no doubt of the family and house of God, and shall dwell in his Tabernacle and
rest securely upon his holy Mountain, for they are of the generation of the
just: but there is a generation (says Solomon) that are pure in their own
conceits, and yet are not washed from their filthiness: they follow the
devices of their own hearts, And assume unto themselves a peculiar manner of
serving of God, not according to the sincere truth: but as God abhors all
sacrifices of unclean things: so does he all counterfeit shows of sincerity.

God admits not sinners; namely, such as make no conscience of sin, to
come into his holy presence, much less to dwell in his holy Temple, though
they may seem to honor him with their lips: He detesteth their forged
sacrifices, and their very prayers are abominable, though they partake of the
holy Sacraments, and perform outwardly other divine duties: He is not pleased
with them, neither behold they the beauty of the Lord; but his severe and
fierce countenance is bent against them.

But such as desire with the like affection as David did, to behold the beauty
of the Lord, and to visit his Temple, are such as the Lord enuiteth and wills
to come, and lovingly embraces them. They come not for a spirt and away, but
desire to make their continual abode, where they may still behold his beauty
and his glory; his loving kindness and mercies toward them, showed in his
word as in a glass, which appears more sweet and amiable to the cies of
their sanctified souls, than the most beautiful feature of Angels. This most
heavenly beauty David desired to see, and saw it; as Paul teaches, saying;
That God commanded the light to shine out of darkness, even in our hearts, that
the light of the knowledge of the glory of God might shine in the face of Jesus
Christ, whose glory we see in the preaching of his word; wherein he declares
the riches of his glory upon the vessels of mercy, which he has prepared unto
glory. This glory the more the spiritual man beholds, the more is he moved
with desire to see more and more, and can never be sufficiently filled with
that heavenly Contemplation. Much were the Disciples moved at the sight of
Christ's transfigured glory; in so much as they desired to have enjoyed the
sight of it still, so glorious it was, that their minds were even ravished with
the beauty thereof. So David desired to dwell in the Temple of the Lord; not
for a day, but all the days of his life, to behold the beauty, the goodness,
and mercies of God, revealed in his Word, and to exercise himself in prayer.

Where God is duly and truly called upon by a holy Congregation, there
appears the glory and beauty of Jehovah. There is the Ark of the Lord, the
presence of the mighty God of Jacob: whose glory fills the Temple, which the
faithful man sees with a spiritual eye; but the carnal man, though bodily
present in the same Temple, apprehends it not. As when Paul was converted, he
saw the glory of God shine upon him; but they that iournied with him, though
near him, saw nothing. So that God is only seen of them, to whom he
pleases to reveal himself.

This beauty of the Lord shines in the hearts of Gods elect children, by the
revelation of the holy Ghost, which none sees but themselves. And they take
such sweet delight in the beholding of the face of God in Christ, as they do
receive in their souls the very Impression of the Image of the glory of the
only begotten Son of the Father, full of grace and truth: even as Moses
received through the splendour of the glory of God upon Mount Sinai in his
countenance, such an impression of that glory, that the children of Israel
could not endure to behold with their eyes the glory of his countenance.

What remains then, but that we neglect not the continual visitation of the
temple of God, to accompany the Congregation in the hearing of that heavenly
Word, to pray unto God for his blessings, and to give him praise for his
benefits. And the Lord open our spiritual eyes, that we may even here behold
his beauty, and be hereafter pertakers of his glory.

A Prayer for spiritual knowledge, and increase of our holy desires to visit
the Temple of God, to hear his Word, to pray unto him, and to praise him.
O Gracious Lord God, most loving, who reiectest none that come unto thee with
a perfect heart; and none can come unto thee unless thou call him, as well by
thy inward Grace as by thy outward Word: Vouchsafe according to the riches of
thy Grace to grant, that I may be strengthened by thy Spirit in the inner man,
that Christ may dwell in my heart by faith, and that my whole spirit, soul and
body, may be kept blameless, to the coming of the Lord Jesus. For thou
know, Lord, what I am by nature, a man unworthy to enter under thy roof, or
to press into the place where thine honor dwells.

For thou art a God that love righteousness, and acceptest of such as are of
clean hearts, and whose conuersations are upright before thee: but I am a
sinner and corrupt, as all my fathers were; Cleanse me therefore, O gracious
Lord God, in the blood of Jesus Christ, and make me fit to approach thine holy
Temple, that I may see thy beauty, and behold thy glory. Open mine ears that
I may hear; prepare my heart that I may understand what thou teach in thy
word: Enlighten mine inward eyes, the eyes of my soul, that I may see thee,
and take comfort in thy presence. And open my lips, that I may speak unto thee
in faith, and answer me again in love. Teach me that celestial language,
that may move thee to hear me.

For what booteth it me to come into thy house with deaf ears, not to hear
thee? without attention, to understand thee? mute, and not be able to speak
unto thee?

Yet I know, good Father, that thou hear them that cannot speak, and thou
teach them that understand not; and thou openest the eyes of them that see
not: such is thy love toward us, as thou acceptest even of the language of
hearty sighs, whither they be for sin, or for want of spiritual graces:
Thou know the inward desires of the heart, tending to good or evil.

I am sorry, good Father, that any corruption lurketh in my defiled heart, to
keep out that blessed guest thy Spirit. I cannot of my self abandon
corruption: I cannot of my self so mortify my sin, but that the dregs
therefore will still remain. But cast me not out of thine holy Temple, because
I am a sinner; but rather, because I am a sinner, admit to visit thy Temple, to
hear thy Word, that I may learn to live more and more obediently unto thee.

Make thou my heart clean and I shall be all clean; so shall I visit thine
house to honor thee, and comfort my self by thy holy presence, and shall take
spiritual pleasure in thy beauty, and be finally pertaker of thy glory.

Thou love righteousness, O make me righteous: Thou hate iniquity, abandon
my sins: Knit my heart unto thee, that I may both fear and love thy name.
Give me a holy desire to seek thee, and to serve thee, both in the material
Temple with thy people, and in all places, at all times; for thou art every
where to be found. And where thou art, there is thy house; for thou dwell
not in Temples made with hands, but in the heavens, and in the hearts of them
whom thou have sanctified.

Turn thy face unto me, O Lord, for thy face I seek: Show me thy beauty and
glory of thy countenance, and change me into thine own Image by thy Spirit,
and in the same Spirit admit me continually to visit thy holy Temple.

Make my heart stable and unblameable before thee in holiness, that I may
serve thee with a sincere and pure heart, and conscience undefiled: That I come
not into thine house only to seem religious, but in true faith and due
reverence, and give thou a blessing unto my godly desires, Amen.

VERSE 5. In the time of trouble he shall hide me in his Tabernacle, in the
secret place of his Pauilion shall he hide me, and set me upon a Rock.
THe very name of Trouble is fearful to a worldly man, for he loves pleasure
and ease, and when trouble comes, he is cast down, and is (as it were) at
deaths door: but the true child of God being forewarned, that if he will
live godly, he must look for and prepare himself to suffer trouble and
affliction in this life: Trouble therefore does little or nothing move him when
it comes, because when he first entered into the school of christianity, he
learned that the love of God, and the love of the world, could not stand
together with his profession, and that there is a kind of enmity between the
children of God and the love of the world, or at least no agreement; And that
is the cause that the good are most afflicted, and the worldlings prosper most:
The first are innocent, in whom there is neither gall nor bitterness; the
other, as they are covetous, so are they commonly proud and envious. The first
is commonly injured, and bears it with patience: the other triumphs over them
that resist them not, but have only in all their troubles recourse unto God,
whose they are, being assured that he in the time of trouble will be their
defense, and hide them in his Tabernacle, which was only godly David's refuge,
being often and many ways afflicted, as at large before appears.

God sends affliction upon his own dearest children, when oftentimes he
lets the wicked go free; yet is not God unjust in this, nor partial, in
sparing the evil, and punishing the good. He has his ends in both, according
to his heavenly wisdom, who knows how to deal with both. And he that
seems most to be spared, and thinks himself in best case, is in greatest
danger; and he that seems in most danger, is nearest greatest happiness:
Howsoever indiscreet men measure their felicity by this worlds fullness, and
freedom from troubles; and censure the dearest children of God to be surely
out of his favor, by reason of their manifold afflictions. And yet they see
that the simple nurse, though she love her Infant never so dearly, she will
weane it from the breast by some bitter thing, when she thinks her milk not
good for the child; And that a Father, if he love his child, will with the
rod of correction restrain him from things dangerous. And think they, that
our heavenly Father thinks it not fit to weane his own children from this
hurtful world, that they perish not with worldlings? But when he strikes the
wicked, it is in his anger, as the beginning of their perpetual sorrows, by
whose severe punishments here, his own children may be terrified from
committing like sins, by example of their punishments.

He that will live godly must suffer affliction; yet not above their strength,
for God puts to his hand, to moderate and mitigate the weight of their
burden. The troubles and afflictions of the faithful seem more intolerable to
the beholders, then to themselves that seele them, and have a lively faith and
constancy to bear them: Great and many are the troubles, even of the
righteous; but God delivers them out of all. In the time of trouble he hides
them in his Tabernacle, in the secret place of his Pauilion shall he hide them,
and set them upon a Rock. He hid David from Saul, and Moses from Pharaohs
murderers: his Tabernacle is always open to entertain them, that in their
troubles fly for shelter to him: His favor is the Rock that cannot be moved;
his providence, the mountain of their rest and refuge.

Troubles are but for a moment, and then comes comfort; therefore do the
children of God with patience, great alacrity and joy undergo them. But
contrary, the comfort of the wicked is here short and momentany; but the^r
future misery shall have no end.

Seeing then that no man, especially such as are Gods dearest children, can
live here in this earthly Pilgrimage, but he must look for and endure
troubles: Who will not then prepare himself with constancy and patience to
embrace them when they came?

The holy Ghost by the pen of godly David, has assured the poor oppressed and
afflicted children of God, never to be forgotten: Their hope shall not perish
for ever, for God is not an idle obseruer, or a careless spectator of the
afflictions and miseries* of those that are his: Though he suffer the^ to be
oppressed long; as some with enemies, as David; some by loss of goods, as Job;
some by imprisonment, as Joseph; some with sickness, as Hezekiah; and withal
to permit the wicked to mock and deride them, for that they trusting in God,
are suffered thus to be afflicted; and notwithstanding their prayers not to be
delivered or relieved, which is no small tentation. But these men look into
the outward prosperity of men, and commend them, entertain them, embrace them;
as if all cause of love were due to them that were laden with lucre, As for
the poor, they are despised, contemned, and had in continual derision, of
such only indeed as are blind, and see not; ignorant, and know not; dull, and
observe not, That there is a God that cares for such as worldlings cast off:
that he embraces his poor that the wealthy despise, and that he loves them
that the worldlings hate; And that in the time of trouble he hides them in
his Tabernacle, within the secret place of his Pauilion shall he hide them:
Nay, the very Angels of God (whom man sees not) pitcheth round about them that
fear him and call upon him, and delivers them; therefore though the godly be
poor, the Lord thinks on them.

Many a mean contenmed child of God, (having little m^anes) by the blessing
of God, do eat with more contented, and more salutary saturity, than many
times do the most wealthy of the abundance of all their table dainties: A
little that the righteous has, is better than the abundance of the ungodly
rich. Let no man therefore faint nor fear, when trouble, affliction, or
persecution comes; but rather rejoice, knowing that tribulation bring^th
forth patience; and patience, experience; and experience, Hope; and Hope makes
not ashamed; but assures the faithful of the goodness and love of God, which
is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost: so that howsoever we be
scorned, we need not blush at our troubles and afflictions, but at our sins
that procure them: yet are they unto the children of God but wholesome
medicines to cure them, and to prevent them: only unsavory to the carnal
mind, which also do accustom to patience, which by experience cherishes and
confirms our hope, which through faith is an assured testimony unto our
conscience, that we are beloved of God, so much the more, by how much he
keeps us under, and in obedience through afflictions. For, if he leaves us
unto our own corrupt conuersations without correction, so much the stronger
grow we in sin: therefore necessary it is, that we should often feel his
correcting rod, lest at the last he should confound us with his devouring
sword; for if we should be without trouble, which is our correction, whereof
all Gods children are partakers, we could not but account our selves bastards,
and no sons: And if his corrections keep us in obedience, then we may
assure our selves, he will hide us in his Tabernacle, that no power or policy
of the wicked shall find us out to hurt us.

As men are in number many, and their affections diverse, and none lives
without some trouble or affliction, not all in one measure or in like degree:
so is every man comforted or cast down according to the measure of his
faintness or faith, for many men may be equal partakers of one and the same
trouble, yet not of equal resolution to bear it.

Some men have great afflictions, and bear them with great patience; some
small, and yet cry out under the burden of them; some men have many troubles
and yet account them few; some few, and yet account them many; some have
fearful afflictions, yet they repute them favorable; some very favorable
crosses, yet esteem them very fierce and cruel; some have long and tedious
afflictions, yet supposed short; some very short, yet conceived long and
cumbersome.

This arises only of the difference of men's faith and frailty. The first is
bold and strong, able to bear and undergo whatsoever it pleases God to lay
upon them; saying with faithful David, God is my hope and strength and my
portion. The second is weak and sinketh under the burden of most easy
trialls, because they cannot say in their hearts as David did, the Lord is my
rock and my salvation, nor assure themselves yt God will hide them in his
Tabernacle, in the secret place of his pauilion.

And what is this hiding of his Saints, but his continual watchfulness over
them, and his providence in keeping and defending them? he sets them upon a
rock, namely, he takes them into his own protection, and none is able to
take them out of his hands; therefore are they constant in all their troubles,
let them lose their children: let them be robbed of their goods, afflicted in
their bodies, vpbraided of their enemies, condemned for Hypocrites, persecuted
as Heretics, or brought to extreme poverty; let them endure all these and more
troubles with holy Job, yet will they retain their constancy and confidence in
God, still knowing that he in whom they trust is faithful in his promises;
and his power is absolute, and that in the time of their trouble he will hide
them in his Tabernacle, in the secret place of his pauilion, he will hide them
and set them upon a rock.

There is no trouble, trial or affliction of what kind soever, but the
dearest and most beloved of God have been partakers of them. Abel was murdered
by Cain his wicked brother for his sincere worship of God. Faithful Abraham
was not free from troubles, from doubting and fear; he was commanded to offer
his dearest son Isaak in sacrifice, in whose seed the general blessing was
promised: being afraid of his life, for his wives sake, was twice driven to
feign untruths, both to Pharaoh in Egypt, and Abimelech King of Gerar: He had
trouble by Lot his brother, he had grief for the destruction of Sodom,
besides many other troubles. Isaak likewise for fear of his life for Rebeccah
his wife, by his untruth exposed her chastity to the will of a heathen King: he
was afflicted by the Philistines, he was crossed in his desire of preferring
Esau before Iaakoh in the blessing. Iaakob was forced to fly out of his own
Country, and from his friends, and to be a servant in a strange land, for fear
of his brother Esau, that threatened to kill him: being envied by Labans his
Uncles sons, he fled with his wives and children, he was pursued by Laban:
he was encountered by an Angel that wrestled with him all the night, shook him
fearfully and lamed him: he marched in great fear and perplexity with his
wives children and droues, toward his offended brother Esau, who came against
him with four hundred men: he was miserably tormented for the supposed death
of his dearest son Joseph, and much perplexed for his sons murdering his
neighbor Seehemites. Joseph was guiltlesly accused and wrongfully imprisoned.
Moses was like to have been slain by the Angel in the Inn, for not
circumcising his son, prevented by Zipporah his wife, who after circumcised
him, and cast the fore skin of her son at Moses feet, saying, Thou art
indeed a bloody husband unto me: many other troubles he had for the
disobedience of the people of Israel. Not one of Gods children have been free
from troubles, therefore let none refuse to take up the Cross of Christ, who
in his own person suffered many reproaches, ignominies, and at last the death
of the cross for us: None of his Apostles escaped most cruel torments, some
were stoned to death, some slain with the sword, every of them had their
troubles and torments, and all the Fathers of the Primitive Church had their
several miserable ends for Christ, and yet tenderly be loved of God. Shall we
then that have the like and the same benefit by the death of Christ, be ashamed
of his Cross? Shall we think to enjoy his glory, and shall we suffer none of
his disgrace? We are his members, and he is our head, and shall our head suffer
and we live at ease?

Satan is malicious, he can endure none that lives uprightly, but he will
use his instruments to molest them; if he cannot induce them to sin against
God with a high hand, he will procure them troubles, and such as wherewith if
it were possible, he would so weaken their faith in God, that they should use
any ungodly means to free themselves; and will persuade them that God
punishes none but such as he has no love unto: but the truly faithful know
that he is a lier from the beginning, and therefore will not give ear unto his
false suggestions; and therefore when any afflictions do befall them, they
will take them as indeed they are, Gods loving corrections and wholesome
preservatives, to keep them from all things that may offend God, and will in
their troubles seek no other refuge, but (as the little Chiekens fly to the
wings of the Hen) so they run and hide-themselues in Gods protecting
Tabernacle, who is ready to receive them into his saving pauilion, and to set
them upon the rock of his salvation.

Experience has found it a dangerous thing to live in carnal security and
without trouble; as long as David was pursued by his enemies, as long as he was
visited with troubles, he could seek the Lord, he was exercised in continual
prayer, and finding God ready to help him, he could say, I will go forward in
the strength of the Lord, then he could declare that God was his defense, and
that he should never be confounded: But when he had no enemies, and all his
troubles were removed, he forgot that ever he was in danger, he lived at
ease, took his pleasure and delights, walking without fear on the top of his
house securely, delighting himself in his pleasant prospects, and behold a
woman bathing her self; then his heart which was before set upon God, was set
on fire of lust, and committed grievous sins without remorse, until God sent
Nathan to put him in mind of that which he had forgotten a whole year
together, then was he stricken with another kind of fear, not of humane
enemies, but of Gods justice, and where before he continually besought God to
hide him from his enemies, now he cries, Have mercy upon me* O God, according
to thy loving kindness, according to the multitude of thy mercies, put away
mine iniquities. I know my iniquities, and my sin is ever before me. Sin we
see is the fruit of security, and by that godly man's example, it appears that
some troubles are better than a quiet and secure estate, as appears also by
Hezekiah, who being magnified in the sight of all Nations, and was free from
fear of trouble, he became proud, his heart was lifted up; but when God had
sent him an enemy Senacherib, to rouse him by threats, and sickness to afflict
him, then he became humble, then he fell to his prayers to God, and God then did
hide him in his Tabernacle, in the secret place of his pauilion did he hide
him, and in his sickness set him again upon the rock of health.

Gods own children are known by his fatherly correcting them: and they that
come into no troubles in this life, live they never so carnally contented, may
suspect themselves, and may be suspected to be none of his: and therefore faith
Eliphaz to Job, Blessed is the man whom God corrects and afflicts here. If
then affliction and troubles be the way to become blessed, or at least an
argument of Gods favor; with what patience should we endure them; nay, with
what joy should we embrace them? Saint Paul accounted the afflictions of this
present life, not to be worthy of the glory which we shall enjoy hereafter.

Why therefore should we fear or repine against trouble, seeing it is so
necessary for us? It is not yet meant, neither is it required of us voluntarily
to run into, or to seek troubles, as some Vo^aries do wilful poverty and
other needless crosses, which is not only not required of them of God, but
offensive unto him, being mere idleness, one of the sins of Sodom. It is
required of us, only when troubles of what kind soever befall us, to undergo
them with patience, faith and constancy; and then shall God hide us in his
Tabernacle, in the secret place of his Pauilion shall he hide us and set us
upon a Rock. To him let us commit our souls in well doing as unto our
faithful Creator, knowing that we are not afflicted by chance, but by the will
of God our most loving Father in Jesus Christ, the Rock of our salvation; him
let us seek in trouble, and to him let us pray.

A Prayer in whatsoever trouble.
O Lord my God in Jesus Christ, who art only wise in disposing all things for
all men, and to whose will all creatures in Heaven, Earth and Sea are subject;
and none, be he never so mighty, can withstand what thou will have done: Open
thine eyes and behold me, open thine ears and hear me, open thine hands and
relieve me. I am in trouble, not by chance, but of thine own will; not in
thine anger to destroy me, but in thy love to reform me; my sins I do
confess have offended thee, and yet are they strong in me, it is a deadly
disease which none can cure* but thou through the blood of thy son; O wash me
thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sins, use not thy
severity against me, O Lord, for I were never able to abide it: but as thou
have begun gently to correct me, so proceed not as a just Judge, but as a
loving Father; so shall not I wax worse and worse, but shall grow from virtue
to virtue, from faith to repentance, and consequently to newness of life by
thy spirit.

Make therefore thy corrections light unto me by thy supporting hand, that
though they be many, they exceed not my power to bear them, for I am of my
self weak, but assisted by thy spirit, I shall become strong; and though I be
ignorant how to ease me of this burden, he shall teach me that repentance,
that through faith in thy Son, shall procure the mitigation of mine
afflictions: though they be many and of diverse kinds, they are all known of
thee, and all necessary for me, because thou have sent them, and that not in
vain, for all work and work together for my good through thy blessing.

I am cast down, I am brought low, I am scorned, because of my baseness and
troubles, but I bear it, and keep silence when I hear the vpbraidings and
contempt of my late familiars, who abandon my ancient-society, because they wax
aloft and I become low: this yet comes not to pass without thee, thy hand is
in every action for the good of thine: if enemies assail me, thou biddest
them; if poverty and want oppress me, thou sendest it; if sickness afflict
me, thou do it; and therefore good: and none of these shall exceed my
strength, through thy strength. As for mine enemies thou can bridle them, for
poverty and want thou can supply them, for sickness and carnal infirmities
thou can cure them: all these have their turns to visit me, only to turn
me to thee.

Lord I come unto thee, reject me not, I pray unto thee, deny me not; but as
thou have ears to hear; and eyes to see, even from Heaven, hear my prayers
and behold mine afflictions; they are great, yet they show the greatness of
thy love, that would not that I perish, therefore embrace I thy corrections
as a gentle yoke, not heavy but only to my carnal part, to which every cross
seems a curse, and every medicine seems mortal.

Bear with my weakness Lord, and lay not much trouble upon me, but according
to the measure of mine affliction, let the measure of my patience be, and the
measure of thy mercies above measure.

And as thou obseruest my sins, so consider what correction is fit for my
reformation; I know thou art just, but most sweetly tempered with mercy, yet no
equality between thy mercy and thy justice, for all thy ways are mercy and
truth, and there is no injustice in thy feuerity, for thou show mercy to
whom thou wile show mercy, and executest justice justly.

Who then can complain in whatsoever sharp affliction? when all men's sins
are the cords that draw them upon them, and no man deserves thy mercy to be
freed from them, therefore disclaim I any merit of mine, Lord, to be
released, and crave only mercy, for thou in thy mercy wilt bless the
righteous, and with favor wilt compass him about as with a shield, so that no
affliction, cross or trouble shall be too heavy for him.

Thou Lord have promised to be a refuge for the poor, yea a refuge in due
time, even in greatest afflictions. O hide me therefore in thy Tabernacle, in
the secret place of thy pauilion hide me, and set me upon a sure rock.

VERSE 6. That he will now lift up my head above mine enemies round about me:
therefore will I offer in his Tabernacle sacrifices of joy, I will sing and
praise the Lord.
David having bin long beset with enemies (after he was co^stituted and also
anointed King by Samuel) by the malice of Saul, who sought his death, and
continued many years in continual troubles, wherein being exercised, he betook
himself to prayer to God, living in hope that the time would come wherein he
should be freed from Saul's tyranny, and as he was anointed, so should he be
at length eustalled King, having in many years little or no breathing time, or
freedom from afflictions, yet was his faith strong, and his confidence in God
firm, as appears by the first, second and third verses of this 27. Psalm,
wherein he declares the favor of God toward him, that he was his light and
his salvation, and his strength, so that he feared not Saul, nor whatsoever
wicked enemies, being assured that if they came upon him to take away his life,
God would make them to stumble and fall, as by his own hands and Gods
providence Goliath fell, and after Saul his enemy by his own sword: so that in
the first Uerse he took courage through faith in God, and sang, In the time
of trouble God shall hide me in his Tabernacle, in the secret place of his
Pauilion shall he hide me and set me upon a Rock. And in this verse, Now shall
he lift up mine head above mine enemies round about me.

When Saul was dead his mighty enemy, he took the Government of his Kingdom,
but was not yet free from enemies; whereby we may see, that the death of one
enemy is the life of another; and to teach us not to be secure at any time, but
when one danger is past, to look for another: yet not without Hope, though
cast down, in the end to be lifted up and raised again. For as the Moon
wareth full, and decreaseth and the Sea ebbeth and flows, and as the sky
clears and cloudeth; so do the estates of men, high and low, rise and fall,
and fall and rise. What a fall had Joseph, being the darling of his Father, to
be sold as a slave, to be falsely accused, and to be strictly imprisoned, and
yet in the end to be so highly advanced?

Now, says David, shall he lift up my head: as if he could limit God the time
to raise him. No doubt, it was not his meaning to tie God to a certain time:
but when Saul his Predecessor was dead, and the Crown open sor him, he might
well say* Now, that is, now has God appointed the time to bring that to pass,
which long before he had promised.

Indeed when he was made King, he might well say, that God had lifted up his
head above his enemies round about him; for he had many, as before is showed,
and net a few, even of Saul's followers after; who when they saw David exalted,
might envy his advancement, being lifted up so far above them, and had then
power to recompense their wickedness against him. But he had no reuengefull
spirit; if he had had, he would have revenged himself upon Shemey, that
railed on him, and cursed him; and upon Doeg, that discovered his abode to
Saul: Neither of these did he touch, but as touching Shemey, though he swore
unto him that he would not slay him; yet he commanded Solomon, that he should
cause his hoare head to go to the grave with blood: which it seems he spoke
by the spirit of prophecy, foreseeing that he should die by the sword.

Thus David delivered from his enemies, and lifted up above them, shows the
wonderful power of God in preserving him, and his providence and love in
advancing him, yet continued he not long without his troubles, and enemies to
exercise him, though he were now established in his Kingdom: for he having
peace and security a while, we find into what sins he fell, though he were
advanced above his corporal enemies, his spiritual foes grew stronger than
he; therefore it is good that the children of God, though never so great in the
world, have afflictions and troubles, lest they forget God, as this godly King
for a time did, yet upon repentance God raised him again: Which example of
sinning we must avoid, and imitate his repentance.

By his assured confidence in God he still withstood, and prevailed against all
that rose up against him: none could make him afraid, but rested still assured
that God would now, namely whenever he was beset with danger, lift up his
head above all his enemies round about him: His enemies in their policies,
became fools; in their strength, weak; and all their devices brought to
naught. So that David might well sing this joyful Song, The Lord has lifted
up my head above all mine enemies round about me.

Nothing prevails without or against God: None can be lifted up to sit safely
without God: therefore the man that is wise being advanced, will-imitate David
in faith, and a holy resolution: then shall he mount that rock that shall
never be moved, God shall maintain his lot, so that troubles shall not dismay
him, enemies shall not hurt him, neither shall any thing make him afraid.

None must yet stand in conceit, that David's infirmities and falls should be a
privilege for them to commit sin; but rather let his fall be a-motiue to
them, to be watchful over their ways, for the preventing of like danger, and
to beware of security: For easy it is for a man to fall of himself, as David
did, but without God not to rise again, and repent as David did. Though he
fell and was lifted up, Saul fell and never rose; Peter fell and rose again;
but Judas fell, and that finally.

David had an eye unto his ways, and respect unto his walkings, to prevent a
second fall, so as his enemies could not prevail: yet he confessed, that it
was the Lord that supported him, and made him to abide in safety. It was not
his own power, or wit, or policy, but the mercy of God that preserved him, and
that lifted up his head above his enemies. He was constant, and waited the
Lords leisure* he made not haste as he might have done, having Saul twice
within his power: though he were anointed King, yet would he lay no violent
hands upon him that was pre-anointed and invested, but waited his time, as
Joseph did, whose head was lifted up above his envious brethrer. Mordochay, and
the Jews likewise with patience waited the time, and were lifted up above
H^man, but otherwise, higher by the gallows than they.

Many are lifted up above their enemies in conceit, and yet themselves lifted
up as enemies against themselves: for the more man insulteth in pride over
other men, the more the mighty triumph over the weak, the rich over the poor,
the glorious over the base: and the more that they in authority abuse and
tyrannize over them they govern, so much the further off are they from the
true lifting up, how high soever they carry their heads: and so much the more
enemies they are unto themselves.

There is no true lifting up without love, for God is love, he lifts up the
heart and soul through faith above the outward man, even to have their
conversation in heaven. This is the true and sweetest advancement, this is the
glorious lifting up of the head: And thus was David also lifted up spiritually,
together with his outward lifting up, above his corporal enemies.

Many good men are advanced to honor and office; To what end? Not only not to
gain earthly glory thereby, or to enrich themselves by sinister means
thereby, and to abuse their places, and wrong their lifter and lifting up: but
as David being lifted up, did acknowledge it to be the Lords doing: and as he
was advanced by him, so did he seek by all means to advance his glory; and
though he were lifted up above his enemies, he insulted not over them, but gave
God the praise, that his enemies triumphed not over him.

Praise and thanksgiving are due unto God, for every benefit and blessing he
bestows upon us; and he requires it, especially of them whom he lifts up
above their enemies: and that they be lowly in their own eyes, and loving to
all, even to their enemies. And to learn also of Paul, in a low estate to be
patient, and being lifted up to be thankful, neither to be grieved at the one,
nor to glory too much in the other: In the one, pray to be constant; in the
other, give glory to God.

David, when he knew by his anointing, that he should be King after Saul's
death, continued yet humble, and was yet contented to keep his fathers sheep
(a mean office, for a man anointed to be a King) and thought it no
disparagement. And when he was indeed exalted, he set not out his glory by
outward vanities: neither was he guarded with swaggering, swearing Drunkards,
and with vile and vicious persons, though with sufficient noble attendants (his
Worthies) abandoning his house of the known wicked, and retained such into his
service as he found to fear God. And in stead of worldly vainglory, he went
into the Temple of God, and there offered the sacrifices of prayer and praise:
and not himself alone, but called the people together, and with them went, not
once, but many times into the house of the Lord: He was not ashamed, being a
King, to be the foremost in the service of God. And let us praise God for his
like mercy vouchsafed unto us, and let us imitate godly examples.

Here is a lively pattern of a thankful heart to God for his advancement,
contrary to the course of many, who being lifted up, not above their enemies,
but above their equals; of whom many give rather thanks to their own wit and
policy, and to inferior means, friends, or money. But such their advancement
is but as the building of Babel, and though their language be not confounded
(but many times changed) their manners often altered: They rise without God,
and oftentimes we see them fall of themselves. If therefore thou be exalted,
remember David, by whom, and by what means he was lifted up. He prayed, and
the Lord heard him, and he gave the whole glory to God.

Whatsoever thou art, be thou never so eminent, think not prayer and praising
God to be base exercises, or things indifferent. They are the works of Gods
Saints, and therein they exercise themselves day and night. But woe to them,
that only make their prayers and suits unto men, forgetting God, and that
being lifted up, offer the sacrifice of praise unto men to their own devices,
to their Silver and Gold, etc. Forget not God* that can wink at ambitious men's
lifting up, and laugh at their falls.

But when God affords lawful means to lift up any, he gives the^ assurance
of his approbation, and if they pray for good success, they shall prosper and
profit the place they execute, and the place shall justify their integrity:
for, as without him, nothing can come to good effect; So, to whatsoever action
he sets his helping hand, it cannot but prosper: And he that is by him
lifted up, let him not forget to pray and to praise God, lest he hurl him
down again, and his latter end prove worse than the beginning.

A Prayer with thanksgiving to God, for defense from enemies, in that they have
not prevailed against us.
O Eternal, most wise, most loving, and most powerful Lord God, who guidest,
gouernest, and disposest all things for all men, according to thine own will,
and know what is meet, necessary, and expedient for all those that are
thine; Grant that whatsoever befalls me here in this mortal life, be it
poverty or riches, prosperity or adversity, trouble or peace, yea, if
enemies rise up against me, all may be for my good, for as much as nothing
comes to pass but by thy providence in love.

Poverty thou suppliest with plenty, if thou see it good for me: troubles
thou can remove, if expedient, and can send me quietness and comfort;
enemies thou can restrain, and howsoever they seem to insult over me, thou
can lift up my head above them: And though I be brought low, and for a time
endure disgrace, ignominy and shame, even among my familiars; yet as long as it
pleases thee to accept and retain me in thy favor, I shall not be
discouraged, being assured that thou can and wilt in thy good time show thy
self the God of my salvation: thou will give me favor again, even of those
that now scoff and deride me for my miseries, they shall again receive me
in love, seeing thy fatherly respect unto me: For I know, that I seeking help
and comfort of thee, shall again rejoice and be glad in thee: for though I be
poor and needy, though troubles abou^d and enemies rage against me, thou
think on me, and according to thy promise wilt never leave me nor forsake
me: therefore if all the world disdain me, be thou favorable unto me. O help
me and deliver me from them that afflict me, and save me, for I trust in thee;
and none that trusts in thee shall be cast down for ever. I power out my
whole desire before thee, my sorrows and my sighs are not hid from thee; and
though I seem to faint, and my heart to fail me, because my lovers and my
friends leave me, by reason of my miseries, yet I wait on thee, for coming, I
know thy help will come: for thou art an upright Judge, though thou have
brought me low, I know thou can and wilt lift me up again; and they that
think thou have utterly forsaken me, shall see that there is a God that has a
care of his dejected people; though they say now, Where is thy God in whom thou
seem so much to trust? Does he help thee or relieve thee? thou call upon
him, but he hears thee not; thou seem to seek him, but find no help
at his hands. O grievous tentation to a weake-minde: but it daunteth me not, I
am confident in thy mercies; I faint not at these reproaches, for they vpbraid
not me, but thee, saying as it were in their hearts, it is bootlesse for the
distressed to trust in thee.

O consider this, my God, and permit me not (though sore oppressed) to give
over calling continually and faithfully upon thee, for with thee there is
mercy, and with thee is timely redemption: though thou seem to tarry long and
to give no ear unto my prayers (which makes those that are ignorant of thy
ways to think thou have utterly forsaken me) yet I know and am assured that
thou forgettest me not; neither do thou so leave me but that thou will
return unto me again, and in the multitude of thy mercies lift me up again:
and then shall they that thus have censured me, find and confess, that indeed
I have not trusted in thee in vain, and that thou art a God indeed, powerful,
able and loving, willing and ready to help thine in the time of most need: I
am thine, O Lord, for in all my troubles I have hitherunto found thee my God,
my helper, and my refuge, though there be that have said there is no help for
me in thee, I have found them liars, for thou have never failed me nor forsaken
me hitherunto, neither will thou fail me or forsake me for ever.

Thou have ever been my rock and fortress, and have ever delivered me,
therefore art thou worthy to be praised, yea I will praise thee, for I was left
unto thee as soon as I was borne, and thou have ever been a loving father
unto me: though as a father thou have gently corrected me, yet thy loving
kindness thou have never withholden from me; but when in my greatest troubles
and afflictions I have been like to perish, thou have not left me to the will
of mine enemies; and when they they thought to rejoice most at my miseries,
thou have lifted up my head above mine adversaries: in thee therefore will I
trust, and not be afraid what man can do unto me. Haste thee to help me, O God
of my salvation, and praised be thy holy name for ever, Amen.

VERSE 7. Hearken unto my voice, O Lord, when I cry, have mercy also upon me
and hear me.
THese words of David import a most earnest prayer unto God, though seeming
short, yet contains matter of good consideration even of us, yt in all our
necessities we should cry unto God, and teaches us that when we are in
distress we may not lie still and think that God will help us, if we call
not upon him; and again we may call and cry and not be heard. As David's
enemies when they were deservedly overcome, cried for help at God, but he
neglected them and rejected them, because they cried being a wicked people in
their distress for help at Gods hands whom they before despised. But
contrarily, the children of Israel, the people of God cried unto him in their
distress, and the Lord heard them and delivered them, 1. Sam. 12. 10, 11.
There are vocal cries, and there are cries that none hear but God, as the
guiltless blood of Abel yet cries unto God for vengeance. Likewise the sins
of Sodom and Gomorrah, cried unto God for judgment, as sin and murder daily
do: these are woeful cries, silent, and yet God hears them in displeasure;
whereby we may learn, that sin, and chiefly the murder of Innocents, be
it never so secret, do cry and shall be revealed, and though never so seeming
to be grounded upon pretended devotion and zeal, it cries to God for
vengeance.

David's cry was of another kind; for where the former cries were the cries of
the sins of the wicked against their wills, for revenge against their own
impieties; David's tended to the glory of God and his own succor and safety:
and therefore said he, Hearken unto my voice, O Lord, when I cry; Which
teaches us not to be mute, when any occasion of fear or affliction may move
us to seek the help of God: We must cry unto God, not unto dumb stocks and
stones, nor to any dead creature or Angel, whom they are fondly framed to
represent, but unto the living God; he only can hear, be our prayers never so
secret and silent. He heard Moses and Anna, only moving their lips without
sound. So that it is not the loudness of the voice, but the affection of the
heart that makes the cry, where unto God gives ear: many no doubt can and do
cry Lord, Lord, and that loud enough, and yet they are not heard because they
cry not in faith. And therefore David did not only say, Lord hearken unto my
cry, but withal craved that God would have mercy upon him, for men may cry
long enough and loud enough, and not be heard unless GOD show mercy. Therefore
says David, Hearken unto my voice when I cry, have mercy also upon me and
hear me; for God hears no man's prayer but in his mercy, and therefore is
mercy in the first place so be sought, but by faith, for he yt trusts in the
Lord, mercy shall compass him about; though we be in never so great misery or
danger, if we cry faithfully unto God, he will hear us, and in his mercy
help us: As David complained unto God, saying, I am in a wonderful strait,
let us now fall into the hands of the Lord, (for his mercies are great) and let
us not fall into the hands of men. God shows mercy unto thousands that love
him and keep his Commandments, and hears them: but the wicked and such as
contemn his Word he will not hear, for they cry not in says, they cry only
for their own necessities, not referring the end of their desires to Gods
glory; they cry of themselves with the lips only, they come in their own
names, and respect only themselves and their own outward wants, and feel not
nor acknowledge their inward defects; they are sinners and repent them not,
they ask therefore and receive not; They cry unto me, says God, but I will
not hear them, because they pray without faith and repentance. Therefore when
affliction and anguish shall fall upon them, they shall call upon me, but I
will not answer; they shall seek me, but shall not find me. But the faithful
afflicted he hears, and such as depart from their sins and walk
righteously before him he considers: as David himself confesses, I cried
unto the Lord, says he, and he heard me, and delivered me out of all my
fear and trouble. They that fear the Lord need fear no trouble, for mercy
compasses them about, on every side Gods providence attends them, and they
no sooner call upon God but he hears, nay before they cry he is ready to
help them; for his eye is ever upon them, even at an instant to prevent
whatsoever danger; therefore may the faithful go comfortably forward in the
strength of the Lord trusting in him, and they shall never be ashamed: he is
our strength and salvation and our defense: let us power out ^ur hearts before
him and say, Hearken unto my voice, O Lord, when I cry have mercy also upon me
and hear me. Then will he assuredly hear us and help us: he will delay no
further time than may be for our good, he may seem unto us long in coming,
but he will come in a time convenient, and his delays work only patience and
hope in us, which if these graces have their perfect working in us, we shall
find that he will never fail us nor forsake us, howsoever such as are
ignorant of Gods power and providence may think, that unless God come at our
first call he will not come at all, which is an argument they believe not Gods
promises, for if they did they would make no such haste, but wait the Lords
leisure; not that he is so busted as he cannot intend either to hear us or
help us, for his ear is always open to hear, and his hand always able to
help every man as well as one, and that at an instant; but we may not limit
the holy one of Israel, for he knows the times and seasons fit for every of
his intentions; shall we think that David in his extremest dangers did not
pray for delivery, yet though his says were great, he was not presently set
free, though he cried out, How long Lord, how long, will thou absent thy self
for ever? Joseph likewise in his captivity and imprisonment, shall we think
that he cried not unto the Lord for delivery, and that instantly? and yet he
suffered him to endure the very iron setters and stocks until Gods appointed
time came, and then when the counsel of the Lord had sufficiently tried them,
then he delivered them, and showed the abundance of his mercies toward them in
advancing them both: we may not therefore murmr or repine at Gods
corrections, though they continue in our opinions long; it is not only that it
is unsavory to our carnal minds but for want of faith, for where faith is
strong it produces hope, and in hope we wait with patience; and we find by
experience that hope and patience shall not be in vain. Then whosoever is
afflicted, let them cry unto God to have mercy upon them, and that in a lively
faith, and he will at least case them, if he do not altogether deliver them:
he will keep his own under his own hand, and not suffer them to have the
freedom of the raines at their own pleasure, knowing the unruliness of our
own nature, which if he curb it not, will run into every sin, and make no
conscience of any impiety: as we may see by holy David himself, when God
permitted him but to have a little liberty, a small breathing time from his
troubles; into what sins did he run, yet a man chosen of God; if he so
far forgot himself, how shall we that have not his spiritual gifts refrain
our selves from offending God more grosely in our security?

Troubles and afflictions fall not upon us without Gods providence, though
Satan works what he can to trouble us, as appears in his trying of Job, to
draw us from God, but howsoeruer he aims to make us distrust God by his
tentations and afflicting us, the more do the children of God clean unto God
for succor, and cry unto him for mercy: and that which Satan intends to be
for our hurt, God works it for our good, for all things work together for
the good of them that love God, and are called of his purpose, namely, his own
elect, who as they are truly Gods own, so they depend upon him alone, and know
that what cross or affliction soever befall them, it comes from none but from
their own loving father, for their especial good to prevent greater danger, as
the holy Apostle Paul himself confesses, yt lest he should be exalted out of
measure through the abundance of revelations, there was given unto him a prick
in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet him, because he should not be
exalted out of measure. God seeing our corrupt nature, always apt to be puffed
up with a kind of pride and security, when we feel the abundance of Gods
graces and favors toward us, in his wisdom and mercy takes down our over
good conceits of our selves by corrections: as David before he was afflicted
went awry; Manasses a great Idolater, by troubles was reclaimed, and then he
prayed unto God and humbled himself; we may see it also in the prodigal
son, who as long as he had money to bestow upon his vanities and lusts, he
lived a rebellious life against his father; but when he was afflicted by penury
and want, he returned home to his father, repenting and crying unto him in
effect as here David does; O father hearken unto my voice, I cry unto thee for
pardon, have mercy also upon me and hear me, as much as if he had said,
Father forgive me.

Gods corrections, though grievous and unsavory for a time, yet good and
profitable for us, we are thereby the more drawn from the delighting in sin,
and made more obedient unto the will of God, especially if they be seasoned
with reverence to God that sends them with faith, repentance, and fervent
prayer: then shall we find that they will bring us (being exercised with
them) the quiet fruit of righteousness: Wherefore let us not only not be
discouraged at the chastisements of God, for they are in love; but rather make
use of them for our humiliation, and unfeigned reformation. Adding daily and
continual prayers unto God, who smites us; neither to kill us orto maime us,
but only to keep us in awe, having a special eye unto his hand: for, when we
intend or are committing of any sin against God let us do as scholars do,
who when they are in their unhappiness, have one eye (as it were) to see
whether the master observes them or no, and should give them a clap before
they were aware: We are to be as wary of the hand of God, and as the maiden of
the hand of her mistrisse; so shall God hearken unto our voice when we cry, he
will have mercy also upon us, and hear us.

A Prayer, that God will have mercy upon us and hear us.
Have mercy upon me, O God, have mercy upon me, for my soul trusts in thee,
and in the shadow of thy wings will I trust, until mine afflictions come to an
end. I will call upon thee, O hearken unto my voice when I cry unto thee, have
mercy also upon me, and hear me; But how can thou hear, unless I speak?
Yes, Lord, I know that thou hear the very silent sighs and groans of the
faithful heart. As for my vocal voice, it is but the voice of a sinful man,
but an outward voice that sounds but in the air, it only enters into the
ears of man and beasts, passing through the throat, and sounds by the lips, a
voice of no force, to pierce the skies, to sound through the clouds, to mount
the heavens; it is a low voice, a weak voice; it ascends not where thou, my
loving God sit, in the heaven of heavens: and therefore how can it procure
thine attention any thing at all? Why then should I say unto thee, hearken? Why
did David say unto thee, hearken? He was assured to be heard: Therefore I pray
thee hearken, O my God, Hearken unto the voice of my cry, have mercy also upon
me and hear me. Hear the voice of my renewed heart, the voice of my soul
that figheth for my sins: have mercy therefore upon me, O Lord, and pardon
me, that I may so cry, and it may please thee so to hear as I may hear thine
answer within, as I cry within. Lord, let thy holy Spirit both speak to thee,
and answer me: for I cannot preuailingly cry unto thee, unless thou cry in me
by thine own Spirit, sanctifying my spirit, and answering my spirit again by
thy spirit. Hearken, even unto thy self, speaking in me; and let my spirit
hear thy spirit, speaking to me, and in me. So shall my soul sound forth a
glorious voice, a sharp and piercing voice, a voice whose sound shall ascend
above the clouds, where I have a most loving and prevailing Mediator with thee,
even Jesus Christ the righteous: in whose name, and for whose sake, thou will
deny nothing unto those that come and cry faithfully unto thee. Then I, even I,
shall hear a most sweet and comfortable Echo of Grace resound in the ears of
my soul, that shall assure me of answer of every my petitions.

When I cry, Lord forgive me my sins, I shall hear, Thy sins, O man, are
forgiven thee: when I shall say, Open thou my lips, I shall hear, Open thy
mouth, and I will fill it: When I shall say, Lord I believe, I shall hear,
Thou beleeuedst, therefore shall thou be saved: When I call for strength in my
tentations, I shall hear, My grace is sufficient for thee: When I shall call
unto thee in my necessities for help, I shall hear, I will never fail thee,
nor forsake thee. This is thy goodness, O Lord, and thy mercy, therefore will
I evermore pray unto thee: O hearken unto my voice, when I cry unto thee, have
mercy also upon me, and hear me.

The ground of all my comforts in all my troubles to be eased, is thy mercy;
yea, thy mercy only. In me there is nothing worthy to be regarded of thee,
it is thy mercy only that makes me to dwell in safety: And had it not been
of thy free mercy, I had bin confounded long agone; therefore in thy mercy
hear me when I call upon thee, and in thy mercy relieve me, in thy mercy
help me. Then shall neither enemies prevail against me, poverty and want
shald not overmuch oppress me, sickness shall not dismay me, nor any outward
or inward trouble, sin nor Satan prevail against me: For thou, O God, art
the God of my salvation, my glory, the God of my strength, in thee will I ever
trust. So be it.

VERSE 8. When thou said, seek ye my face, mine heart answered unto thee, O
Lord, I will seek thy face.
IN this verse, there is (as it were) a familiar conference between the Lord
and David: God says unto David, and in the plural number, to all that are
his, Seek ye my face; And David again in the name of the faithful replies,
Thy face, O Lord, will I seek. It seems to be a strange command, that we
weak Creatures that cannot look with steadfast eyes upon the Sun, that is but
one of his inferior Creatures, but shall be stricken blind with the radiant
beams thereof, should seek and behold his face, which none could ever see and
live. And it seems likewise to be as strange a promise in David, to say that
he would seek the face of God. To seek the Lord, is in many places of
Scripture enjoined us: but to seek and to see his face, is not so frequently
commanded. But these phrases of speech differ not, for both signify the
seeking of his help, and are not literally to be understood, as if God had a
visible face to be seen; or that he had a corporal being to be felt. God is a
spirit, and spiritually to be sought, and spiritually to be discerned, and is
not otherwise to be seen, but in the face of Jesus Christ, who is also now
glorified in the heavens, not visibly to be apprehended by us, until his
second coming.

What is then meant by the seeking of the face of God? only his favor and his
protection in the time of our danger: And to seek God, is to implore his
power, providence, and help in our afflictions: As Jeremiah comforting the
captive Israelites in Babylon: You shall go and pray unto me, (says God) and
I will hear you, and if you seek me, ye shall find me, if you seek me with
all your hearts. And again, Azariah, said to Asa, Judah and Benjamin, The Lord
is with you while ye be with him: And if ye seek him, he will be found of
you; but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. God is present with the
faithful by his continual helping power, as long as they hold him fast by
their prayers, and wrestle with him with their faithful petitions, as Jacob
did with the Angel, and cry unto him till he answer, and never leave seeking
of him, till he find him. If we seek him in the Word, we shall find him
there, as the spirit has described him, both a merciful God, and a consuming
fire. The faithful find him merciful, even in this life: the wicked shall
find him a severe Judge hereafter. The first shall see his face, and rejoice:
the second shall see his face, and tremble. The first shall see, and behold the
beauty of his countenance with great gladness for ever: the second shall see
his face for a moment in his last sentence, and that with horror.

God says unto all, Seek ye my face, but few with their hearts do seek
him: And that is the reason that many call upon him and are not heard; they
seem to seek him, and find him not: but unto the truly faithful, he
offers himself as he did to Moses; My presence shall go with thee, and I
will give thee rest. This is the true beholding of the face of God, to enjoy
his presence; namely, when he is ready in his power and providence to help us
in our afflictions, and to deliver us in our dangers; any other presence of his
in this life we need not seek, his glory is above the Heavens: What is man
then that he should seek to see his all-glorious face here in earth, which
Moses saw but in a bush obscurely, in respect of his full and complete glory;
and yet with that sight his face did shine so, as the people could not abide
the glory of his face? How much less, the glory of the most unspeakable beauty
of ye face of ye most high? whose dwelling is in the heavens, and whose power
is over all his works in heaven and earth? And therefore says David; O Lord
our God, how excellent is thy name in all the world, which have set thy glory
above the heavens, where he sits and sees the troubles and afflictions of
his, and is near them when they call upon him, he turns his face and loving
countenance toward them, to cheer them and comfort them; as for the wicked,
he beholds them a far off. I have set the Lord (says David) always before
me, for he is at my right hand, therefore I shall not slide: As if he had said,
I see the face of God continually: and he it is that preserves me from
danger; so that mine heart is glad, and my tongue rejoices, my flesh also does
rest in hope. The tongue of men or Angels cannot sufficiently express what God
is: only the heavens do show unto us his glory, the Sun, the Moon, and
Stars fixed in the Firmament, the Earth, the Sea, and all that are therein,
all being the works of his hands. This God did David seek, to this God did
David pray, and he turned his face unto him, and delivered him out of all his
fear: To him I will pray.

A Prayer that God will never hide his face from us.
THY favor, O Lord, which thou show unto us, weak and unworthy creatures,
is as an vnfathomable Sea of love, who becommest (as it were) a suter unto us
to come to seek and to see thy face: Thou the most beloved seem to make
love unto us: Thou the most mighty creator call us unto thee thy weak
creatures; And shall we, hateful, deformed, and vile wretches, stand therefore
in conceit, that we are lovely and beautiful, because thou, great Jehovah,
absolute in all perfection, do thus entreat us? Thou say, Seek my face;
And what is it, but as if thou said, Come and see me, come and receive me,
come and dwell with me. It seems to be rather the voice of a familiar friend,
than of the Creator of heaven and earth.

But when I consider thy greatness, thy Majesty, and glory, thy power and
omnipotency, I cannot but fear, considering what I am, and rather desire to
hide me from thee as Adam did, than to intrude my self into thy presence in my
deformities, and to cover my nakedness of all goodness, with the fig leaves
of shameful absence, than to come into thy presence, being naked of all
spiritual virtues.

Should I come into thy presence, O most powerful and holy Lord God, in the
bespotted garments of mine own corruptions? Then may thou well stand with
the burning sword of thy fury, to keep me from the sweet Paradise of thy
loving and amiable presence: amiable in deed to them whom thou make worthy,
but most fearful unto such as have not on the wedding garment of the
righteousness of JESUS CHRIST. If thou observe the selfe-deseruings of the
best men, and deal with them accordingly, who can see thy face and live? Who
dare to seek thy face as of himself worthy?

But since it pleases thee to call me, though unworthy, and to accept me as
worthy; how can I but give all diligence to attend thy call? Should I stand
consulting with flesh and blood, whether I should seek thy face and live; or
remain out of thy favor, and perish eternally?

Thou say, Seek my face: O that my heart could truly answer and faithfully
perform the seeking of thy face; for I cannot say, of my own power, I will
seek thy face: Though my spiritual part be willing, my carnal part is
weak. I desire yet to seek and to find thee; for with thee is the well of
life: Thine eyes are upon them that fear thee, and thine ears open unto their
cry. Show me therefore the light of thy countenance, and turn thy face toward
me that I may see it, in thy favor and loving kindness.

Thy face is no way so lively to be seen, as in the Image of thy Son, who
although he were here in the earth in the form of a servant, he had the
invisible form of thine own Essence; and is now ascended and glorified in the
heavens, endowed with that absolute glory which he had from the beginning with
thee, whose visible form cannot be seen with mortal eyes, whose face yet
shines more gloriously than it did upon the holy Mount, which Peter, James and
John, to their unspeakable comfort, beheld with their eyes, that visible glory
of his cannot be here seen, it is hid from us until the time; but he
vouchsafes unto us his Word, wherein we see him through faith.

O seek his face evermore my soul, seek his Word, believe his promises,
observe his Will. Grant Lord that I may fly sin and embrace righteousness;
that I may pray continually, love all men, bear with the weak, be patient in
troubles, and thankful unto thee for all thy mercies, and grant Lord that I
may seek thee while it is to day, let me omit no time in seeking thy face:
thou say, Seek my face; let me cast off all impediments and clogs of worldly
occasions, and cast my care upon thee, for thou have promised to care for me:
what thou have said is true, what thou have promised is Yea and Amen; as sure
as if I were possessed of what I ask.

I am in danger, I will seek thy face as David did, who found it in the
Wilderness pursued by Saul. I have enemies, I will seek thy face as Eliah
did, being threatened by Iezabel. If I be in prison, I will seek thy face as
Joseph did, who was delivered and advanced: what misery or danger, trouble or
affliction soever it shall please thee to inflict upon me, I will seek thy
face, so shall I not be confounded in the perilous time; and in whatsoever
calamity I am, be thou near unto me and save me.

VERSE 9. Hide not thy face from me, nor cast thy servant away in displeasure;
thou have been my succor, leave me not, neither forsake me O God of my
salvation.
BY this prayer of David it may appear that God sometimes hides his face from
his dearest children, and seems as if he had cast them away in his anger,
which yet though it be fearful, it is not small, for he continues not long
in his displeasure; though the weakness of men (be they never so sanctified)
will many times show it self, and produce such corrupt fruits as may incense
God to displeasure, and enforce him to absent himself from them for a time, in
so much as he may seem to have left them quite to their own corrupt wills, as
it seems holy David felt some alteration as it were of Gods dealing toward
him, that he cried out, hide* not thy face from me, whereby it seems David had
not that comfort of Gods presence as in times past he had, especially when he
was afraid that God had cast him away in displeasure. It may be the weakness
of David's faith, (which is not at all times alike strong) could not so well
apprehend Gods mercies as before, or that he felt his own infirmities to grow
stronger, and his spiritual powers weaker, so that in the combat between the
flesh and spirit, he found his inward part the weaker, and so suspecting as it
were the love and presence of God to aid the one and to suppress the other,
he thought God had left him.

But it seems his outward enemies did more prevail against him than before,
and being so oppressed by them or afraid of them, he turned himself unto God,
but he seemed to hide his face from him, and therefore prayed so instantly that
God would not cast him away being his servant, in displeasure: yet David had
the true fear of God in his heart, although he were a little shaken with
doubting for the absence of Gods presence; and necessary it is, that we should
sometimes feel the want of Gods presence with us, that we should not too much
presume upon our own worthiness, power and strength, to stand firm without
him, for if he leave us, be it never so little, such is our frailty, that we
begin to faint, and our spiritual strength saileth us, which if we can
apprehend, it is an argument that we are not altogether destitute of the grace
of God, for if we be so carried away with our own corruptions as we never
feel our own wants of spiritual graces, we have no grace at all. The wicked
and such as sin without touch of conscience, they never feel the want of
that they never had, the spirit of God, and therefore run on still in their
impieties, following every kind of carnal destres with greediness.

It is not so with them that God has chosen and enlightened, for they find in
themselves the least of Gods absence if but for a moment, for they are seldom
idle in one kind of holy duty or another; they either meditate on the word and
works of God, they pray or offer the sacrifice of thanks to God, and when they
find in them selves a dullness to pray, or ignorance how to pray, they
presently suspect that they have deserved by some means that God has left
them to themselves, who of their own power without the help of the Spirit of
God cannot think a good thought, much less faithfully and seruently pray unto
him, and then feeling the grief of their hearts that they cannot be comforted
by the exercise of these holy duties, find the fault to be in themselves, and
that God for some sin committed, or some good duty omitted, is angry with
them. And therefore, as David does here, they cry out unto God, O hide not thy
face from me, nor cast thy servant away in displeasure. So fearful are the
children of God, to lose the benefit of his presence, as they think nothing so
irksome unto them as his absence; and therefore have always a kind of holy
jealousy, that the least sin they do commit, will cause the Lord* to hide
himself from them. Therefore when David considered his infirmities, he could
confess and say, Wicked deeds have prevailed against me, but thou will be
merciful unto my sin. God is merciful to them that are sorry for their
sins, which sorrow and repentance is the gift of God, and the children of God
instantly and often call to God for it, as a mean whereby they may redeem his
love and obtain his presence, and the beauty of his face again. And therefore
says David, being as it were forsaken, and had lost his chief comfort, the
loving countenan^^ of the Lord. Turn us again, O Lord God of hosts (says he)
cause thy face to shine, and we shall be safe: Return we beseech thee, O God
of hosts, look down from Heaven and visit us again with the brightness of
thy loving countenance, and hide not thy face from us, nor cast us away in
displeasure. There is nothing more causes the Spirit of God to leave us than
our sins, and neglect of the true service of God, and nothing retains him
more than the continual meditation of heavenly things, seruent prayer with a
godly life; he that thus exercises himself, has God always with him, he
hides not his face from such; but in what misery, trouble, fear or affliction
they are, they are sure either to receive outward deliverance or inward
comfort, and to say with David, yet my soul keeps silence unto God, of him
comes my salvation; yet he is my strength and my defense, therefore shall I
not much be moved; not much, we may have some doubtings in our heavy
afflictions, and cry out with David, O God why have thou forsaken me; and
though we be moved, we shall never be removed from the loving favor of God; we
shall never fall finally into his displeasure, though for a time he seem to
hide his face from us, which he never does until we covet to hide our sins
from him, and to do the things which we think he sees not; we may not
think that God hides his all-seeing cies from our transgressions, though he
turn not his face toward us to flatter us (as it were) in our sins, for he
loves righteousness and hates iniquity; righteousness and equity are the
establishment of his throne, therefore deals he justly when he hides his
face from them that deal unjustly, from them that obey him not, from them that
neglect to call upon him in ^aith, and omit those holy duties which he
requires. How can he look upon them in love that leave him? How can he but
hide his face, and as it were, cast them away in his displeasure that never
seek him or serve him? Nay, that seek him not with a pure heart, and that
continually? for it is not enough to sin and serve him by turns, as if he
allowed us a time for our selves to take our carnal pleasures and delights in,
and a time again for him, to have our times wherein we cannot sin, either
being glutted with sin, or unable to sin. How can he but hide his face
from such? How can it be, but he must cast away such in his displeasure? David
that thus cries out, that God had hid his face from him, never took such
profane liberty, and yet through his humane frailty, fell, and that
grievously: but he lay not in it as the reprobate do; he examined his heart,
and found it corrupt, and falted it with the tears of repentance: Thou have
fed me with the bread of tears (says he) and given me tears to drink.
This is the true medicine to cure the soul that has sinned, Faith and
Repentance. And who so applies it truly to himself, as David did, shall find
ease; and although God seem sometimes to hide his face, it is but to cause us
the more to seek it, and though he seem to cast us off in displeasure, it is
but as a loving father that dissembleth extreme anger to his child that has
offended him, and makes a show as if he will utterly cast him off, determining
yet nothing less. So though God the most loving father to his children seem
often angry with us, as he seemed to be with David, it was more in show than
in deed (which we may not slightly regard, for so we may indeed turn his
fatherly displeasure into just revenge) let us observe in wisdom the Lords
ways, how indeed he never winketh long at our least sin, for many little
sins make a great cry, and when God hears their clamor he turns away
his face as a thing loathsome unto him, as he did from David for a time, who
feeling it, ran crying again unto God: O hide not thy face from me, O Lord
nor cast thy servant away in displeasure.

Thou have been my succor (says David) leave me not, neither forsake me O
God of my salvation: though David found that God had hid his face from him, and
seemed displeased with him, yet he took a godly courage through says, to put
God in mind of his former favors toward him, saying, Thou have been my
succor, and thou changest not, thou art still the same, and whom thou have
once chosen, thou never forsakest. He may be angry with his dearest children
for a time, but he endures not long in his displeasure: but when he with
rebukes does chastise a man for his sin, his beauty consumes, and all
carnal delights are as it were irksome unto him in respect of the loss of
Gods favor.

Though David seemed much to be troubled that God did hide his face from him,
and to withhold his helping hand against his enemies, yet he had hope to
redeem his favor again, because he was before his succor, which no doubt
he in his heart acknowledged, not to proceed of his own deserving, but of the
mere and free mercy of God. And therefore as he first freely chose him without
his desert, he would not cast him off in regard of his humane frailties,
incident to all men, even to ye best men; but would rather renew, maintain and
confirm those divine graces which it had pleased God before to plant in him,
and so would return again unto him in love, and turn his face toward him
again, and not utterly to leave him nor forsake him; and why? because he was
assured, that as God had promised to be, so he was, and would be, the God of
his salvation for ever: for he never fails the performance of his promises to
a thousand generations. And his gifts and callings are without repentance.
Therefore if we be chosen of God, we cleave unto God; if we cleave unto God,
God is faithful to succor us, and will never leave us nor forsake us.

Though he seem to hide his face from us a little, as he did from David, and
to be displeased with us as he seemed to be with him; we may with like
boldness build our assurance of his future help, as David did, by his former
succouring of us: And as David held it as an argument of Gods never failing
help, in that he was ence his succor; how much more may such as have often
found him their defense and succor assure themselves, that though he hide his
face for a while, he will never fail them nor forsake them? But that he will
establish his according to his promise, yt they may yet live, and not be
disappointed of his loving favor again: howsoever they seem to be forsaken,
He that trusts in the Lord, mercy shall compass him about on every side.

A Prayer that God will be always near unto us in our afflictions, and not to
hide his face and favor from us.
O Lord, hide not thy face from me, and cast me not away in thy displeasure.
Thou did not in the beginning choose me for my worthiness, O cast me not
off for my weakness; thou knew before whereof I was made, and that in me
neither was nor is any goodness at all: and therefore if thou should hide
thy face from me, I could not justly accuse thee of leuity or lightness, soon
to love, and as soon to reject; but condemn my self, in that I have cast
away thy fear, and have forgotten and neglected thy due praises for thy former
succor and goodness toward me.

I have run too far in the way of sin and vanity, by a lewd law that is
in my members, rebelling against the law of thy Spirit, incensing thee to
displeasure against me, wherein thou seem to hide thy face from me, as if
thou had never known me to be one of thine; yet Lord I know thee, and do
acknowledge that thou have been my succor, thou have been a gracious God
unto me; when I have called upon thee, thou have heard me; when I have sought
thee, thou have turned thy loving countenance toward me, thou have not left me
nor forsaken me, therefore Lord forsake me not for ever, give me not over,
leave me not unto my self, but keep me under the shadow of thine own
wings, show me the light of thy countenance again: and as thou have been
formerly my succor, leave me not now, nor forsake me, O God of my salvation.

If thou turn from me altogether, I shall altogether perish. Remember that I am
thine, and the work of thine own hands, destroy me not therefore o my God,
that which thy self have made, for there is none that can plead or maintain
my cause against thee; but as sin has cast me down, thy grace can raise
me up: I have fallen through frailty, I may rise again by faith in thee: I
have lost the view of thine amiable countenance, by turning my face unto
vanity, I may find it again if it please thee to turn me to thee, and thy
face to me.

I have been too negligent, when thou said, Seek my face, I gave not such
ear unto thy words, nor such eye unto the beauty of thy face as I ought. But
be thou pleased, now to be found when I seek thee; I pray thee hear me, now I
entreat thee: And cast me not away in displeasure, though I have displeased
thee. As long as I see thy face I am safe; but as soon as thou turnest thy
face from me, I am troubled.

When thou leauest me, I am left without spiritual hope or help, and busy my
self in things that profit not: And therefore I cannot but confess indeed,
that thou may turn away thy face from me a sinner, but remember then I
became a sinner, when thou did hide thy face from me: Yet have not I
forsaken thee, O God, neither can I go from thee wheresoever I should covet to
hide my self. No, I will not only not cover to hide my self, but I come even
as David to Saul, to discover my self unto thee. Alas, to discover my self,
when I cannot hide my self from thee? Though thou may hide thy face from me,
I cannot hide my ways from thee. No, Lord, I seek thee, let me find thee:
Leave me not, nor forsake me, O God of my salvation, nor cast me thy poorest
and meanest servant away in thy displeasure: But as thou have ever been my
succor, sustaining me, releeuing me, defending me, and comforting me; So
gracious Lord God, in Jesus Christ, continue my loving and helping father
still. And then, whatsoever, or whosoever shall rise up against me, I will
neither faint nor fear: for thou will be my succor, thou will neither fail
me nor forsake me, O God of my salvation, Amen.

VERSE 10. Though my Father and my Mother forsake me, thou Lord wilt take me
up.
IT is impossible for man to comprehend the depth of Gods unsearchable wisdom,
providence, and love toward his children: his wisdom in disposing, his
providence in finding out, and his love in bestowing things, both spiritual
and corporal upon his children necessary. In so much, as we may admire with
Saint Paul, and say; O the deepnesse of the unsearchable riches, of the
wisdom, providence, and love of God toward us, who when father, mother,
friends, and means fail us, he takes charge of us; we are all cast upon his
providence and care, even as well before, as when we are borne. And if then
father and mother fail us, or forsake us, he will take us to himself, as he
took up Moses out of the river, being cast into it in a basket of reeds in a
most desperate danger to be utterly cast away. Did father or mother preserve
him? Was it not the providence of God that saved him? Was not Joseph cast into
a pit by his Brethren, intending he should have there perished? Was he not
after sold to Merchants, and then as a slave, deprived of the aid or comfort
of father, mother, or friends, falsely accused, unjustly imprisoned? Who took
him into protection? Who took care of him? was not God alone he that preserved
him?

The providence of God ouer-ruleth all things that fall out in the world, for
he causes them all to work for the best, not only for them that are of age
to love him, and to pray unto him, as David did, but even unto Infants; as unto
Moses when he was a child, preserving him beyond the expectation of his own
Parents. It works also all troubles, crosses, and afflictions, to the good of
his. There is none so young, nor any so old, but God disposes of them; yea,
when they have neither father nor mother, or friend to help them, he then
comes and takes them into his own guard and keeping, be they never so base and
vile in man's corrupt indgement; he can make them honorable, be they never so
abject and despised, either for birth, or poor estate, he is all one to all:
he respects no degree. Though he dwell in the heavens, far above our
apprehension, yet he beholds all his creatures, and knows them; he can see
through the Clouds, and behold all the things on earth: He is good to all, and
his mercies are over all his works: He vpholdeth all that fall, and lifts up
all that are ready to fall.

When a man loses father and mother, being left naked and destitute of help,
is it not a great tentation? When he knows not which way, or to whom to turn
for relief; What a comfort is it then, which the holy spirit has here
recorded of the providence and love of God, who has promised, that when we are
deprived of all earthly means, he will be a father and mother unto us?

Children commonly in their young years, care for no provision, for food or
maintenance, but rely only upon their parents: So the Children of God,
howsoever old they are, yet unable of themselves to provide things necessary
without their heavenly fathers help: And therefore as the young birds ^ang at
the bill of the old for food; so do Gods children depend upon God for all that
they need, and he does nourish them. He is in stead of their natural father
and mother; nay, fathers and mothers may have a good desire to provide for
their children, but want the means; but our heavenly father wants none. To
come to preferment (nay to be supplied with things necessary) is neither from
the East nor from the West (says David) nor from the South: But God is the
Judge, he makes low, and he makes high.

What a strange kind of care then is it in many Parents, that setting God (as
it were) aside, his providence and care; and only study how they may advance
their children to greatness after their deaths? As, if when they can see them
richly provided for, it is sufficient; riches, lands, and revenues, are in
stead of father and mother, and of Gods providence also: And yet if these men
were not wilfully blind, or rather besotted (whether more with the fond love
of their children, or foolish desire of vainglory, I cannot tell) they might
observe more (poor) cast, and depending upon the providence of God, by
religious endeavors to live more contentedly with their little, than many left
rich with their plenty: and more from mean beginnings to rise to greatness,
than in hereditary greatness, to gain glory and continuance.

Let them then that are in a mean estate, wanting father and mother, which
imply all worldly means, take comfort and courage in this; That God to the
faithful is in stead of al helps; and if our natural fathers that begat us,
our natural mothers that bare us, our friends that professed friendship to us,
and the means that we had to sustain us, fail all; let us not fear, for
the Lord of heaven and earth, and the owner and disposer of all things within
the same, has given us a promise to be a father unto us; if a father, he will
love us; if he love us, he will not see us want any thing that is fit and
necessary for us.

Though then our eyes fail us, our feet falter under us, our hands be
helpless to us, though our limbs become weak; though we hane neither Gold,
nor Silver, nor food, nor raiment, nor friend, nor helper, but our ancient
friends and companions to deride us for our baseness, enemies to rage and
rail against us for our poorness: let us not dismay nor fall from our faith
and assurance in God; he is our father, let us return unto him though as
Prodigalls, he will entertain us into his house, not as servants but as
sons. He will regard us as his sons, provide for us as his sons, and
defend us as his sons; and in stead of our natural father he will be our
heavenly father, he will bring us up, and we shall want nothing that is good,
though he seem here to expose us to be as Apprentises for a time in the
world, to learn to bear the Cross of Christ; it is but seven years, be it
seventy, he in the end will make us free men of the City, new Jerusalem, where
we shall work no more in our former trade of life, but in stead of all the
miseries and troubles we here endure, we shall have peace, and rest, and
glory for evermore.

Therefore in the mean time, while we shall live as the worlds slaves here,
let us undergo it with patience, it is but a little while: If we want any
thing for soul or body, he wills us to tell him and he will supply it; If
any wrong us or abuse us, to complain to him and he will redress it. If we
be sick, he knows our diseases; he is our Physician, and knows whether
life or death be fittest for us. If we die, he will restore us to life
eternal, therefore may we freely cast our care upon him, for he cares for
us.

Fathers (says Solomon) are the glory of their children. How much more shall
the God of all glory, our heavenly Father, be a glory to us his children? who
has provided for us an inheritance, which no man can deprive us of, yea a
Kingdom whose glory shall have no end. The remembrance of our futur^ enjoying
it, is as a most deep Sea of comfort in this inferior Kingdom of crosses. It
cannot be fadomed with the line of man's capacity; what he has promised he
will perform for his children, therefore may we stand assured and boldly
affirm, that though the fathers and mothers of the faithful do forsake them,
that God will take charge of them.

A Prayer that God will show himself our father in all our troubles and
afflictions when all other help fails.
O Gracious Lord God, most merciful and loving Father, from whom proceeds
every good and perfect gift, and who of thine own will have begotten us with
the Word of truth; show thy self a father unto me who am deprived of father
and mother, from all help and comfort in this life, beset on all sides with
troubles, dangers and many afflictions, relying only upon thy providence; show
thy self unto me a father, a powerful and protecting father, as thou did
unto Joseph, who being deprived of father and mother, hated of his brethren,
sold as a slave, falsely accused, sharply imprisoned, having none to help him
or to comfort him, forsaken of all his friends; yet when all help failed, thou
tookest him into thy protection, and directedst him in thy ways, he became
loving unto thee as a son, obedient unto thee as a servant, he waited on thee
as upon a most faithful father, he called upon thee and thou heardest him,
and gave him the honor of a son, even in this life holiness and honor;
testifying unto him that thou his father had a respect unto his faith,
constancy and wrongs, never leaving him nor forsaking him; to teach us, O Lord,
faithfully to depend upon thy mercy, power and providence, in whatsoever danger.

I was left unto thee as soon as I was borne, and thou like a most loving
father tookest me up and have hitherunto kept me: O forsake me not, for if
thou my father leave me and forsake me, who will or can take charge of me? I
am many ways afflicted and full of sorrow, not so much for my troubles as for
that I have sinned and offended thee so loving a God as thou Have been unto me
ever unto this day: but now loving Father, I seem destitute of thy favor, of
thy releeuing hand, I am he ^ily oppressed, and what I endure is not hid from
thee, and thou only know how to relieve me; my father, my mother, and all
my friends have forsaken me. David being thus destitute, he resorted unto thee,
confessing that when his father and his mother forsook him, thou tookest him
up; and is thyr fatherly affection dead and discontinued in David? No, no,
loving art thou still, powerful art thou still, and helpful art thou still,
for thy faithfulness, and thy truth, and thy power, and thy providence are for
ever: and happy, yea most happy is he that has thee his releeuing and helping
father; for nothing is wanting to him that is thus cast upon thee: He has not
only the promise but the assurance of thy presence and love both in this life
and the life to come.

Yet gracious Father, among all men it goes hardest with thine own children,
often troubled, much abused, deeply distressed, falsely accused, scoffingly
derided, and many crosses, cruel calamities, and great afflictions follow
them; and I am enforced to undergo the burden of infinite trialls, as if thou
had not only not taken me up, but utterly cast me off: And were it not
that I truly know thee to be my father, in that thou so fatherly, yet sharply
correctest me, I could not but faint: but thy grace sustaineth me, and does
inwardly comfort me, else should I utterly despair.

O my father, take me into thy protection, leave me not, forsake me not, for
I am brought very low, and there is none that cares for me, there is none
willing to add any comfort but sorrow unto my soul; there is neither father
nor mother, neither friend nor helper to commiserate mine estate, but thou whom
I only trust, for thy promises tend to mine encouragement, to cast my care upon
thee, who have willed all that are oppressed to come to thee and be eased: But
Lord what booteth it me to seek thee when I cannot find thee? to pray unto
thee when thou seem to refuse to hear me? Have I so deeply offended thee,
that neither my repentance can pacify thee? the mediation of thy Son
reconcile thee? nor my faithful prayers prevail with thee? Is thy mercy come
to an end? Have thou no more blessings for thy children?

O wretch that I am, Why do I thus reason with thee? am I able to overrule
thee with my words? Shall I teach thee what thou should do? No Lord, I only
bewray mine ignorance by my words; which can no further prevail with thee,
than thou in thy wisdom and mercy think fit for me. Therefore will I close
my lips, I will keep silence, and wait both thy pleasure and leisure, for thou
have a time to be angry, and a time to he pacified. I will rest with patience,
and commit my self unto thee in obedience, and if thou lay a greater burden
upon me then yet I bear, if thou suffer me to sink and to be clean
overwhelmed with more bitter waters than yet I feel, I will yet trust in thee
though my body perish, and all outward help fail me, preserve my soul O
Lord, for thou art the father of it, and respectest it far above my carnal
par^^; yet both make but one body, yet may the one prosper when the other may
perish. But I know that such is thy care of both, that rather than thou will
permit me utterly to be confounded, thou will even send from Heaven and save
me. Be it unto me even as thou will, O God, my strength and my salvation.

VERSE 11. Teach me thy way, O Lord, and lead me in a right path, because of
mine enemies.
IT is the property of an enemy to be always prying into the life of him he
hates, and to observe whatsoever faults he does commit (though he himself be
quilty of more) and to publish and proclaim them to the world to his uttermost
disgrace. And therefore it behooves all men, especially a man that has
enemies (as David had) to look unto his ways, lest by the errors of his life
they take advantage, and so make his cause (otherwise good) seem the worst,
though his errors no way concern the matter in controversy between them, but
merely his frailty; falling as a natural man, whereof David being afraid, he
prays unto God that he would teach him his way which is vncorrupt, and to
lead him in an upright path; not only in his ordinary calling, but in the
sincerity of his religion and profession, lest his enemies that are always
watchful should have cause to accuse him of some gross sin, and so draw him
into the censure and condemnation of the world.

David was a man chosen of God, but by nature apt and inclined to sin like
other men, who all have their peculiar faults: No man lives so sincerely, but
if his life in all points, at all times, be narrowly observed and examined by
his own conscience, he may be taxed or tax himself, either for committing
things which God has forbidden, or omitting things which God has commanded:
And therefore as David here prays God to teach him his way, and to lead him
in a right path, and as Moses before him prayed unto God saying, If I have
found favor in thy sight, show me now thy way, that I may know thee, and that
I may find grace in thy sight; So ought every Christian to pray that God would
not only teach him but lead him also, not only because of his enemies whose
slanders he fears (which yet is necessary) but because God should not be
dishonored by his corrupt conversation and sin.

There is no man, especially Gods children, but have enemies, not only
corporal but spiritual, among whom the subtillest and strongest is Satan, who
looks not so much into what a man does, as into the inclination of his heart
by the things he does: for by his works he finds what is in man (for
thoughts are hid) and by his outward actions he can collect whereunto he is
inclined: and upon that he works and lays his plots accordingly, and most
commonly he observes in every man some sin that reigns and rules above
all other sins, which he hugs (as it were) in his bosom: there does Satan
apply his greatest battery, knowing that if he vanquish him in it, and see him
to continue in it, it is as much as if he had enticed him to a thousand sins,
and therefore he lays baits (according to a cunning Fowler or Fisherman,
that has one especial bait for each kind of Foul or Fish) according to the
desire of that peculiar sin wherein a man most delights, entertaining every
occasion or fit opportunity to feed his desire, which Satan finding, uses his
instruments to feed him with varieties.

Every reigning or rather raging sin in man, may be compared to the disease
in man's body called the Wolf, which if it be not continually fed with some
kind of satisfactory matter, will soon devour the very flesh of yt part of
the body whereupon it has seized; so that sin that a man holds so dear (to
which he cannot but yield upon every opportunity afforded) must be fed with
the satisfying of those corrupt desires which best agree with the nature of
that woluish disease, otherwise it will even eat up their senses, and they will
become as mad men when they are restrained from what that sin desires: As
for example, take game from the covetous man he will become even cut of his
wits; bar the drunkard of his liquor, and he will rage like a sheebeare
robbed of her whelps; prevent the lascivious man of his Harlots, he will
swagger, swear, and adventure his life to have them: and so of the rest.

If therefore a man fall into any of these dominant sins, and live in it,
what an advantage is it unto his enemies? It is a double advantage; first, it
makes him scandalous in the world, whose good opinion with the virtuous and
religious he loses; It offends GOD, whose hand is always over the righteous
to defend them, and against the wicked to confound them.

How sottish then are these men that will give entertainment at the first to
such servants, as at last shall become their masters? Sin in the beginning is
weak, and with ease may be subdued, but when it has been cherished and
nursed up awhile in our breasts, as beloved, and fed, as it will require, it
beconuneth predominant, facing as it were a man, and as if it should say, I
have thus long ouerruled thee, I will yet make thee my slave. O fearful
estate, yet not a few live in this miserable seruility; and does not that enemy
Satan triumph to observe his vassals thus subjected? and does he not stir up
enemies to vpbraid them? some to mock and scorn them? some to reproach and
revile them? and finally, does he not laugh at their destruction?

Had not holy David the^ good cause to be afraid to be thus carried away with
the violence of his own corrupt nature, which no doubt he felt something
inclinable rather to go astray, than to go on ye way the Lord taught him? and
had he not good cause (as eueryman has) instantly to pray unto God, Teach me
thy way O Lord, and lead me in thy right path, because of mine enemies? Where
it appears that it is not enough to know the way of God unless we walk in
it, and what power have we of our selves to walk aright unless the spirit of
God lead us? we may think we are right when we are clean out of the way,
as many deceived silly souls do* that think themselves right, and others out
of the way, when indeed they walk in darkness and have no light at all.

Enemies are always envious against the prosperity and good that the godly
receive, and rejoice when any disgrace, misery, or misfortune befalls them:
When my foot slipped (says David) mine enemies rejoiced. So does Satan and his
instruments, who never rest day nor night, seeking to draw (if it were
possible) Gods own children into the ways of the wicked, and then again to
move and instigate the wicked to reproach us for our sins, so that we must
not look to live here securely, even in our seeming most quiet estate; for
when we think of none, and deserve least disgrace, Satan will raise up one
railing and reuiling Shemei, some one traitorous Judas, or one treacherous
Achithophel or another to trouble us. And if we have committed any known sin,
be it never so small, whether in our place, conversation or profession, we
shall be sure to hear it. Let us live never so warily, never so ciuily, never
so sincerely, we have enemies enough to espy out our secretest actions, to hear
our most private speech: for in the most godly little sins seem great, and
are soon discovered; and great sins in the wicked seem no sins, therefore
have the wicked few enemies whom they fear to see their ways, but the godly
many. It is no disgrace to a wicked man to be wicked, it is his profession: as
it is no blemish to the beauty of an Ethiopian to be black, it is his
natural color; and therefore as long as none but wicked men scandalize us and
condemn us, we need not be ashamed; no, though they rail, revile and curse
us, we need not fear it, for in stead of their curses God will bless us: yet
let us pray, Teach me, O Lord, thy way, and lead me in thy path aright because
of mine enemies.

None but envious and wicked men are malicous enemies unto such as fear God,
and they indeed cannot sleep until they have contrived some mischief against
the innocent whom they would disgrace, taking all occasions and advantages to
work them any violence; though they be already afflicted, they will afflict
them more; if they be already fallen, they will even tread upon them to keep
them down that they may not rise. It is their glory if they can add more
sorrow to the sorrowful, and more grief to the grieved; they are continually
traveling with wickedness, conceiving mischief, but they commonly bring forth
a lie; for the mischief yt they intend to others falls in the end upon their
own heads, and their cruelty upon their own pates: they are snared even with
the works of their own hands, for God has ever, he does, and ever will
preserve his own from these wicked men; though he suffer them sometimes bodily
to perish under their tyranny, it is but to aggrauate the sins of their
persecutors, and the sooner to bring his unto their final glory. Therefore
behooves the most godly to be wary of their ways; for how much the more
godly, religious and zealous they are in walking with God, so much the more
malicious is Satan to raise up troubles, slanders and reproaches against them,
by such as he can stir up against us; who howsoever inwardly envious they are,
yet have they learned of their master to speak plausibly, though deceitfully,
flattering with their lips, having a venomous heart within, whereby they
oftentimes allure the innocent without suspicion to bewray unto them their
secret thoughts and intentions: and in simplicity (by their enchanted
subtilties) discover that which these wicked serpentine wretches work upon,
and wrest to bring, not only their names, reputation and credit, but their
estates and lives in question. By their wicked counsel they compass our
steps, they set their envious eyes upon our ways: If they find we walk
unblameable, they will plot to have some blocks to be laid in our ways, that
if it be possible we might stumble, though they could not make us fall
altogether: If we err (on the other side) never so little, they will insult
over us, they will blow the trumpet of our defamation and cry, There, there, so
would we haut it. But these devices of theirs God sees, and what they practice
against such as fear him: therefore let us only say, Teach us, O Lord, thy way,
and lead us in the right path because of our enemies.

As long as we walk in the way of God truly, and be lead that path that is
right, let us not fear. Hear what David said unto Solomon his son, whom he
exhorted to walk in the ways of the Lord, to keep his Statutes and his
Commandementes, his Judgments and his Testimonies. We must endeavor to have
Gods laws ever before our eyes, and never depart from his precepts: This is
the way, walk in it. Though it be a strict way and unpleasant to a carnal
mind; it is a most sweet and comfortable way, a way that leads here to
happiness, and after to Heaven.

There is another way, a common high way, much beaten by diverse passengers, all
carnal men traffike this way, a very pleasant way, wherein yet many have
walked for a time, but they have found that as a man that eats too much honey,
may surfeit through the sweetness of it, so they were even glutted with the
vanities that are strewed in the way. It is a way full of carnal content
indeed, but it is but short; men are at their ways end many times when they
think themselves not half way there, and are grieved their journey is so soon
done. But when they come to the end of the race, they suddenly find a most
fearful gulf which they cannot avoid; turn back again they cannot as
ordinary travelers often do when they have mistaken their way and take
another; but they that walk this high and pleasant way must be enforced to
stay, and to take up their hideous Inn, not for a night as waifaring men do,
but remain there for ever with the Devil and his Angels.

A Prayer that God will be pleased to direct us in his ways, and lead us
uprightly because of our enemies.
O Gracious Lord God, most merciful and loving father in Jesus Christ,
vouchsafe to look in mercy upon me, teach me thy way O Lord, and lead me in a
right path because of mine enemies. Give me grace that I may walk aright, and
pray aright, and believe aright, and in all mine actions be guided by thee
aright. Reframe me from the way of the wicked, and guide me in the paths of
righteousness, make thy way plain before my face: for of my self I am
blind, I cannot see the right way, direct and guide me that I stumble not, to
cause mine enemies to laugh and rejoice at my fall. Send out thy light and thy
truth, let them lead me and bring me to thine holy mountain, where I shall
be safe from mine enemies; order and direct my goings, O Lord, aright according
to thy word; reclaim me from every evil way, and direct my feet in the way of
truth, in that way that leads to life; prevent me of that forbidden way
which is pleasant yet perilous; seeming plain and delectable, but the end
thereof is death: Lord let my walkings be upright because of mine enemies, who
watch even the course of my life, they pry into all mine actions, they observe
my conversation, and if they see me but slide or slip never so little awry,
they sound the trumpets of my disgrace: If they see me to fall into any sin
through my frailty, they cry out and say, That there is no fear of thee before
mine eyes.

O my God, consider this, and in mercy remember I am but dust, by nature
subject to great infirmities, which I do acknowledge, O Lord; reclaim me
from my evil inclination by thy grace, set me in the way of truth and
obedience, and lead me therein for ever, and learn me to live after thy
Commandments, and yield me thy fear and thy direction that I may walk in
them, for mine own ways are (as my will is) by nature evil evermore: but thy
ways are mercy and truth, and such as truly fear thy name thou teach the
ways of perfect obedience, and reducest even sinners to walk aright,
reclaiming them by thy grace from their evil ways.

Guide me that I may know thee and thy ways, and lead me aright in them: let
me never go astray from them, lest mine enemies take occasion by my
transgressions, to say that I have no fear of thee before mine eyes: deliver
me out of their hands O Lord, out of the hands of evil and cruel men, and
from their slanderous and false tongues that are set on fire against the
innocent. They hate them that offend them not, they persecute them that resist
them not; let them have no just cause to condemn my ways.

Thou have set before us a blessing and a curse; a blessing for them that walk
uprightly in thy ways; and a curse to them that wilfully fotsake the way which
thou have appointed thy children to walk in. O show me the good and right
way, and evermore lead me therein: Give me grace to take heed of that way
which seems right, the end whereof is death: Draw me, O Lord, out of this
way, and lead me by thy right hand, so shall I abandon this way, full of
carnal pleasures and sinful delights: Teach me thy ways, the ways of
obedience and repentance, the ways of righteousness and peace, which tend to
eternal life. It is not in my power or wisdom to find out, or walk in this
way: It is hid from humane understanding; and therefore even Moses, though
otherwise of deep knowledge, being by nature ignorant of this way, sought to
be and was instructed by thee therein. How much more, good Father, need I to
entreat thee to learn me this way; for I have been long lead awry be mine
own corrupt affections, not knowing the way of truth and righteousness:
wherein I beseech thee to guide and lead me now at the last and for ever,
because of mine enemies, O Lord, my God, my guide, and my Redeemer, Amen.

VERSE 12. Give me not over to the lust of mine enemies, for there are false
witnesses risen up against me, and such as speak cruelly.
WHat man is he that lives, and is free from enemies? Of what estate,
condition, or quality soever? If he be good, the wicked will hate him, the
world will disfavor him, and the Devil will malign him. If he be evil, the
virtuous will dislike him, the godly cannot affect him, God cannot bless him:
yet ought every man to endeavor to be godly, howsoever Satan will do what he
can to raise enemies against him, as he did against godly David, and against
all the holy men of God from the beginning; as first against Abel, against Job,
and above all, against Christ himself; whose enemies seemed to have their full
lust fulfilled against him, never leaving him until they had crucified him:
And yet then were they nearest to their own confusion when they had their wills
of him.

David in this Psalm seems to have been much troubled with enemies, and yet
shows in the second verse of the same, that when his enemies and his foes
came upon him to eat up his flesh, they stumbled and fell. In the third verse,
he shows such faith and confidence in God, that though an Host pitched
against him, his heart should not be afraid: Yet in this twelfth verse, he
seems to fear again, lest his enemies might yet prevail against him; and
therefore prays, that God would not give him over to the lust of his enemies;
which may teach* us, that when we think our selves most free from, and (as it
were) out of the reach of all enemies, not to be secure: for a reconciled enemy
may harbor secret mischief, which although he will not for his counterfeit
promise sake, execute by his own public violence; yet he may suborne such
secretly, as may renew either the open quarrel again, or falsely accuse the
innocent party. And this as it seems did David find: for when he thought
all his enemies were at peace with him, he observed some secret practices
against him, By false witnesses which were risen against him, who accused him
afresh, and procured him new, or moved his old Adversaries against him, which
seems to afright him more, than before an Host of enemies could do. For now
he prays, that God would not give him over to the lust of them that before
he feared not; which shows, that a second danger is more fearful than a
former: And which also shows our too much security, after our delivery from
a danger, as though we need no more to fear another to follow: But if we
observe well the course of the ways of wicked men, we shall see, that they
seldom give over to prosecute them they once desired to persecute. And God
has likewise such an eye unto his own children, that he will not have them
idle; he will exercise them as long as they live here; they must be
partakers of his crosses; they must have enemies as he had, they must suffer
poverty, ignominy and disgrace in the world as he did: Though he being Lord
of all, and could command all; he was poor, yet all the world, and the things
in the world were his; when he was hungry, he could have plentifully supplied
his hunger; being disgraced by the reproba^e Jews, he could have done as Peter
did with Annanias and Saphira, have spoken but the word, and his enemies should
have fallen dead at his foot. But he patiently suffered all, to teach us that
are but servants, to imitate him that is our master and Lord. If they called
him. Belsabub, and he suffered them, why should we take scorn to be despised,
reproached, and ill entreated, and our enemies to insult over us, and to have
their lust fulfilled against us, even to take away our lives? We are but
servants, he was our Lord, yet he endured; and shall we think our selves
better, or deserve to be more free than he, that was guilty of no offense
against them that thus abused him? We being culpable of a thousand sins
against him, and yet has freed us from the guilt and punishment of all? Yet it
behooves us to pray as David did: Give me not over unto the lust of mine
Adversaries; For as there were against Christ, so there are false Witnesses
risen up against us, and such also as speak cruelly: Cruel and wicked men
have commonly attending them, such as will speak and practice what they will
have them for gain: if they will have them to accuse any man falsely, they can
coin matter; This man said, If they did destroy the Temple of Jerusalem which
was made with hands, he would build it in three days without hands. Whereas
indeed he said, that if they did destroy the Temple of his body, he would
raise it again in three days, as he did. But by this may be observed the
cunning and subtilty of the Devil, that can and does prompt his wicked
Instruments, how they may pervert the words and actions of the innocent, to a
sense clean contrary to their meaning, and make so false a Gloss upon it, as
if it were truth it self; and will set such an audacious face upon it, as (if
God deal not with the falsely accused, as he did for the defense of innocent
Susanna) they will have their lust of them. Such a false witness was
perfidious Ziba against Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan, Saul's son, who
accused him most falsely to David, persuading him that Mephibosheth went about
to take from David the kingdom, only to get Mephibosheths patrimony: as it is
commonly the end of all the testimonies false witnesses give, to gain outward
reward thereby. As the Jews hired and suborned false witnesses against that
most sanctified man Stephen, to put him to death. The like against innocent
Naboth by wicked Iezabel, who was likewise stoned, to fulfill the lust of
enemies.

It is a dangerous thing, for the most innocent man in the world, to fall under
the testimony of false witnesses. The accused seldom escapes, unless there be
a Daniel to examine circumstances to find out the truth. A false witness is
one of the six things that God himself abhors: for of all men he is the
most dangerous; and therefore no marvel, that David having such enemies as
made no conscience of whatsoever deuillish invention to betray him, and to have
their lust of him, did pray, Give me not over to the lust of mine enemies; for
there are false witnesses risen up against me, and such as speak cruelly.

David feared more false witnesses than the open force of his enemies; who when
they came upon him they stumbled and fell; and therefore was not dismayed if an
Host pitched against him. Secret false combinations of enemies accompanied with
false witnesses, who can withstand, or avoid?

The tongue which God made in the beginning good, and to be a faithful
witness of the heart, the Devil has made the instrument of falsehood and
lies: For now in many, the heart and the tongue are so estranged, as the one
utters what ye other thinks not, and the other thinks what ye other vtters
not. The tongue becomes an instrument to deceive, which was made to explain
the true meaning of the heart: But where the tongue speaks falsely, the heart
cannot be right; and where the heart is corrupt, the tongue cannot be sound.

There was once a confusion of tongues; not of that part which moves to frame
the voice, for the tongue it self remained as before it was; but enforced to
alter the language: but now there seems to be a confusion between the tongue
and the heart, which should be as one: Both which being so far disioyned in
consent now, as it seems to be another confusion of our language. One knew
not what another said, when that one language became so changed; and who
understands now what another speaks, when he speaks what he means not? How
then can he be truly understood what he speaks? Men indeed are become (as
it were) false witnesses against themselves, when the tongue bears witness
against the heart, and the heart against the tongue. If then we become so
confounded in our language, when we call for one thing, we be offered another;
all good men had need to crave a divine Interpreter, who knows the heart; for
by the tongue we cannot truly understand what some men mean. And that is the
reason so many are at this day deceived, and unjustly many times condemned; and
therefore not unfit for every man, though he observe to have no professed
enemy, as David seemed to have, to pray, as David did unto God, the searcher
and disposer of all hearts, and she restrainer of all false tongues, O give me
not over to the lust of mine enemies, for there are false witnesses risen up
against me, and such as speak cruelly.

A Prayer, that God will preserve us from our enemies, that they prevail not
against us, and to prevent us of false witnesses.
O Most mighty God, Defender of the faithful, the Protector of them that
betake themselves under thy protecting hand; the mightiest among men cannot
hurt the least whom thou protectest; the subtillest cannot circumuent them,
whom thou guidest in thine own ways. Saul could not hurt David, though he
pursued him with deadly hatred, pursuing him to take away his life: Thou never
leftest him to the lust of his enemies: Thou art powerful, and in respect of
thee, my most powerful and politickest Adversaries are weak and foolish. O
let them not have their wished desires against me; though they suborne false
witnesses against me, let their false tongues falter in their mouths: Let
their lying lips be shut up with shame; and let all those that take malicious
counsel against me, and combine together to hurt or to destroy me, be turned
enemies one to the other, and let them do each to other as they intend to do
unto me. Let their tongues wherewith they think to speak falsely against me,
cleave to the roofes of their mouths.

For thou hear how proudly, hatefully, and disdainfully they speak against
me falsely, as if I were their enemy: But thou art a righteous Judge, and
markest theirs and my ways, their thoughts, and their practices and policies,
and my simplicity: None of their inward inventions, none of their wicked
proiects, policies, and secret practices are hid from thee; and therefore
(Lord) leave me not unto their lust. Confirm my faith in thee; power thy grace
and holy spirit into the inward parts of my soul, that I sincerely serving
thee, may either win their unfeigned friendship, or that thou will prevent their
malicious devices against me, and that I may possess mine own in peace.
Although they now stand upon the open stage of the world, and sound out the
Trumpets of their envious and slanderous tongues of reproach against me; And
although they suborne false witnesses against me; let my uprightness approve
them liars: Let my course of life so contrary to their false reports, try and
approve prove them false witnesses risen up against me. Though I cannot but
confess against my self, not only unto thee in secret, but unto them openly,
that I come short of some duties that I ought to perform, yet consider my
willing mind to perform them without reproof.

Lord, I am weak in strength, I am not wise enough to deal with the
Politicians of this world, I cannot withstand nor find out the practices that
mine enemies contriue against me, who have a strong desire to have their wills
and to execute their lust, especially false witnesses being suborned against
me: but give me not over to the lust of mine adversaries that speak so
cruelly against me, falsifying the cause of their hatred as if I had done them
injury, extenuating their own malice and mischief, as if their wicked devices
were lawful and grounded upon Justice, and their violence rather charitable
than malicious: what they have done, and what they intend thou know, and how
unjustly they afflict me thou see, who art a God that iudgest right.

Rise up therefore, O Lord, and take my cause into thine own hand, make their
wicked counsels as Achithophels; for have they not said in their hearts, Come
let us cut them off from being a people, and let their name be no more had in
remembrance? In so much as many of them say, There is no help for me in thee:
Yet Lord I dismay not, for thou art my defense, and in thine appointed time
wilt lift up my head again; for salvation belongs unto thee, O God, and thou will destroy the bloody and deceitful men. But blessed and preserved shall they
be that truly fear and trust in thee, thy power is seen in weakness, and
thy help in affliction: therefore O Lord, let not mine enemies have their lust
of me.

I know thou will perform thy promise of my defense in thy good time,
therefore will I rest in hope, I will patiently wait for yet a little while,
and these wicked men shall not appear. In the mean time I will commit my
cause unto thee my Lord, my God, my strength and my Redeemer.

VERSE 13. I should have fainted except I had believed to see the goodness of
thee in the land of the living.
ENemies troubles and afflictions are heavy to be borne of such as are weak
in faith, and have not perfect patience to bear them, as may appear by godly
David himself; who acknowledges that himself, though he were a man chosen
after Gods own heart, should have fainted under the malice and fury of his
enemies and other afflictions, but yt he believed to see the goodness of God,
namely his timely delivery in the land of the living, even here before the
sons of men, where if he had not found the goodness of God toward him, all
men would have thought as his enemies did, that God had utterly forsaken him
for ever: and therefore prayed God in a lively faith that his defense might here
appear before he were taken hence, no more to be seen, although he knew that
after this life he should be in a far more happy and blessed estate than
his enemies, but that he might find Gods favor here, to the end that other
godly afflicted men, seeing the mercies of God toward him in delivering him
out of his troubles, might by his faith and patience take like godly resolution
to depend upon the power and providence of God for their like delivery.

Why art thou cast down O my soul (says David in his troubles) and so
unquiet within me? which argues, that troubles and afflictions even to a
faithful man do at the first much disquiet his heart, like as they that first
are committed to prison, they are much disquieted, their hearts faint and are
much cast down, until they have been for a time enured to their restraint,
and then come by little and little to themselves again; so do they that upon
a sudden fall into any affliction as David did, but having a little considered
that it is the Lords doing, he could then say unto his sad soul, Wait on God,
for I will yet give him thanks for the help of his presence. This shows the
strong faith and confidence of David, who although his troubles were so many
and heavy, even at the present, that he was ready to faint under them, yet he
waited with a firm assurance, that the time would come wherein he should
rejoice again and praise God again for his help and certain delivery which
he knew was not far off.

This teaches every faithful man in his afflictions and troubles to repair
unto God in prayer, not to be daunted or dismayed, nor to disquiet himself,
but in patience to possess his soul, waiting the time wherein God has
appointed to deliver him, for it is a vain thing and unprofitable for a man in
affliction to go before the Lords providence; struggling and striving by
sinister and uncommanded means to free himself: he does by that means the
more entangle himself as the Bird in the Net: warranted means he may use,
and those with faithful prayer unto GOD to bless the means, for lawful
means profit not, unless they be also lawfully done, and that is when and
where God is made, not only a party, but the principal in the means. It was
a very weak weapon that David used against Goliath, who was completely armed
from the foot to the head, there was but one small part of his whole body
unarmed, and that was the fore part of his head, but God so directed the stone
that came out of his sling, that it found that open way to cast that monster of
men to the earth. If God had not added strength to David's arms, and by his
providence carried the stone aright, David's aim might have failed the mark;
so whatsoever means we use, either in preventing or easing our selves in any
kind of affliction, if our hearts be not seasoned with faith in God, joined
with prayer, we may miss of our hope, and so faint in the expectation of our
delivery; and therefore says David, I should have fainted except I had
believed to see the goodness of the Lord. Except I had depended on his
providence for my delivery from mine enemies, and had taken hold and been
assured of the true performance of his promises to ease me of mine afflictions,
I should have sunk under the burden of my troubles. God who is our Father is
goodness it self, of whom and from whom we obtain all things through faith
in his Son: by him we live, move and have our being; and therefore there is
none, in whom or by whom we should seek help in troubles, but in God alone.
He is our hope and strength, and help in troubles ready to be found:
Therefore (says David) I will neither faint nor fear: and again, my defense
is in God, who preserves the upright in heart. He is God, and none besides; he
is mighty, and none else; Why then should we faint in any troubles? Why should
we be daunted, though enemies rise up against us? Seeing this God is our God,
whose goodness, help and delivery (if we believe) we shall see, and our very
enemies shall see it even here, here in this vale of misery amongst the sons of
men, he shall be our guide and defense unto death.

Unbeleefe is a most dangerous disease in the heart of man, nothing succeeds
comfortably unto them that believe not in God: good things unto unbelievers
turn to evil. As unto a raw, crude, and a stomach overcome with superfluous
humors, the best meat turns to increase their disease; so to an unfaithful
man all things work together to the increase of Gods judgments against him.
As to the sons in law of Lot in Sodom, who would not believe the Word of God
declared by Lot, for the confusion of the City perished. So the children of
Israel, to whom God had promised to give the Land of Canaan, in their journey
toward it, did not only not believe the Lord, but murmured against him
saying, Who shall give us flesh to eat? would God we had died in the land of
Aegyt, or in this Wilderness: would God we were dead, were it not better for
us to turn into Egypt? With many such reproachful, murmurous and faithless
obiurgations, as well against God himself as against Moses and Aaron: but for
their infidelity, faintings and murmurings, God answered their impious desires
to die, he destroyed them in the Wilderness in his heavy displeasure.

The frailty of a faithless man is great, he can bear no troubles, he can
endure no afflictions with any kind of patience, because he has no true and
sound understanding of God and his providence. He thinks if he prosper, and by
his natural policy and means, can prevent dangers and troubles, or having
them can use sinister means to ease them, he ascribes it to his own carnal
wisdom; but when that prevails not, but that he is pinched and deeply
plunged in distresses and miseries which he cannot ease; then he begins to
faint and to murmur and cry, Who shall give me flesh to eat? How shall I get
money to supply my wants? Would God I had died when I was young; would God I
were dead, and the like.

The troubles and afflictions of the wicked and the godly differ not in the
outward show: the wicked may be poor, so may the most godly: they may have
like outward crosses and afflictions, but their bearing of them is unequal;
the wicked, as before is said, faint and fume, and murmur, and grudge at every
small cross or affliction: and although they hear the promises of God, who is
ready to help, yet they believe them not. They can be assured of nothing that
hangs upon Gods promises: they would think, and speak, and object against God,
as that Prince in Samaria did, when Elisha foretold from the mouth of God
plenty to that distressed and besieged City: Though the Lord (said he) would
make windows in the Heaven, could this come to pass? So incredulous are men
without sound faith, that once down, they think they shall never rise; once
in trouble, they shall never have ease: and this is the cause that men seeming
faithful, faint under their crosses, and despair in their afflictions: but it
is otherwise with the truly faithful indeed, who know by the foretelling of
the Spirit of God in his Word, that troubles attend the godly as the shadow the
body; and therefore prepare themselves before hand for them, and rejoice in
them, in as much as they are partakers here of Christ's sufferings: So they are
likewise assured, that when his glory shall appear, they also shall appear
with him in glory; yet the most faithful may have a kind of fearfulness and
fainting for a time, but not such as shall prevail, but they will soon
overcome all such faithless qualmes by a lively apprehension of Gods ready
help through faith; and then they may indeed say as David did, I should have
fainted except I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of
the living. There is none of himself so strong, but when troubles and
afflictions come will faint if faith in God fail them.

A Prayer that God will not forsake us in our troubles, and that our faith
fail not.
HAd I not taken hold (O God) of thy loving promises, and believed thy Word, I
should have fainted, and yet should faint under my troubles, if I did not
believe that thou, O Lord, know my troubles, and that mine afflictions are
not hid from thee; thou have promised to be a refuge for the poor, a refuge in
due time even in affliction: keep me, O Lord, as the apple of thine eye
according to thy promise, hide me under the shadow of thy wings from the wicked
that oppress me.

I have called upon thee in my troubles, O Lord, and cried unto thee, my God,
and thou have heard me and helped me, yea when I have been ready utterly to
have fainted, I have cried unto thee and thou have redeemed me and delivered
me. Those mercies of thine, O Lord, remember still, renew them evermore toward
me, for I stand in continual need of thy continual presence.

Thy goodness is great, O Lord, which thou have laid up for them that fear
thee, and done to them that trust in thee, even before the sons of men. I
have felt thy favor, and formerly tasted of thy love. How could I but have
fainted, but that I still believed to be partaker of thy goodness and mercy
in my troubles? Thou, O Lord, art my secret place, thou preseruest me in
trouble, and compassest me about with joyful deliverance, therefore will I not
faint, knowing that thine eyes are upon me, and thine ear open unto my
prayers. I trust in thee, I will not be afraid what man can do unto me.

Thou Lord have said concerning the faithful; he shall call upon me and I
will hear him, so that both my prayers and thy hearing are both thine own
gifts. Nay, thou addest further, Lord, I will be with him in trouble, I will
deliver him and glorify him. O why should I fear then or faint, seeing thou
art pleased to be with me in my troubles, as to take part as it were with me of
mine afflictions: wonderful and unspeakable, O Lord, is the extent of thy
power, and wonderful the limits of thy love; impossible it is to find out the
depth of thy compassions toward thy children; thou hear us before we call,
thou give before we ask, thou helpest us before we cry, thou give us
power to call, thou teach us what to ask, and thou even meetest us when we
are but even coming unto thee.

Thus gracious have thou ever been, O Lord, thus gracious thou art, and thus
gracious will thou show thy self unto them that believe to see and taste of
thy goodness, even unto the end of the world; and as thou art gracious, so art
thou absolute in wisdom; thou know how to relieve the distressed, and how
to comfort the afflicted, yea when they are ready to faint, and to give over
any more to call for help, being as it were hoarse with crying as David was,
thou give them of thy water of life, and it reuiueth the fainting souls, and
strengthens the weak spirits that g^oane under the burden of any calamity or
trouble.

Strengthen me therefore with thy grace, O Lord, I shall not then faint nor
fear, for my sure defense is in thee, who wilt in time bring the malice of
mine enemies to an end; and as I believe, so shall I see thy goodness in the
land of the living: for thou that have promised it art just of thy promises,
and powerful to perform what thou have said. Therefore even here I do
merely believe to receive at thy hands free release and pardon of all that
has been the ground of my troubles and cause of my miseries. Grant me Lord
freedom from mine enemies, and restitution of what I have been deprived of by
any of them: then shall they find that I have not only not fainted, but
believed to see and have seen thy goodness, O Lord, even here in the Land of
the living, where even mine enemies and my soes shall witness that I have not
believed in thee my God in vain.

VERSE 14. Hope in the Lord, be strong, and he shall comfort thine heart, and
trust in the Lord.
THis verse is a fit and comfortable conclusion of this Psalm; showing herein
that David in all his troubles depended only on God; and by his own
experience encourages himself and all other men in all kinds of troubles and
afflictions to do the like; and then, as he found they shall find, that God
will never fail nor forsake them that truly trust in him. Though David say
here, Hope in the Lord; he speaks not to the encouragement of other men,
excluding himself: but rather stirs (...) his own soul, his faith and
affections; as if he should have said, O my soul, hope in the Lord: Thou have
proved the goodness of the Lord sufficiently in all thy troubles: Thine
enemies have not prevailed against thee: Thy foes have not had their lust of
thee; therefore as thou have heretofore hoped; so still hope in the Lord, faint
not, but be strong; be not afraid whatsoever befalls thee, or whosoever
assaileth thee, be not dismayed; for he that has hitherunto been thy helper
and refuge, will never leave thee nor forsake thee, if thou hope in him and be
strong in ^^ith. And though thou be in danger, in trouble, and in whatsoever
affliction, and see no delivery present; trust in the Lord, and he will
deliver thee and comfort thine heart: For if in trouble and danger there were
instant delivery, there were no place for Hope; for Hope is of things not
seen, not of things presently enjoyed. Wherefore David exhorts himself (as it
were) and others to wait on God for their delivery out of their miseries and
troubles, through faith. Hope in the Lord, wait on God with faithful patience:
Grudge not though troubles arise, though crosses come, and afflictions befall
thee; be strong, be constant, take courage, murmur not, fret not, disquiet not
thy self, but be strong, and trust in the Lord.

There are some, no doubt, that can bear troubles, nay fortures, with a
seeming invincible patience in an ill cause; carrying themselves with such a
valorous force of spirit, as if they had the very Quintessence of faith, and an
undaunted hope; as we may read of Reualiack, Balthazar, and other murderers
of Kings. It is but a patience without true patience; for without obedience to
Gods precepts, there is no true religion; without true religion, there can be
no true faith; without true faith, no true patience; and therefore that
patience that is showed in such, and like capital murderers, howsoever
constantly they may seem to endure their torments, it is but the delusion
Satan, that while they are yet breathing, does stand to animate them to that
seeming patience, and resolution outward, which (the parties being dead) their
consciences shall never approve, but their last gasp shall carry that horror
with it, that if it might after outwardly appear, would manifestly testify,
that as the cause for which they suffered, was in it self wicked, their
punishments legally and justly deserved and inflicted; their patience would
show it self a kind of desperate running headlong into their own perdition:
Leaving then these men to their own Diabolical strength, let us hope in the
Lord, let us pray to become strong in him, faithful in him, and truly patient
in him in all our sufferings, for there is no commendable suffering for evil
doing; and therefore says S. Paul, speaking to the faithful: Let none of you
suffer as a murderer or a thief, etc. But if any man suffer as a Christian,
namely for Christ's Gospels sake, and for well doing, let him not be ashamed,
but let him glorify God in this behalf, namely, that he is accounted worthy
to suffer for the truth of Christ.

Hope in the Lord; Here is our confidence: Be strong; here is our constancy:
And he shall comfort thine heart; Here is the end of Hope and strength, comfort
of the heart. Whosoever then hops of help from any inferior creature, nay,
from an Angel in heaven, and excludes God; or stands upon his own strength,
wealth, wisdom, friends, or worldly policy, and thinks by these, or any of
these to be freed from danger, eased in troubles, or relieved in want,
exempting God; nay, if he take not the counsel of God, by the direction of
his word and prayer; his hope will prove but a shadow, and his strength as the
strength of a Bull-rush.

David bends his eyes from all these, to the love, power, and providence of
God, in whom and whose aid he only takes for his strength: assuring himself,
that he will not only send him outward relief according to his hope; but with
inward joy and consolation comfort his heart: Therefore does he encourage
himself and others, to hope in the Lord, and not in carnal means: To be
strong in faith in God, not in ye strength of humane aid. God must be totally
our hope and strength, or else he will be no part: for a hope that is partly in
God, and partly in other means, is not the hope that tieth the promise of the
true comfort, but that hope that is confirmed and made strong by faith. To this
hope is a promise annexed, that when dangers, enemies and troubles, beset a man
round about, though he want things necessary, though sickness afflict him,
though crosses without and griefs within do oppress him, though friends
sail him, and every thing seem to go against him, and he be deprived of all
visible means to escape; there remains yet hope in the Lord to be patient,
and not to faint.

This hope is the gift of God: But there is a hope that is common to carnal
men. They hope upon some probabilities seen, or conceived: As the hope of a
son for the inheritance of a father or a friend, for something upon death to be
given them, and the like. This is not that hope that David means, when he
says hope; but a certain kind of uncertain expectation of things desired.
But David's hope is a saving hope, necessarily joined with says and a patient
waiting: For that which we steadfastly believe shall come to pass; and in
nothing is the force of faith and hope more seen or felt, than in affliction
and trials: For these bring forth patience, and patience experience, and
experience hope; which makes the godly to rejoice in tribulation, wherein is
glory and no shame: whereas in carnal hope there is often shame and seldom
glory.

Saint Paul was so far from being ashamed of his afflictions, as he gloried
in them, for the hopes sake that is set before us all, of a most excellent
issue, and end of our hope; and as through the holy Ghost, the God of hope
plentifully filled Paul with joy and strength, even in his afflictions, and
with peace in believing the promises, whereby he abounded in hope, that all his
troubles, trialls, and afflictions should end with comfort; So let us pray unto
the same God of hope to be filled with like hope, that our afflictions may
likewise end in comfort; which though we presently possess not, yet let us
with that blessed Apostle, with patience wait for it.

But Paul's hope and patience aimed to heavenly, not to earthly accomplishments;
not looking for the event of his hope in this life: How then may his hope of
heavenly glory, and David's hope to be defended and relieved here in the land of
the living concur? They may well stand together: Even as Christ by healing of
corporal diseases, made men heavenly minded, and clean by forgiving their
sins; so David prayed not so simply for corporal delivery, but he prayed
also for the light of the truth, that he might dwell in the Temple of God, for
mercy, and the like. And although Paul seemed by his words to hope only for
heavenly glory, necessaries for this life were necessarily included. He that
duly and truly prays for heavenly, cannot be frustrate of earthly: and he that
prays faithfully for earthly, cannot but therewith join heavenly blessings;
for true and sincere hope includes both. He therefore that through faith in
Christ does hope in the Lord, and becomes strong in him: He will comfort his
heart with the supply both of heavenly and earthly blessings. As it is lawful
for us to pray unto God for corporal necessaries; so are we bound to hope and
wait for them. Without hope of victory David would never have entered the combat
with Goliath.

We must therefore hope in the Lord and be strong, trusting in God, and our
hearts shall be comforted. We may not look back or about us for help, our
help comes from heaven; therefore must we not hope, and hope a hope partly
from above, and partly from beneath; but our hope must be in God alone: yet
not to contemn or despise the inferior means that God uses here below, as
his Instruments for our good; in whom we may have a kind of hope, as David
had in Jonathan, that he would deal faithfully with him in the matter of Saul
his father: so may we hope in man: but our confidence must be in God alone.

What God has promised in his Word, he will assuredly perform to them that
truly believe. And that did David find, even when the Crown was like to be
taken from his head: He fainted not, but held fast by the accustomed love and
help of God, and became strong in faith, even when his enemies were in their
fiercest fury against him. He waited still, using little or no other resistance
against his enemies, than fervent prayer to God, and his counsel: and his
expectation in patience was not in vain; for the Lord subdued his enemies
without the great force of David; and thereupon he took courage, he hoped in
the Lord, he was strong in faith, and the Lord did comfort his heart.

He sought not as the wicked do, sinister and forbidden means to be
delivered: For when Saul his mortal enemy pursued him with deadly malice to
take away his life; yet when Saul fell into his hands, and had him twice in his
power, and might have ended the quarrel, and freed himself of danger, he
would not do it, no, though he might have made present way for himself to the
kingdom, whose it was after Saul: yet neither his own peril wherein he
daily stood, through the malice and fury of Saul, nor his own future right to
the Crown could move him to touch the Lords anointed; contrary to the minds of
many ambitious men, both of former and latter ages, who are loath to let slip
any opportunity offered, be it never so unjust, to advance their greatness.
But David staid himself upon hope, that God who had so often delivered him,
would still do it without any unlawful means of his own, and in his time
appointed would advance him as he had promised, and therefore waited the time
with patience, comforting his heart in the midst of his dangers. And long it
was not before he came lawfully to that which before he might and would not,
because he hoped in God whom he knew he should have offended, if he had taken
the counsel of some that advised him.

There is no hope to that hope whereunto David encourages himself and others,
no strength to that strength: and no man's heart can be truly comforted, but by
the comfort wherewith he affirms his heart was comforted: therefore cheereth
he up his own soul with this holy resolution, to hope in the Lord, with this
heavenly strength, to be strong in the Lord, and with that comfort wherewith he
was comforted of the Lord. There is a hope that is vain, a strength that is
weak, and a comfort that is but counterfeit. Let us then take hold of that
hope, and that strength, and that comfort that is of God, and trust in him: So
shall we not need to be afraid of enemies, to faint in afflictions, but shall
be sure to find comfort in all our troubles.

Solomon says, that hope that is deferred, is the fainting of the heart; but
that is but to the faint-hearted: For if we wait not, it is no hope; but if we
abide with patience Gods appointed time, we shall enjoy what we hope for: And
when the desire comes it is a tree of life. And David having often gathered
the fruit of this tree, and fed thereon when he fainted, he gives here of the
same fruit to others; Hope (says he) in the Lord, be strong, be not
faint-hearted, though hope be deferred: for coming the thing we hope for will
tarry no longer than a convenient time, and then it will comfort the heart.
Hope grows strong, by the effects of Gods goodness formerly hoped for, and
had: which Saint Paul affirms, encouraging the Corinthians as David did
himself and others, To hope, to be strong, to trust in the Lord, and to lay
hold upon the hope that is set before us, which hope we have as an anchor of the
soul, sure and steadfast. And this is the comfort of the heart that David
means, even our faith in God, whereby we take hold of the assured
performance of his promises, not only of temporal and corporal, but of
spiritual and celestial blessings: And the patient waiting for them is our
Hope.

How then can it be, that God who has promised unto the faithful the life to
come, that with patience in hope wait for it under the cross, should not
consider and regard their dangers, troubles, afflictions, even in this life?
For if he have given his Son to die for our sins, how should he not with
him give us all things to enjoy? Though we must wait his time* he is not
slack as some men count slacknesse, but is always ready and at hand; he that
has promised, he is faithful and true. Though the unfaithful will not take
his word, not his hand, not his oath; the faithful know and are assured, that
he will never fail them, nor forsake them; Therefore hope in the Lord, be
strong, and he will comfort thine heart: And trust in the Lord.

A Prayer for strength, patience, and hope in troubles.
O Father, possessor of Heaven and Earth, and the disposer and preserver of
them and of all things within the same, the fountain of all perfect hope, the
giver of patience, and maintainer of our strength; thou know my troubles,
and beholdest mine afflictions, and what and how many they are, and how
burdensome unto me thy weak creature: in stead therefore of my weak
ability, give me thy prevailing strength, give me hope in thee, let me be
strong in thee, let my comfort be of thee, and let me truly trust in thee, then
shall I with patience bear these and whatsoever troubles it shall please thee
to lay upon me.

Arm me with faith, O Lord, that I trusting in thy defense may not sink
under the weight of my troubles importable to flesh and blood; thou have
promised to be the God of my salvation, so shall nothing hurt me; my glory,
so nothing shall disgrace me; my rock and my strength, so nothing shall move
me nor remove me from my trust in thee.

I am thine, save me, keep me as the apple of thine eye, hide me under the
shadow of thy protecting wings, then shall no enemy annoy me, no trouble
dismay me, nor affliction or fear shall cast me down: by thee I shall
withstand or escape the fury, force, and fraud of all my foes; by thee I shall
be timely relieved in all my necessities, and in thee shall I be comforted in
all mine afflictions: I will not fear, thou art my God; I will not faint, thou
art the comfort of my heart: Let me still taste of thy goodness, and behold
thy salvation; in hope let me hold fast by thee, in faith let me be strong in
thee, with comfort let me rejoice and be glad in thee.

Continue thy mercies toward me, O Lord, for my soul trusts in thee,
knowing and confessing that I have no other Comforter but thee, no Defender but
thee, nor any Helper but thee: Forsake me not therefore, O my God, in my
greatest need; send from Heaven and save me, for all power belongs unto thee,
therefore does my soul cleave unto thee, it longs and thirsts for thy
salvation.

O let me plentifully taste how sweet thy goodness is; thy goodness appeared
in my creation, more in my redemption, but most in mine election; thou formedst
me in the womb, thou broughtest me thence, giving me hope even from my Mothers
breast, and I was even then cast upon thy providence, therefore leave me not nor
be far from me now trouble is befalne me; but as thou have taken charge of
me from the beginning, so continue still to defend me, for I have none besides
thee to help me, therefore cast I my burden upon thee, for thou have taken
upon thee to nourish me. In thee, O Lord, I trust, let me never be ashamed nor
confounded, deliver me according to thy promise, for thou art my hope, O Lord,
in thee have I trusted from my youth.

Let my prayers, O Lord, enter into thy presence, hear me and help me, let
nothing hinder the work of thy mercies toward me* not mine unworthiness, O
Lord, but accept me worthy in thy most worthy; then shall not the weakness of
my faith diminish my hope, nor extenuate my strength, nor deprive me of my
comfort in thee; but my faith, hope, strength and comfort shall increase more
and more, and patience shall have it perfect working in me, to wait until
thine appointed time come for my delivery out of some of my troubles, for I
endure many, O Lord, and the least of them of weight more than sufficient to
press me down unless thou support me, yet I acknowledge them easy in
comparison of my evil deseruings.

O pardon mine offenses, cleanse me of my sins, and make me upright in thy
ways; then shall I with perfect patience bear my troubles and rest in hope
until it shall please thee to ease me of my troubles, or to bring them to an
end, which grant gracious Lord God in Jesus Christ, to whom with thee and the
holy Ghost, be honor, power* and praise for evermore. Amen.

A Prayer for forgiveness of sins, reformation of life, and comfort in
affliction.
O My God my God, hide not thy face from me, stop not thine ears at my
prayers, and refuse not to hear the words of my complaint; though I cannot but
confess, O Lord, against my self, that by reason of my sins I have deserved
thy displeasure, and that in so high a measure, as if thou should utterly
confound me, yet were there no injustice in thee, for the evils that I have
committed, and the good duties I have omitted, in thy severe justice deserve
the same; but Lord look not so narrowly into my ways as to observe and
register against me every sin committed and every duty omitted by me, knowing
that I am by nature corrupt and sinful, as all my fathers were.

Lord, what were Abraham, Izaak, Iaacob, Job, Noah, Lot, Moses, Eliah, or
David, though a man chosen after thine own heart? Paul that elect vessel, but
men by nature carnal, and even sold under sin, until thou of thine own
free mercy vouchsafedst to infuse heavenly wisdom into their hearts, and
divine graces into their souls? until thou did fully season them above
others by thy holy Spirit, yet Lord thou know, that even these select
vessels of thine were not without their own natural infirmities. They stood
not uprightly by their own strength, but by thee; if they had had will and
power of and in themselves to work righteousness, they might have had whereof
to boast, but not with thee; but being only supported by thee, they gave the
sole glory to thee.

Seeing then, gracious Father, that all our most godly forefathers had their
defects by nature, and their perfection through thy grace; I being corrupt, as
they were by nature borne corrupt, and brought forth the fruits of corruption
until thou begattest them anew by thy Spirit, what differ I from them by
nature? And therefore, Lord, as they became holy, not of themselves but by
thee; so can thou make me holy, as they were holy, by the same grace.

There is none, O Lord, that by his own wisdom is capable of that wisdom
whereby to know thee aright, how much less able by his own power to perform
that obedience which may make him accepted of thee?

If then it be, as indeed it is, of thine own free mercy and grace, that any
man becomes wise in thee and righteous before thee, who has cause to boast of
his own merit? Or who needs despair of his own unworthiness, seeing thou
art equally merciful to all whom thou have called and accepted into the number
of them that shall be saved?

O send down, send down from Heaven, that thy sanctifying Spirit into my
heart, that that lively faith whereby our most godly forefathers were accepted
of thee, may be more and more inkindled, and break forth into a holy flame of
godliness and zeal, and my whole man be changed into the same image of
sanctity, which appeared in them in whom thou most delightest; then thou my
God, now deservedly offended with me for my sins past, shall be so fully
reconciled unto me again, though not by my best renewed works, which are and
will be for ever here imperfect; but through the merits and mediation of thine
own and only Son, whose death is my life, and thy mercies in him my
salvation.

This is my hope, O Lord, though I be yet in the estate of corruption, and
enforced to undergo infinite infirmities of body and mind by nature. Thou who
art the God of Abraham, and of all our godly forefathers dead to the world,
art no less the same God unto those that are thine yet living in the world.
And as they already dissolved, are now in glory with thee in the Heavens, so
confirm my faith in thee and order my ways, that I being likewise dissolved
through Christ my Redeemer, may be also glorified with them, and with them give
glory to thee.

Make me therefore, gracious Father, to abound here, as they here abounded in
all spiritual graces and heavenly virtues, that I may find thee a like loving
father unto me, as thou were a father unto Abraham, and a helping God, as thou
were unto Iaacob, and then shall I offer, even here, the sacrifice of unfeigned
praise unto thy name, and make mine humble prayers unto thee, in his name whose
death and mediation thou acceptest above all other whatsoever sacrifices.

O accept that his sacrifice, made once for all, for all believers; it is
sufficient, Lord, to purge me from all my sins that formerly have offended
thee, and to keep me from future wilfully displeasing thee.

My sins, O Lord, I do confess have worthily moved thee to correct me: I
feel thy rod, but the rod of a loving father, not to confound me, but to
confirm me, not to destroy me, but to save me.

O let me not faint under thy correcting hand, which thou have promised shall
be no more heavily laid upon me than I shall be able to bear.

Let not therefore, Lord, my faith fail me, but let perfect patience have it
effectual working in me; then whatsoever it shall please thee to appoint me
to bear, I shall bear it, for my heart through thy grace is prepared to obey
thee.

Thou have been ever my helper since I was borne, thou have vpholden me,
sustained and relieved me, O forsake me not now when all carnal help fails
me.

There is no certain hope in the help of man; though he promise, he may be
unable or unwilling to perform; if he yield me help it is of thee, and among
thy promised means of help; and nothing hinders the performance of thy
promise of helping me, but the weakness of my faith in not steadfastly
believing, mine impatience in not willingly bearing, and my want of lively hope
in not contentedly waiting thine own good time in effecting what thou have
promised.

Yet I have hope, loving Father, that coming, thy help will come, and that in
a time most convenient in thine own wisdom, although through mine infirmity I
think it long, but when it comes, it shall be as a Well, not only of
releeuing but of living water, springing up not only to my corporal comfort,
but to my spiritual and eternal glory.

In the mean time, O Lord, let me evermore taste of thy goodness, that I
faint not under the burden of my troubles, but as thou have worthily corrected
me, so vouchsafe mercifully to relieve me.

In hope and assurance of this thy mercy, O Lord, I commend and commit my
self, my soul and body, unto thy fatherly disposing, for thou have promised
to take care of me, therefore cast I my care upon thee, not as careless of
mine own duty, but in a lively faith going forward, waiting thy leisure and
thy good pleasure, when thou will come and how thou will deliver me, O Lord,
make no long tarrying, Amen.

An effectual Prayer for forgiveness of sins.
O Lord, when I do consider the account that I am to make for the time which I
have so sinfully spent in this life, and how I have walked here as in a
Wilderness of all impieties: I feel my conscience burdened with so heavy a
weight of fear and trembling, that I am cast down as into a gulf of
inevitable danger, and know not which way to turn me with any hope of
comfort: if I turn me to the consideration of my best works, I find them
rather to aggrauate than to extenuate my fear: if I appeal unto thee as thou
art a severe Judge, I shall be condemned in thy just judgment; I therefore as
the prodigal son, do upon the knees of mine unfeigned heart fall down before
thee, imploring mercy though I deserve it not; but Lord, I know that in thy
seuerest justice thou art accustomed to remember mercy, and in thy hottest
displeasure thou show compassion even to greatest sinners, even upon their
unfeigned desire to repent: how much more upon their actual and sincere
repentance, especially of such as through a lively faith take hold of Christ,
who has taken upon him to stand between thy justice and a sinner. O accept
his death and merits for the forgiveness of my sins, who by reason of them
am become deeply endangered and indebted unto thee. And if thou should
exact the uttermost farthing at my hands, I were never able to make the least
satisfaction; and the more hardly can I answer the committing of so many
sins, and the omitting of so many good duties, by how much I have received a
great measure, yea many talents of grace, and a great portion of heavenly
knowledge at thy hands, which I should have used, not only to the good of mine
own soul, and comfort of mine own conscience, but to the increase of
spiritual knowledge in others, whom I should have endeavored to have drawn to
the obedience of thy will by the example of mine obedience.

Alas, good Father, such has been the neglect of my duty in this behalf,
that I have not only laid these heavenly treasures under the earthly
corruption of mine own heart, but have laid out the wicked dregs of original
sin, and have therewith gained unto my self infinite iniquities and
innumerable actual sins, in so much as injustice thou may condemn me as a
most unprofitable disposer of thy manifold graces: and the more, good Father,
by how much I have not only sinned my self, and that oftentimes, as it were,
with a high hand, but in alluring and stirring up others to sin by mine
example; nay Lord, many times by mine own instigation, and thereby the more
dangerously drawn down thy displeasure upon my self, and them that have
sinned by the example of my sin.

Lord, what shall I say to excuse me? What shall I bring unto thee to appease
thee? If I say the corruption of mine own nature provoked me, and I did
sin; thou have commanded me to mortify the deeds of my corrupt flesh by thy
Spirit. If I plead that the world allured me and I did sin, thou have
forbidden me to love the world or the things in the world: if I say Satan
enticed me, and I did sin, thou have commanded me to resist Satan and his
tentations, so that though I plead with Adam, that my Heuah, my carnal part
that thou gave me, did move me and I did sin, it will be no excuse for me;
if I say the world allured, or Satan tempted me, it booteth me not: and
therefore, Father, I cannot but freely confess against my self, that I, even
I have sinned, and done all these evils against thee, against thee, O Lord, I
have sinned, and against my self, and have deservedly stirred up thy
displeasure against me, and in thy displeasure is death.

This, this, O Lord, is the gain that my sins have gotten, not only a
dissolution of the soul and body due to all flesh: but the death of body and
soul due only to impenitent sinners, among whom I, even I, acknowledge my
self worthy to be numbered without thy mercy. For who has power, Lord, by his
own corrupt nature to repent? By nature, Lord, I sin: How can I by the same
sinful part, repent of that wherein nature it self delights? A fountain
brings not forth bitter water and sweet: How then Lord can I bring forth true
repentance out of a corrupt heart, as it is corrupt? Yet Lord, though my heart
be corrupt by nature, being made in part sincere and holy by thy grace, it
shall so far forth work repentance, as is thy grace powerful and effectual
in me. So that though sin by nature dwell in me, by thy grace may sanctity
also; as Esau and Iaakob in Rebeccahs womb, striving for superiority.

Therefore, good Father, as Esau the elder, gave place and became servant to
Iaakob: So let sin, which is in me the first borne, give place in me unto
sanctity: And let sanctity have the sole dominion in my heart, then shall my
heart bring forth the good fruits of a godly life: though while I live here,
the weeds of corruption will also grow; but Lord, let them not ouergrow the
good seed of thy spirit: but let them wither and die before they grow up to
bear any fruit unto death. But feed me now at the last with the most wholesome
fruits of thy spirit, and give me grace to express my sorrow for my sins that
I have done with an inward relenting heart, grieved that ever I contrived sin
in my inward thoughts, that ever I acted it, or consented unto it.

Lord see and behold my sorrow for my sins, if it bring not forth sincere
repentance, water it so with thy mollifying spirit, that it may work in me
that which may testify that I repent indeed: so that sin may become
loathsome unto me, and sanctity sweet. And although while I carry about me
this unholy lump of earth, my best exercises cannot but savor of the fountain
from whence they flow; if of corruption, corruptly; if of thy spirit, heavenly.

O season therefore my heart, O Lord, my soul and whole man with thy spirit,
that whatsoever I think, speak, or do, may savor from above, that I may
feel in my heart and soul a true and lively detestation of whatsoever
sauoureth of the love of this world; as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life.

Give me strength to perform all perfect obedience in all righteousness, even
to the forgetting of sin. And yet to remember my sins past, and to repent
them, that thou my loving Father, before whose presence I presently stand,
may be pleased to turn thy loving and fatherly countenance in mercy
toward me, in the merits and mediation of Christ my Reedeemer.

Let these mine humble petitions, O Lord, ascend up unto thee; and let the
infallible tokens of thy mercies appear toward me: that my heart now cast
down for fear of thy judgments, may be again lifted up, feeling the inward
testimonies of thy mercies in Christ. To whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be
all honor, praise, and glory.

A Prayer for the morning, with thanks for rest and safety.
O Father, merciful and evermore loving in Jesus Christ, who this night past
have been a powerful and provident Watchman over me, even when by the
deadness of sleep I was deprived, even of sense, care or fear of any danger,
which yet without thy preservation and providence, might suddenly have seized
upon me, and that by infinite means: For, Lord, thou know what a malicious
and watchful Adversary we have, who is attended on by a troop of infernal
Ministers that hourly seek by some means to surprise us: Besides the
corruption of our own nature, that is always working in us sinful thoughts,
unclean desires, and most ungodly affections: moving us in our night-wakings
(in stead of holy meditation and godly prayer) to purpose the committing of
infinite sorts of sins, when we enter into the day, having no means to
prevent the execution of most sinful actions, but by thine own most gracious
working holy fear and godly obedience in our hearts: Wherefore, loving Father,
I come this morning into thy holy presence, from which I cannot hide me, and
upon the knees of my heart I unfeignedly entreat thee, that as it has pleased
thee this night to preserve me, and giving me comfortable rest and sleep in
safety; so thou will be pleased to watch over me this day that no danger
befall me, either in body, soul, or any thing belonging unto me; But that I
may be so led under the pauilion of thy protection, guided by thy spirit, that
neither in thought, word or deed I may offend thee; endeavoring to perform all
holy and heavenly duties unto thee my God, who for all thy mercies requirest
only pure and sincere obedience, which is also thy gift: for none by his own
power can think a good thought, much less Lord, work any thing pleasing unto
thee, but the contrary: therefore disclaim I all mine own merit, and cleave
only unto thy mercy in Jesus Christ; Humbly beseeching thee for his sake to
take charge of me this day: prevent the malicious intentions of Satan and his
ministers: mortify mine own sinful affections, and infuse into my heart all
divine graces, that my ways this day may nothing savor of sin, but of
sanctity. And as I have by thee safely passed this night; so I may begin,
continue and end this day, and all the days of my life, in thy faith, fear,
and obedience. And that in all mine actions whereunto I am bound by my place
and calling, I may so walk and so perform them, as that thy blessing^ may
accompany whatsoever I endeavor. Give me Lord an upright heart, asking; and let
me ever receive counsel from thee, to be guided in whatsoever I purpose: that
so prospering, the glory may be thine, to whom all power, wisdom, strength,
and glory belongs, Amen.

A Prayer to be used before a man goes to his rest.
LOrd, as it has now pleased thee to bring me in safety to the end of this
day, and have therein by many blessings testified thy fatherly care over me: so
let my heart within me through faith, and faithful obedience, testify mine
unfeigned thankfulness to thee. The light of this day has afforded unto me
that benefit which the darkness of the night could not, though to thee the day
and night are of equal light; for with thee is no darkness at all. But to me,
as I am blind by nature, the day and night are of like darkness and
obscurity: though the light of the day discover visible creatures, yet as long
as the darkness of the ignorance of heavenly things possesses my inward
parts, I see not at all as I ought to see: the light of the day does administer
unto my corporal eyes many outward objects, which often causes me inwardly to
err, and outwardly to go astray, as the sins which I have this day
committed, by the miscarriage of mine eye may witness against me. Forgive it
Lord unto me, and grant that the light which thou have created good, turn not
through my corruption to thy dishonor and my shame, but as the light of the
day is a most especial blessing to the good, to do good offices in this life;
so let me use it to the doing of the works of divine light, not of darkness.
Let it henceforth serve unto me as a Motive to the Contemplation of that
celestiall-light, that is never ouershadowed with darkness; and to the
observation of thine immensurable greatness and power in creating and
preserving of thy Creatures, (visible) numberless. Give me grace, that I
beholding the infinite works of thy hands, may with divine modesty consider thy
wisdom in framing and disposing them; thy deep and vnfathomable providence,
in oftentimes turning those things to the comfort of those that are thine,
which their enemies suppose and hope will tend to their confusion. This also is
thy doing, marvelous in the eyes of such as either know thee not, or that
think all things to come to pass without thy direction and limitation.

Lord I have this day found, that thy wisdom has directed me, thy power has
preserved me, and thy providence guided me. And in thy great mercy I have
finished this day in safety, and received many blessings at thy hands;
acknowledging yet my self unworthy of the least of them, by reason that I have
many ways offended thee. Though I have not noted in my thoughts all my sins,
yet thou know them: And if the righteous man fall seven times a day, how
often have I that am all corrupt, sinned this day? None is so just as sins
not, but he is blessed to whom thou (O Lord) imputest it not.

Sinners covet secrecy, they hate to be seen, but love the sin: darkness is
their desire, and the night is as a Closet to hide them in conceit, when thou,
O God, see their actions in the dark as at noone day. O preserve me in thy
light, Lord, and grant I never covet to do that in secret, whereof I should be
ashamed to commit it openly: and even this night now come upon me, vouchsafe
Lord to ouerspread the bright beams of thine all shining light over me that
sin enter not into my heart in the darkness of the same. And let me make my
night wakings as interims gained for Meditation and Prayer; And that I may
spend the intermissions of my sleep in preparing my self to my final rest:
That through thy power and providence, I may rest safely this night, free from
all danger of soul and body: And that rising again in the morning, I may not
be forgetful to give thee the glory. And as the night succeeds the day, and
the day the night; so let my faithful prayers succeed holy Meditation, and a
holy endeavor to work righteousness, succeed my faithful petitions.

Let thine ears be open unto my prayers: Let thine eyes (by way of blessing)
be upon all mine actions: Let thy providence prevent whatsoever mischief,
Satan, or any mine enemies his accomplices shall plot, practice, or endeavor to
execute against me: In hope whereof, I do commit and commend my self, my
soul and body, and whatsoever concerns me, into thy most powerful
protection this night, in the name of Christ, thine alone beloved. To whom with
thee and the holy Ghost be ascribed, as most due, all honor, praise and glory
for ever, Amen.

Lord evermore increase my faith.

