Sir Francis Drake Revived: Calling upon this Dull or Effeminate Age, to follow
his Noble Steps for Gold and Silver, By this Memorable Relation, of the Rare
Occurrances (never yet declared to the World) in a Third Voyage, made by him
into the West Indies, in the Years 72. and 73. when Nombre de Dios was by him
and 52. others only in his Company, surprised. Faithfully taken out of the
Report of M. Christofer Ceely, Ellis Hixon, and others, who were in the same
Voyage with him.

By Philip Nichols, Preacher. Reviewed also by Sr. Francis Drake himself
before his Death, and Much helped and enlarged, by diverse Notes, with his own
hand here and there Inserted. Set forth by Sr Francis Drake Baronet (his
Nephew) now living.



LONDON Printed by E. A. for Nicholas Bourne dwelling at the South Entrance of
the Royal Exchange. 1626.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY, CHARLES THE FIRST, OF GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE AND
IRELAND KING, All the blessings of this, and a better Life.
Most gracious Sovereign,
THat this brief Treatise is yours, both by right and by succession, will
appear by the Authors and Actors ensuinge Dedication:

To praise either the Mistress or the Servant, might justly incur the Censure
of Quis eos vnquam sanus vituperauit, eithers worth having sufficiently blazed
their fame.

This Present loses nothing, by glancing on former actions and the
observation of passed adventures, may probably advantage future employments.
Caesar wrote his own Commentaries; and this dooer was partly the Inditor:
Neither is there wanting living testimony to confirm its truth. For his sake
then, cherish what is good, and I shall willingly entertain check for what is
amiss. Your favorable acceptance, may encourage my Collecting of more
neglected Noates: how-euer though Virtue (as Lands) be not inheritable, yet
has he left of his Name, one that resolves and therein joys to approve
himself

Your most humble and loyal Subject, Francis Drake.

The Dedicatory Epistle, intended to Q. Elizabeth Written by Sir. Francis
Drake, deceased. To the Queens most excellent Majesty, my Most dread
Sovereign.
MAdam, seeing diverse have diversely reported, and written, of these voyages and
actions which J have attempted and made, every one endeavoring to bring to
light, whatsoever inklings or conjectures they have had; whereby many untruths
have been published, and the certain truth concealed: as I have thought it
necessary my self, as in a Card t^ prick the principal Points of the
counsels taken, attempts made, and success had, during the whole course of
my employment in these services against the Spaniard, not as setting sail, for
maintainnig my reputation in men's judgment, but only as sitting at Helm if
occation shall be, for conducting the like actions hereafter: So J have
accounted it my duty, to present this Discourse to your Matie. as of right,
either for it self, being the first fruits of your servants Pen, or for the
matter, being service done to your Mati. by your poor vassal against your
great enemy, at such times, in such places, and after such sort, as may seem
strange to those, that are not acquainted with the whole carriage thereof: but
will be a pleasing remembrance to your Highness, who take th'aparent height of
the almighty's favor toward you, by these events, as truest instruments,
humbly submitting my self to your Gracious censure, both in writing and
presenting: that posterity be not deprived of such help, as may happily be
gained hereby, and our present age (at least) may be satisfied, in the
rightfulnes of these actions, which hitherto have been silenced, and your
Servants labor not seem altogether lost, not only in Travel by Sea and
Land, but also in writing the Report thereof, a work to him no less
troublesome, yet made pleasant and sweet, in that it has been, is and shall
be, for your Ma^ies content; to whom J have devoted my self, live or dye.

Francis Drake.
Ian. 1. 1592.
TO THE COURTEOUS READER.
HOnest Reader, without Apology I desire thee in this ensuing Discourse; to
observe with me the power and Justice of the Lord of Hosts, who could enable
so mean a person, to right himself upon so mighty a Prince, together with the
goodness and Providence of God very obseruable, in that it pleased him to
raise this man, not only from a low condition, but even from the state of
persecution: his father suffered in it, being forced to fly from his house
(near South Tauistocke in Deuon) into Kent, and there to inhabit in the Hull
of a Ship, wherein many of his younger sons were borne: he had twelve in
all, and as it pleased God to give most of them a being upon the water, so the
greatest part of them dyed at Sea: the youngest, who though he were as far
as any, yet dyed at home, whose posterity inherits that, which by himself, and
this Noble Gentleman the eldest brother, was hardly yet worthily gotten. I
could more largely acquaint thee, that this voyage was his third he made into
the West Indies, after that his excellent service both by Sea and Land in
Ireland, under Walter Earl of Essex; his next about the World: Another wherein
he took Saint Iago, Carthagena, Saint Domingo, Saint Augustino, his doings at
Cadiz, besides the first Carricke taught by him to sail into England, his
stirrings in eigty seven, his remarquable actions in eighty eight, his
endeauours in the Portingall employment, his last enterprise determined by
death, and his filling Plymouth with a plentiful stream of fresh water; but I
pass by all these, I had rather thou should enquire of others, then to
seem my self a vainglorious man. I intend not his praise, I strive only
to set out the praise of his and our good God, that guided him in his truth,
and protected him in his courses: my ends are to stir thee up to the worship
of God, and service of our King and Country by his example: if any thing be
worth thy consideration, conclude with me, that the Lord only can do great
things.

FRANCIS DRAKE.

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE REVIVED: Calling upon this Dull or Effeminate Age, to follow
his Noble Steps for Gold and Silver.
AS there is a general vengeance, which secretly pursues the doers of wrong,
and suffers them not to prosper, albeit no man of purpose empeach them: so is
there a particular indignation, engraffed in the bosom of all that are
wronged, which cease not seeking by all means possible to redress or remedy
the wrong received. In so much as those great and mighty men, in whom their
prosperous estate has bred such an ouer-weening of themselves, that they do
not only wrong their inferiors, but despise them being injured; seem to take a
very unfit course for their own safety, and far unfitter for their rest. For
as Esope teaches, even the Fly has her spleen, and the Emmet is not with on
there choler, and both together many times find means whereby though the
Eagle lay her eggs in Jupiters lap, yet by one way or other, she escapes
not requital of her wrong done the Emmet.

Among the manifold examples hereof, which former ages have committed to
memory, or our time yielded to sight: I suppose, there has not been any, more
notable then this in hand: either in respect of the greatness of the person,
by whom the first injury was offered; or the meannesse of him, who righteth
himself: the one being (in his own conceit) the mightiest Monarch of all the
world: the other an English Captain, a mean subject of her Majesty's. Who
(besides the wrongs received at Rio de Hacha with Captain John Louell in the
years 65. and 66.) having been greiuosly indamaged at Saint John de Vllua in
the bay of Mexico, with Captain John Hawkins, in the years 67. and 68. not
only in the loss of his goods of some value, but also of his kinsmen and
friends, and that by the falsehood of Don Martin Henriquez then the viceroy of
Mexico, and finding that no recompense could be recovered out of Spain, by
any of his own means, or by her Majesty's letters: he used such helps as
he might, by two several voiages into the West Indies: the first with two
Ships, the one called the Dragon, the other the Swan, in the year 70. the
other in the Swan alone in the year 71. to gain such intelligences, as might
further him, to get some amends for his loss. And having, in those two
voyages, gotten such certain notice of the persons and places aimed at, as he
thought requisite, and therevppon with good deliberation resolved on a third
voyage (the description whereof we have now in hand) he accordingly prepared
his ships and Company, and then taking the first opportunity of a good wind,
had such success in his proceedings, as now follows farther to be declared.

On Whitsunday Eeue being the 24. May 24. 1572.
of May in the year 1572. Captain Drake in the Pascha of Plymouth of 70.
tonnes his Admiral, with the Swanne of the same Port of 25. tonnes his
Vice Admiral, in which his brother John Drake was Captain (having in both of
them of men and boys seauenty three, all voluntarily assembled, of which the
eldest was fifty, all the rest under thirty: so divided that there were forty
seven in the one ship, and twenty six in the other: both richly furnished,
with victualles and apparel for a whole year: and no less heedfully provided
of all manner of munition, Artillery, Artificers, stuff and tools, that were
requisite for such a Man of war in such an attempt, but especially having
three dainty Pinnases, made in Plymouth, taken a sunder all in pieces and
stowed aboard, to be set up as occasion served:) set sail from out of the
Sound of Plymouth, with intent to land at Nombre da Dios.

The wind continued prosperous and favorable at Northeast, and gave as a very
good passage, without any alteration or change: June 3.
so that albeit we had sight of Porto Sa to, one of the Maderas, and of the
Canaries also within twelve days of our setting forth: yet we never struck
sail, nor came to anchor, nor made any stay for any cause, neither there nor
elsewhere, until 25. June 28.
days after; when we had sight of the Island of Guadalupe, one of the Islands of
the West Indies, goodly high land.

The next morning we entered between Dominica and Guadalupe, where we descryed
two Canoas, June 29,
coming from a rocky Island, three leagues off Dominica, which usually repair
thither to fish, by reason of the great plenry thereof, which is there
continually to be found. We landed on the South side of it, remaining there
three days to refresh our men, and water our ships, out of one of those goodly
rivers, which fall down off the mountain. There we saw certain poor
cottages, built with Palmito boughs and branches, but no inhabitants at that
time civil nor savage; the cottages it may be, (for we could know no certain
cause of the solitariness we found there) serving, not for continual
inhabitation, but only for their uses that came to that place at certain
seasons to fish.

July 1.
The third day after about, three in the afternoon, we set sail from thence,
toward the continent of Terra firma. And the fifth day after, we had sight of
the high land of Santa Martha, July 6.
but came not near the shore by ten leagues. But thence directed our course,
for a place called by us Port Phesant, for that our Captain had so named it in
his former voyage, by reason of the great store of those goodly Fowls, which
he and his Company did then daily kill, and feed on, in that place. In this
course, notwithstanding we had two days calm, July. 12.
yet within six days after we arrived at our Port Phesant, which is a fine
round Bay, of very safe harbor for all winds, lying between two high points,
not past half a cables length over at the mouth, but within, eight or ten
cables length every way, having ten or twelve faddome water more or less, full
of good fish, the soil also very fruitful; which may appear by this, that
our Captain having been in this place, within a year and few days before,
and having rid the place with many alleys and paths made, yet now all was so
ouer-grown again, as that we doubted at first, whither this were the same
place or no.

At our entrance into this Bay, our Captain having given order to his brother
what to do, if any occasion should happen in his absence, was on his way, with
intent to have gone aland, with some few only in his company, because he knew,
there dwelt no Spaniards within thirty five leagues of that place. Tolou being
the nearest to the Eastwards, and Nombre de Dios to the westwards, where any of
that Nation dwelt. But as we were rowing a shore, we saw a smoke in the
woods, even near the place, which our Captain had aforetime frequented:
therefore thinking it fit to take more strength with us, he caused his other
boat also to be mand, with certain muskets, and other weapons, suspecting some
enemy had been a shore.

When we landed, we found by evident marks, that there had been lately there,
a certain English man of Plymouth, called John Garret, who had been conducted
thither by certain English Mariners, which had been there with our Captain
in some of his former voyages. He had now left a plate of Lead, nailed fast to
a mighty great tree (greater then any four men, joining hands, could fathom
about; on which were engraven these words, directed to our Captain.

Captain Drake, if you fortune to come to this Port, make have away: For the
Spaniards, which you had with you here the last year, have bewrayed this
place, and taken away all that you left here. I depart from hence, this present
7. of July, 1572.

Your very loving friend JOHN GARRET.


The smoke which we saw, was occationed by a fire, which the said Garret and
his Company, had made before their departure, in a very great tree (not far
from this which had the lead nailed on it) which had continued burning at least
five days before our arrival.

This advertisement notwithstanding, our Captain meant not to depart, before
he had built his Pinnases, which were yet aboard in pieces, for which purpose
he knew this Port, a most convenient place. And therefore as soon as we had
moared our Ships, our Captain commanded his Pinnases to be brought ashore, for
the Carpenters to set up, himself employing all his other company in
fortifying a place, which he had chosen out, as a most fit plot, of three
quarters of an acre of ground, to make some strength or safety for the present,
as sufficiently as the means he had would afford, which was performed, by
felling of great trees, and bowsing and haling them together with great Pulleis
and halsers, until they were enclosed to the water, and then letting others
fall upon them, until they had raised with trees and boughs thirty foot in
height round about, leaving only one gate to issue at, near the waters side,
which every night (that we might sleep in more safety and security) was shut
up, with a great tree drawn athwart it. The whole plott was built in a
Pentagonall form, to wit, of five equal sides and angles, of which angles two
were toward the sea, and that side between them was left open, for the easy
launching of our Pinnases: the other four equal sides were wholely (excepting
the gate before mentioned) firmly closed up. Without, instead of a trench, the
ground was ridd for fifty foot space, round about. The rest was very thick
with trees, of which many were of those kinds, which are never without green
leaves, till they are dead at the root (excepting only one kind of tree
amongst them, much like to our Ash, which when the sun comes right over
them, causing great raines, suddenly casts all their leaves, viz. within
three days, and yet within six days after becomes all green again. The
leaves of the other trees do also in part fall away, but so as the teees
continue still green notwithstanding) being of a marvelous height, and
supported as it were with five or six natural buttresses growing out of their
bodies, so far, that three men may so be hidden in each of them, that they
which shall stand in the very next buttresse shall not be able to see them. One
of them specially was marked to have had seven of those stays or buttresses,
for the supporting of his greatness and height, which being measured with a line
close by the bark and near to the ground, as it was indented or extant, was
found to be above thirty nine yards about. The wood of those trees, is as heavy
or heavier then Brafill or Lingnum vitae, and is in color white.

The next day after we had arrived, July 1^
there came also into that bay, an English Bark of the I Will of Wight, of Sir
Edwaad Horseys, wherein James Rause was Captain and John Ouery Master, with
thirty men; of which, some had been with our Captain in the same place the
year before. They brought in with them a Spanish Caruell of Siuell (which he
had taken the day before, athwart of that place, being a Caruell of Aduiso
bound for Nombre de Dios) and also one Sallop with Oars, which he had taken at
Cape Blanck. This Captain Rause understanding our Captains purpose, was
desirous to join in consort with him, and was received upon conditions agreed
on between them.

July 20.
Within seven days after his coming, having set up our Pinnaces, and
dispatched all our business, in providing all things necessary, out of our ships
into our Pinnaces: we departed from that harbrough, setting sail in the
morning toward Nombre de Dios, continuing our course till we came to the Isles
of Pinos: where being within three days arrived, we found two Fregates of
Nombre de Dios, lading planck and timber from thence. July 22.


The Negroes which were in those Fregates, gave us some particular
understanding of the present state of the town: and besides, told us that
they had heard a report, that certain soldiers, should come thither shortly,
and were daily looked for, from the Governor of Panama and the country
thereabout, to defend the town against the Symerons (A black people, which
about 80. years past, fledd from the Spaniards their Masters, by reason of
their cruelty, and are since grown to a nation, under two Kings of their own:
the one inhabiteth to the west, the other to the East of the way from Nombre de
Dios to Panama) which had near surprised it about six weeks before.

Our Captain willing to use those Negroes well (not hurting himself) set them
ashore upon the maine, that they might perhaps join themselves to their
contrymen the Symerons, and gain their liberty if they would, or if they would
not, yet by reason of the length and troublesomenes of the way by land to
Nombre de Dios, he might prevent any notice of his coming, which they should
be able to give. For he was loath to put the town to too much charge (which
he knew they would willingly bestow) in providing before hand, for his
entertainment, and therefore he hastened his going thither, with as much speed
and secrecy as posibly he could.

To this end, disposing of all his companies, according as they inclined most,
he left the three Ships and the Caruell with Captain Rause, and chose into
his four Pinnaces (Captain Rauses Shallop made the fourth) besides fifty
three of our men, twenty more of Captain Rauses company, with which he seemed
competently furnished, to atcheiue what he intended: especially having
proportioned, according to his own purpose, and our men's disposition, their
several arms* viz six Targets, six Firepikes, twelve Pikes, twenty four
Muskets and Calliuers, sixteen Bows, and six Partisans, two Drums, and two
Trompets.

Thus having parted from our company: July 28.
we arrived at the Island of Catinaas, being twenty five leagues distant; about
five days after, there we landed all in the morning betimes: and our Captain
trained his men, delivering them their several weapons and arms, which
hitherto he had kept very fair and safe in good caske: and exhorting them
after his manner, he declared the greatness of the hope of good things that was
there: the weakness of the town being unwalled, and the hope he had of
prevailing to recompense his wrongs, especially now that he should come with
such a crew, who were like minded with himself; and at such a time, as he
should be utterly undiscovered.

Therefore even that afternoon, he causes us to set sail for Nombre de
Dios, so that before sun set we were as far as Rio Francisco: thence he
led us hard aboard the shore (that we might not be descried of the watch
house) until that being come within two leagues of the point of the Bay, he
caused us to strike a hull, and cast our grappers, riding so until it was
dark night.

Then we waighed again and set sail, rowing hard aboard the shore, with
as much silence as we could, till we recovered the point of the harbor under
the high land: there we stayed all silent, purposing to attempt the town in
the dawning of the day, after that we had reposed our selves for a while.

But our Captain with some others of his best men, finding that our people
were talking of the greatness of the town, and what their strength might be,
especially by the report of the Negroes that we took at the I Will of Pinos:
thought it best to put these conceits out of their heads, and therefore to take
the opportunity of the rising of the moon that night, persuading them that it
was the day dawning. By this occasion we were at the town, a large hour
sooner then first was purposed. For we arrived there by three of the clock
after midnight: at what time it fortuned that a Ship of Spain, of sixty
Tons, laden with Canary wines and other commodities, which had but lately
come into the Bay, and had not yet furld her sprit-saile, espying our four
Pinnaces, being an extraordinary number, and those rowing with many Oars, sent
away her Gundeloe toward the town, to give warning: but our Captain
perceiving it, cut betwixt her and the town, forcing her to go to the other
side of the Bay: whereby we landed without impeachment, although we found one
gunner upon the platform, in the very place where we landed, being a sandy
pray and no key at all, not past twenty yards from the houses.

There we found six great Pieces of brass Ordinance, mounted upon their
cariages, some Demi, some whole Culuering: we presently dismounted them, the
gunner fled, the town took alarm (being very ready thereto, by reason of
their often disquieting, by their near neighbors the Symerons) as we
perceived, not only by the noise and cries of the people, but by the bell
ringing out, and drums running up and down the town.

Our Captain according to the directions which he had given over night, to
such as he had made choice of for the purpose, left twelve to keep the
Pinnases, that we might be sure of a safe retreat, if the worst befell. And
having made sure work of the platform before he would enter the town, he
thought best, first to view the mount, on the East side of the town, where he
was informed, by sundry intelligences the year before, they had an intent to
plant Ordinance, which might scour round about the town. Therefore leaving
one half of his company, to make a stand at the foot of the mount, he
marched up presently unto the top of it, with all speed to try the truth of the
report for the more safety. There we found no piece of Ordinance, but only a
very fit place prepared for such use, and therefore we left it without any of
our men, and with all celerity returned down the mount, Then our Captain
appointed his brother, with John Oxnam and sixteen other of his men, to go
about, behind the Kings treasure-house, and enter near the Easter end of the
marketplace: himself with the rest, would pass up the broad street, into the
market place, with sound of drum and trompet.

The Firepikes divided half to the one, and half to the other company, served
no less for fright to the enemy, then light of our men, who by this means
might discern every place very well, as if it were near day, whereas the
inhabitants stood amazed at so strange a fight, maruelling what the matter
might be, and imagining, by reason of our drums and trompets sounding in so
sundry places, that we had been a far greater number then we were.

Yet by means of the soldiers, which were in the town, and by reason of the
time which we spent in marching up and down the mount, the soldiers and the
inhabitants had put themselves in arms, and brought their companies in some
order, at the south east end of the market place, near the governors house,
and not far from the gate of the town, which is only one, leading toward
Panama, having (as it seems) gathered themselves thither, either that in the
governors sight they might show their valor, if it might prevail, or else that
by the gate, they might best take their vale, and escape rediest.

And to make a show of far greater numbers of shot, or else of a custom they
had, by the like device to terrify the Symerons, they had hung lines with
matches lighted, overthwart the wester-end of the marketplace, between the
church and the cross, as though there had been in a readiness some company of
shot, whereas indeed there was not past two or three that taught these lines
to dance, till they themselves ran away, as soon as they perceived they were
discovered.

But the Soldiers and such as were joined with them, presented us with a jolly
hot volue of shot, beating full upon the egresse of that street, in which we
marched, and leuelling very low, so as their bullers often times grazed on the
sand. We stood not to answer them in like terms; but having discharged our
first volly of shot, and feathered them with our arrows (which our Captain
had caused to be made of purpose in England, not great sheafe arrows, but fine
rouing shafts; very carefully reserved for the service) we came to the push of
pike, so that our fire-pikes being well armed and made of purpose, did us very
great service. For our men with their pikes and short weapons, in short time
took such order among these gallants, some using the but-end of their pieces
in stead of other weapons, that partly by reason of our arrows, which did us
there notable service, partly by occasion of this strange and sudden closing
with them, in this manner unlooked for, and the rather for that at the very
instant, our Captains brother, with the other Company, with their fire-pikes,
entered the market place by th'easter street: they casting down their weapons,
fled all out of the Town by the gate aforesaid, which had been built for a
bar to keep out of the Town the Symerons, who had often assailed it, but
now served for a gap for the Spaniards to fly at.

In following and returning, diverse of our men were hurt, with the weapons
which the enemy had let fall as he fled: somewhat, for that we marched with
such speed, but more for that they lay so thick and cross on the other.

Being returned, we made our stand near the midst of the market place, where a
tree grows hard by the Cross; whence our Captain sent of our men to stay
the ringing of the alarm Bell, which had continued all this while: but the
Church being very strongly built and fast shut, they could not without firing
(which our Captain forbad) get into the steeple where the Bell hung.

In the mean time, our Captain having taken two or three Spaniards in their
flight, commanded them to show him the Governors house, where he understood
was the ordinary place of vnlading the Moyles, of all the treasure which came
from Panamah by the Kings appointment: Although the silver only was kept there:
the gold, pearl and jewels (being there once entered by the Kings Officer) was
carried from thence to the Kings treasure-house not far off, being a house
very strongly built of lime and stone, for the safe keeping thereof.

At our coming to the Governors house, we found the great door (where the
Moyles do usually unlade) even then opened a Candle, lighted upon the top of
the stairs; and a fair Gennet ready sadled, either for the Governor
himself, or some other of his household to carry it after him. By means of
this light, we saw a huge heap of silver, in that nether room: being a pile
of bars of silver, of (as neareas we could guess) seauenty foot in length,
of ten foot in breadth, and twelve foot in height, piled up against the wall,
each bar was between thirty five and forty pound in weight. At sight hereof
our Captain commanded straightly that none of us should touch a bar of
silver, but stand upon our weapons, because the Town was full of people, and
there was in the Kings treasure-house near the waters side, more gold and
jewels then all our four Pinnases could carry, which we would presently set
some in hand to break open, notwithstanding the Spaniards reports of the
strength of it.

We were no sooner returned to our strength, but there was a report brought by
some of our men, that our Pinnases were in danger to be taken, and that if we
our selves got not aboard before day, we should be oppressed with multitude both
of Soldiers and townes-people. This report had his ground from one Diego a
Negro, who in the time of the first conflict, came and called to our Pinnaces,
to know whether they were Captain Drakes? and upon answer received, continued
entreating to be taken aboard (though he had first three or four shot made at
him) until at length they fetched him, and learned by him, that not past eight
days before our arrival the King had sent thither some hundred and fifty
Soldiers to guard the Town against the Symerons, and the Town at this time
was full of people besides: which, all the rather believed, because it agreed
with the report of the Negroes, which we took before at the I Will of Pinos: and
therefore our Captain sent his brother and John Oxnam to understand the truth
thereof. They found our men, which we left in our Pinnaces, much frighted, by
reason that they saw great Troops and Companies running up and down, with
matches light, some with other weapons; crying Que gente? que gente? which
having not been at the first conflict, but coming from the utter ends of the
Town (being at least as big as Plymouth) came many times near us, and
understanding that we were English, discharged their pieces and ran away.

Presently after this, a mighty shower of rain, with a terrible storm of
thunder and lightning, fell, which powered down so vehemently (as it usually
does in those Countries) that before we could recover the shelter of a certain
shade or pent-house, at the Wester end of the Kings treasure-house (which
seems to have been built there of purpose to avoid Sun and rain) some of
our bow-strings were wet, and some of our match and powder hurt: which while we
were careful of, to refurnish and supply; diverse of our men, harping on the
reports lately brought us, were muttering of the Forces of the Town, which our
Captain perceiving, told them, that he had brought them to the mouth of the
treasure of the world, if they would want it, they might henceforth blame no
body but themselves. And therefore as soon as the storm began to aswage of
his furye (which was a long half hour) willing to give his men no longer
leisure to demurre of those doubts, nor yet allow the Enemy farther respit to
gather themselves together: he stepped foreward, commanding his brother, with
John Oxnam and the Company appointed them, to break the Kings Treasure-house;
the rest to follow him, to keep the strength of the market place, till they
had dispatched the business for which they came.

But as he stepped forward, his strength and sight and speech failed him, and he
began to faint for want of blood, which as then we perceived, had, in great
quantity, issued upon the sand, out of a wound received in his leg in the
first encounter, whereby though he felt some pain, yet (for that he perceived
diverse of the Company, having already gotten many good things, to be very ready
to take all occasions, of winding themselves, out of that conceited danger)
would he not have it known to any, till this his fainting, against his will,
bewrayed it; the blood having first filled the very prints which our
foote-steps made, to the great dismay of all our Company, who thought it not
credible, that one man should be able to spare so much blood and live.

And therefore even they, which were willingest to have adventured most, for so
fair a booty, would in no case hazard their Captains life; but (having given
him somewhat to drink wherewith he recovered himself, and having bound his
Scarf about his leg, for the stopping of the blood) entreated him to be
content to go with them aboard, there to have his wound searched and dressed,
and then to return a shore again if he thought good.

This when they could not persuade him unto (as who knew it utterly time)
impossible, at least very unlikely, that ever they should (for that) return
again, to recover the state in which they now were: and was of opinion, that
it were more honorable for himself, to jeopard his life for so great a
benefit, then to leave off so high an enterprise unperformed:) they joined
altogether, and with force mingled with fair entreaty, they bare him aboard
his Pinnace, and so abandoned a most rich spoil for the present, only to
preserve their Captains life, as being resolved of him, that while they
enjoyed his presence, and had him to command them, they might recover wealth
sufficient; but if once they lost him, they should hardly be able to recover
home, no not with that which they had gotten already.

Thus we embarked by break of the day, July. 29.
having besides our Captain, many of our men wounded, though none slain but
one Trumpetter: whereupon though our Chyrurgeons were busily employed, in
providing remedies and salues for their wounds: yet the maine care was
respected by all the rest; so that before we departed out of the Harbor for
the more comfort of our Company, we took the aforesaid Ship of Wines without
great resistance. But before we had her free off the Haven, they of the Town
had made means to bring one of their Culuerins, which we had dismounted, so as
they made a shot at us, but hindered us not from carrying forth the prize to the
I Will Bastimientos, or The I Will of victualles; which is an Island that lies
without the Bay to the Westwards, about a league off the Town, where we stayed
the two next days, to cure our wounded men, and refresh our selves, in the
goodly Gardens which we there found, abounding with great store of all dainty
roots and fruits, besides great plenty of Poultry and other Fowls, no less
strange then delicate.

Shortly, upon our first arrival in this Island, the Governor and the rest of
his assistants in the Town (as we afterward understood) sent unto our
Captain a proper Gentleman of mean stature, good complexion, and fair
spoken, a principal Soldier of the late sent Garrison, to view in what state
we were. At his coming he protested he came to us of mere good will, for
that we had attempted, so great and incredible a matter with so few men: and
that at the first they feared that we had been French, at whose hands they
knew they should find no mercy: but after they perceived by our Arrows, that
we were Englishmen, their fear were the less, for that they knew, that though
we took the Treasure of the place, yet we would not use cruelty toward their
persons.

But albeit this his affection gave him cause enough, to come aboard such,
whose virtues so he honored, yet the Governor also had not only consented to
his coming, but directly sent him, upon occasion that diverse of the Town
affirmed (said he) that they knew our Captain, who the last two years had
been often on their coast, and had always used their persons very well. And
therefore desired to know, first, whether our Captain were the same Captain
Drake or no? and next, because many of their men were wounded with our Arrows,
whether they were poisoned or no? and how their wounds might best be cured?
lastly what victualles we wanted, or other necessaries? of which the Gouereour
promised by him to supply and furnish us, as largely as he durst. Our Captain
although he thought this Soldier but a Spy: yet used him very courteously, and
answered him to his Governors demands. That he was the same Drake whom they
meant: it was never his manner to poison his Arrows: they might cure their
wounded by ordinary Surgery: as for wants he knew the Island of
Bastimientos had sufficient, and could furnish him if he listed: but he
wanted nothing but some of that special commodity, which that Country
yielded, to content himself and his Company. And therefore he advised the
Governor to hold open his eyes, for before he departed, if God lent him life
and leave, he meant to reap some of their Harvest, which they get out of the
Earth, and send into Spain to trouble all the Earth.

To this answer unlooked for, this Gentleman replied: If he might without
offense move such a question, what should then be the cause, of our departing
from that Town at this time, where was above three hundred and sixty Tun of
silver ready for the Fleet, and much more Gold in value, resting in iron
chests in the Kings Treasure-house? But when our Captain had showed him the
true cause of his unwilling retreat aboard; he acknowledged, that we had no
less reason in departing, then courage in attempting: and no doubt did easily
see, that it was not for the Town to seek revenge of us, by manning forth
such Fregates or other vessels, as they had: but better to content themselves
and provide for their own defense. Thus with great favor and courteous
entertainment, besides such gifts from our Captain as most contented him:
after dinner he was in such sort dismissed, to make report of that he had
seen, that he protested, he was never so much honored of any in his life.

After his departure, the Negroe forementioned, being examined more fully,
confirmed this report of the gold and silver, with many other intelligences of
importance, especially how we might have gold and silver enough if we would,
by means of the Symerons, whom though he had betrayed diverse times (being
used thereto by his Masters) so that he knew they would kill him, if they gat
him: yet if our Captain would undertake his protection, he durst adventure
his life, because he knew our Captains name was most precious and highly
honored of them.

This report ministered occasion to further consultation: for which, because
this place seemed not the safest; as being neither the healthiest nor quietest.
The next day in the morning we all set our course for the I Will of Pinnos or
Port Plenty, where we had left our Ships, continuing all that day, and the
next, till toward night before we recovered it. We were the longer in this
course, for that our Captain sent away his brother and Ellis Hixon to the
westward, to search the River of Chagro, where himself had been the year
before, and yet was careful to gain more notice of: it being a River which
trendeth to the southward, within six leagues of Panamah, where is a little
town called Venta Cruz, whence all the treasure, that was usually brought
thither from Panams by Moyles, was imbarqued in Fregates, down that River into
the North sea, and so to Nombre de Dios. It ebbeth and flows not far into
the land, and therefore it asks three days rowing with a fine Pinnace to
pass from the mouth to Venta Cruz, but one day and a night seruerh to return
down the River.

At our return to our Ships, in our consultation, August. 1.
Captain Rause forecasting diverse doubts, of our safe continuance upon that
coast, being now discovered, was willing to depart: and our Captain no less
willing to dismiss him: and therefore as soon as our Pinnaces returned from
Chagro, with such aduertisements as they were sent for, about eight days
before: Captain Rause took his leave, August. 7.
leaving us in the I Will aforesaid, where we had remained five or six days. In
which mean time, having put all things in a readiness, our Captain resolved,
with his two Ships and three Pinnaces to go to Carthagene, whither in sailing
we spent some 6. days, by reason of the calmes which came often upon us: but
all this time we attempted nothing that we might have done by the way,
neither at Tolou, nor otherwhere, because we would not be discovered.

We came to anchor with our two Ships in the evening in seven fadome water,
August 13.
between the Islands of Charesha and Saint Barnards: our Captain led the three
Pinnaces, about the Island, into the harbor of Carthagene; where at the very
entry, he found a Fregate at anchor, aboard which was only one old man; who
being demanded, where the rest of his company was? answered, that they were
gone ashoare in their Gundeloe that evening, to fight about a mistress: and
voluntarily related to our Captain that two hours before night, there past by
them a Pinnace, with sail and Oars, as fast as ever they could row, calling
to him, whether there had not been any English or Frenchmen there lately? and
upon answer that there had been none: they bid them look to themselves:
that within an hour, that this Pinnace was come to the vtterside of
Carthagene, there were many great Pieces shot off, whereupon one going to top,
to descry what might be the cause? espied, over the land, diverse Fregates and
small shipping, bringing themselves within the Castle.

This report our Captain credited, the rather, for that himself had heard the
report of the Ordinance, at sea, and perceived sufficiently, that he was now
descried: notwithstanding, in farther examination, of this old mariner, having
understood, that there was, within the next point, a great ship of Siuell,
which had here discharged her loading, and rid now with her yards a cross,
being bound the next morning for Saint Domingo: our Captain took this old man
into his Pinnace to verify that which he had informed, and rowed toward this
Ship, which as we came near it, hayled us, asking whence our Shallops were?
we answered, from Nombre de Dios: straight way they raild and reviled: we
gave no heed to their words, but every Pinnace, according to our Captains
order: one on the starboord bough, the other on the starboord quarter, and the
Captain in the midship on the larboord side, forthwith boarded her, though we
had some difficulty to enter, by reason of her height, being of two hundred
forty Tun. But as soon as we entered upon the decks, we threw down the
grates and spardecks, to prevent the Spaniards from annoying us with their
close fights: who then perceiving that we were possessed of their Ship, stowed
themselves all in hold with their weapons, except two or three yonkers, which
were found before the beetes: when having light out of our Pinnaces, we found
no danger of the enemy remaining, we cut their Cables at half, and with our
three Pinnaces, towed her without the Island, into the sound right before the
Town, without danger of their great shot.

Mean while, the Town having intelligence hereof, by their watch, took
th'alarme, rong out their Bells, shot off about thirty Pieces of great
Ordinance, put all their men in a readiness horse and foot, came down to the
very point of the wood, and discharged their Caliuers, to impeach us if they
might, in going forth.

The next morning our Ships took two Fregats, August 14.
in which were two, who called themselves the Kings Scriuanos, the one of
Carthagene, the other of Veragua, with seven Mariners and two Negroes: who had
been at Nombre de Dios and were now bound for Cathagene, with double letters
of advise, to certify them that Captain Drake had been at Nombre de Dios,
had taken it, and had it not been that he was hurt with some blessed shot,
by all likelihood he had sacked it: he was yet still upon the Coast: they
should therefore carefully prepare for him.

After that our Captain had brought all his fleet together: at the Scriuanos
entreaties, he was content to do them all favor, in setting them and all
their companies a shore; and so bare thence with the Islands of Saint Barnards,
about three leagues off the Town: where we found great store of fish for our
refreshing.

Here our Captain considering that he was now discovered, upon 2. of the
cheifest places of all the Coast, and yet not meaning to leave it, till he had
found the Simerons, and made his voyage, as he had conceived, which would
require some length of time and sure manning of his Pinnaces, he determined
with himself, to burn one of his Ships, and make of the other a storehouse,
that his Pinnaces (which could not otherwise) might be thoroughly mand, and so
he might be able to abide any time. But knowing the affection of his company,
how loath they were to leave either of their Ships, being both so good Sailors
and so well furnished, he purposed in himself by some policy, to make them
most willing to effect that he intended. And therefore sent for one Thomas
Moon (who was Carpenter in the Swanne) and taking him into his Cabin,
charge him to conceal for a time, a piece of service, which he must in any
case consent to do aboard his own Ship: that was, in the middle of the second
watch, to go down secretly into the well of the Ship, and with a great
spike-gimlet, to boar three hoales, as near the keele as he could, and lay
something against it, that the force of the water entering, might make no great
noise, nor be discovered by boiling up: Thomas Moon at the hearing hereof
being utterly dismayed, desired to know what cause there might be, to move
him to sincke so good a Bark, of his own, new, and strong, and that by his
means, who had been in two so rich and gainefull voyages in her with himself
heretofore: If his brother, the Master, and the rest of the company should
know of such his fact, he thought verily they would kill him. But when our
Captain had imparted to him his causes, and had persuaded him with promise
that it should not be known, till all of them should be glad of it: he
undertook it, and did it accordingly.

The next morning our Captain took his Pinnace very early, August 15.
purposing to go a fishing (for that there is very great store on all the
Coast) and falling aboard the Swanne, calls for his brother to go with him,
who rising suddenly, answers that he would follow presently, or if it would
please him to stay a very little, he would attend him. Our Captain perceiving
the feate wrought, would not hasten him, but in rowing away, demanded of them,
why their Bark was so deep? as making no great account of it: but by occasion
of this demand, his brother sent one down to the Steward, to know whether
there were any water in the Ship? or what other cause might be? The Steward
hastily stepping down at his usual skuttle, was wett up to the waste, and
shifting with more have to come up again as if the water had followed him,
cried out that the Ship was full of water. There was no need to hasten the
company, some to the pumpe, others to search for the leake, which the Captain
of the Bark seeing they did on all hands very willingly, he followed his
brother, and certified him of the strange chance befalne them that night; that
whereas they had not pumpt twice in six weeks before, now they had six foot
water in hold: therefore he desires leave from attending him in fishing, to
intend the search and remedy of the leake: and when our Captain with his
company proffered to go to help them, he answered, they had men enough
aboard, and prayed him to continue his fishing, that they might have some part
of it for their dinner. Thus returning, he found his company had taken great
pain, but had freeed the water very little: yet such was their love to the
Bark (as our Captain well knew) that they ceased not, but to the utmost of
their strength, labored all that they might till three in the afternoon: by
which time, the company perceiving, that though they had been relieved by our
Captain himself and many of his company, yet they were not able to free above
a foot and a half of water, and could have no likelihood of finding the
leake, had now a less liking of her then before, and greater content to hear
of some means fot remedy: whereupon our Captain consulting with them what they
thought best to be done: found that they had more desire to have all as he
thought fit, then judgment to conceive any means of remedy. And therefore
he propounded, that himself would go in the Pinnace, till he could provide
him some hansome Fregate, and that his brother should be Captain in the
admiral, and the Master should also be there placed with him, instead of
this: which seeing they could not save, he would have fired, that the enemy
might never recover her: but first all the Pinnaces should be brought aboard
her, that every one might take out of her whatsoever they lackt or liked. This,
though the company at the first marueiled at, yet presently it was put in
execution and performed that night: our Captain had his desire, and men enough
for his Pinnaces.

The next morning, we resolved to seek out some fit place, in the sound of
Darienne, Aug. 16.
where we might safely leave our Shipp at Anchor, not discouerable by the
enemy, who thereby might imagine us quite departed from the Coast, and we the
mean time better follow our purposes with our Pinnaces; of which our Captain
would himself take two to Rio Grande, and the third leave with his brother to
seek the Symerons.

Upon this resolution, Aug. 21.
we set sail presently for the said sound: which within five days we
recovered, absteining of purpose, from all such occasion, as might hinder our
determination, or bewray our being upon the Coast. As Soon as we arrived, where
our Captain intended, and had chosen a fit and convenient road (out of all
trade) for our purpose; we reposed our selves there, for some fifteen days,
keeping our selves close, that the brute of our being upon the Coast might
cease.

But in the mean time we were not idle: for besides such ordinary works, as
our Captain every month did usually enure us to, about the trimming and
fitting of his Pinnaces, for their better sailing and rowing: he caused us to
ridd a large plot of ground, both of Trees and brakes and to build us houses,
sufficient for all ourlodging, and one especially for all our public
meetings; wherein the Negroe which fled to us before did us great service, as
being well acquainted with the Country, and their means of building. Our
Archers made themselves Butts to shoot at, because we had many that delighted
in that exercise, and wanted not a Fletcher to keep our Bows and Arrows in
order. The rest of the company, every one as he liked best, made his disport
at Boules, Quoits, Keiles, etc. For our Captain allowed one half of their
company to pass their time thus, every other day interchangeably, the other
half being enjoined to the necessary works, about our Ship and Pinnaces, and
the providing of fresh victual, Fish, Foul, Hogs, Dear, Conies, etc. whereof
there is great plenty. Here our Smithes set up their Forge, as they used, being
furnished out of England, which Anuill, Iron, Coals, and all manner of
necessaries, which stood us in great steed.

Septem. 5.
At the end of these fifteen days, our Captain leaving his Ship in his
brothers charge, to keep all things in order; himself took with him,
according to his former determination, two Pinnaces for Rio Grand, and passing
by Carthagene, but out of sight, when we were within two leagues of the River,
Septem. 8.
we landed to the westwards on the maine, where we saw great store of Cattle.
There we found some Indians, who asking us in freindly sort, in broken
Spanish, what we would have, and understanding that we desired fresh victuals
in traffic; they took such Cattle for us, as we needed, with ease and so
readily, as if they had a special Commandment over them, whereas they would
not abide us to come near them: And this also they did willingly, because our
Captain (according to his custom) contented them for their pains, with such
things as they account greatly of, in such sort that they promised, we should
have there of them at any time, what we would.

The same day we departed thence to Rio grand, where we entered about three of
the clock in the afternoon. There are two entrings into this River, of which
we entered the Westermost called Boca chica. The freshet of this River is so
great, that we being half a league from the mouth of it, filled fresh water
for our beuerage.

From three a clock till dark night we rowed up the stream, but the current
was so strong downwards, that we got but two leagues all that time. We moared
our Pinnaces to a tree that night: for that presently with the closing of the
evening, there fell a monstrous shower of rain, with such strange and terrible
claps of thunder, and flashes of lightning, as made us, not a little to meruell
at, although our Captain had been acquainted with such like in that Country,
and told us that they continue, seldom longer then three quarters of an hour.
This storm was no sooner ceast, but it became very calm, and therewith there
came such an innumerable multitude, of a kind of Flies of that Country called
Muskitos (like our Gnats) which bite so spitefully, that we could not rest all
that night, nor find means to defend our selves from them, by reason of the
heat of the Country: the best remedy we then found against them, was the
juice of Lemmons.

At the break of day we departed, rowing in the eddy, and haling up by the
trees where the eddy failed, with great labor, September. 9.
by spells, without ceasing, each Company their half hour glass: without
meeting any, till about three a clock afternoon, by which time we could get
but five leagues a head. Then we espied a Canow with two Indians fishing in the
River: but we spoke not to them, least so we might be descried: nor they to
us, as taking us to be Spaniards. But within an hour after we espied certain
houses, on the other side of the River, whose channel is twenty five fathom
deep, and his breadth so great, that a man can scantly be discerned from side
to side. Yet a Spaniard which kept those houses, had espied our Pinnaces, and
thinking we had been his Contrymen, made a smoke, for a signal to turn
that way, as being desirous to speak with us. After that, we espying this
smoke, had made with it, and were half the River over, he wheaued us with his
hat, and his long hanging sleeves to come ashoare: But as we drew nearer unto
him, and he discerned that we were not those he looked for, he took his
heels, and fled from his houses, which we found to be, five in number, all
full of white Ruske, dried Bacon, that Country Cheese (like Holland Cheese in
fashion, but far more delicate in taste, of which they send into Spain as
special Presents) many sorts of sweet Meats, and Conserues; with great store
of Sugar: being provided to serve the Fleet returning to Spain.

With this store of Victuals we loaded our Pinnaces, and by the shutting in of
the day we were ready to depart; for that we hastened the rather, by reason of
an intelligence given us by certain Indian Women which we found in those
houses: that the Fregates (these are ordinarily thirty, or upwards, which
usually transport the Merchandise sent out of Spain to Carthagene, from thence
to these houses, and so in great Canoas up hence into Nuevo Reyno, for which,
the River running many hundredth leagues within the land serves very fitly, and
return in exchange, the Gold and Treasure, Silver, Victuals and Commodities,
which that Kingdom yeildeth abundantly:) were not yet returned from
Carthagene, since the first alarm they took of our being there.

As we were going aboard our Pinnaces from these Storehouses, Sept. 10.
The Indians of a great Town called Villa del Rey* some 2. miles distant from
the waters side where we landed, were brought down by the Spaniards into the
bushes, and shot their Arrows; but we rowed down the stream, with the
current (for that the wind was against us) only one league, and because it
was night, Anchored till the morning, when we rowed down to the mouth of the
River, where we vnladed all our provisions, and cleansed our Pinnaces,
according to our Captains custom, and took it in again, and the same day
went to the westward.

In this return, we descried a Ship, a Bark, and a Fregate, of which the Ship
and Fregate went for Carthagene, but the Bark was bound to the Northwards, with
the wind easterly, so that we imagined she had some gold or treasure going
for Spain: therefore we gave her chase, but taking her, and finding nothing
of importance in her, understanding that she was bound for Sugar and Hides, we
let her go, and having a good gale of wind, continued our former course to
our Ship and company.

In the way between Carthagene and Tolou, we took five or six Fregates, which
were laden from Tolou, Sept. 11.
with live Hogs, Hens and Maiz, which we call Guynie wheat: of these having
gotten what intelligence they could give, of their preparations for us, and
diverse opinions of us, we dismissed all the men, only staying two Fregates
with us, because they were so well stored with good victuals.

Within three days after we arrived at the place which our Captain chose at
first to leave his Ship in, which was called by our Company P^r^ plenty, by
reason we brought in thither continually all manner store of good victuals,
which we took going that way by Sea, for the victualling of Carthagene and
Nombre de Dios, as also the Fleetes going and coming out of Spain: so that if
we had been two thousand, yea three thousand persons, we might with our
Pinnaces easily have provided them sufficient victual of Wine, Meal, Ruske,
Cassauy, (a kind of Bread made of a root called Yucca, whose juice is poison,
but the substance good and wholesome) dried Beef, dried Fish, live Sheep,
live Hogs, abundance of Hens, besides the infinite store of dainty fresh fish
very easily to be taken every day. Insomuch that we were forced to build four
several Magazines or storehouses, some ten, some 20. leagues a sunder, some
in Islands, some in the maine, providing our selves in diverse places, that
though the Enemy should with force surprise any one, yet we might be
sufficiently furnished, till we had made our voyage as we did hope. In
building of these, our Negroes help was very much, as having a special skill,
in the speedy erection of such houses.

This our store was such, as thereby we relieved, not only our selves and the
Symerons, while they were with us, but also two French Ships in extreme want.
For in our absence Captain John Drake having one of our Pinnaces as was
appojnted, went in with the maine, and as he rowed a loofe the shore* where
he was directed by Diego the Negroe aforesaid, which willingly came unto us at
Nombre de Dios, he espied certain of the Symerons, with whom he dealt so
effectually, that in conclusion he left two of our men with their Leader, and
brought aboard two of theirs: agreeing that they should meet him again the
next day, at a River midway between the Cabezas and our Ships, which they
named Rio Diego.

These two being very sensible men, chosen out by their Commander, did with all
reverence and respect, declare unto our Captain, that their Nation conceived
great joy of his arrival, because they knew him to be an enemy to the
Spaniards, not only by his late being in Nombre de Dios, but also by his former
voyages, and therefore were ready to assist and favor his enterprises against
his and their Enemies to the uttermost: and to that end their Captain and
Company, did stay at this present near the mouth of Rio Diego, to attend what
answer and order should be given them: that they would have marched by land,
even to this place, but that the way is very long, and more troublesome, by
reason of many steep Mountains, deep Rivers and thick brakes: desiring
therefore, that it might please our Captain to take some order, as he thought
best, with all convenient speed in this behalf. Our Captain considering the
speech of these persons, and waighing it with his former intelligences had, not
only by Negroes but Spaniards also, whereof he was always very careful: as
also conferring it with his brothers informations of the great kindness, that
they showed him being lately with them: after he had heard the opinions of
those of best service with him, what were fittest to be done presently:
resolved hmselfe with his brother, and the two Symerons, in his two Pinnaces to
go toward this River, as he did the fame evening; giving order, that the
Ship and the rest of his Fleet, should the next morning follow him, because
there was a place of as great safety and sufficiency, which his brother had
found out near the River. The safety of it consisted, not only, in that which
is common all along that coast from Tolou to Nombre de Dios, being above sixty
leagues, that it is a most goodly and plentiful Country, and yet inhabited
not with one Spaniard, or any for the Spaniards: but especially in that it
lies among a great many of goodly Islands full of Trees, where, though there be
channels, yet there are such Rocks and shoales, that no man can enter by
night, without great danger, nor by day without discovery, whereas our Ship
might lie hidden within the Trees.

Sept. 14.
The next day we arrived at this River appointed, where we found the Symerons
according to promise: the rest of their number, were a mile up, in a vvood by
the Rivers side. There, after we had given them entertainment, and received
good testimonies of their joy and good will toward us, we took two more
of them into our Pinnaces, leaving our two men with the rest of theirs, to
march by land, to another River called Rio Guana, with intent there to meet
with another Company of Symerons, which were now in the Mountains. So we
departed that day ftom Rio Diego, with our Pinnaces toward our Ship, as
maruelling that she follovved us not as was appointed.

But two days after, we found her in the place where we left her, but in
far other state, Sept. 16.
being much spoiled and in great danger, by reason of a tempest she had in our
absence.

As soon as we could trim our Ship, Sept. 18.
being some two days, our Captain sent away one of his Pinnaces, toward
the bottom of the Bay, amongst the shoales and sandy Islands, to sound out the
channel) for the bringing in of our Ship nearer the maine.

The next day we follovved, and were (with wary pilatage, directed safely
into the best channel, Sept. 19.
with much ado to recover the Road, among so many flats and shoales. It was
near about five leagues from the Catiuaas, betwixt an Island and the maine,
where we moared our Ship. The Island was not above four Cables length from
the maine, being in quantity some three Acres of ground, flat and very full of
Trees and bushes.

We were forced to spend the best part of three days, after our departure
from our Port plenty, Sept. 22.
before we were quiet in this newfound Road, Sept. 23.
which we had but newly entered, when our two men and the former Troop of
Simerons, with twelve other whom they had met in the Mountains, came in sight
over against our Ship, on the maine: whence we fet them all aboard, to their
great comfort and our content: they rejoicing that they should have some fit
opportunity, to wreake their wrongs on the Spaniards: we hoping that now our
voyage should be bettered.

At our first meeting when our Captain had moved them, to show him the means
which they had to furnish him with gold and silver: they ansvvered plainly,
that had they known gold had bin his desire, they could have satisfied him
with store, which for the present they could not do, because the Rivers, in
which they had suncke great store, which they had taken from the Spaniards,
rather to despite them then for love of gold, were now so high, that they could
not get it out of such depthes for him, and because the Spaniards in these
rainy months do not use to carry their Treasure by land.

This answer although it were somewhat unlooked for, yet nothing discontented
us, but rather persuaded us farther of their honest and faithful meaning
toward us. Therefore our Captain to entertain these five months, commanded
all our Ordinance and Artillery a shore, with all our other provisions:
sending his Pinnaces to the maine, to bring over great Trees, to make a Fort
upon the same Island, for the planting of all our Ordinance therein, and for our
safeguard, if the Enemy in all this time should chance to come.

Sept. 24.
Our Symerons cut down Palmi^o boughs and branches, and with wonderful speed
raised up two large houses for all our Company. Our Fort was then made (by
reason of the place) Triangle wise with maine timber and earth, of which the
Trench yielded us good store, so that we made it thirteen foot in height.

October. 7.
But after we had continued upon this Island fourteen days, our Captain
having determined, with three Pinnaces to go for Carthagene, left his brother
John Drake, to govern these who remained behind with the Symerons, to finish
the Fort which he had begun: for which he appointed him to fetch boords and
plancks, as many as his Pinnace would carry, from the prize which we took at
Rio Grand, and left all the Catiuaas, where she drove a shore and wracked, in
our absence: but now she might serve very commodiously, to supply our uses, in
making platformes for our ordinance. Thus our Captain and his brother took
their leave, the one to the Eastward, and the other to the Catiuaas.

That night we came to an I Will, which he called Spurkite Island, because we
found there great store of such a kind a Bird in shape, but very delicate, of
which we killed and roasted many; staying there till the next day midnoone,
when we departed thence: Octo. 8.
And about four a clock recovered a big Island in our way, where we stayed all
night, by reason that there was great store of Fish, and especially of a great
kind of Shellfish of a foot long: we called them Whelkes.

The next morning we were clear of these Islands and Shoales, and haled off
into the Sea. Octo. 9.
About four days after, near the Islands of Saint Barnards, Octo. 13.
we chased two Fregats a shore: Oct. 14 15.
and recovering one of the Islands, made our abode there some two days to wash
our Pinnaces and take of the Fish.

Thence we went toward Tolou, Octo. 16.
and that day landed near the Town in a garden, where we found certain
Indians, who delivered us their Bows and Arrows, and gathered for us such
Fruit as the Garden did yield, being many sorts of dainty Fruits and Roots,
still contenting them for that we received: our Captains principal intent in
taking this and other places by the way, not being for any other cause, but
only to learn true intelligences, of the state of the Country and of the
Fleetes.

Hence we departed presently, and rowed toward Charesha the Island of
Carthagene, and entered in at Bocha Chica, and having the wind large, we
sailed in toward the City, and let fall our Grappers betwixt the Island and
the maine, right over against the goodly Garden Island. In which our Captain
would not suffer us to land, notwithstanding our importunate desire, because
he knew, it might be dangerous: for that they are wont to send Soldiers
thither, when they know any men of war upon the Coast: which we found
accordingly: for within three hours after, passing by the point of the Island,
we had a Volly of a hundred shot from them, and yet there was but one of our
men hurt.

Octo. 17.
This evening we departed to Sea: and the day following, being some two leagues
off the Harbor, we took a Bark, and found that the Captain and his wife with
the better sort of the Passengers, had forsaken her, and were gone a shore in
their Gundeloe: by occasion whereof we boorded without resistance, though they
were very well provided, with Swords and Targets and some small Shot, besides
four iron Bases. She was about fifty Tun, having ten Mariners, five or six
Negroes, great store of Soap and sweet Meats, bound from Saint Domingo to
Carthagene. This Captain left behind him a silk Ancient with his Arms, as
might be thought, in hasty departing.

Octo. 1g.
The next day we sent all the company a shore to seek their Masters, saving a
young Negrito of three or four years old, which we brought away, but kept
the Bark, and in her, bore into the mouth of Carthagene Harbor where we
Anchored.

That afternoon, certain horsemen came down to the point by the Wood side,
and with the Scriuano forementioned, came toward our Bark with a Flag of
Truce, desiring of our Captain safe conduct for his coming and going: the
which being granted, he came aboard us, giving our Captain great thanks for
his manifould favors, etc. promising that night before day break, to bring
as much victual as they would desire, what shift so ever he made, or what
danger soever he incurd of law and punishment. But this fell out to be nothing
but a device of the Governor forced upon the Scriuano, to delay time, till they
might prouid ethemselues of sufficient strength to entrappe us: for which this
fellow by his smooth speech, was thought a fit mean. Octo. 19.
So by Sun rising, when we perceived his words but words, we put to Sea to
the westward of the Island, some three leagues off, where we lay at Hull the
rest of all that day and night.

The next day in the afternoon, Octo. 20.
there came out of Carthagene, two Fregats bound for Saint Domingo, the one of
fifty, the other of twelve Tonne, having nothing in them but ballast: we took
them, within a league of the Town, and came to Anchor with them, within Saker
short of the East Bulwark: there were in those Fregats some twelve or thirteen
common Mariners, which entreated to be set a shore: to them our Captain gave
the great Fregates Gundelow, and dismissed them.

The next morning when they came down to the Wester point with a flagge of
Truce, Octo. 21.
our Captain mand one of his Pinnaces and rowed a shore: when we were within
a Cables length of the shore, the Spaniards fled, hiding themselves in the
Woods, as being afraid of our Ordinance; but indeed to draw us on to land
confidently, and to presume of our strength. Our Captain commanding the
Grapnell to be cast out of the stern, veered the Pinnace a shore, and as soon
as she touched the sand, he alone leapt ashore in their sight, to declare
that he durst set his foot a land, but stayed not among them: to let them
know, that though he had not sufficient forces to conquer them, yet he had
sufficent judgment to take heed of them. And therefore perceiving their
intent, as soon as our Captain was aboard, we haled off upon our Grapner and
rid a while. They presently came forth upon the sand, and sent a youth, as with
a message from the Governor, to know what our intent was, to stay thus upon the
Coast? our Captain answered he meant to traffic with them: for he had
Tin, Pewter, Cloth and other Merchandise that they needed. The youth swam
back again with this answer; and was presently returned, with another
message: that, The King had forbidden to traffic with any foreign Nation for
any commodities, except Powder and Shot, of which if he had any store, they
would be his Merchants; he answered, that he was come from his Country, to
exchange his commodities for Gold and Silver, and is not purposed to return
without his errand. They are like (in his opinion) to have little rest, if that
by fair means they would not traffic with him. He gave this Messenger a
fair Shirt for a reward, and so returned him: who rolled his Shirt about his
head and swamme very spedily.

We heard no answer all that day, and therefore toward night we went aboard
our Fregats and reposed our selves, setting and keeping very orderly all that
night our watch, with great and small shot.

The next morning the wind which had been westerly in the evening, altered to
the eastward. About the dawning of the day, we espied two Sails turning
toward us, where upon our Captain waighed with his Pinnaces, leaving the two
Fregats vnmand. But when we were come somewhat nigh them, the wind calmed,
and we were feign to row toward them, till that approaching very nigh we
saw many heads peering over board. For, as we perceived, these two Fregates
were mand and set forth out of Carthagene, to fight with us, and at least to
empeach or busy us, whilst by some means or other they might recover the
Fregates from us: but our Captain prevented both their drifts. For commanding
John Oxnam to stay with the one Pinnace, to entertain these two men of war,
himself in the other made such speed, that he gate to his Fregates which he
had left at Anchor, and caused the Spaniards (who in the mean time had gotten
aboard in a small Canow thinking to have towed them within the danger of their
shot) to make greater have thence, then they did thither. For he found that
in shifting thence, some of them were feign to swim a land (the Canow not being
able to receive them) and had left their apparel, some their Rapiers and
Targets, some their Flaskes and Calliuers behind them, although they were
towing away of one of them: therefore considering that we could not man them,
we sunck the one, and burnt the other, giving them to understand by this, that
we perceived their secret practices.

This being done, he returned to John Oxnam, Octo. 22.
who all this while lay by the men of war without proffering of fight. And
as soon as our Captain was come up to these Fregates, the wind blew much from
the Sea, so that, we being betwixt the shore and them, were in a manner
forced to bear room into the Harbor before them, to the great joy of the
Spaniards who beheld it, in supposing, that we would still have fled before
them. But as soon as we were in the Harbor, and felt smooth water, our
Pinnaces (as we were assured of) getting the wind, we fought with them upon
the advantage, so that after a few shot exchanged, and a storm rising, they
were contented to press no nearer. Therefore as they let fall their Anchors,
we presently let drop our Grapners in the wind of them, which the Spanish
Soldiers seeing, considering the disadvantage of the wind, the likelihood of
the storm to continue, and small hope of doing any good, they were glad to
retire themselves to the Town. But by reason of the foul and tempestuous
weather, we rode there four days, feeling great cold, by reason we had such
sore raines with westerly wind, and so little succor in our Pinnaces.

Octo. 27.
The fifth day after, there came in a Fregate from the Sea, which seeing us make
toward her, ran herself a shore, vnhanging her Rudder and taking away her
Sails, that she might not easily be carried away. But when we were come up
to her, we perceived about a hundred horse and foot, with their furniture,
came down to the point of the maine, where we interchanged some shot with
them. One of our great short past so near a brave Caualiere of theirs, that
thereby they were occasioned to advise themselves, and retreat into the woods,
where they might sufficiently defend and rescue the Fregate from us, and annoy
us also, if we stayed long about her. Therefore we concluded to go to Sea
again, putting forth through Boca chica, with intent to take down our Masts,
upon hope of fair wether, and to ride under the Rocks called Las Serenas,
which are two leagues off at Sea, as we had usually done aforetime, so that
they could not deserne us from the Rocks. But there the Sea was so mightily
grown, that we were forced to take the Harbor again: where we remained six
days, notwithstanding the Spaniards grieved greatly at our aboade there so
long, Nouem. 2.
put an other device in practice to endanger us.

For they sent forth a great Shallop, a fine Gundeloe, and a great Canow, with
certain Spaniards with Shot, and many Indians with poisoned Arrows, as it
seemed, with intent to begin some fight, and then to fly. For as soon as we
rowed toward them and enterchanged shot, they presently retired and went a
shore into the woods, where an Ambush of some sixty shot were laid for us:
besides two Pinnaces and a Fregate warping toward us, which were mand as the
rest. They atttemed us very boldly, being assisted by those others, which from
out of the wood, had gotten aboard the Gundelo and Canow, and seeing us bearing
from them (which we did in respect of the Ambuscado) they encouraged
themselves and assured their fellows of the day. But our Captain weighing
this their attempt, and being out of danger of their shot from the land,
commanding his other Pinnace to be brought a head of him, and to let fall their
Grapners each a head the other, environed both the Pinnaces with Bonnets, as
for a close fight, and then wheaued them aboard him.

They kept themselves upon their Oars at Calliuer shot distance, spending
powder apace, as we did some two or three hours; we had one of our men only,
wounded in that fight: what they had is unknow to us, but we saw their
Pinnaces shot through in diverse places, and the powder of one of them took
on fire: vvhereupon we vvaighed, intending to bear room, to ouer-run them:
which they perceiving and thinking that we would have boorded them, rovved
away amain to the defense which they had in the vvood, the rather because
they were disappointed of their help, that they expected from the Fregate
which was vvarping toward us, but by reason of the much vvinde that blevv,
could not come to offend us, or succor them.

Thus seeing that we were still molested, and no hope remained of any purchase
to be had, in this place any longer, because we were now so notably made
known in those parts, and because our victuals grevvv scant, as soon as the
vveather vvexed somevvhat better (the Wind continuing alvvayes Westerly, so
that we could not return to our Ships) our Captain thought best to go to
the Eastvvard, toward Rio grand, Nou. 3.
along the Coast, where we had been before, and found great store of
victuals.

Nou. 5.
But when after two days sailing, we were arrived at the Villages of store,
where before we had furnished our selves with abundance of Hens, Sheep,
Calves, Hogs, etc. Now we found bare nothing, not so much as any people
left, for that they by the Spaniards commandment were fled to the Mountains,
and had driven away all their Cattle, that we might not be relieved by them.
Herewith being very sorry because much of our victual in our Pinnaces was
spoild, by the foul weather at Sea, and raines in Harbor: a Fregate being
descryed at Sea revived us, and put us in some hope for the time, that in her
we should find sufficient; and thereupon it may easily be guessed, how much
we labored to recover her: but when we had boarded her, and understood, that
she had neither meat nor money, but that she was bound for Rio grand, to take
in provision upon bills, our great hope converted into grief.

We endured with our allowance seven or eight days more, proceeding to the
Eastwards, and bearing room for Santa Martha, upon hope to find some shipping
in the Road, or Limpets on the Rocks, or succor against the storm in that
good Harbor. Being arrived, and seeing no shipping, we anchored under the
Wester point, where is high land, and, as we thought, free safety from the
Town, which is in the bottom of the Bay, not intending to land there, because
we knew that it was fortified, and that they had intelligence of us. But the
Spaniards knowing us to be Men of war, and misliking that we should shroud
under their Rocks, without their leave, had conveyed some thirty or forty shot
among the cliffes, which annoyed us so spitefully and so vnreuengedly (for that
they lay hidden behind the Rocks, but we lay open to them) that we were
soon weary of our Harbor, and enforced, for all the storm without, and want
within, to put to Sea, which though these Enemies of ours were well contented
withal, yet for a farewell, as we came open of the Town, they sent us a
Culuerine shot, which made a near escape, for it fell between our Pinnaces,
as we were upon conference of what was best to be done. The Company advised
that if it pleased him, they might put themselves a land, some place to the
Eastward to get victuals, and rather hope for courtesy of the Countrey-people,
then continue at Sea, in so long cold, and great a storm in so leake a
Pinnace. But our Captain would in no wise like of that advice, he thought it
better to bear up toward Rio de Haca, or Coricao, with hope there to have
plenty without great resistance, because he knew, either the Islands were not
very populous, or else it were very likely that there would be found Ships of
victual in a readiness.

The Company of the other Pinnace answered, that, they would willingly follow
him through the World, but in this they could not see how, either their
Pinnace should live in that Sea, without being eaten up in that storm, or they
themselves able to endure so long time, with so slender provision as they had,
viz. only one Gammon of Bacon and thirty pound of Biscuit for eighteen men.
Our Captain replied, that they were better provided then himself was, who had
but one Gammon of Bacon, and forty pound of Biscuit for his twenty four men:
and therefore he doubted not but they would take such part as he did, and
willingly depend upon Gods Almighty providence, which never fails them that
trust in him: with that he hoysed his fore-sayle, and set his course for
Coricao, which the rest perceiving with sorrowful hearts in respect of the
weak Pinnace, yet desirous to follow their Captain, consented to take the
same course.

We had not sailed past three leagues, but we had espied a sail plying to the
Westward with her two coarses, to our great joy, who vowed together, that we
would have her, or else it should cost us dear. Bearing with her, we found her
to be a Spanish Ship of above ninty Tun, which being wheaued a maine by us,
despised our summons, and shot off her Ordinance at us.

The Sea went very high, so that it was not for us, to attempt to board her,
and therefore we made fit small sail to attend upon her, and keep her
company to her small content, till fairer weather might lay the Sea. We spent
not past two hours in our attendance, till it pleased God, after a great
shevvr to send us a reasonable calm, so that we might use our Pieces and
approach her at pleasure, in such sort that in short time we had taken her;
finding her laden with victual well poudred and dried, which at that present
we received as sent us of Gods great mercy. After all things were set in
order, and that the Wind increased toward night, we plied off and on, till
day, at what time our Captain sent in Edward Hixom, Nou. 13.
who had then charge of his Pinnace, to search out some Harbor along the
Coast: who having found out a little one, some ten or twelve leagues to the
East of Santa Martha, where in sounding he had good ground and sufficient
water, presently returned, and our Captain brought in his new Prize. Then by
promising liberty, and all their apparel to the Spaniards which we had taken,
if they would bring us to water and fresh victuals, the rather by their means,
we obtained of the inhabitants Indians, what they had which was plentiful.
These Indians were clothed, and governed by a Spaniard which dwelt in the next
Town, not past a league off: we stayed there all day, watering and wooding,
and providing things necessary, by giving content and satisfaction to the
Indians. But toward night our Captain called all of us aboard, (only leaving
the Spaniards lately taken in the Prize ashoare, according to our promise made
them, to their great content, who acknowledged that our Captain did them a
far greater favor, in setting them freely at liberty, then he had done them
displeasure in taking their Ship) and so set sail.

The sickness which had begun to kindle amongst two or three days before,
did this day show it self, in Charles Glub, one of our Quarter Masters, a
very tall man, and a right good Mariner, taken away to the great grief both of
Captain and Company. What the cause of this malady was, we knew nor of
certainety, we imputed it to the cold, which our men had taken, lying without
succor in the Pinnaces. But howsoever it was, thus it pleased God to visit us,
and yet in favor to restore unto health, all the rest of our Company, that
were touched with this disease, which were not a few.

Nouem. 15.
The next morning being fair weather, though the Wind continued contrary, our
Captain commanded the Minion his lesser Pinnace, to hasten away before him
toward his Ships at Fort Diego within the Cabecas to carry news of his
coming, and to put all things in a readiness for our Land journey, if they
hear any thing of the Fleets arrival by the Simerons, giving the Minion
charge if they wanted Wine, to take Saint Bernards in their way, and there take
in some such portion as they thought good, of the Wines which we had there
hidden in the sand.

Nouem. 22.
We plied to windwards, as near as we could, so that within a seauen-night
after the Minion departed from us, we came to Saint Barnards, where we stayed
many hours, finding but twelve Botijos of Wine, of all the store we left,
which had escaped the curious search of the Enemy (who had been there) for
that they were deep in the ground.

Within four or five days after, Nou. 27.
we came to our Ship, where we found all other things in good order, but
received very heavy news of the death of John Drake our Captains brother, and
another young man called Richard Allen which were both slain at one time, as
they attempted the boarding of a Fregate within two days after our departing
from them.

The manner of it (as we learned by examination of the Company) was this: when
they saw this Fregate at Sea, (as they were going toward their Fort with
planckes to make the Platformes) the Company were very importunate on him, to
give chase and set upon this Fregate, which they deemed had been a fit booty
for them. But he told them, that they wanted weapons to assail, they knew not
how the Fregate was provided, they had their boat laden with planckes, to
finish that his brother had commanded. But when this would not satisfy them,
but that still they urged him with words and supposals: If you will needs said
he adventure, it shall never be said that I will be hindmost, neither shall you
report to my Brother, that you lost your voyage by any covvardise you found in
me.

Thereupon every man shifted as they might for the time: and heauing their
planckes over board, took them such poor weapons as they had: viz. a broken
pointed Rapier, one old Visgee and a rusty Caliuer: John Drake took the
Rapier, and made a Gantlet of his Pillovv, Richard Allen the Visgee, both
standing in the head of the Pinnace, called the Ei^n, Robert took the Caliuer
and so boarded. But they found the Fregate armed round about with a close
fight of hides, full of Pikes and Caliuers, which were discharged in their
faces, and deadly vvounded those that were in the Fore-shippe, John Drake in
the belly, and Richard Allen in the head. But notvvithstanding their vvounds,
they with Oars shifted off the Pinnace, got clear of the Fregate, and with
all have recovered their Ship, where within an hour after this young man
of great hope, ended his days, greatly lamented of all the Company.

Thus having moared our Ships fast, our Captain resolved to keep himself
close, without being descried, until he might hear of the coming of the
Spanish Fleet, and therefore set no more to Sea, but supplied his wants, both
for his own Company and the Symerons, out of his foresaid Magazine, besides
daily out of the vvoods, with vvilde Hogs, Pheasants and Guanas, continuing
in health (God be praised) all the mean time, which was a month at least,
till at length about the beginning of January, ^an. 3.
half a score of our Company fell down sick together, and the most of them
dyed within two or three days: so long that we had thirty at a time sick
of this Calenture, which attache our men, either by reason of the sudden
change from cold to heat, or by reason of brackish water which had been
taken in by one Pinnace, through the sloth of their men in the mouth of the
River, not rovving further in where the water was good.

Among the rest, Joseph Drake another of his brethren dyed in our Captains
arms, of the same disease: of which, that the cause might be the better
discerned, and consequently remedyed, to the relief of others, by our
Captains appointment he was ripped open by the Surgeon, who found, his Liver
swollen, his heart as it were sodden, and his guts all fair. This was the first
and last experiment that our Captain, made of Anatomy in this voyage.

The Surgeon that cut him up, ouer-liued him not past four days, although he
were not touched with that sickness, of which he had been recovered above a
month before: but only of an ouerbold practice which he would needs make upon
himself, by receiving an ouer-strong purgation of his own device: after which
taken, he never spoke, nor his boy recovered the health which he lost by
tasting it, till he saw England.

The Symerons, who, as is beforesaid, had been entertained by our Captain in
September last, and usually repaired to our Ship, during all the time of our
absence, ranged the Country up and down, between Nombre de Dios and us, to
learn what they might for us: whereof they gave our Captain advertisement
from time, to time, as now particularly, certain of them let him understand,
that the Fleet was certainly arrived at Nombre de Dios.

Therefore he sent the Lion, Ian. 30.
to the seamost Island of the Catiu^as, to descry the truth of the report: by
reason it must needs be, that if the Fleet were in Nombre de Dios, all the
Fregates of the Country would repair thitherwards with victual.

The Lion within few days descryed that she was sent for, espying a Fregate
which she presently boarded and took, laden with Maiz, Hens, and Pompions
from Tolou, who assured us of the whole truth, of the arrival of the Fleet:
in this Fregate were taken one woman and twelve men, of whom one was the
Scriuano of Tolou. These we used very courteously, keeping them dilligently
guarded from the deadly hatred of the Symerons, who sought daily by all means
they could to get them of our Captain, that they might cut their throats, to
revenge their wrongs and injuries, which the Spanish Nation had done them: but
our Captain persuaded them not to touch them, or them ill countenance, while
they were in his charge: and took otder for their safety, not only in his
presence, but also in his absence. For when he had prepared to take his journey
for Panama by land, he gave Edward Hixom charge of his own Ship and Company,
and especially of those Spaniards whom he had put into the great Prize, which
was haled a shore to the Island (which we termed slaughter Island, because so
many of our men dyed there) and used as a storehouse for our selves, and a
prison for our Enemies.

All things thus ordered, our Captain conferring with his Company and the
Chiefest of the Symerons, what provisions were to be prepared for this great
and long journey, what kind of weapons, what store of victuals, and what
manner of apparel: was especially advised, to carry as great store of Shoes as
possibly he might, by reason of so many Rivers, with stones and gravel as
they were to pass, which accordingly providing, prepared his Company for that
journey, Febr. 3.
entering it upon Shrouetuesday. At what time there had dyed twenty eight of our
men, and a few whole men were left aboard with Edward Hixom, to keep the
Ship and tend the sick, and guard the prisoners.

At his departure our Captain gave this Master strait charge, in any case not
to trust any messenger, that should come in his name with any tokens, unless
he brought his hand writing: which he knew could not be counterfeited, by the
Symerons or Spaniards.

We were in all forty eight, of which eighteen only were English, the rest
were Symerons, which besides their Arms, bare every one of them, a great
quantity of victual and provision, supplying our want of cariages in so long a
march, so that we were not troubled with any thing but our furniture. And
because they could not carry enough to suffice us altogether, therefore, as they
promised before, so by the way with their Arrows, they provided for us
competent store from time to time.

They have every one of them two sorts of Arrows, the one to defend himself
and offend the enemy, the other to kill his victuals. These for fight are
somewhat like the Scottish Arrowe; only somewhat longer, and headed with iron,
Wood or Fishbones* but the Arrows for provision are of three sorts, the first
serves to kill any great Beast near hand, as Ox, Stagge, or wild Boar: this
has a head of iron of a pound and a half weight, shaped in form like the
head of a Iauelin or Boare-speare, as sharp as any knife, making so large and
deep a wound, as can hardly be believed of him that has not seen it. The
second serves for lesser Beasts, and has a head of three quarters of a pound:
this he most usually shoots. The third serves for all manner of Birds: it
has a head of an ounce weight. And these heads though they be of iron only,
yet are they so cunningly tempered, that they will continue a very good edge a
long time: and though they be turned sometimes yet they will never or seldom
break. The necessity in which they stand hereof continually, causes them to
have iron in far greater account then Gold: and no man among them is of
greater estimation, then he that can most perfectly give this temper unto it.

Every day we were marching by Sunrising: we continued till ten in the
forenoone: then resting (ever near some River) till past twelve, we marched
till four, and then by some Rivers side, we reposed our selves in such
houses, as either we found prepared heretofore by them, when they traveled
through these woods, or they daily built very readily for us, in this manner.

As Soon as we came to the place, where we intended to lodge, the Symerons,
presently laying down their burdens, fell to cutting of Forkes or Posts, and
Poles or Rafters, and Palmito boughs, or Plantaine leaves: and with great
speed set up, to the number of six houses. For every of which, they first
fastened deep into the ground, three or four great Posts with Forkes: upon
them, they laid one Transome, which was commonly about twenty foot, and made
the sides, in the manner of the roofes of our Country houses, thatching it
close with those aforesaid leaves, which keep out water long time: observing
always that in the lower ground, where greater heat was, they left some three
or four foot open vnthatcht below, and made the houses, or rather roofes, so
many foot the higher. But in the Hills, where the air was more peircing and
the nights colder, they made our rooms always lower, and Thatched them close
to the ground, leaving only one door to enter at, and a Lover hole for a vent,
in the midst of the roof In every of these, they made four several lodgings,
and three fires, one in the midst, and one at each end of every house: so that
the room was most temperately warm, and nothing annoyed with smoke, partly
by reason of the nature of the wood, which they use to burn, yielding very
little smoke, partly by reason of their artificial making of it: as firing the
wood cut in length like our billets, at the ends, and joining them together so
close, that though no flame or fire did appear, yet the heat continued
without intermission.

Near many of the Rivers where we stayed or lodgd, we found sundry sorts of
Fruits, which we might use with great pleasure and safety temperately,
Mammeas, Guayuas, Palmitos, Pinos, Oranges, Limes and diverse other; from eating
of which they dissuaded us in any case, unless we eat very few of them, and
those first dry roasted, as Plantans, Potatos and such like.

In iournying, as often as by chance they found any wild Swine, of which those
Hills and Valleys have s^ore, they would ordinarily, six at a time, deliver
their burdens to the rest of their fellows, and pursue, kill and bring away
after us, as much as they could carry, and time permitted. One day as we
traveled, the Symerons found an Otter, and prepared it to be dressed: our
Captain maruelling at it, Pedro (our chief Symeron) asked him, Are you a man
of war, and in want, and yet doubt whether this be meat, that has blood?
herewithall our Captain rebuked himself secretly, that he had so slightly
considered of it before.

The third day of our journey, they brought us to a Town of their own, seated
near a fair River, on the side of a Hill, environed with a Dike of eight
foot broad, and a thick mud wall of ten foot high, sufficient to stop a
sudden surpriser. It had one long and broad street, lying East and West, and
two other cross streets of less breadth and length: there were in it some five
or six and fifty households, which were kept so clean and sweet, that not
only the houses, but the very streets were very pleasant to behold. In this
Town we saw they lived very ciuilly and cleanely: for as soon as they came
thither, they washed themselves in the River, and changed their apparel which
was very fine and fitly made (as also their women do wear) somewhat after the
Spanish fashion, though nothing so costly. This Town is distant thirty five
leagues from Nombre de Dios and forty five from Panama. It is plentifully
stored with many sorts of Beasts and Foul, with plenty of Maiz and sundry
Fruits.

Touching their affection in religion, they have no kind of Priests, only
they held the Cross in great reputation: but at our Captains perswation, they
were contented to leave their Crosses, an^ to learn the Lords prayer, and to
be instructed in some measure concerning Gods true worship. They keep a
continual watch in four parts, 3. miles off their Town, to prevent the
mischeifes which the Spaniards intend against them, by the conducting of some
of their own coats, which having been taken by the Spaniards have been
enforced thereunto: wherein, as we learned, sometimes the Spaniards have
prevailed over them, specially when they lived less careful; but since they
against the Spaniards whom they kill like Beasts, as often as they take them
in the woods, having aforehand understood of their coming.

We stayed with them that night, Feb. 7.
and the next day till noone: during which time they related unto us diverse
very strange accidents, that had fallen out between them and the Spaniards,
namely one: A gallant Gentleman entertained by the Governors of the Country,
undertook the year last past, with a hundred and fifty Soldiers, to put
this Town to the sword, Men, Women, and Children. Being conducted to it by one
of them, that had been taken prisoner, and won by great gifts: he surprised
it half an hour before day, by which occasion most of the men escaped, but
many of their women and children were slaughtered, or taken: but the same
morning by Sun rising, after that their guide was slain, in following another
man's wife: and that the Symerons had assembled themselves in their strength:
they behaved themselves in such sort, and drove the Spaniards to such
extremity, that what with the disadvantage of the woods, having lost their
guide and thereby their way, what with famine and want, there escaped not past
thirty of them, to return answer to those which sent them.

Their King dwelt in a City within sixteen leagues Southeast of Panama, which
is able to make one thousand seven hundred fighting men.

They all entreated our Captain very earnestly, to make his aboade with them
some two or three days, promising that by that time, they would double his
strength if he thought good. But he thanking them for their offer, told them,
that he could stay no longer, it was more then time to prosecute his purposed
voyage: as for strength, he would wish no more then he had, although he
might have presently twenty times as much: which they took as proceeding not
only from kindness, but also from magnanimity, and therefore, they marched
forth that afternoon with great good will.

This was the order of our march: Four of those Symerons that best knew the
ways, went about a mile distance before us, breaking boughs as they went, to
be a direction to those that followed: but with great silence, which they
required us also to keep. Then twelve of them were as it were our Vantgard,
and other twelve our Reereward: we with their two Captains in the midst.

All the way was through woods very cool and pleasant, by reason of those
goodly and high Trees, that grow there so thick, that it is cooler traveling
there under them in that hot region, then it is in the most parts of England in
the Summer time. This gave a special encouragement unto us all, that we
understood there was a great Tree about the midway, from which, we might at
once discern the North Sea from whence we came, and the South Sea whether we
were going.

Feb. 11.
The fourth day following we came to the height of the desired Hill, (a very
high Hill, lying East and West, like ridge a between the two Seas) about ten
of the clock: where the chiefest of these Symerons took our Captain by the
hand, and prayed him to follow him, if he was desirous to see at once the two
Seas: which he had so long longed for.

Here was that goodly and great high Tree, in which they had cut and made
diverse steps, to ascend up near unto the top, where they had also made a
convenient Bower, wherein ten or twelve men might easily sit: and from thence
we might without any difficulty plainly see, th'Atlantick Ocean whence now
we came, and the South Atlantic so much desired: South and North of this
Tree, they had felld certain Trees, that the prospect might be the cleerer:
and near about the Tree there were diverse strong houses, that had been built
long before, as well by other Symerons as by these: which usually pass that
way, as being, inhabited in diverse places in those waste Countries.

After our Captain had ascended to this Bower, with the chief Symeron, and
having as it pleased God, at that time, by reason of the brize, a very fair
day, had seen that Sea, of which he had heard such golden reports: he
besought Almighty God of his goodness, to give him life and leave to sail once
in an English Ship in that Sea: and then calling up all the rest of our men,
acquainted John Oxnam especially with this his peticion and purpose, if it
would please God to grant him that happiness: who understanding it, presently
protested, that unless our Captain did beat him from his company, he would
follow him by Gods grace.

Thus all thoroughly satisfied with the sight of the Seas, descended, and after
our repast, continued our ordinary march, through woods, yet two days more as
before: without any great variety. Feb. 13.
But then we came to march in a Champion Country, where the grass grows,
not only in great length as the knotgrasse grows in many places, but to such
height, that the inhabitants are feign to burn it thrice in the year, that it
may be able to feed their Cattle, of which they have thousands. For it is a
kind of grass with a stalk, as big as a great wheaten reed, which has a
blade issuing from the top of it, on which, though the Cattle feed, yet it
grows every day higher, until the top be too high for an Ox to reach. Then
the inhabitants are wont put fire to it, for the space of five or six miles
together, which notwithstanding after it is thus burnt, within three days
springs up fresh like green Corn. Such is the great fruitfulnes of the
soil: by reason of the eeuennes of the day and night, and the rich dewes which
fall every morning.

Feb. 14.
In these three last days march in the Champion, as we past over the Hills,
we might see Panama five or six times a day, and the last day we saw the
Ships riding in the road.

But after that we were come within a days journey of Panama, our Captain
understanding by the Symerons that the Dames of Panama are wont to send forth
Hunters, and Fowlers, for taking of sundry dainty Foul, which the Land
yields, by whom if we marched not very heedfully, we might be descried;
caused all his company to march out of all ordinary way, and that with as great
heed, silence and secrecy, as possibly they might, to the Grove, which was
agreed on four days before, lying within a league of Panama, where we might
lie safely undiscovered nere the high way, that leads from thence to Nombre
de Dios.

Thence we sent a chosen Symeron, one that had served a Master in Panamah
before time, in such apparel as the Negroes of Panamah do use to wear, to
be our Espyall, to go into the Town, to learn the certain night, and time
of the night, when the Carriers laded the Treasure from the Kings
Treasure-house to Nombre de Dios.

For they are wont to take their journey from Panama to Venta Cruz, which is
six leagues, ever by night, because the Country is all champion, and
consequently by day very hot: but from Venta Cruz to Nombre de Dios, as often as
they travel by land with their Treasure, they travel always by day and not
by night, because all that way is full of Woods, and therefore very fresh and
cool: unless the Symerons happily encounter them, and make them sweat with
fear, as sometimes they have done: whereupon they are glad to guard their
Recoes with Soldiers as they pass that way.

This last day our Captain did behold and view, the most of all that fair
City, discerning the large street which lies directly from the Sea into the
Land, South and North. By three of the clock we came to this Grove, passing
(for the more secrecy) along a certain River, which at that time was almost
dried up.

Having disposed of our selves in the Grove, we dispatched our Spy an hour
before night, so that by the closing in of the evening, he might be in the
City, as he was: whence presently he returned unto us, that which very happily
he understood by companions of his: That the Treasurer of Lima, intending to
pass into Spain in the first aduiso, (which was a Ship of three hundred and
fifty Tun, a very good sayler) was ready that night, to take his journey
toward Nombre de Dios, with his Daughter and Family: having fourteen Moyles
in company, of which, eight were laden with gold, and one with jewels And
farther, that there were two other Recos, of fifty Moyles in each, laden with
victualles for the most part, with some little quantity of silver, to come
forth that night after the other. There are twenty eight of these Recas, the
greatest of them is of seauenty Moyles, the less of fifty, unless some
particular man hire for himself, ten, twenty or thirty, as he has need.

Upon this notice, we forthwith marched four leagues; till we came within two
leagues of Venta Cruz, in which march two of our Symerons which were sent
before, by scent of his match, found and brought a Spaniard, whom they had
found a sleep by the way, by scent of the said match, and drawing near
thereby, heard him taking his breath as he slept; and being but one, they fell
upon him, stopped his mouth from crying, put out his match, and bound him so,
that they well near strangled him by that time he was brought unto us. By
examining him, we found all that to be true, which our Spy had reported to us,
and that he was a Soldier entertained with others by the Treasurer, for the
guard and conduct of this Treasure, from Venta Cruz to Nombre de Dios.

This Soldier having learned who our Captain was, took courage, and was bold
to make two requests unto him: the one, that he would command his Symerons
which hated the Spaniards (especially the Soldiers) extremely, to spare his
life, which he doubted not but they would do at his charge: the other was,
that seeing he was a Soldier, and assured him, that they should have that
night, more gold, besides jewels, and Pearls of great price, then all they
could carry (if not, then he was to be dealt with how they would) but if they
all found it so, then it might please our Captain to give unto him, as much as
might suffice for him and his Mistress to live upon, as he had heard our
Captain had done to diverse others: for which he would make his name as
famous, as any of them, which had received like favor.

Being at the place appointed, our Captain with half of his men, lay on one
side of the way, about fifty paces off in the long grass: John Oxnam with the
Captain of the Symerons, and the other half, lay on the other side of the
way, at the like distance: but so far behind, that as occasion served, the
former Company might take the foremost Moyles by the heads, and the other the
hindmost, because the Moyles tied together, are always driven one after
another; and especially that if we should have need to use our Weapons that
night, we might be sure not to endamage our fellows. We had not lain thus in
ambush much above an hour, but we heard the Recos coming both from the City
to Venta Cruz, and from Venta Cruz to the City, which has a very common and
great trade, when the Fleetes are there: we heard them, by reason they delight
much to have deep sounding Belles, which in a still night are heard very far
off.

Now though there were as great charge given as might be, that none of our men
should show or stir themselves: but let all that came from Venta Cruz to
pass quietly: yea their Recos also, because we knew that they brought
nothing but Merchandise from thence: yet one of our men called Robert Pike,
having drunken too much Aqua vitae without water, forgot himself, and entising
a Symeron forth with him, was gone hard to the way, with intent to have shown
his forwardness on the foremost Moyles. And when a Caualier from Venta Cruz,
well mounted, with his Page running at his stirrup, past by, unadvisedly he
rose up to see what he was: but the Symeron of better discretion pulled him
down, and lay upon him, that he might not discover them any more. Yet by this
the Gentleman had taken notice by seeing one all in white: for that we had all
put our shirts over our other apparel, that we might be sure to know our
own men in the pell mell in the night. By means of this sight, the Caualier
putting spurs to his Horse, rode a false gallop, as desirous not only himself
to be free of this doubt; which he imagined, but also to give advertisement to
others that they might avoid it.

Our Captain who had heard and observed (by reason of the hardness of the
ground and stillness of the night) the change of this Gentleman's trot to a
gallop, suspected, that he was discovered, but could not imagine by whose
fault, neither did the time give him leisure to search. And therefore
considering that it might be, by reason of the danger of the place, well known
to ordinary travelers: we lay still in expectation of the Treasurers coming,
who was by this time within half a league, and had come forwards to us, but
that this Horseman meeting him, and (as we afterward learned by the other
Recoes) making report to him, what he had seen presently that night, what he
heard of Captain Drake this long time, and what he conjectured to be most
likely: viz. that the said Captain Drake, or some for him, disapointed of his
expectation, of getting any great Treasure, both at Nombre de Dios and other
places, was by some means or other come by land, in covert through the woods
unto this place to speed of his purpose: and thereupon persuaded him to turn
his Reco out of the way, and let the other Recoes, which were coming after to
pass on. They were whole Recoes, and laden but with victuals for the most
part, so that the loss of them were far less if the worst befell, and yet
they should serve to discover them as well as the best.

Thus by the rechlesnesse of one of our Company, and by the carfulness of
this Traveler, we were disappointed of a most rich booty, which is to be
thought God would not should be taken, for that by all likelihood it was well
gotten by that Treasurer.

The other two Recoes were no sooner come up to us, but being stayed and seized
on, one of the chief Carriers a very sensible fellow, told our Captain by
what means we were discovered, and counseled us to shift for our selves
betimes, unless we were able to encounter the whole force of the City and
Country which before day would be about us.

It pleased us but little, that we were defeated of our golden Recoe, and
that in these we could find not past some two Horse-loade of silver: but it
grieved our Captain much more, that he was discovered, and that by one of
his own men. But knowing it bootlesse to grieve at things past, and having
learned by experience, that all safety in extremities consists in taking of
time: after no long consultation with Pedro, the chief of our Symerons, who
declared that there were but two vvayes for him: the one to travel back
again the same secret way they came, for four leagues space into the Woods:
or else to march forward, by the high way to Venta Cruz, being two leagues, and
make a way with his Sword through the Enemies. He resolved, considering the
long and weary marches that we had taken, and cheefely that last evening and
day before: to take now the shortest and readiest way; as choosing rather to
encounter his Enemies while he had strength remaining, then to be encountered
or chased when we should be worn out with weariness: principally now
having the Moyles, to ease them that would, some part of the way.

Therefore commanding all to refresh themselves moderatly with such store of
victual, as we had there in abundance: he signified his resolution and
reason to them all: asking Pedro by name, whether he would give his hand not
to forsake him (because he knew that the rest of the Symerons would also then
stand fast and firm, so faithful are they to their Captain.) He being very
glad of his resolution, gave our Captain his hand, and vowed that he would
rather dye at his foot, then leave him to the Enemies, if he held this course.

So having strengthened our selves for the time, we took our journey toward
Venta Cruz, with help of the Moyles, till we came within a mile of the
Town, where we turned away the Recoes, charging the Conducters of them, not
to follow us, upon pain of their lives.

There the way is cut through the Woods, about ten or twelve foot broad,
so as two Recoes may pass one by another. The fruitfulness of the soil,
causes that with often shredding and ridding the way those Woods grow as
thick as our hickest hedges in England that are oftnest cut.

To the midst of this Wood, a Company of Soldiers, which continually lay in
that Town, to defend it against the Symerons were come forth, to stop us if
they might on the way, if not, to retrait to their strength, and there to
expect us. A Convent of Friars of whom one was become a Leader, joined with
these Soldiers, to take such paete as they did.

Our Captain understanding by our two Symerons, which with great
heedfulnesse and silence, marched now, but about half a flight-shot before
us, that it was time for us to arm and take us to our weapons, for they knew
the Enemy was at hand, by smelling of their match and hearing of a noise: had
given us charge, that no one of us should make any shot, until the Spaniards
had first spent their volly which he thought they would not do before they
had spoken, as indeed fell out: For as soon as we were within hearing, a
Spanish Captain cried aloud, Hoo, our Captain answered him likewise, and
being aemanded, Que gente? replied Englishmen. But when the said Commander
charged him in the name of the King of Spain his Master, that we should yield
our selves, promising in the word and faith of a Gentleman Soldier, that if we
would so do, he would use us with all courtesy; our Captain drawing somewhat
near him said: That for the honor of the Queen of England his Mistress, he
must have passage that way: and therewithal discharged his Pistol toward him.

Upon this, they presently shot off their whole volly, which, though it lightly
wounded our Captain and diverse of our men, yet it caused death to one only of
our Company called John Harris, who was so poudered with haile-shot (which they
all used for the most part as it seemed, or else quartered, for that our men
were hurt with that kind) that we could not recover his life, though he
continued all that day afterward with us. Presently as our Captain perceived
their shot to come slacking, as the latter drops of a great shewre of rain,
with his Whistle he gave us his usual signal, to answer them with our shot
and Arrows, and so march onwards upon the Enemy, with intent to come to
handi-strokes, and to have joined with them: whom when he found retired as to
a place of some better strength, he increased his pace to prevent them if he
might. Which the Symerons perceiving, although by terror of the shot
continuing, they were for the time stepped a side: yet as soon as they discerned
by hearing that we marched onward, they all rusht forwards one after another,
traversing the way, with their Arrows ready in their Bows, and their manner
of Country dance or leap, very lustily, singing Yo peho, yo peho, and so got
before us, where they continued their leap and song, after the manner of their
own Country wars, till they and we ouer-tooke some of the Enemy, who near
the Towns end, had conveyed themselves within the Woods, to have taken their
stand at us, as before.

But our Symerons now thoroughly encouraged, when they saw our resolution,
brake in through the thickets, on both sides of them, forcing them to fly,
Friars and all, although diverse of our men were wounded, and one Symeron
especially was run through with one of their Pikes, whose courage and mind
served him so well notwithstanding, that he revenged his own death ere he
dyed, by killing him that had given him that deadly wound.

We, with all speed, following this chase, entered the Town of Venta Cruz,
being of about forty or fifty houses, which had both a Governor and other
Officers and some fair houses, with many Storehouses large and strong for the
Wares, which were brought thither from Nombre de Dios, by the River of Chagro,
so to be transported by Moyles to Panama: besides the Monastery where we
found above a thousand Bulls and Pardons newly sent thither from Rome.

In those houses we found three Gentlewomen, which had lately been delivered
of Children there, though their dwelling were in Nombre de Dios, because it
has been observed of long time, as they reported to us, that no Spaniard or
White woman could ever be delivered in Nombre de Dios with safety of their
Children, but that within two or three days they died; notwithstanding that
being borne and brought up in this Venta Cruz or Panama five or six years,
and then brought to Nombre de Dios, if they escaped sickness the first or second
month, they commonly lived in it as healthily as in any other place: although
no stranger (as they say) can endure there any long time, without great danger
of death or extreme sickness.

Though at our first coming into the Town with Arms so suddenly, these
Gentlewomen were in great fear: yet because our Captain had given strait
charge to all the Symerons (that while they were in his company, they should
never hurt any woman, nor man that had not weapon in his hand to do them hurt,
which they ernestly promised, and no less faithfully performed) they had no
wrong offered them, nor any thing taken from them, to the worth of a garter:
wherein, albeit they had indeed sufficient safety and security, by those of his
company, which our Captain sent unto them, of purpose to comfort them: yet
they never ceased most earnestly entreating, that our Captain would vouchsafe
to come to them himself for their more safety: which when he did, in their
presence reporting the charge he had first given, and the assurance of his men,
they were comforted.

While the Guards which we had (not without great need) set, as well on the
bridge which we were to pass over, as at the Towns end where we entered
(they have no other entrance into the Town by Land: but from the waters side
there is one other, to carry up and down their Merchandise from their
Fregates) gained us liberty and quiet to stay in this Town some hour and
half: we had not only refreshed our selves, but our company and Symerons had
gotten some good pillage, which our Captain allowed and gave them (being not
the thing he looked for) so that it were not too combersome or heavy in respect
of our travel, or defense of our selves. A little before we departed, some
ten or twelve horsemen came from Panama by all likelihood, supposinge that we
were gone out of this Town, for that all was so still and quiet, came to enter
the Town confidently: but finding their entertainment such as it was, they
that could, rode faster back again for fear, then they had ridden forwards
for hope.

Thus we having ended our business in this Town, and the day beginning to
spring, we marched over the Bridge, observing the same order that we did
before. There we were all safe in our opinion, as if we had been environed
with Wall and Trench: for that no Spaniard without his extreme danger could
follow us. The rather now, for that our Symerons were grown very valiant. But
our Captain considering that he had a long way to pass, and that he had
been now well near fortnight from his Ship, where he had left his Company
but weak by reason of their sickness, hastened his jorneys as much as he might,
refusing to visit the other Symeron Towns (which they earnestly desired him)
and encouraging his own Company with such example and speech that the way
seemed much shorter. For he marched most cheerfully and assured us, that he
doubted not but ere he left that Coast, we should all be bountifully paid
and recompensed for all those pains taken: but by reason of this our Captains
haste, and leaving of their Towns, we marched many days with hungry
stomachs, much against the will of our Symerons: who if we would have stayed
any day from this continual journeying, would have killed for us victual
sufficient.

In our absence, the rest of the Symerons had built a little Town within three
leagues off the port where our Ship lay. There our Captain was contented,
upon their great and earnest entreaties to make some stay, for that they
alleged, it was only built for his sake. And indeed he consented the rather,
that the want of shoes might be supplied by means of the Symerons, who were
a great help unto us: all our men complaining of the tenderness of their feet,
whom our Captain would himself in their complaint accompany sometimes without
cause, but sometimes with cause indeed, which made the rest to bear the
burden the more easily.

These Symerons during all the time that we were with them, did us continually
very good service, and in particular in this journey, being unto us instead of
intelligencers, to advertise us; of guides in our way to direct us; of
purueiors to provide victuals for us; of housewrights to build our lodgings;
and had indeed able and strong bodies carrying all our necessaries, yea many
times when some of our company fainted with sickness or wearines, two Symerons
would carry him with ease between them two miles together, and at other times
when need was they would show themselves no less valiant then industrious and
of good judgment.

Feb. 22.
From this Town, at our first entrance in the even on Saturday, our Captain
dispatched a Symeron with a token and certain order to the Master, who had
this three weeks, kept good watch against the enemy, and shifted in the woods
for fresh victual, for the relief and recovery of our men left aboard.
As Soon as this messenger was come to the shore, calling to our Ship, as
bringing some news, he was quickly set aboard, by those which longed to
hear of our Captains speeding: but when he showed the tooth-pike of gold,
which he said our Captain had sent for a token to Edward Hixom, with charge
to meet him at such a River: though the Master knew well the Captains
Tooth-pike: yet by reason of his admonition and caveat given him at parting,
he (though he bewrayed no sign of distrusting the Symeron) yet stood as
amazed, least something had befallen our Captain otherwise then well. The
Symeron perceiving this, told him, that it was night when he was sent away,
so that our Captain could not send any letter, but yet with the point of his
knife, he wrote something upon the Tooth-pike, which (he said) should be
sufficient to gain credit to the messenger.

Thereupon the Master looked upon it, and saw written By me Francis Drake,
wherefore he believed, and according to the message, prepared what provision
he could, and repaired to the mouth of the River of Tortugos, as the Symerons
that went with him then named it.

That after noone toward three a clock, we were come down to that River, not
past half an hour, before we saw our Pinnace ready come to receive us:
which was unto us all a double rejoicing: first that we saw them, and next so
soon: our Captain with all our Company praised God most heartily, for that we
saw our Pinnace and fellows again.

We all seemed to these who had lived at rest and plenty all this while aboard,
as men strangely changed (our Captain yet not much changed) in countenance and
plight: and indeed our long fasting and sore travel might somewhat fore-pine
and waste us: but the grief we drew inwardly, for that we returned without
that Gold and Treasure we hoped for, did no doubt show her print and
footesteps in our faces.

The rest of our men which were then missed, could not travel so well as our
Captain, and therefore were left at the Indian new Town: and the next day we
rowed to another River in the bottom of the Bay and took them all aboard.
Feb. 23.


Thus being returned from Panama, to the great rejoicing of our Company, who
were thoroughly revived with the report we brought from thence: especially
understanding our Captains purpose, that he meant not to leave off thus, but
would once again attempt the same journey, whereof they also might be
partakers: our Captain would not in the mean time suffer this edge and
forwardnes of his men to be dulled or rebated, by lying still idly vnimployed,
as knowing right well by continual experiences, that no sickness was more
noisome to impeach any enterprise then delay and idleness.

Therefore considering deeply the intelligences of other places of importance
thereabouts, which he had gotten the former years: and particularly of
Veragua, a rich Town lying to the Westvard, betvveene Nombre de Dios and
Nicaragua, where is the richest Mine of fine Gold, that is on this North side:
he consulted with his company touching their opinions, what was to be done in
this mean time, and how they stood affected? Some thought, that it was most
necessary to seek supply of victuals, that we might the better be able to
keep our men close and in health till our time came: and this was easy to be
compassed, because the Fregates with victual went without great defense,
whereas the Fregates and Barks with Treasure, for the most part were vvafted
with great Ships and store of Soldiers. Others yet judged, we might better
bestow our time in intercepting the Fregates of Treasure: first for that our
Magasines and Storehouses of victual were reasonably furnished, and the
Country it self was so plentiful, that every man might provide for himself
if the worst befell: and victual might hereafter be provided abundantly
as well as now: whereas the Treasure never floateth upon the Sea, so ordinarily
as at this time, of the Fleets being there, which time in no wise may be
neglected.

The Symerons being demanded also their opinion, for that they were experienced
in the particularities of all the Towns thereabouts, as in which, some or
other of them had served: declared that by Veragua Sinnior Pezoro sometime
their Master from whom they fled, dwelt not in the Town for fear of some
surprise, but yet not far off from the Town, for his better relief: in a
very strong house of stone, where he had dwelt ninteene years at least, never
traveling from home, unless happily once a year to Carthagene or Nombre de
Dios when the Fleets were there: he keeps a hundred slaves at least in the
Mines, each slave being bound to bring in daily clear gain (all charges
deductted) three Pezos of Gold for himself and two for his women (eight
shillings three pence the Pezo) amounting in the whole, to about two hundred
pound sterling each day: so that he has heaped a mighty Mass of Treasure
together, which he keeps in certain great Chests of two foot deep three
broad, and four long: being, notwithstanding all his wealth, hard and cruel,
not only to his slaves, but unto all men, and therefore never going abroad,
but with a Guard of five or six men to defend his person from danger, which
he fears extraordinarily from all creatures. And as touching means of
compassing this purpose, they would conduct him safely through the woods, by
the same ways by which they fled, that he should not need to enter their
Havens with danger, but might come upon their backs altogether unlooked for.
And though his house were of stone so that it could not be burnt, yet if our
Captain would undertake the attempt, they would undermine and overthrow, or
otherwise break it open, in such sort, as we might have easy access to his
greatest Treasure.

Our Captain having heard all their opinions, concluded so; that by dividing
his Company the two first different sentences, were both reconciled, both to
be practiced and put in ure. John Oxnam appointed in the Bear, to be sent
Estwards toward Tolow, to see what store of victuals would come athwart his
half, and himself would to the Westward in the Minian, lie off and on the
Cabezas, where was the greatest trade and most ordinary passage of those which
transported Treasure from Veragua and Nicaragua to the Fleet: so that no time
might be lost, nor opportunity let slip either for victual or Treasure. As
for the attempt of Veragua or Sinior Peroros house by land, by marching through
the woods, he liked not off, least it might over weary his men by continual
labor, whom he studied to refresh and strengthen, for his next sreuice
forenamed.

Therefore using our Symerons most courteously, dismissing those that were
desirous to their wives, with such gifts and favors as were most pleasing, and
entertaining those still aboard his Ships, which were contented to abide with
the Company remaining, the Pinnaces departed as was determined, the Minion to
the West, the Bear to the East.

The Minion about the Cabecas met with a Fregate of Nicaragua, in which was
some gold, and a Genoway Pilot, of which Nation there are many in those Coasts,
which had been at Veragua not past eight days before, he being very well
entreated, certified our Captain of the State of the Town, and of the Harbor,
and of a Fregate that was there ready to come forth within few days, aboard
which there was above a million of Gold, offering to conduct him to it, if we
would do him his right, for that he knew the channel very perfectly, so that
he could enter by night safely without danger of the sands and shallowes,
(though there be but little water) and utterly vndescryed, for that the Town
is five leagues within the Harbor, and the way by land is so far about and
difficult through the Woods, that though we should by any casualty be
discovered, about the point of the Harbor, yet we might dispatch our business
and depart, before the Town could have notice of our coming. At his being
there he perceived they had heard of Drakes being on the Coast, which had put
them in great fear, as in all other places ( Pezoro purposing to remove
himself to the South Sea) but there was nothing done to prevent him, their
fear being so great, that, as it is accustomed in such cases, it excluded
Counsel and bred despair.

Our Captain conferring with his own knowledge and former intelligences, was
purposed to have returned to his Ship, to have taken some of those Symero^s
which had dwelt with Sinior Pezoro, to be the more confirmed in this point. But
when the Genoway Pilot was very earnest, to have the time gained, and warranted
our Captain of good speed, if we delayed not, he dimissed the Fregate somewhat
lighter to, hasten her journey, and with this Pilots advise, labored with
sail and oars to get this Harbor and to enter it by night accorcordingly,
considering that this Fregate might now be gained, and Pezoros house attempted
hereafter notwithstanding.

But when we were come to the mouth of the Harbor, we heard the report of two
Chambers, and farther off about a league within the Bay, two other as it were
answering them: whereby our Geno^aise Pilot coniectured that we were
discovered: for he assured us, that this order had been taken, since his last
being there; by reason of the advertisement and charge, which the Governor of
Panama had sent unto all the Coast, which even in their beds lay in great and
continual fear of our Captain, and therefore by all likelihood, maintained
this kind of watch, at the charge of the rich Gnuffe Pezoro, for their
security.

Thus being defeated of this expectation, we found that it was not Gods will
that we should enter at that time: the rather for that the wind, which had
all this time been Easterly, came up to the Westward, and invited us to
return again to our Ship, March 19.
where on Sheere Thursday we met according to appointment with our Bear, and
found that she had bestowed her time to more profit then we had done.

For she had taken a Fregate in which there were ten men, whom they set
ashoare; great store of Maiz, twenty eight fat Hogs, and two hundred Hens. Our
Captain discharged this Fregate of her lading, and because she was new, March
20.
strong and of a good mould, the next day he tallowed her to make her a Man of
war: disposing all our Ordinance and provisions that were fit for such use in
her. March 21.
For we had heard by the Spaniards last taken, that there were two little
Galleys built in Nombre de Dios, to waft the Chagro Fleet to and froe, but
were not yet both lanched: wherefore he purposed now to adventure for that
Fleet. And to hearten his Company he feasted them that Easter Day with great
cheer and cheerfulness, March 22.
setting up his rest upon that attempt.

The next day with the new tallowed Fregate of Tolow and his Bear, March 23.
we set sail toward the Catiua^s, where about two days after we landed,
and stayed till noone: at what time seeing a sail to the Westwards, as we
deemed making to the Island: we set sail and plied toward him, who descrying
us, bare with us, till he perceived by our confidence, that we were no
Spaniards, and conjectured that we were those Englishmen, of whom he had
heard long before. And being in great want, and desirous to be relieved by us,
he bare up under our Lee, and in token of amity, shot off his Lee Ordinance
which was not unanswered.

We understood that he was Tetu a French Captain of New-hauen, a Man of
war as we were: desirous to be relieved by us. For at our first meeting the
French Captain cast abroad his hands, and prayed our Captain to help him to
some water, for that he had nothing but Wine, and Cider aboard him, which had
brought his men into great sickness. He had sought us ever since he first
heard of our being upon the Coast, about this five weeks. Our Captain sent
one aboard him with some relief for the present, willing him to follovv us to
the next Port, where he should have both water and victuals.

At our coming to anchor he sent our Captain a case of Pistols, and a fair
guilt Symeter (which had been the late Kings of France, whom Monsieur
Mongomery hurt in the eye, and was given him by Monsieur Strosse) our Captain
requited him with a Chain of gold, and a Tablet which he wore. This
Captain reported unto us the first nevves of the Massacre at Paris, at the
King of Nauars Marriage on Saint Bartholomewes day last, of the Admiral of
France slain in his Chamber, and diverse other murders: so that he thought
those Frenchmen the happiest which were farthest from France, now no longer
France but Frenzy, even as if all Gaul were turned into Worme-vvood and Gall:
Italian practices having ouer-mastred the French simplicity. He shevved what
famous and often reports he had heard of our great riches: he desired to know
of our Captain which way he might compass his voyage also.

Though we had him in some jealousy and distrust, for all his pretense,
because we considered more the strength he had, then the good-vvill he
might bear us: yet upon consultation among our selves, whether it were fit
to receive him or no: we resolved to take him and twenty of his men, to serve
with our Captain for halfes: in such sort as we needed not doubt of their
forces, being but twenty, nor be hurt by their portions, being no greater then
ours: and yet gratify them in their earnest suite, and serve our own purpose,
which without more help we could very hardly have atcheiued. Indeed he had
seauenty men, and we now but thirty one: his Ship was above eighty Tun, and
our Fregate not past twenty, our Pinnace nothing near ten Tun: yet our
Captain thought this proportionable, in consideration that not number of men,
but quality of their judgments and knowledge, were to be the principal
actors herein: and the French Ship could do no service, nor stand in any
steed to this enterprise which we intended, and had agreed upon long before,
both touching the time when it should take beginning, and the place where we
should meet, namely at Rio Francisco.

Having thus agreed with Captain Tetu, we sent for the Symerons as before was
decreed: Two of them were brought aboard our Ships, to give the French
assurance of this agreement. And as soon as we could furnish our selves and
refresh the French Company, which was within five or six days (by bringing
them to the Magazine which was the nearest, where they were supplied by us in
such sort, as they protested they were beholding to us for all their lives)
taking twenty of the French and fifteen of ours with our Symerons, leaving
both our Ships in safe Road, we mand our Fregate and two Pinnaces (we had
formerly suncke our Lion, shortly after our return from Panama, because we
had not men sufficient to man her) and went toward Rio Francisco, which
because it had not water enough for our Fregate: caused us to leave her at the
Cabecas, mand with English and French, in the charge of Robert Doble, to stay
there without attempting any chase, until the return of our Pinnaces. And
then bear to Rio Francisco, where both Captains landed with such force as
aforesaid, March 31.
and charged them that had the charge of the Pinnaces, to be there the fourth
day next following without any fail. And thus knowing that the cariages went
now daily from Panama to Nombre de Dios, we proceeded in covert through the
Woods, toward the high way that leads between them.

It is five leagues accounted by Sea, betvveene Rio Francisco and Nombre de
Dios, but that way which we marched by land, we found it above seven
leagues. We marched as in our former journey to Panama, both for order and
silence, to the great vvonder of the French Captain and Company, who
protested they knevv not by any means how to recover the Pinnaces, if the
Symerons (to whom what our Captain commanded was a law, though they little
regarded the French, as having no trust in them) should leave us: our Captain
assured him, there was no cause of doubt of them of whom he had had such
former trial.

When we were come within an English mile of the way, we stayed all
night, refreshing our selves in great stillness in a most convenient place,
where we heard the Carpenters, being many in number vvorking upon their
Ships, as they usually do by reason of the great heat of the day in Nombre
de Dios, and might hear the Moyles coming from Panama, by reason of the
advantage of the ground.

April 1.
The next morning upon hearing of that great number of Belles, the Symerons
rejoiced exceedingly, as though there could not have befallen them a more
joyful accident, cheefely having been disappointed before. Now they all
assured us, we should have more gold and silver then all of us could bear
away, as in truth it fell out.

For there came three Recoes, one of fifty Moyles, the other two of seauenty
each, every of which carried three hundred pound weight of silver, which in all
amounted to near thirty Tun. We putting our selves in readiness, went
down near the way to hear the Belles, where we stayed not long, but we saw
of what metal they were made, and took such hold on the heads of the
foremost and hindmost Moyles, that all the rest stayed and lay down as their
manner is.

These three Recoes were guarded with forty five Soldiers or their abouts,
fifteen to each Reco, which caused some exchange of Ballets and Arrows for a
time, in which conflict the French Captain was sore wounded with hayle-shot in
the belly, and one Symeron slain: but in the end these Soldiers thought it
the best way to leave their Moyles with us, and to seek for more help abroad:
in which mean time we took some pain to ease some of the Moyles, which were
heauiest laden of their cariages. And because we our selves were somewhat
weary, we were contented with a few bars and quoits of gold, as we could
well carry: burying about fifteen Tun of silver, partly in the boroughs which
the great Landcrabs had made in the earth, and partly under old Trees which
were fallen thereabout, and partly in the sand and gravel of a River, not very
deep of water.

Thus when about this business we had spent some two hours, and had disposed
of all our matters, and were ready to march back, the very self same way that
we came, we heard both Horse and Foot coming as it seemed, to the Moyles,
for they never followed us, after we were once entered the Woods: where the
French Captain by reason of his wound, not able to travel farther, stayed, in
hope that some rest would recover him better strength.

But after we had marched some two leagues, upon the French Soldiers
complaint, that they missed one of their men also, examination being made
whether he were slain or no: it was found that he had druncke much Wine, and
ouerlading himself with pillage, and hasting to go before us, had lost
himself in the Woods. And as we afterward knew, he was taken by the
Spaniards that evening, and upon torture, discovered unto them where we had
hidden our Treasure.

April 2.3.
We continued our march all that and the next day, toward Rio Francisco, in
hope to meet with our Pinnaces, but when we came thither, looking out to Sea,
we savve seven Spanish Pinnaces, which had been searching all the Coasts
thereabout: vvhereupon we mightily suspected, that they had taken or spoiled
our Pinnaces, for that our Captain had given so straight charge, that they
should repair to this place this afternoon from the Cabecas where they
rode, whence to our sight, these Spaniards Pinnaces did come.

But the night before, there had fallen very much rain, with much westerly
wind, which as it enforced the Spaniards to return home the sooner, by reason
of the storm: so it kept our Pinnaces, that they could not keep
th'appointment, because the wind was contrary, and blewe so strong, that with
their Oars they could all that day get but half the way. Notwithstanding, if
they had followed our Captains direction in setting forth over night, while
the wind served, they had arrived at the place appointed with far less
labor, but with far more danger, because that very day at noone, the Spanish
Shallops mand out of purpose from Nombre de Dios, were come to this place to
take our Pinnaces: imagining where we were, after they had heard of our
intercepting of the Treasure.

Our Captain seeing the Shallops, feared least having taken our Pinnaces, they
had compelled our men by torture, to confess where his Fregate and Ships were.
Therefore in this distress and perplexity, the company misdoubting that all
means of return to their Country were cut off, and that their Treasure then
served them to small purpose: our Captain comforted and encouraged us all,
saying: we should venture no farther then he did: it was no time now to fear:
but rather to haste to prevent that which was feared: if the Enemy have
prevailed against our Pinnaces, which God forbid, yet they must have time to
search them, time to examine the Mariners; time to execute their resolution
after it is determined: before all these times be taken, we may get to our
Ships if ye will, though not possibly by land, because of the Hills, Thickets
and Rivers, yet by water. Let us therefore make a Raft with the Trees that are
here in readiness, as offering themselves being brought down the River, happily
this last storm, and put our selves to Sea. I will be one, who will be the
other? John Smith offered himself, and two Frenchmen that could swim very
well, desired they might accompany our Captain, as did the Symeron likewise
(who had been very earnest with our Captain to have marched by land though it
were sixteen days journey, and in case the Ships had been surprised, to have
aboade always with them) especially Pedro, who yet was feign to be left
behind, because he could not row.

The Raft was fitted and fast bound; a Sail of a Biscuit sack prepared; an Oar
was shaped out of a young Tree to serve in steed of a Rudder, to direct their
course before the wind.

At his departure he comforted the Company, by promising, that if it pleased
God, he should put his foot in safety aboard his Fregate, he would, God
willing, by one means or other get them all aboard, in despite of all the
Spa^iards in the Indies

In this manner putting off to the Sea, he sailed some three leagues, sitting
up to the waste continually in water, and at euey surge of the wave to the
armepits, for the space of six hours, upon this Raft, what with the parching
of the Sun and what with the beating of the salt water, they had all of them
their skins much fretted away.

At length God gave them the sight of two Pinnaces turning toward them with
much wind, but with far greater joy to him, that could easily conjecture,
and did cheerfully declare to those three with him, that they were our
Pinnaces, and that all was safe, so that there was no cause of fear. But
see, the Pinnaces not seeing this Raft, nor suspecting any such matter, by
reason of the vvinde and night growing on, were forced to run into a coue
behind the point, to take succor for that night: which our Captain seeing,
and gathering, because they came not forth again, that they would Anchor
there, put his raft a shore, and ran by land about the point, where he found
them, who upon sight of him, made as much have as they could to take him and
his Company aboard. For our Captain, of purpose to try what have they could
and would make in extremity: himself ran in great haste, and so willed the
other three with him, as if they had been chased by the Enemy: which they the
rather suspected, because they saw so few with him. And after his coming
aboard, when, they demanding, how all his Company did? he answered coldly,
well: they all doubted, that all went scarce well. But he willing to ridd all
doubts, and fill them with joy, took out of his bosom a Quoit of Gold,
thanking God that our voyage was made. And to the Frenchmen he declared, how
their Captain indeed was left behind, sore wounded and two of his Company
with him: but it should be no hindrance to them.

That night our Captain with great pain of his Company, rowed to Roo
Faancisco: April 4.
where he took the rest in, and the Treasure which we had brought with us:
making such expedition, that by dawning of the day, we set sail back again,
to our Fregate, and from thence directly to our Ships: where as soon as we
arrived, our Captain divided by weight, the Gold and Silver into two even
portions, between the French, and the English.

About a fortnight after, when we had set all things in order, and taking out
of our Ship all such necessaries as we needed for our Fregate, had left and
given her to the Spa^iards, whom we had all this time detayned, we put out
of that Harbor, together with the French Ship, riding some few days among the
Cabezas.

In the mean time our Captain made a secret composition with the Symerons,
that twelve of our men and sixteen of theirs, should make another voyage, to
get intelligence in what case the Country stood, and if it might be, recover
Monsieur Tortu the French Captain, at leastwise to bring away that which was
hidden in our former surprise and could not then be conveniently carried.

John Oxnam and Thomas Sherwell were put in trust for this service, to the
great content of the whole Company, who conceived greatest hope of them next
our Captain, whom by no means they would condescend to suffer to adventure
again this time: yet he himself rowed to set them ashore at Rio Francisco:
finding his labor well employed both otherwise, and also in saving one of those
two Frenchmen that had remained willingly to accompany their wounded Captain.

For this Gentleman having escaped the rage of the Spaniards, was now comwing
toward our Pinnace, where he fell down on his keees, blessing God for the
time, that ever our Captain was borne, who now beyond all his hope, was
become his deliverer. He being demanded what was become of his Captain and
other fellovv, shevved that within half an hour after our departure, the
Spiniards had ouergotten them, and took his Captain and other fellow: he
only escaped by flight, having cast away all his carriage, and among the rest
one Box of Ievvells, that he might fly the svvifter from the pursuers: but his
fellovv took it up and burdened himself so sore, that he could make no
speed, as easily he might otherwise, if he would have cast down his
pillage, and laid aside his covetous mind: as for the silver, which we had
hidden thereabout in the earth and the sands, he thought that it was all gone;
for that he thought there had been near two thousand Spaniards and Negroes
there, to dig and search for it.

This report notwithstanding, our purpose held, and our men were sent to the
said place, where they found that the earth, every way a mile distant had been
dug and turned up in every place of any likelihood, to have any thing hidden
in it. And yet nevertheless, for all that narrow search, all our men's labor
was not quite lost: but so considered, that the third day after their
departure, they all returned safe and cheerful, with as much silver as they
and all the Symerons could find, ( viz: thirteen bars of silver, and some
few quoits of gold) with which they were presently embarked without
empeachment, repairing with no less speed then joy to our Fregate.

Now was it high time to think of homewards, having sped our selves as we
desired: and therefore our Captain concluded to visit Rio grand, once again,
to see if he could meet with any sufficient Ship or Bark, to carry victual
enough to serve our turn homewards, in which we might in safety and security
embarque our selves.

The Frenchmen having formerly gone from us as soon as they had their shares
at our first return with the Treasure, as being very desirous to return home
into their Country, and our Captain as desirous to dismiss them, as they
were to be dismissed; for that he foresawe they could not in their Ship
avoid the danger of being taken by the Spaniards, if they should make out any
Men of war for them, while they lingered on the Coast, and having also been
then again relieved with victuals by us: Now at our meeting of them again,
were very loath to leave us, and therefore accompanied us very kindly as far
up as Saint Barnards, and farther would, but that they durst not adventure so
great danger, for that we had intelligence, that the Fleet was ready to set
sail for Spain, riding at the entry of Carthagena.

Thus we departed from them, passing hard by Carthagena, in the sight of all
the Fleet, with a Flagge of Saint George in the maine top of our Fregate, with
silk streamers and ancients down to the water, sailing forward with a large
wind, till we came within two leagues of the River, being all low land, and
dark night: where to prevent the ouer-shooting of the River in the night, we
lay off and on bearing small sail, till that about midnight the wind veering
to the Eastward, by two of the clock in the morning, a Fregate from Rio grand
passed hard by us, bearing also but small sail. We saluted them with our shot
and Arrows, they answered us with Bases: but we got aboard them, and took
such order, that they were content against their wills to depart a shore and
to leave us this Fregate which was of twenty five Tun, loaded with Maiz, and
Hens and Hogs, and some Honey, in very good time fit for our use: for the Honey
especially was a notable releeuer and preserver of our crased people.

The next morning as soon as we set those Spaniards a shore on the maine,
we set our course for the Cabecas without any stop, whither we came about
five days after. And being at anchor, presently we houe out all the
Maizaland, saving three Buts which we kept for our store: and carrying all our
provisions a shore, we brought both our Fregates on the Carine, and new
tallowed them.

Here we stayed about seauenight, trimming and rigging our Fregates, boarding
and stowing our provisions, tearing abroad and burning our Pinnaces, that the
Symerons might have the yron-worke.

About a day or two before our departure, our Captain willed Pedro and three
of the cheifest of the Symerons to go through both his Fregates, to see what
they liked, promising to give it them whatsoever it were, so it were not so
necessary as that he could not return into England without it. And for their
wifes he would himself seek out some silks or linen that might gratify
them: which while he was choosing out of his Trunckes, the Cymeter which
Captain Tetu had given to our Captain, chanced to be taken forth in Pedros
sight, which he seeing grew so much in liking thereof, that he accounted of
nothing else in respect of it, and preferred it before all that could be given
him: yet imagining, that it was no less esteemed of our Captain, durst not
himself open his mouth to crave or commend it: but made one Francis Tucker to
be his mean to break his mind, promising to give him a fine quoit of gold,
which yet he had in store, if he would but move our Captain for it; and to
our Captain himself, he would give four other great quoits, which he had
hidden, intending to have reserved them till another voyage.

Our Captain being accordingly moved by Francis Tucker, could have been
content to have made no such exchange, but yet desirous to content him, that
had deserved so well, he gave it him with many good words, who received it
with no little joy, affirming that if he should give his wife and children
(which he loved dearly) in liew of it, he could not sufficiently recompense
it, (for he would present his King with it, who he knew would make him a
great man, even for this very gifts sake) yet in gratuity and steed of other
requital of this jewel, he desired our Captain to accept these four pieces
of gold, as a token of his thankfulness to him, and a pawn of his
faithfulness during life.

Our Captain received it in most kind sort, but took it not to his own
benefit, but caused it to be cast into the whole adventure, saying, if he had
not been set forth to that place, he had not attained such a commodity, and
therefore it was just that they which bare part with him of his burden in
setting him to Sea, should enjoy the proportion of his benefit whatsoever at
his return.

Thus with good love and liking we took our leave of that people, setting
over to the Islands of (...) whence the next day after, we set sail toward
Cape Saint Anthony, by which we past with a large wind: but presently being
to stand for th'Hauana, we were feign to ply to the windward some three or
four days: In which plying we fortuned to take a small Bark, in which were
two or three hundred Hides, and one most necessary thing, which stood us in
great steed, viz. a Pumpe, which we set in our Fregate: their Bark, because
it was nothing fit for our service, our Captain gave them to carry them home.

And so returning to Cape Saint Anthony, and landing there we refreshed our
selves, and besides great store of Turtles eggs, found by day in the (...) we
took two hundredth and fifty Turtles by night: we poudred and dried some of
them, which did us good service, the rest continued but a small time.

There were at this time, belonging to Carthagene, Nombre de Dios, Rio grand,
Santa Martha, Rio de Hacha, Venta Cruz, Veragua, Nicaragua, the Honduras,
Iamaica etc. above two hundred Fregates, some of a hundred and twenty Tons,
other but of ten or twelve Tun, but the most of thirty or forty Tun,
which all had intercourse between Carthagene and Nombre de Dios, the most of
which, during our abode in those parts we took, and some of them twice or
thrice each, yet never burnt nor suncke any, unless they were made out Men of
war against us, or laid as stales to entrappe us. And of all the men taken in
these several vessels, we never offered any kind of violence to any, after
they were once come under our power, but either presently dismissed them in
safety, or keeping them with us some longer time, (as some of them we did) we
always provided for their sustenance as for our selves, and secured them from
the rage of the Symerons against them, till at last, the danger of their
discovering where our Ships lay being over past, (for which only cause we
kept them prisoners) we set them also free.

Many strange Birds, Beasts and Fishes, besides Fruits, Trees, Plants, and the
like, were seen and observed of us in this journey, which willingly we
pretermit as hastening to the end of our voyage, which from this Cape of Saint
Anthony, we intended to finish, by sailing the directest and speediest way
homeward, and accordingly, even beyond our own expectation most happily
performed.

For whereas our Captain had purposed to touch at Newfound land, and there to
have watered, which would have been some let unto us, though we stood in
great want of water, yet God Almighty so provided for us, by giving us good
store of rain water, that we were sufficiently furnished: and within twenty
three days we past from the Cape of Florida, to the Isles of Silley, and so
arrived at Plymouth, on Sunday about Sermon-time, August the ninth 1573. at
what time the news of our Captains return brought unto his, did so speedily
pass over all the Church, and surpass their minds, with desire and delight
to see him, that very few or none remained with the Preacher, all hastening to
see the evidence of Gods love and blessing toward our Gracious Queen and
Country, by the fruit of our Captains labor and success.

Soli Deo gloria.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 7. lines 26. and 33. for Rause read Ranse: as also in other pages, l.
32. for Sallop, read Shallop. p. 11. l. 2. pray, read Bay. p. 14. l. 3. sent
of, read sent some. p. 17. l. 18. utterly time, leave out time: l. 19. read
(for that time) p. 18. l. 5. read, maine care of our Captain was r^sp. l. 35.
fear read, fears. p. 19. l. 4. so he, read, he so. p. 37. l. 2. leaft all,
read, left at. p. 43. l. 23. atttemed, read, attempted. p. 45. l. 19. free
safety, read, free in safety. p. 48. l. 11. amongst two, read, amongst us two.
l. 16. nor, read, not. p. 50. l. 30. attache, read attached. p. 52. l. 16. or
them ill, read, or give them ill. l. 19. Edward, read, Ellis. p. 53. l. 5.
Edward, read, Ellis. p 55. l. 22. Limes, read, Limons: and whereuer you find
it, read, Limons. p. 56. l. 16. as they came, read, as we came. p. 58. l. 31.
ridge a, read, a ridge. p. 60. l. 11. wont put, read, wont to put. p. 67. l. 4.
hickest, read, thickest. l. 12. pacte, read, part. l. 24. aemanded, read
demanded. p. 68. l. 32. they our, read, they saw our. l. 33. thickets, read,
thick^st. p. 76. l. 25. Peroros, read Pezor^^. l. 3^. to their wives, read, to
go to their wives. p. 87. l. 25. R^^ read, Rio.


