Here begins a godly new story of.xii. men that moses (by the
Commandment of god) sent to spy out the land of canaan: of which.xii. only
Joshua and Caleb, were found faithful messengers.
Psalm. Cv. O that me^ would prays ye goodness of god and the wonders that he
does for the children of men: for he has broken the gates of brass, and
smytten the bars of Iron in sunder. Folyshemen were plaged for their offenses
and because of their wickedness.

The Epistle to the reader
To all the faithful brethren which only desire the glory of god, in our
savior and Redemer Jesus Christ: be grace mercy and peace through the workyng
of his holy spirit. Amen.

WHERE Salomo^ had considered al thiges do^ under ye su^ne; Eccle. viii
to be but vanity and vexacione of mind: Yet says he is there a vanyte
upon earth. There be just men unto whom it happens as though they had the
works of the ungodly: again their be ungodly with whom it goes as though
they had the works of the tyghteous. This me think alse a vain thing etc.
This vexed saloinon above other things and moved him the rather to say: al is
but vanyte, when he saw good men rewarded with euel and the wicked floryshe and
have prosperyte. he saw the Good and the badde prospere alyke i^crese their
riches and possessyo^s and to be had i^ reuerenc: he saw the wicked decay and
peryshe, and likewise, it happened to the innocent. Vnmeate it seems to a man
of good reason, that a soore laboring man should lack his meat, and an idle^
sleep with a full belly. But what shall we say, like as it was in salomons
days: so also now is it most sure and certain that many times a man shall
seek his brothers wealth and show him a great benefit: and find his
displeasure and have his evil will that is, for his well doing shall be rewarded
with euel, and yet shall ye disse^bler have great benevolence and favor.
Oftentimes it cha^nceth yt he which ^^nestly studyeth to profyt the common
wealth: has little thank for his labor and is despised of ye same: and he
whose dylygence may be best spared, most avau^ceth him self there by, and
comes to honor. Riches, possessyo^s, and ple^teousnes of ye world happens
not seldom, to ye wicked and ungodly, yea they be had in favor with great
men and wythowte any deseruynge be brought to great dignyte. Peuury, scarsite,
trouble and aduersyte, be said on ye ryghteous which fears god, and his good
wysdom brings him dispyt. This is well known to such as seek wisdom in
christ whom fortune always favors not, and have experymented the assaults
of the enimye. He that reapeth the corn perchance eats non of the bred. He
yt treads ye vine press drynketh not always of ye wine. The labor and travel
yt some men take of pure good will and also effectuous, has not ye grace with
me^, nor favor ye others past^^^ concylyateth withowte pain yea and at last
unprofitable. But should I now be agreued with ye wedes growing among the corn:
Seeing the ldrds says: Mat. xiii. psa. xxvii
Let them grow both till harvest? Ca^ my hatred destroy sin? or does my sin
myny she their offenses? fret not thy self at ye ungodly (saeth a David) be
not enuyous against ye euel doers. And why so? for they shall sone be cut do wne
like the grass and be wythered as the grene herb. Put you thy trust in the
lord and be doing good, so shall you dwell in the land, and it shall surely feade
the.etc. Understand now ge^tyll reader, that when I was about to write this
matter that I have taken in hand: I co^sydered what anu^bre of books there be
abroad in every ma^s hand of diverse and sundry matters which at very gredely
devoured of a great sorte^. Who so laboreth both writig and redig I do very
much co^me^d. But ar ye labors of al such writer tha^kefully received trow ye?
Ar there diligence and study gratified accordingly? or does every man read with
such a purpos and itent yt ye common wealth of christ's flock might thereby be
profyted and the people reduced to a christen co^uer sation and amendment of
life: As the auctor intended? Do they read with such judgment that they
receive the Good and reiecte the badd? No no. The wayghtyer matter, the sonner
passed over, and the less thank to the aucthour. But tryflynge matters,
fynely Handled are esteemed. So crooked and perverse is the nature of man and so
little pleasure have we in following the heavenly doctrane of christ: And so
little profytte have they also that with synglenes of heart labor therein. But
what the^: should the writers therefore leave writing, because the most part
do not wourthyly receive it? God forbid: But rather would I wyshe ye those
which never wrote before, should also set them selfs to work be stowinge
the talent that god has lent them to the most advantage, And saying it is not
lauful for any man (as yet) to preach in an open audyence, on^es he be or has
byne an Apostata: (an Apostle I should say) I purpose by the grace of god and
the helping of his holy sprete, to do that lies in me, to spy out the land
of Canaan and to bring such tidings as the Lord shall open unto me, in
writing, by means whereof his people may know their Lord the better and at
last be partakers of that plesaunt land flowinge with milk and honey. Now for as
much as by all likelyhods and tokens we approach near ye borders of this
promised land, for ye Lords comma^ndeme^t is come into the heart of our moises
which wills me of every sort to go spy out ye co^tre and to bring tidines
what manner of contre it is that al his people might enter I thought it very
good and profitable to publyshe the storye of these.xii. messengers written in
ye book of Numeri ye.xiii. and.xiiii. cha. yt we being admonished by their
example may the better know how to behave owr selves in owr journey, every man
in his calling specially such as are purposly sent. Lift up your hearts therefore
brethren unto ye lord besechyng hi of his mer cyful goodness, yt he will
wouchesafe to govern my heart and al others trauialinge this heavenly land and
that through faith in his promyses (according to the example of Joshua and
Caleb) we may be found faithful and true messengers bryngyng with us the fruit
of the same land and auoidig ye unfaithfulness of ye other te^ cowerdes which
brought an euel report up po^ ye land and cause ye people to sine we may
comfort them so, with the promises, yt with a glad heart and surs hope, of a
constant faith we may altogether enter into ye heavenly taberna cle, which
christ has prepared for his elect. Amen

Spiritus vbi vult spirat.P.N..Phillyp Nycolls

The story
It shall not need to write yt hole stori word for word i^ this placebut to
refer the (gentle reder (to ye place written in ye bok of nu^bre the.xiii.
and.xiiii. Chapters: theffect where of is this. After that ye children of
Israel were gone out of Egypt and had bin a great while in the wyldernes:
Number. xiii
and nowdraweyng nygh the land of Canaan, the lord spoke unto Moses and said
send forth men to spy out the land of. Canaan, which I will give un to the
children of Israel of every trybe of their fathers, a man, and let them be
such as are captains among them. etc. Moses did so chose out of every
trybe a man and sent the^ forth and bad the^ vieu ye land and see what manner
of cu^tre yt was, and what manner of people they were that dwelte in yt, and
also to bring some of the fruit of the land with them. They went and after.xl.
days they returned and came to Moses and Aaron and the hole Congregacyon, and
declared unto the^ that they had townde a goodly Contre flowinge with milk,
and honey and they had brought of the fruit of the land, A Cluster of Grapes,
pomegranetes, and fygges. But there be strong people dwelling in ye land and
grate and mighty Cytyes: we are not able to go against the^ (say they:) for
all the men are of great stature: yea we saw Gyauntes there also, as the
Children of Enock, and we seemed in our sight as the greshoppers, and so did we
in their syghte. At this report, Nu. xiii.
the Children of Israel took on and cried and wept and murmured Against
Moses and Aaron, and said: oh yt we had dyed in Egypt, or that we might dye
yet in this wilderness. Wherefore bryn geth ye lord us into this land, that
our wives should fall through the sword, and our Children to be a prey. Is yt
not better yt we goo again into Egypt? And they said, one to another: let us
make a Captain and goo into Egypt again.

But Moses and Aaron fell upon their faces before ye whole Congregation of ye
multitude of ye children of Israel: and Joshua the Son of Nun and Caleb the
so^n of Iephun (which were also.ii. of ye.xii. that had been to spy out the
land:) rent their clothes and spoke to the hole Congregation of the children
of Israel and said: the land which we have walked through to spy yt owte, is
a very good land: yff the lord have lust unto us, he shall bring us, into
the same land and give yt us, wiche is a land that flows with milk and honey.
But in any wise, rebel ye not against the Lord, and fear not the people of
this land: for we will eat the^ up as bread. Their defense is is departed from
the^, but the lord is with us, be not ye affrayed of them. And all the people
bad stone them with stones. The^ appeared the glory of ye lord i^ ye tabernacle
of witness unto all the children of Israel. And the Lord said unto Moses: how
long shall this people blasp heme me? And how long will yt be ear they believe
me, for all the tokens that I have showed among them I will smit the^ with
pestilence and destroy them, and will make of the a greter and a mightier people
then this is. But Moses said: The^ shall the Egiptia^s hear yt (for with
pour have thou brought this people fro^amo^g the^) so shall yt be told to ye
i^habyters of this land also which have herd that thou o lord art among
this people that you art seen from face to face, and that thy clowd stand the
over them, and ye you go before the^ i^ the cloudy pyller on the day time,
and in the fyrye pillar in the night ceason. If thou should now slay this
people, as one manne, than the heathen that have heard so good report of thee,
should say: The lord was not able to bring the people into the land that he
swear unto them, therefore has he slain them in the wyldernes. So let the
power of the lord now be great according as thou have spoken and said: the
lord is of long sufferaunce and of great mercy, and forgeueth syn and
trespass, and leaves no man inocent, and vysyteth the misdeeds of the
fathers, upon the cyldren unto the third and fourth generatyon. O be gracyous
now unto the sin of this people according to thy great mercy, like as you
have forborne this people also ever from Egipte unto this place. And ye lord
said I have forgiven itas you have said, but as truly as I live, al ye world
shall be full of my glory. For of al ye me^ that have seen my glory, and my
tokens, which I did in Egypt, and in the wilderness and tempted me now.x.
times and have not hearkened unto my voice. et c. For I have heard their
murmurynges against me: tell them therefore, As truly as I live (says the
Lord) I will do unto you, even as ye have spoken in mine ears. Your carcases
shall lie in this wilderness: But my servant Caleb, because there is Another
manner of sprete in him, and because he has followed me: him will I bring into
the land, and Joshua the son of Nu^. But ye with your carcasses shall lie in
this wilderness: And your children shall bear your mysdeades, forty years,
for the.xl. days that you were aspyenge out of the land, a day for a year,
that ye may know what it is wha^ I with draw my hand. even I ye lord have said
it and will do it i^deid unto all this euel co^gtegacio^ ye have lift up the^
selves against me: i^ this wilderness shall they be consumed, and there shall
they dye. And their deeds were plaged before ye lord, all ye me^, whom moses
sent to spy out ye land, save Joshua and Caleb. And when Moses had declared
this to ye people, they took great sorrow, and they rose early in ye morning
and went up to the top of ye mountain and said: Io we are here ready to go
up to the place that the lord commanded us: for we have sinned. But Moses
said: wherefore go ye on this manner beyond the word of the Lord? Yt shall
not prosper with you. Go not up (for ye lord is not among us) hat ye be not
slain of your enymyes. But they were blinded and would go up: not withstanding
Moises and Aaron nor the arc of covenant came not into the host and three they
were slain every one of the enemies.

Here have you (derely beloved i^ christ) almost the hole matter even as it is
written. Now shall it be (in my judgment) very profitable to recyte it again
and apply it to owr tym that it may be prynted the better i^ owr mind, and
that we may both learn by the^ to beware of infidely te and impatie^ce and ye
we murmur not against god and neglecte his co^mau^ deme^tes and also to follow
ye stedfastnes of. Caleb and. Joshua in faith and believe, doing all thing
according to ye word and co^ma^ndeme^t of ye lord. Eebre. iii.
This counsel does saint Paul give us saige take heed good brethren says he yt
there be not i^ any of you an euel heart of unbelieve to depart from ye liuiggod
but exhort out selves daili whil it is called to day lest any of you wax hard
hearted throu ye deceatfulnes of syn^e etc. Take head say eth he. By this we may
perceive ye through unbelieve we depart from ye lyui^g god and for lack of
daily exhortactyo^s me^ wax hard hearted tho row yt deceatfulns of si^ue. He
that has ye grace, consider and perceive well ye stat of vnbeleffe and
speacilli when ye heart is once hardened through syn^e^ shall not me ruayle ye
saint Paul says take heed. For suer, he yt will serve ye lord, must take heed and fear for he shall have many emmies, Eccle. ii.
the ye fear of ye lord is ye right gods service (says syrach (and het
serves god well yt fears to displese hi now ar all those things written for
our lernyng yt we might learn both by examples and exhortacions to fear god
and do his will. Exo. ii. vii. viii xi. x. xiiii.
The children of Israel, after that the egyptyans be gonne to make slaves of
then cried unto the lord and syghed to be dely ueredat, but after the the
lordehade wrought many wonders in Egypt for their delyueraunce, and caused ye
sea to open and gave the^ rome, and pharao with his host drowned: yet all this
notwithstanding, asson as any temptacion arose, they forgart altogether and,
Ex. xv xvi xvii. Gene. xvii xxv. xxxv Exo. xiii. Exo. xxxii Nu xxxv. psalm. c.
vi.
murmured against the lord and wyshed ye they had dyed in Egypt: although
the lord had promised their fathers abraa^ isaac and Jacob, to multyplye their
seade, bless the^, and bring the^ into ye land ye flows with milk and honey:
yea yt lord went with the^m ye pyller of a cloud by day and by night i^ a
pyller of fire. All this notwithstanding (I say) for every tryfle, they
murmured, and gruged, wyshyng the^ selves again in egypt: even dispysyng ye
boyce of ye lord there god, and made the^ other gods, and served the gods of
the nacyo^s, and went a whoring after there own inuencyons: for which ye lord
plaged them often, very sore. These are examples unto us says saint Paul yt
we should not lustafter euel things, i. cor. x.
as they lusted: nether be ye worshypers of images, as were so^ of them,
according as it is written, the people sat down to eat and drink and rose
up to play, Exo. xxxii Nn. xxv Nu xxi.
nether let us commit whordome, as some of the^ committed and fell in oneday.
xxiii. tho^ sand: Nether let us tempte christ as some of the^ tempted him and
were destroyed of serpe^tes: Number. xi.
Neither murmur ye as some of the^ murmured and were distroyed of ye dystroyer.
All these happened unto them for ensamples (says saint paul) but they are
written towarne us, upon whom the end of ye world is come: therefore let him
that thinks he stondeth take heed lest he fall. These be saint paul's words.
And I would wyshe from my very heart that all men from the highest to the loweste
would wey them ernestly. For they be written for our learning and to thente^t
that we should take head frar god and flee such oftences, lest we provoke ye
lord to cast us of forever. He speaks eue^ to ye wysest among men, saying:
let him ye thinks he stands take heed lest he fall. This waruyng of saint
Paul may not be forgotten, take heed therefore breath ten ye there be not in any
of you an euel heart of vnbelef to depart from ye lyuyug god. Where withal shall
ayoung man cle^^e his way? psalm. c. ix.
says david, he answers him self and says even by rulyng him self after
the word of god, but he ye goes beside ye word of ye lord must needs fall
though he think hi self never so sure For what is man ory^ wisdo^m of man? i.
cor. i
is not wysdo^ of ye world folly shnes with god^ The lord bade Moses send out.
samu. xiii
xii, men to spy owte the land of canaue. For he wuld give It to the
chyldrenne of Israele in possessyon. Moses did so, and chose of every of the,
xii tribes, one to go spy out ye land. And ye no (...) fools, but eue^ of the
thief of the trybes. And there they found a frutful cu^tre flowi^g with mylk and
houy. They brought of the grapes, pomgranettes, and fygges. All this was
according to the word of the lord, and his promys made to the fathers. But
as the nature of man is always, to love him self to lean to his own wisdom,
and to put some confidence therein and thus forsake faith: so these messengers
said un to the pople: we came unto the land whether ye sent us where it flowath
with milk and honey, and this is the fruete thereof. Bute then the people are
mighty, their Cities strong and great: So that we at not able to match
the^ Yea we saw gyauntes there also, the children or Euocke (say they) And we
femed^ our sight as the greshoppers and fodyd we in their syghte like wise. Now
here we sauhow they fall away through vubelef: for what neded they have feared
the gia^nts, or any other thing if they had believed god as Abra^ their fathers
did? but they tok no head to the word of the lord, therefore they brought this
euel report upon the land, i^ so much yt the people these words began to
cry and howl saying: Nu. xiiii.
oh yt we had dyed in the land of Egypt, or yt we might dye yet in this
wyldernes, wherefore brings the lord us into this land that our wives should
fall through the swerd, and our Children be a pray? Is yt not better that we go
again into Egypt? And thus they said on to another let us make a Captain
over us, and go again Into Egypt. Mark here the the vnfayfullnes of the so
Messen, gers Behold also the weak (...) faith that was in the people. The
word of the lord bad moses send spies into the land (which the lord would give
to the children of Israel) as yt was often promised before, But these
messengers looked upon the mighty men and great gyauntes, and forgot the promise
of god.

Likewise the people herkened to the voice of the messengers and let the voice
of the lord go. Oh unfaithful generacyon. Where was Abraham's faith? which when
he was commanded to kill his only son, Genesis xxii
i^ whom ye lord had promised to bless al nacyo^s, he forsook, reason left his
own wisdom, and believed yt yt lord would raise him again from death to life
rather the^ his word should not be fulfiled. This is wryt ten for our learning
yt, we also may set hand of the promyeses of god with like faith. is
But where this faith? let us now talk awhyle of our latter days, that we
may se whether this faith be among us or not. Many writers have compared the
Pope to king Pharoo of egypt. And in deed yt may welbe: for as long as he
governed ye church: he made us bond sines, he and his mynysters. Yea we were
so blyndly ledd and so tyraun nously handled, and that with such vylany: that I
am sure, the Israelytes were never so shameful entreated of king Pharoo and his
my nysters: As we have been of this Phatao and his shaven genetacion. For the
days has been that if a man hadd fownde a Priest or A F^yer in the vedde
with His wyffe: He durst not to have laid his Hands upon him. Where as y^yt
hadd been another mann all though He hadd stayne him? yt hadd been accoumted
no fa^lte at all. No mann might have sewed them at yt common law. Ye, these
egyptyans were wexed so proud yt they had divided them selfs from ye pore
israelites, i^ so much yt they must be called spiritual fathers and we the
lewd people. And if any poor Israelyte had grudged at anytime to bear there
heavy and intolerable but thens: there was no remedy but cruel death with out
mercy. Onles he would swear to be obedient unto them in All things whasoeuer
they should command him. Many a pore soul has suffered vnderthe^ most cruel
torments. Many a one have they put to death ye could not be suffered to answer
for them self many a one have they put to death the cause where of was never
known. Many a one have they murdered i^ prison secretly lest there outragius
cruel ma^slaghter should be ope^li knowe^but thanks be unto ye almighti god
which of his love ye he bare unto us, at the cries of some faithful Israelytes,
has delyuerd us, by his minister King Henry ye viii, from under the great and
intolerable burdens of this cruel pharao, and has brought us into ye
wylderness, where we hear ye lord speak to us daily, in the bible, wherein is
written both ye new testament and ye old, is brought among us, Pharaos power
is taken from him: his bulls be not regarded, his supersty oyous seetes of
relygyon be gone and agreate meany of his mahometrye and other baggage did ye
worthey king henry destroy. Many wonderful things did ye lord bring to
pass in his days, yet lo for all ye, could not we contynew faithful. Al
these wonders the prophecyes of ye lord him self against those false prophe
tes, nor yet the examples of those israelytes in the wyidernesse, cowlde keep us
in a steadfast faith In the promyfes of the lord, but at every temptation we
were ready to go back again i^ to Egipte. For if there came but a
commandment to burn our books, or such like: strayghtway we began to
dyspayre to grudg, and murmur, ye, and many went back again into Egypt, and
benot yet returned. Rather had they to be slaves in Egypt, to sytte by the
fleash pottes, fyllyng their lusts: the^ to ieopred their lives at the
commandment of god, in the wilderness. And for such i^fy delity and
wickedness, how have we felt ye plages of ye lord, both hunger pestilence and
war. But they will say, it happens only, for these new fownd out Heresies, ye
be now abroad. And every evil that chauncethe, they impute it to the Gospel,
which they call He resye. Yet this I am sure, All they can not deny: But these
plagues in the wilderness happened unto the people, for dysobeyng the word of
the lord, and for walkinge after there own in uencions. Now if these (whom they
call heretics) go about to set up, or put down any thing bysyde the
doctrine of christ: then might they have some couller to cloak their matter
withal, to make the rude people be leave that these plages belonged not to their
unfaithful works. But now to contyrme there malice they say: Look upon their
living. Here is one preaches asermon at fore none and is drou^k at after
none. Another i^ ahole asseble makethe an oratyon to destroy vice: and forth
with a contynente commits abhomynacion. One wryttethe in book this day to
exhort men to good living:

And the next day him self is fownde an opene transgressoure of the law.
Look upon them (say they) greatter whroekepers and adulterers, greater sueare^
^ and blas phemers of the name of god, gretter extorcyoners and deceauers, more
proud, more enuyous more covetous then these (which talk so much of the
gosple) can not, nor is possible to be. But what shall we say to them now?
shall we say they lie? no, for they speak many things truli (although they
speak yt of malice) as I have seen the experyence to often. But alas ye ever
such manifest wyckednes should be suffered unpunished. Look to yt (O ye
Magystrates) for right sharp judgment shall be done on these ye be in
auctorite: sape. vii.
and it pertains to your charge, as well to maintain christ's doctrine in
punishynge the wicked living, As to destroy I dolatrye In aboly shynge false
preaching.

Therefore I say a gain look to yt. For these false baalams be notable to open
their mouths with learning to defend their false doctrine. For every child
almost is able to confound them, even by their own learning, and Doctors.
Only now do they slander the gospel, with the fylthy living of a sort of
false faiued brethren, which with their lyppes confess christ the lord, but in
there deeds they deny him openly, Tit. i.
and that unpunished. And therefore yet once again (though I be but a poor,
and unprofitable servant of Jesus christ) do I exhort you (O ye Magystrates
and high rulers. Nu. xxv
in the zeal of Phinees, that due punishment may be had for such outeragyous
wickedness to the^tent that the Lord may the sonnet wythedrawe his plague from
us, and his mercy take place in repentaunte hearts by faith converted. Due
punyshme^t, I say, for I fear me exhortacion will not serve, wickedness is so
great. And I beseech you (o ye Magystrates) that you will pardon me of so much
boldness that I may exhort you also to take heed that there be not in any of you
an euel heart of unbelief to depart from the living god: for I am sure the
deuel goes above like a rori^g lyo^, i. petre. v.
sekyng whom he may devour: therefore take heed. For if any of you be given to
desire and couette to reing with riches and possessions in this world: He will
be at hand with you, in such wise will he persuade you, that you shall think ye
can not have to much to set furhe Christ's Gospel. If any of you, be
given to the lust of women: He shall persuade your (by the scryptures ye shall
think) that you may take another bysyde your wife. Orells put away your wife,
and marye another for every fault, Though you your self be the cause of her
fall. If any of you be given to pride, this wicked serpente is always at hand to
persuade you, that forasmuch as ye be i^ aucthoryte, ye ought to be known
abue other men. Thus shall he bring into you a certain love of your self, and
ye shall think that you be lift up above other me^, which yet be your
brethreu. If you be given to be angrye, he shall cause you in a fury to forget
mercy, yea and the^ shall your autoryte be aminister of sin. Do what vice soener
you be bent to, heys ready to i^crease yt and to make you forget yt: And the^
for lack of exhortacyons, may ye be hardened in your sin, and the^ is yt
dangerous. Take heed therefore, for a li^tlesin i^ you is much noted of the
commo^s: and in those things ye fall Yourefalses, how ca^ ye punysh other? So
by this means may yt come to pass that sin shall not be punyshed. Thus
shall these backbyters have always an occasyo^ to slander Christ's gosple. For
they forget not the euel lyui^ge, that they may spy in these Gospelers. But I
ask these holy Fathers, whene theye say these gospellers live so naughtyly in all kind of sin and abhomynacyons: Whether do they hate the Sin, that
these men commytte: Or else the gospel, that they so much talk of? Nay, the
sin will they say for very shame. But if sin be be the cause, why theye
say these gospelers be such horemongers susuche swerars, such proud men
such coueteous persons et. cc. If These Be the Causes: Why hadd they not made
Statutes (When they bare the Rule) and strayghte Laws, to Punyshe These
abhominacions with some punishments at lest as well as they made laws to
punysh with death (...) as red ^e^alked, preached, or (...) any thing out of
the (...) defense of christ's gosple (...) their Ipoc^ytys and falsy (...)
^^yne? yea why do they not ^^e owl upon these Abhomy a^yous indeferentsye in
all ^^enne Seeing even of there own sect be as filthy lives and as wicked ^s
The other, and A greater number? ye the holy fathers them salues wylbe known
to be no sayilles (I warante ye we) ^umtyme. But will ye know the cause why the
gosple preaches A g^ynste there Ipocrysy^, A ga^nste there ed^et cousnes,
Against their p^y^e and daily gloryt: And Against theyte blyndenesse
specyal^ye in gods word: And any^^te all there abhomynacyons The gosple, ye
gospel. Ho^est illud hinc illi clamores. Hecest illa maliiia. This is the
thing they be a grieved with all. How careful therefore and ware, ought they
to be in their conuersacyon, that shale preach, Teach, wryt or read or with
authoryty set forth gods word unto the people for they be as it were
messengers sent to spy owte the land. How had they need to take heed that
there be in none of them an evil heart of unbelieve to depart from the lyunge
God: lest through Infydelyte they Bring Ane euelle report upon the land of
Canuaan. We are Admonyshed here bye These messengers to cleave fast to the
word of god: To stycke, to his promyle be to dy^gence in owre vocatione. And
to forsacke owre o^ne wosdome Ye: and to do only which he commands. For if
the word of ye lord said; destroy the Images of baall, pluck down the Idols,
iiii Re. xx iii.
destroy the hylaulters, burn the groves, leave nothing fear theme not, I am the lord. What councelle is there (In this case) that may be allowed.
Has not the lord sayede to Moysese send men to spy out the land which
I will give to the children of Israel? Heb. iii
Understand (dear brethren) that as Moses the chosen servant of god to whom
was committed the governance of the children of Israel to rule In the leter.
Does sygnyfye the only begotten son of god Jesus Christ, to whom is
committed al Judge went rule and powe out al mean in his spirit: Give. xv. Head.
vii.
Aod as Melchysedech king of salem the hye priest of god withowet beginning or
ending: does paynt before owre eyes the everlasting presthod of christ, which
offered the true bread and the true wine, Heb. iiii.
of which whosoever eats and drynketh: has euerlaflyffe: so does this holy land
promisyd to Abraam and his posteryte sygnyfy unto us ye holy promised dwelling
of the father, that heavenly mansyon prepared of christ for this elect, that
kingdom in which is joy and peace i^ the holy ghost. Hebre. x.
These are the shadows of good things is come, and not ye things i^ there
nation says sayut pauie) and this land of Canaan) which was promisd to
abraam and to his seed and they possessed yt in deed was but a shadow of the
everlasting kingdom of heaven. The Journey through ye wilderness: betok^^th this
miserable lyffe, so full of troubles and te^ptacyon. And as all such as grudged
a gaynste god in the wilderness when any temptacyon arose, and would go back
again into egypt: dyed in the wilderness and were not suffrede to enter into
the land of canaan: cuu^ so are all such unfaithful, and fleshly lyuers, as
can not abide to have their lusts restraned but would go again into egypt by
the flesh pottes, and all such as will not abide by the word of the lord, to
worship him according as he has appointed, but would go after strau^g gods
worshipping hi^after there own inuentyons: all these I say (oneles they repent
and be converted) shall not enter ye kingdom of god, but shall lie in ye
wilderness, yt is, in ye place of everlasting trouble and vexacyo^. Take heed
therefore there be not i^ any of you a^ euel heart of unbelief. Let us not
shrynkee In this wylldernessee but pacyentelye abide the will of god and then
be we sure we shall possess this trutefull land: for god has promised, and
that is sufficient. Look what he has spoken must needs come to passt, and (god
is mi witness) I did ever se^e I had any perseaueraunce i^ christ's doctryn,
believe, that as the pope was deprived of his false usurped pour: so should al
his feigned relygyo^ de caye, and be utterly destroyed. For the lord says:
Math. XV.
every plant which my heavenly father has not planted shall be pluckede up
bye the roots. Not with stanedynge, yt has come forth fair and easylye,
and peradventure some of these unfaithful. Messengerse has brought An
evil report upon this heavenly Canaan, which is the very doctrine of.
Christ, What. xiii
as christ callethe yt him self. For I have heard some say (which have
been no small fools) it is good in such wayghtye matters to take good
aduyseme^t and do al things with discretion. For if we should abolyshe and put
down al things that gods word does not allow, meaning the abhomynable
abuses of the mass, and the great dysorder of mynysters with such like:
great hoostes, and great armies of men will invade us: And we shall not be
able to Endure against them. For here have we the scottesone the one side, the
frenchmen on the other side. The Irysh men be brute beasts. The pope shall set
the Emperor upon us. And all nacyons will in vade us. Ye owr own country will
rebel agadnst us. Oh Caleb Caleb.

Oh Joshua, here you not what an euel report this messengers bring upon the
land. Thus and such like tales will make the people rebel against Moses. Why
rent you not your clothes? among these xii. messengers that were sent to spy
out the land: was there but two faithful men. But these two when they saw
the multytud so far out of order, so void of grace, that Moses and Aaron
fell down upon there faces to entreat them: They rent their clothes, and
spoke to the hole congregatyon saying: The land that we have walked tho row to
spy out, is a very good land: if the lord have lust unto us, he shall
bring us into the same land and give yt us, which is a land that flows with
milk and honey. But in any wise rebel not against the lord: And fear not
the people of this land. For we will eat them up as bread. Their defense is
departed from them, but y^lord is with us, be not afraid of the^er. c Mark well
the werdes of these two faithful Messengers, we will eat the^ up as bread say
they there defense is departed from them, the lord is with us, be not affrayd,
of them. Oh faith faith. If all these lands and coutrees were bent to come i^
deed, what should we fear? Rather should we believe, yt of these Enymtes in
coming over the River, the hole host should synke: then yt god should fail
those that faith fully trust in him. But all thing must be done with dyscretio^,
sobryete and wysdom say they. But I pray you what greater wisdom and
dyscretion ca^ therbe: then to do ernestli ye co^ma^ndeme^t of god, and with an
ernest; ele to set forth his truth; what is your mind to do? are ye not myu
ded to set forth gods word with a pure conscience? Are you not minded to do
according to ye same? is it not your purpose to Root out Idolatry? do you not
intend to set up ye treu wourshipe of god? if co^sie^ce be defiled with
coueteousnes hordo^e pride, or any such like vice: then fear how ye go
forward, and take good council before you procead, for gods word will not
cloak y^ long, but will doutles se it punish ed, ye and al men shall se it. But
if your conscience be clear, and ye seake nothing but the only glory of god
(though it were with ye loss of al your goods if it plesed god so to hryng
it to pass) and to do only yt he co^nmundeth your why stay ye are ye afraid
of the number of me^ and the great gyauntes? is it not godds cause that you
take in hand darennynat you bentet upon such a la^d^ is not god our sheld and
defense have we not apromise that v. shall chase a^^e hundredth, Le. xxvi Deuteronomy.
xxx ii.
and an.C. shall chase tene thousand? Are these v^yne words are they not our
life? do we not se here in the same story, that when the people would have
stoned Caleb and Joshua, for spekyng to them in this tayth: the glory of the
Lord appeared in the tabernacle of witness unto the people, And the lord said
unto Moses: How long shall this people blaspheme me? And how long will it be
ere they believe me, for all the Tokens that I have showed among them? I will
smpte this people with pestilence, and dystroy them, and will make of the a
greatter and a myghtyer people, then this is, says ye lord. Consider well
these words, consider who, spoke them, to whom they were spoken, and for whose
sake they were written. Oh what case should we be in, Psalm, cvi.
if our Moses stood, not in the gapp, and prayed his father for us? How
unfaithfully do we daily fall, even as yt were a people that had no god at all?
Let us therefore be warned in time. Let us be converted unto the lord. Let us
separate oureselues from the trust of men, from the wisdom of men, from
the vain confydence of this world, with all the vanytes of yt. And let us
with a syugle eye and a pure conscence call upon the name of the Lord. Our
medyatour is always ready to offer out prayers to his father, and has
promised that we shall be heard, if we call in faith.

Let us learn of Moses and other holy fathers, of Christ and his apostles
how to pray: For always are there oceasyons offerede to afaythefull Manne to
Pray: As was here to Moses for the people. But we had need to pray for our
selves and to desire our Moses to pray for us also: for we have offended
after this manner. Therefore let us lift up our boyce saiynge: o lord be
merciful unto thy people accor dyng to thine accoustomable mercyes, do away
our offenses: For we have sinned. But yet for thy names sake deliver us. We
have taken upon us to be of thy gosple, and with our mouths we confess the,
but in our deades we deny thee: yet lord have mercy, for if you should plage
us according to our deserts: the^ should ye other vnbeloui^ge say: Lo: Behold
how God hates their heresye, and thus should thy word be despised and hared of
al nacyo^s oh be gracyous therefore unto our sins accorynge to thy great
mercy, likewise as thou have forborne us always hitherto be thus gracyous unto
us for christ's sake. Let all such faithful men, as do earnestly study the
amendment of their wicked life, say amen. But he that does not so: let him keep
silence orels say our lady Psalter: for such prayers does gods word teach
us, by his saints, which were writ ten for our learning. As for matyns
mumblers and mass mongers with dyryges and trentalles with such superstious
prayers, the scry pture speaks not of them. But these and such like ar ye
scypture full. No vain babbling: but effectual faithful, and fervent, ought
our prayers be. For the prayer of a cyghtesous man, Iaco. v.
avails much (says laynct James) if it be fervent. As it appears also i^
this story by Moy sts, which obtained grace for the people. For the lord said:
I have forgiven it as you have said. But those ye have murmured agayust me, tell
them, as truly as I live (sayrth the lord) I will do unto you: even as ye
have spoken in myue ears. Your carcasses shall lie In the wylldernes, and all
ye that were numbered from.xx. years and above, which murmered against me
shall not come into the land coucecuynge the which I lift up my hand that I
would let youd well therein (save caleb the son of Ie phune and Joshua the son
of Nu^. And so there dyed and were plaged before the lord all the men whom
Moses sent tospye out the land and came again and made the hole multitude to
murmr a^anist yt because ye brought up a misreport upon the land that yt was
evil. Here shall yt be very necessary to remember ye words of ye hieprestes
and pharyses (which gathered a counsel after yt christ had raised lazarus) and
they said what do we? Ioh. xii.
this man does manytoke^s if: we let hi^ go thus, al me^ will believe in hi^,
then shall the tomans come and take away all out land and people. Now within
forty years after (as the histories planly declare) was jerusalem dest royed
in deed of the romans and the most part slain and led away captain. But why
trou ye? because they suffered christ to preach and his doctrine to be
published? not but because they mystrusted lest if they should have suffered
him, the romans should com, as they did i^ did: Quod verebantur hoc acc^dit
illis. Take heed therefore that there be not in any of you an evil heart of
vnbelef to depart from ye living god. I say tak head, for he ye fears the hoar
frost the deep snow shall fall upon him, and surely if ye fear the dystructyon
of your bodyly substance through in fidellte and mystrust of gods mighty
hand: it is to befeared lest he shalde stroi you both body and soul Look to it
al ye yt hold so much of your polytyk wisdom, for gods pleasure. his
co^maundeme^res, pass the ma^s wysdom and reason. He will not be mesured with
man's polycye. He will wourke with his mighty, power, whereas ma^s reason
ca^notvndersta^d it. For these messengers that were sent to spy out the
land, perceauing the multytud of people which were mighty, and the strong
cities that were in the land: Again consy deryng the great gyauntes yt were
there also: thought it could not be that they should get the contre, for it
stood not with reason. And there fore murmurede they and wyshed that they had
dyed in egypt, or yt theymought dye in the wyldernes andeue^ so it cainto
pass for the un faythfulnesse for: they were plaged and dyed in the
wilderness As many as murmured. But Joshua and Caleb were left Alive and
preserved by the wonderful power of god and that because of their steadfast
faith ye they had in the promyses of the lord. But the people wolds have
stoned the^, eue^ for there faith fulness. For ye other.x. look upon ye strong
me^ and great cetyes but these me^ looked upon the people with them But alas for
the blendenes of the world: for as the faisr prophettes sys of god and
conforted the profetes were always the grettest number: so were the rude
multitude coutynually bent to believe the more paree and to stone crucife burn
and hang or with sdme other cruel tormentrs rydde such all way As broughe
them the truth. As we se it euydent in all the holy scriptures by the
prophets, by christ him self and his apostles. And as we have seen also by
good experyence in owre days. But the lord is always at hand to deliver those
that faithful trust in him, he comforts them and helps them. For either he
delyuerethe(...) believe, looked only to ye promise ye was proceeded forth of the
mouth of god, and regarded nothing else.

He did not reason the matter first how he might for another so^n, the ye
former promise of god might (...) pacyence, and comfort of the scryptures might
have hope. They are written for our learning sayethe saint paul. If they be
wryttenfor our learning it is reason we know them. Else how shall we learn (...)
which I conmaunde the this day, shall be in thine heart, Deuteronomy. vi.
and thou shall show them unto thy children, and shall talk of the^ when thou
art at home i^ thin house: And as thou wall kest by ye way, and when y^ lie
down, and when thou rysest up, and thou shall bind them for a sign upon thy
hand, and they shall be a warnyng between thine eyes, and thou shall writ the^
upon ye posts of thy house, and upon thy gates. etc. Again, take heed therefore
yt ye do all the co^maun deme^ts and laws which I set before you this day.
Deuteronomy. xi.
etc. Also, what so ever I command you, yt take heed ye do only to the lord,
and put you nothing thereto, nor take ought therfrom. etc. Behold with what
care the lord gives his co^maundeme^ts, yt they should not be forgote^.
Dylyge^t therefore were ye prophets always to writ forth ye wonders yt god has
always showed for ye children of men. The lord said to Joshua: Let not the
book of the law depart out of thy mouth, Joshua. i.
but record therein both day and night. Now if these co^mau^deme^ts be
forgotten so ye we have the^ not i^ our heart: The^ shall we have litel pleasure
to talk of the^. For the mowth talks of ye abundance of the heart. If they
be not in our heart nor in our mouth: it is not possible that we should be
doing of them. Mat. xii.
If we be not doing of the lords co^mau^deme^ts: surely we turn to the
right hand or the left: we add we diminishe: we forget y^ true wur ship of
god: we ferue Idols and follow our own iue^tions: we forgete Abraham's farth:
we forget Moses doctrine: we forgett Caleb and Joshua, Christ and all his
apostles, with al their doctrine of patience, throw which we should have hope.
Alas what case were we i^ when we knew not what, was the old testament nor
what was ye new? ye bible was an unknown thing with in these xx. year Here i^
England. iii. Re. xii
Ieroboa^ had invented us a new law, a new wurshype of god, for he knew well you
the people would have such devotion that they must needs have what to wurshype,
as we se by the Israelyres i^ the vildernes whirh as soon as Moses was gone
into the mo^te to talk with the lord and to receive the commandments, by
and by they must have some symilitude, some lykenes of god, Ex. xxxii
some on thing or another to direct their prayers unto. And therefore made
them a golden calfe and wourshyped yt. And Jeroboam I say knew well yt the
people must needs have somewhat to wurshyp, and he feared lest (if they should
go to Jerusalem to wurshyp) he should lose his kingdom again, and therefore
he made them two golden calfes, In Dan and Bethel, Owr Jeroboam like wise after
that he came to that great dig nytye that he was called, Pater Patrum Caput
Ecclesie. etc. with such like: he knew well that if the people should know the
scripture, and be brought up in the simple doctryn of christ that he culd
never contynew so prince like clean contrary to the doctrine theyrof, nor non
of his. Wherefore dylgent study was had to invent seruyces, wurshypyngs,
exposytyes, sacraments, with all the goodlyests Iewelles and costly apparel
that moughte be had, so that at the last the hole world was rauyshede with
that great holiness. Than became the mynysters of this Jeroboam in every contre
the greatest men of the world. No Realm but Car dynalles were the cheyfe in
the concell and ruled the hole Realm, by shoppes were Ambassators and of the
preuer cou^saul. Deanes and prebendaryes were the kings phesycya^s chaplens
and stuardes: Parsons and vy cars were great Lords stuardes and chaplyns. I
speak nothing of abbottes pryours pro vyncyalls with such a rablemente of
cloystererss. What did all these did they thach the peoplethe gosple of Jesus
christ? did they teach the people faith in christ, love and charity,
meakenes, gentylnese, symplycytie so bryrte, chastyt lyberalyte, and to dispyce
the world and to go through the wyld ernesse with. Moses and Chry ste their
to be tryede whethere their faith were Like Abraham's, constance and lively in
the promyses of god? Alas few of them cowlde teach Any thonge at all, for
they Were (for the most) part great menes sons brought up in hawkyng and
hu^tyng. They knew not the gosple, per adventure they would set there chaplens
to preach the master of sentence, and the legend horrye, if he brought I.ii.
or.iii. of the doctors, oh what a learned man was that, but these great men
took there pleasures. They knew not what faith is, but Imagened, that they had
faith when they believed there was a god that Jesus christ was his son and born
of the vergyn mari.etc. but now they thought this to be to lytyl to bring them
to heaven and therefore all the mass matins. even songs,. Dyryges holy bread
holy water, palms ashes with such Other gear should be a mean, And
speacyaallye the^yre new sacraments and Idols that Jeroboam had set up and
therefore they helde^ stoutlye that faith only cowlde not iusttifi,
nethercould webi faith only beaccepted into gods favor for they knew not
what this lively faith that abraam had meante letpaule sai wha^he will, the
church was above pale, and all the scripture now was there living lyk unto
other men, or wursse ank the cause of al others myschet for they were as
proud, e^vyous, and mali cyous, as any men were in the world yea man had been
better to have had the dysy leisure of.x. other the^ one of them. They fared as
well and had as many daynte dyshes as any lords in the realm and more quietness
a great deal. This could not be with out weme^. Whether they were whoremongers,
adulterers and wurse, let all the world be judge. Noman roughte more to be
alofte in the world then they did: and such great houses, horses hounds sho
tynge dysynge, open housetor gentylme^ne, there servants In velvet and chains
of gold. What temtatyon they had in in the wyldernes I can not tell, onles they
were tempted with ladies and gentyllwomen that vysyted them. But sure they
tempted other and mad them go through the wyldeenes and through the fire also.
Alas they had no mercy upon a poor wreche yt once opened his mowth against
them, but cried owte herytike herytyke, burn, burn, fagotts, fire But his
examynatyons was not hard of the lay people for fear. Alas If the lord had
not left us sede: We should have been, As sodom, and like unto Gomorra. Psalm.
ii.
Be wise therefore (o ye kings) be learned ye that be Judges of the earth, lest
the lord be angrye with you and ye peryshe from the right way. But kings were
always as kept dionge with wars If they had any learning, and like to smell
out any of their wyies, or if he would reform any thig. Look how thy handled
king John. Tho mas becket was one oi their saints but gentell teader look upon
his liff in the legend the book of saints lives. I am sure they have written
the best they cowld for him, but yet mark yt well. There was noman might
study the scripture before he had bin Master of art, and then was yt nothing
worth till he had studied the doctors, counsels, and decrees, the which is more
thenaman is able to do in all his lyffe though he live. Lxxxx. year and to say
his service beside, which all prestes were bownd to do on pain of
dampnacyon. This I speak of our doctors in the vuibersytees: As for our
prestes in the contree: the days has been that be was coumptedd a great
clarke that could tell whom he should serve to morrow. They knew not what
the bible meanthei were not acquanted with the new testament. Some of them
thought yt should be hetysy because yt was called the new testamente. For this
word now offended then greatly But now they be well amended for some of them
wylbe able to read English wythyn a while though yt before aganst there will. I
know well they can not abyd the hearing of this, Ma. xxii
nomeor then thescribes and pharyses cowld a bide christ when he said woe be
unto you scrybes and pharties for ye shit up the kingdom of godbefore me^. etc.
but weperad ve^ture they will say, we denynot christ put we wurshyp Chrpste and
therefore we kill them that will not believe in Christ.

But says Chrste: take heed that no man decaue you. For there shall many come
and say: I am christ and shall deceive many: but when ye se the abhomynacyon
of desolacyon stond in the holy place.etc. then if any man shall say unto you:
lo here is christ, believe yt not. Jeroboam was not so madd to say ye shall
believe no more tn the lord but in strange gods: Re. xii
but he sai ed yt is much for you to go to Ie rusale^ behold therefore these
shall be your gods. etc. his meaning was that they should do to these gods
the same wursh yppe that they did before at Jerusalem. And our Patryarkes.
Pretend Christ altogether. But the wurshype that he prescrybed unto us was
gone. His Docrryne with all the scryptures had they locked from us so that none
of us durstloke up on yt in the tongue that we understood, so that we could have
but small hope through comfort of the sceyptures. Alas how was yt possible ye we
should be obedyent un to the voice of our lord god and walk in his ways,
when we knew them not, nor could we tell what they meant: but most harti
humble and Immortal thanks be given to the almighti god, which through the
merytes and prayer of our mer cyfull Moses, has sturred the heart of noble
king henry the.viii to destroy the abhomy nacyons of this wicked Jeroboam. But
chefly of al other things (as we are most bownde ar this time) ou ghte we to
lawde and praise the lord which of his tender love likewise has given us a
you^ge Josias which (by ye grace and power of ye lord) shall (through his
godligoueruour and counselors (fynish the building of the holy temple which
his father began according to the patron yt ye lord has perscrybed
ithegosple of has only son^e Jesus christ our lord. Ho wbeit we are not yet
paste the wyld etnesse, we are not yet ente red the la^d of Canaan: for
althoghe the lord have and does daily plage such unfaithful messe^gers, which
have not ernestly believed his word but feared men more then god: yet cease
not temptatcyons, troubles grudginges and murmuringes. For some wrig and wrestto
go back again ito Egypt and do as there forefathers have done, for there is
ple^tey of gold and silver meat and drink, there might we fyl our belyes by
ye fleshpot tes. There was more plenty (say they) of all manner of things i^ oue
town the^ there is now i^ a whole shire: more mirth and pastim i^ on day, the^
is now in a who year. It was never merry se^ce this new learni^g ca^ up. This
say they ye ca^ not abyd ye scarcyte i^ ye wyldernes, nor any te^ptacio^ in ye
de serte. another sort (which be polytik men t)hey would forth with a good will
for they care not, which end of ye stat go forward: so they might not be i^
danger and might also get su^ what byit These me^ beasraid of ye cana^ites mo
abitesamorites with ye rest of ye nations, and specially the Enyckes, which be
great Giaunts. The bishop of To me is agreat man and has done many fetes of
arms i^ his days. I know well his bishops and other prelates bear agreat
stroke yet in many co^trees. But what says Joshua and Caleb: Their shadow is
departed from the^, the lord is with us fear the^ not therefore. And surely (as
is said) if your conscience be clear so ye you seek nothig but the glory of
god: you need not fear men. But nou is there another sort of me^, which after
they perceived yt god had openly plaged ye grndgi^g people for their
unfaithfulness, such as would go back agai ito Egypt: i^ so much yt they perceued
yt ye iord would have them go forewarde to co^quere the land: these me^ comero
Moisesther Gouernouer and captain and say lo we be here and will go up unto
the place of which thelord has spoken unto us. For we have si^ned But Moses
said: why go ye on this be yonde the word of the lord it will not com well to
pass with you, go not up therefore. etc. but they would forth even i^ to the
top of the hill there was no remedy, and there were all slain. Very notable
is this place for us and worthy to be had in remembrance. For here may we
perceive howfro ward and unruly the multitude of me^ are always to be obed ye^t
to the voice of the lord eueri wai ar we pro^e and redi to falfro^ ye word of
pear, they were not sofar f ye right hand, but now thear as far on ye lest
hand they were not so slack before, but now there beas hasti, and al besyd ye
word of ye lord. We have sinned sai they: and whiso? verily be cause they went
not for that ye co^man^ deme^t of god but grutched and now they were commanded
to tarry and not go, and yet they went. Theye thought to have made amends and
marred altogether. A good lessone is this also, for our good intentes What so
ever is done of a good in tent say our fathers is merytoryous. And it is
plain that these men went forth eue^ of such a good intent, and yet were
slain, because they harkened not to the voice of the lord, which spoke unto
them by his Prophet Moses, as he speaks, daily to us by christ and all the
prophets and apostles, Take heed therefore therbe not i^ any of you an euel
heart of unbelief to depart from ye lyui^g god. But these me^ repented and were
sorry, they were converted. Yea they were converted from Ignorance to error.
They would not go forth be fore at ye word and commandment of god and now they
would not tarry at ye commandment of god, but forth without any stay or let. Some
there bey^ perceue ye pope and his guard to have ledd us blyndly this many years
into a sha^ful co^fusyo^ of our faith and of ye true wurship of god. And now
therefore without al ad uyseme^t and discretion would destroialtogether and care
not whether there be any myny sters or no, so they may have ye lands and
benefyces of these blind guydes. they care not whether there be any i^ their
rome or no, or whether gods word be preached, or ye sacraments mi nystred or
uo: I mean not ye. vif. sacraments after ye ministracio^ of these caterpyllers
which do all for lucre but eue^ christ's sacraments which he has ordained to
confirm our faith i^ y^ word. but ye me^ I say be so hasty foreward to kill ye
can anites and other of ye nacyo^s, because they would have their plesau^t la^d
to dwell i^ it balik: for they went besid ye word of ye lord. Many there be that
get spyrytual lands and possessions probendes benefices into their hands, but
how many be there that labor in aman of good knowleg, to enjoy such living?
no fie (say they) yt is pety that ever he should be trubled with yt: For the
possessions and rytches do corrupt eue^ the best preachers (as yt has
happened in deed) But alas good men how careful be they to good preachers, to
provide that they be not corrupt with great lyuings, but I marvel they
have no pety upon the^ self. I promise you ye yff good preachers which have
knowledge in christ's doctrine and have been tied in ye wilderness with trouble
and temptacio^, if they I say cannot well use these riches and possessions
accordingly, but must be corrupted with the^ it shalbehard tomak mebeleue yt you
which have not so much knowlegi^ ye sa^ doctri^ nether has you y^ faith binso
well tired should use them with out a corrupt conscience, which shall be to your
own damnatyon. Take heed therefore ye there be not i^ any of you an euel heart
of unbelief to depart from the living god. And remember that saint Paull
says coueteousnes is y^ root of al euel. I would to our lord men knew and
would consider what a strayte reconynge we shall all be called unto, where we
shall answer for the wyspe^ding of every farthyng yt ye lord has committed to
our gouerna^nce, Then shall we say alas ye ever I tok such pains and travail
for ye which now is beco^e mine euerlasti^ge sha^e and destruction, but what
should it avail to speak against that vice of couete ousnes? nothing at al. And
this is one cause that makes many me^ to have so fast forewarde. But these me^
that came to Moses and would go so freshly against their enymies went up ito
ye mowntain. Moses bade the^ tarry and take the lord with the^ they should sped
the better, but they would not tarry, for they had been to stowe to go foreward at
the co^ma^ndeme^t of god, and therefore, now they would make more have, where as
before they had believed to enter into the kingdom of heaven by their Idle
inverted supersticious vain worckes (or at lest way they thought them amean
the rather to obtain), And therefore grutched at the doctrine of ye gospel and
thought it a new scole inverted by these new fellows (as they teyrme) contrary
to the mother holy church: now they were co^verted from that popish faith, and
begin to run another way, eue^ into ye mowntaine at ye first daish, whether
Moses will or no, And they say: if I be predestyned to be saved: I shall be
saved, do I never so euel. If be predestined to be damned: I shall be damned do
what I will, and say any man what his will. wherefore let us be merry and let god
work. These me^ (onles god of his immite goodness and mercy call the^ to grace)
I may think wellinough ye they be vessels of wrath ordained to damnation, eue^
very brut bestes destytute of all grace and wisdoo^ too. And although I will not
say ye it is syn^e against ye holy ghost: yet surely it is gr^t blasphe^y, with
such lightness or rashness without discretic^ and judgment and hu^lblenes of mid
to talk of y^ high predesti^atyo^ of god. but I let the^ pass as those who^ al
wys me^honest and learned do vtterli abhor But there by other me^, which cly me
not fully so high, as these. But how much they differfro^ ye other I cane not
tell. These be such sort of men which hold y^ faith is sufficyent so y^ no
wurckes are necessurily required to our iustitycatio^, John. vi
Truth it is we nedenoworcke of our oune to be justified or to bemade righteous
i^ye sight of god, for it is y^ work of god to believe i^ him who^ he has sent:
that is Jesus christ, by ye which faith only we are justified in ye sight of
god. But is it not necessary trowye yt I declare this faith to my brethrenels
why says christ eueri good tree brings forth good fruies. etc. Ma. vii
and by there frut ye shall know them. If you will say yt you declar your faith to
your brethren by ye confession of your mouth and say ye believe, and yet do not
y^ works of belefe. christ says to you not al they yt say lord lod shall
e^ter i^toy^ kingdom of heaven, but he y^ does my fathers will which is i^ heaven
The lord is no such idle or vai^ worckma^ yt leteth trees which shall bear no
frut, for dowtles his good trees shall bring forth good fruit onles they be
taken up before so^er and spring tim com, and whiso? to reward or reco^penc his
maker of his benefits? no no. He cares not for our rewards nor reco^penc,
but he does it because we shaldo good to his household and declar to the^ what
goodness I hane reciueed at the lords haude: for there takes, that every membre
might do good one to anothre, he askeh nothing but thanks, but al is for owre
own co^modyte that we should help each other with such love as he has showed
unto us, by doing where we declare our electyone in christ and make owre calling
sure there is no man that loves heartily ^but he has pleasure to do the thing
that deliteth him whom he loves, that he might seal his fryndship to contyew.
contyneu in my loue^ (says christ) if ye shall keep my commandments ye shall
hyde in myloue, even as I have kept my fathers emomaundeme^ts and bid in his
love. Here will they obiecte and say, that forasmuch as saint John saeth if we
say that we have no sin: we deceive our selves and the truth is not in us: Yt
were but pharysaycal pride to seake to be so vpryght in the law, as though we
could be withowte fault for we shall be sinners do what we will. Romans iii.
And Saint Paul saeth we hold ye a aman is Iustylyed by says with cute ehe
works of the law. And Peter says through faith does god puryfy the hearts.
Whereforyf we have faith it is suffye tent. Act. xv.
If these men did truly understand faith: They should know that it is alyuynge
thing, a myghtre thing wurckynge by love, Gale. v.
that faytize does saint Paul mean to the galathya^s where as he excludethe al
things save faith, ye which faith (says he) is mighty in wurckynge by love.
As we se how it wroughe in abraham and all the holy fathers. For if abraham had
not bin obedye^t to the voice and co^mau^dem e^t of god as we read of him: how
should it have be^so much known unto us yt his faith was counted unto for
ryghteousnes if Caleb and Joshua, had not declared there faith to the people how
could we have learned by the^ to be faith full? one man sercheth the scryptures
and fi^deth there: thus says ye lord And then search his own polityke wit
and weyeth the matter with his own reason whether it ve best to do so or no,
as the lord commands: does this man wurcke by faith? another likewise
sercheth the scryptures and fyndeth there: thus says ye lord. He says if I
believe it is suffycient: does this man wurck by faith? or does he know what
faith is? is faith such a common thing yt every man may have it when he will?
or has every man faith that has read in the scryptures? no, uor many which
hane great knowledge in the scryptutes: for many can teach other the lyberty of
the gospel: but they the^ selves be ye bo^d seruau^ts of corruptyon. Yet these
men imagen yt they have faith that iustifyeth. But faith is not man's
imagynatyon. For how can they have the iustyfyenge faith, ii. Their
that conteynew in extortyon and covetousness, i^ wordome and adultery in envy
and wrath, excess and dro^ kenesse, blasphemy and perjury, or in wicked
superstytyon and Idolatrye, with all kind of abhomynatyon? would ye have me
think this man to have the iustyfyinge faith no, no. Ephe. v.
For besure yt ye whoremonger or unclean person, or coueteous person (which is
a wurshyper of images) has no eherytau^ce in the kingdom of christ and God.
Let no mane deceive you with vain words, for because of these, commethe the
wrath of god upon the chyldedrone of vnleife ^etc. All these evil wourkers be
the children of unbelief. Let the^ baost of faith: let them bost of the gospel
Yea let them cast out these deuilels of other men in the name of Christ: yet
shall he say unto them Ineuer knew you, depart from me ye wur kers of iniquite.
The Jews boasted them selves to be abraham's children. But Christ said unto
them if ye were abraham's children, ye would do the deades of abraham. Here unto
pertayneth that of saint James where he says: Ye se then how that of deades a
man is sustyfyed and not of faith oneli. For although abraham's faith were
known Enough unto god, why chsercheth the in ward pattes and Iustyfyeth the
heart yet cowld not we have seen his so great faith, onles yt had bvn declared
by some outward work which might assettayn us alsoof his iustificatio^br
faith and although we be iustified^^ ye sight of god byfayth only (which is
also ye gift of god) yet is it necessari yt we declarour faith to ye brethren
by our obedyence to the will and commandments of god (and notb^) the
eommaundeme^ts of popes and bishops) what a great gift I have received of
the lord, that I might the rather provoke them to do likewise, For other wise
we can not beioyned together in one faith. For my brothers faith is un certain
to me: onles Ife the fruits of yt appear, although god know the heart.
Therefore says saint James show me thy faith by thy deades and I will
show my faith by my deades. And then as the belefe of the heart Iusty fyeth
before god: So do the works of faith Iustyfy before men. That is does declare
our Iustyfy catyon vntomen. This is plain by saint James words when he
says faith without deides is dead, and again: ye se how faith wrought whis
deades so did ye deeds spring of faith for faith was the wurkers Thus do we
make. Paul and James agree. For whereas saint Paul exeludeth (as is said
before) all manner of works, even the vert wurkes of the law in iustificatyon,
that iustificatyon might come by the only faith in Jesus Christ: even here
does he declare what faith he means: faith says he which by love is mighty
in operacyon. If yt be no wurkynge faith: it is not the faith that saint Paul
speaks of. Gala. v.
Take he dether fore brethren that there be not in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief to depart from the lynynge god. Take heed I say and be not deceived:
for faith is not so small a tryfle as men esteem ytt. For to say faith only
Iustyfyethe is sone spoken, But to know the. Wurkynge off yt, and how yt
apprehends the mercy of god offered us in Christ: is a great matter. Forthys
faith that we speak of when we say faith only iustyfyeth: is a lively thing
(as is said) which wurketh by lone in the holy ghost, For there is no sin
raynynge in our mortal bodies but this faith assaulteth yt, and by lytyle and
lityle dryuethyt a way. As when we begin to wax careful for the things of
the world, to couett abundance of rytches: faith says, Ma. v
Be not careful what he shall eat or what ye shall drink. etc. Care not for
tomorowe and so forth, as for abundance, how cane afaythfull man be quyett
with abowndaunce seeing his brother in necessite? what faith has ye man
which sorowethe not ate his neighbors greiffe? how does he sorrow for his
neighbors grief yt labors for his own private pro fyte withowte any
respect of his neyboures neceli^te^. Where be not these men that seake al to
the^ self eue^ with the great loss and hurt to the neighbors? where is faith
which byloue is mighty in operacion: if we be idle and seek not one way or
other to profit the co^meu wealth. faith says. In ye sweat of thy brows
shall you eat thy bread, and he yt laboreth not shall not eat etc. if I love my
neyboure as my self: how can I be idle al day, and at eue^ eat my brothers
supere ye he has soore laborde for all day. It is a token of small jove truly.
But who will yet labor and may be Idle? or if they do labor, what labor do a
great number of men study how they may get a way all that be longs to the
poor: To them self Truly it were better theye were Idle. A las where is fay
the which by love is mighty in operacyon? if we begin to wax proud to exalt
ourselfe above our bre thren faith says he that exalts him self shall be
brought low, Ma. xxiii. Luc. xii.
But who seaketh not to be up? learn of me sayethe Christ for I am meake he
that will be great Among you shall be a servant, for ye son of man came not
to be served, Mat. x.
but to do seruyc. Oh where is this humylyte and humblenes of mind who
couetteth not to rule all men, and would be ruled of none? if god have given
rytches possessions, auctory te or any like benefyte: It is applied to
maintain our pride, to exalte our selves aboueoure brethren. Where is faith
which by love is my^hty in operacyon? If we be tempted with Envy and
malicsayeth faith: avenge not your selves, but give rome to the wrath of god,
for ve^gea^nce is mine and I will reward (says ye lord) yea who can suffer any
iniurye or wrong, and will not be rewenged? ye, who can suffer him self to be
spoken unto, al though he have deserved a great rebuk? where is faith why ch by
love is mighty i^ operation? If we desire ye compani vnlaufulli of our neybours
wife or servant faith says: Math. vi.
who so looks on awyfe lustynge after her, has committed advoutrye alredye in
his heart etc Horekepers and advouterers god will judge. Yet who is not weary of
his own wife and seaketh his neybours? Like stone horses (says Ieremye)
every one neyheth after his neybours wife, Iere. v.
only estymation refrayneth agreate meny, whose wurking are very secret. where
is this rule become? do as ye would be done unto. where is faith which by love
is mighty in operation? if we commit Idolatry, faith says: Thou shall
wurshyppe thy lord god, him only shall thou serve. Some peradventure would
ask me what were Ido latrye? or who commytteth Idolatrye: I say, He that
wurshyppe any thing with out the express word of god: commytteth Idolatrye.
No man has seen god at any time. John. i.


They that will wurshyp god must wurshype him in sprete and truth But who
wurshyppeth not visyble spectacles, John. iiii
and creatures instead of they? creator? And so rob god of his honor? Some
do yt for that they will not offend their brothers conseyence, ye ratheyr
because they will not be called heretykes, that is to say, a true beleuer i^
christ, And a lover of his ddctrine. As Iohu writes how mani of ye chief
rulers belued on him: Iohu. xii
but because of the Pharyses they would not be aknowen of it, Deuteronomy. vi.
lest they should be exco^munycate, for they loved more the praise with me^
then with god. So our men would seem to fear god and love him, but the fear
and love of me^ appears to have the high place.

Where is faith which by love is mighty in operatyon? It cannot be found, it
is lost. When ye son of man comes think ye he shall find faith on the
earth? The old mumsimus will not here the word of the lord but draw back: the
new sustmus be so forewarde eue^ beyond the word of the lord, ye they care
nomor for the word of the lord the^ will serve their coueteous luere to fyl there
lusts, to serve for their envyous and cruel mind, And to live in all
abhomynatyons. They bring saint John for them where he says: if we say we
have no sin we deceive our self and the truth is not in us but why do
remember this so well: verily because that if any ma^ne rebuke their vicious
life: they may answer with saint John no man is with owte sin. But where as
saint John says: he yt says I know him and keeps not his commandments:
is a liar, the truth is not in him. They be so hasty: forth now, they will not
take this with them, that god may work in them. He that says he abides in
christ owght to walk even as he walk sayethe.S. John. Again where as saint
paul says we hold that a man is iustyfyed by fayht with out the deades of
ye law here be they perfyte but when saint Paul says though I had all the
tongues though I could prophecy and understand all secrets and al knowledge. Yea
if I had al faith so ye I cowld move snowntaynes out of their Places if I gave
all my goods to feed the poor, and though I gave my body to be burned, yet if
I have no love, I am nothing says he.

They make no reconynge of this. But what is this love? love suffers long and
is courteous: Love enuyeth not: does not frowardly, swells not, deals not
dishonestly, seaketh not her own, and so forth. Join now Paul's words and
John's words together, for if we boast of faith, and yet contynew in sin,
what faith have we? Rom vi


Look unto whom ye give over your selves as servants to obey his serua^nts ye
are whom ye obey says. S. Paul: whether it be of sin unto death or of
obedyence unto ryghteousnes. They hear S. Peter say through faith god putifieth
owr hearts. Act xv
But they hear him not how ge^tly he desires the^ to leave there wicked
liui^ge, saying dearly beloved Ibesech you as strangers and pilgremes abstain
from fleshly lusts which fight against ye soul, i Pet iii
and se that you have an honest conversation among ye unbelieving yt where as
they back byte you as euel doers they may se your good worckes and praise god
in the day of vysy tatyon. ii. Pe. iii t
etc. for if after we have escaped the fylthynes of the world through the
knowledge of the lord and savior Jesus christ) we be yet tangled a gain therein
and overcome them is the later end wursse then the begynnyng^oh that these men
would hear Moses speak and be obedient unto the voice of the lord spoken by
his prophets and not take that makes for there purpos, and run hedlo^g up in to
the top of the hill. For as many as be so hasty forth beyond ye word of the
lord shall be slain of the enymyes, ouercom of sin, and drowned in there own
lusts, and for lack of true and faithful shepher des (which should exhort
the^ daily they shall be so hardened in there sins that afterward if any
faithful man com unto them they will not hear him, but rather call him
Ipocrite because he thretneth with the law, yet does. S. Paul call ye law owre
scoimaster which leads us to christ for truly whose conscyenre is not feared
first with ye law and so broute to repentance: shall neuere be meet to
receive a sure hope of saluaryone by the gosple. Take heed therefore there be
not in any of you an euel heart of vnbeleu to depart from the living god. And
with saint Poule also I beseech you brethren by the mercyfulnes of god yt ye
make your bodies A sacryfyce, holy, and acceptable which is your reasonable
seruyng of god. And fashy on not your selves like unto this world but be
renewed etc. And with saint Paul also, I beseech you Brethren ye hiye
mercyfullnes of God, ye you make your bodies a sacrifice, holy, and acceptable
which is your reasonable serving of god: and fashion not your selves, like unto
this world: but be ye renewed. etc. And let us be admonished by the Story of
these rwelf messengers, to forsake our own wisdom our own strength, and
our own polecie, and inuencions: that we may wholly and altogether subdue our
selves, and beobedient unto the voice and commandment of the Lord only:
beleuig assuredli that he makes rich, and also poor be maketk sick, and
health again: he only kills and reuiueth he only casts down and exalts.
He saves and co^de^neth, wherefore, Ido exhort you, brethren beloved in the
lord Jesus Christ again and again you chefeli ye are se^te by the pitite in
your conscience to spy out the land of canaan for your brethren: whether it
be by preachi^g readinge, writing exhortinge or other wise Declaring unto ye
people the heavenly ki^gdom, through the Gospel of the lord Jesus. Yea the
magistrates also, and all other officers, appointed by the king as well, as
being commanded by God: you also (by your favor and patience (do I exhort
to take exemple by the tenn unfaithful messingers, which feread the multitud of
strong men,) that yebrynge not an euel report upon the land that through
fear of men, we should mistruste the power of God: But rather provoked by the
exemple of Iesua and Caleb, through a strong faith, do you acordynge to the
comman^dcemente of the lord And then are ye sure, that the lord will appear in
yt tabernacle and deliver us: Where, as else we shall be plaged with everlasting
dampnation for our vnbelif But if we be feu^d faithful Iosues and Calebes, the
there is no doubt but our Moses will so entreat his father for us, that these
plages shall light only vpn such unfaithful messengers, thoro we whose euel
report we have been so long kept from this heavenly doctrine, the kingdom of
god, and everlasting life. Chiefly art they now to be admonyshed that be so
hasty forewarde, lest they go beyond the word of the lord, and instead of
ye true lively faith Imagyn them a faith after their own mind, which shall
suffer the^ still to syn. But theirfore I say-where faith is, it wurketh a
knowledge of our great infirmytye and weakness, it wurketh also an inward sorrow
of the heart, for this our sin and wyckednes, and it provoke us i^ this for
ow! to pray unto ye lord, to call ernestly for stre^th co^tynually through christ
to overcome these re^ptacions, and yt with tears, with asure hope of victo tie,
if I have offended my neybour faith causes me to satisfe and content him
because Il oue him as my self if my neibour be ungodly and by no means wylbe
reco^cyled, yet faith makes me pray for him heartily, as I would he should for
me if I were i^ like blindness. He you fealeth not faith i^ hy shart this wise
wurkyng is blind deceauech him self and is still i^ unbelief tak head therefore
brethren that there be not in any of you an evil heart of vnbelef to depart from
the living god. And I beseach the almighty god father of mercy and god of all
comfort through our savior and redemer Jesus Christ that he will so lyghten
and strenghen them the hearts of our rulers governors prophets and preachers
with his holy spret owr comforter: yt they hatyng all vice and abomynacio^
(specially couetouines) may neither fear men nor love the^ selves but do that
only which the lord commands with a pure and undefiled conscience. And that
we for owr parts as true and loving subjects) may receive yt at their hands
without grudginge and mur murynge, with like faith and pureness, that with a
safe conscience and glad heart, we may be always ready at the commandemente of
the lord to enter the same land of promise: which is prepared from ye
beginning, for all the true and faithful brethren.

Dominus, mihi Adiutor. et c. P N

IMPRENTED AT LONDON the Tenthe day Of May: Anno dominice incaruationis
MDXLViii.

By william hill remaynyng at the Sign of the hill in Paul's Church Yard:
and be there by him to be sold.


