THE SCOVRGE OF Corruption. OR A CRAFTY KNAVE needs no Broker.

Qui been latuit, been vixit.
Dominatur fraus in omnibus.
Written by ANTHONY NIXON.

Printed at London, for Henry Gosson, and William Houlmes, and are to be sold
at his shop in Pope's Head Palace. 1615.

TO THE WORTHY and Judicious Gentleman, ROBERT GARSET Esquire.
SIR, if you only look upon the Title of this little Book, you will
(perhaps) marvel that I am so bold to make passage of it under your Name, it
brings so harsh a name with it: But if you be pleased to look further into the
substance, I hope you will give it a kind intertainement. For I have taken
that course in it, not to be offensive to any. But if (through mistaking) some
shall think themselves touched: it proceeds rather from their own
corruption, then plain meaning: and in this humble tender of my love unto you,
I do but play the ill debtor, who knowing that he is scarce able to ensconce
himself against beggary, yet goes wilfully into further dangers, in hope to
find pity at the hands of his Creditors, trusting upon mittigation or
forbearance, till he be better able to make satisfaction: Even so as I
confess my self bound to you, for some benefits received; and being unable to
make recompense I have adventured to cast my self into further peril; in hope
to be relieved by your wonted favor, and to have my boldness remitted by your
generous respects, to which I wholly submit my self.

For I set before your eyes a mixed banquet of sweet, and sower, mirth and
mourning, Seria cum iocis. If it be not so good as you deserve, nor so rich as
I could wish it, I must entreat you to blam the vanity of our times, which
affoord^ no better condimenta or seasonings: I know you love to read* for that
you know to censure: Read then, as it is writ (willingly) and censure as it is
sent (in love:) Bear with the hard fauourdnesse of the Title: For Diamonds are
not undervalued by their roughness when they are uncut. Nor can it be shame to
gather a violet, though it grow close to the ground. As I have better, you
shall enjoy it; Such as it is, if you be pleased to embrace it, I shall rest*

In the best of obseruantes devoted yours Anthony Nixon,

THE SCOVRGE of Corruption: OR, A crafty Knave needs no broker.
Our English Chronicles have left in remembrance, that in the time of Henry the
fourth there lived in sundry places of this Kingdom: but especially about the
City of London, diverse lewd persons, that gave themselves to no good course of
life: but because the times were then somewhat troublesome, watched
diligently, when by the least occasion of mutiny, they might pray upon the
goods of honest persons, and so in rich themselves by their spoil. At the same
time likewise there lived a worthy gentleman, whose many famous deeds (which
neither time, nor occasion will permit me to rehearse) do renown his name to
all ensuing Posterities. His name was Sir Richard Whittington, founder of
Whittington College, and three times Lord Mayor of the City of London? This
worthy man well observing the dangerous disposition of that evil disposed kind
of people, took such discreet order (after he had sent many of them to the
wars, and they loath to do so well, returned to their former vomit) that in
no place about London they might have entertainment, unless they applied
themselves to such honest exercises, as might witness their maintenance by
true and lawful means: If any were found to the contrary, they were sharply
proceeded withal in justice, as most hurtful and dangerous members of a
Commonwealth.

Now in this most quiet, and happy time of Peace (under out most Excellent and
Sovereign Head) when all men (in course of life) should show themselves
thankful for so great a benefit, this famous City (ray the most part of the
kingdom) is pestered with the like (or worse ki^d of people) that bear an
outward show of honest disposition, when -- front politus,
Astutaem vapido seruat sub pectore vulpem,


Their intentions being in deed very dete^^able, and their behauiours infamous,
who, as by many close and cunning practices, they do wrong, and injury to a
multitude of people, to their several hurts and vndooings: So, if God should
in justice be angry with ^s, as our wickedness has well deserved, and (which
God forfend) our peace should be molested (as in former times) even as they
did: So will these be the first that will seek our Domes^icall spoil and
ruin: not skilling how they come by it, so they may have it.

By reading therefore, and taking a slight survey of th^se four several
personages, that from diverse places lately presented themselves to my sight, in
such anticke attire, and variable carriages, that they set my senses at
amazement, you shall see the subtle policy at four deceivers, and discover
some of their abuses and corruptions. And this (as near as I can) is a true
touch of their several Characters.

The first is, Conscience.
THe first carried the shape of a goodly old ^atherly Man, but it seemed he
had been much wronged, for his cheeks were lean and bloodlesse, his eyes
hollow, his looks (like his fortunes) down and deiect, his apparel comely,
but much torn, his bosom was bare, bloody, and full of wounds, his wrists and
anckles worn (almost) to the bones, with bolts and manacles, so that I could
not imagine, what he was: but that he had been an ancient wronged prisoner.

The second, Simon Saywell.
THe second both in plac^, and order, a proper man, but of a contrar^ garb and
temper. His cheek^ were plumpe, and re^, as a crammed pullet, and covered with
red rose leaves, his looks cheer^^ull, the sap of sherry sack, hunge at his
muchato: The top of his nose was signed ore with the English malt, which the
Master of Copersmiths Hall, had taken up to build almeshouses in, for certain
impotent and tradefalne worms, that pesterd their company. The roof of his
head to my remembrance not much unlike the property of Tiburne. Red strossers,
and a blew codpiece guarded with yellow, like the iags of a Ia^kealents ierkin,
his gown under one arm, within the folds of that a latin Psalter, cry him
heartily mercy, it was a Pewter pot, for I should blame him to say he ever
carried a piece of lattine about him so much as in conceit. A pewter vessel
it was, contained some quart, or birlady more: under one arm his Hostess
talley. His gate was sprightly, his habit anticke, and his gesture apish and
pear^.

The third, Feedwell.
THe third a Country homespun Russetting, none of the fattest, and yet his
Equinoctial or vvast, was at least two else in compass: His face and beard
comely, and not lean, either cheek about the muchnesse of a two penny
Pumpion, or a great Cabbage in September, covered over with red oker, and (but
I knew him to be fled out of England) I should have taken him for the God of
good Housekeeping. His apparel comely, and plain as a pike staff: His legs
like Hercules pillars: His sides sagging over his girdle like an Amazonians
dugs: His gate careless, and his looks not curious.

The fourth, Nemo.
THe fourth and last, was a thin snowted fellow, about the April of his
years, for the spring was newly budding upon his upper lip: His face well
proportioned, his complexion sallow, his attire so full of variety, put my
memory into such a quandary, that I have almost lost it: But to my remembrance
thus. His upper garment was a loose robe of chaungeable taffeta, sky colored
or somewhat more bright: which had such a reflecting glass, and was of so
great a length, it covered and over shadowed all the rest. His pace was flow,
which made me think him a Saturnist. His personage tall and comely, an
observing eye, a sullen and irefull countenance: and still as I thought to take
strickt view of his attire, the color of the roabe so dazelled mine eyes, that
I clean lost it: Some strange fellow I took him to be, and but that I held it
impossible, I should have thought him invisible: For he was but (as it were) a
solid clown cut out in the fashion of a man. Thus having given you a touch of
their several habits, as I can remember. I will grow to their form of
discourse, in which you shall from their own mouths, be made acquainted with
their names, and cause of meeting, and continued parlee.



Quoth goodman Feedwell, (for so they did call our fat Countryman): Goodman
Conscience welcome from London: we have wanted your company in the Country
many a day: you were witness to the lease my young Land lord made me, and want
of your Evidence, that was in good estimation, now the young man is come to the
living, I am like to sit beside my right, but now you are come home I hope all
shall be well. Old father Conscience thanks him for his good conceit, and
withal, fetched a heavy sigh: what is the matter man, quoth Sir Simon Saywell,
(for so is our quartpot master called:) the worse for mine enemies, quoth the
old man, from which number Sir Simon I cannot seclude you: for had your deeds
been answerable to your name, at my being in London, I had not tasted this
long imprisonment, during which I have not only spent my means, undergone
discredit, being counted a Banckerout, and indaungered my health: but had it
not been for this ver^uous gentleman, Signieur Nemo, that paid my Frees, field
of mine irons, and at his own cost and charges bailed me, I had there set a
period to my wretched life. Alas Sir (replied our Maltworme) it stood not in
the reach of my hability to bail you. The some was 1000 pound, your adversary
mighty, your friends sew, and those very poor: Besides he was my chiefest
solliciter in all my suites at Court, and should I have displeased him, I might
have hopt without my benefice. At that Signieur Nemo (for so was the fourth and
last in the sky colored roabe called) folding his brow, as if in anger. Thou
scum of humanity, and basest part of our mother Earth, have thou the shape of
a man, and art not ashamed to shape such a beastly answer? Suppose his
adversary ^ere mighty* his cause was just. This poor man, out of his love to
his Country, groaning under the yoke of your base and vpstart Corruption, made
their public grief, his private grieuance: sold all his means, trudged up to
London, and there soliciting the cause of the who^e Country, was by that
Italian Jack, (whom we may truly term a Crafty knave that needs no broker)
wrongfully arrested, and clapped into prison, thou being by, suffer him to be
laid up, and not so much as offered to bail him.

Alas Sir, quoth Saywell, I durst not, for one word of his mouth to my Patron,
had casshierd me: Base time observing Sycophant, (answered Nemo) does thy place
authorize thee to reprove? to open the master vain of some? and sluice out the
putrified and corrupted sore, and have thou the face to say, Thou dare not?
Hence beastly man: but it is not thy fault, but theirs that countenance thy
ignorance, fitter to cobble a shoe, then to undergo that calling: To which
none but free Spirits, and undaunted souls should be chosen: But I have long
hoped, and at last met that happy day, in which such idle and unnecessary
snaile^ that feed and devour the April leaves, and May blossoms of our
Country, shall by the hand of Justice be rooted out of the Land, or by the
milder Eastern wind of mercy, blown forth the bosom of this peaceful I Will.

That were a happy day indeed (answered father Feedwell) but I fear your news
is like an old Book: Too good to be true, for there is a Crafty Italian gentl^man
(whose name is Corruption) keeps such leuel^ co^le^ here in our Country, we
can have no hoe with him, and t^^l there be some good order taken with him,
you and ^uch honest gentlemen, may feed a sort of poor fools fat with good
words, but we shall find small redress: But you are a Traveler, I pray you
tell us, how the goodyer he came to be so great in England?

I Would fame know that (quoth Conscience) for in my time when I was but a
stripling (and yet, young as I was, more regarded) he came into England, and
offered his service to certain Men of good sort, but his course and behavior
was so insinuating and vile, he was banished the land again^. Now I wonder what
wind brought him in, after his first Exile.

I Will tell you what I know (quoth Nemo) let all the mad dogs snarle, and bite
their own gals, I neither fear them nor stand in awe of their greatness.
This Crafty knave, (as if occasion serve there be many, that could diversely
prove it) is a fellow of long continuance in this I Will, marry (as father
Conscience intimates) he has been so suppressed, and many times banished: but
still by foreign devises he is reentred the Land, and at last (yet many
hundredth years since) he grew so wealthy, and purchased such friends, that
notwithstanding many virtuous Kings, and our late sacred Mistress, did their
uttermost to the suppressing, and rooting out of that grounded damnation, the
Nobilities abuser, the Plenties oppressor, and poor men's confounder, yet has
he so many private maintainers, and harbourers, that in stead of disgracing and
removing him, his state is stronger confirmd, and his friendships inaugurate in
our hearts.

I but (quoth Saywell) me thinks it were easily mended, for we have in every
Town likely a good Justice, a Counselor, or Lawyer, were all of my mind, we
would prefer our petiti^^s to them.

An^ (...) ^he near (answered Nemo) but because I f^^d you (...) in this
Knaves true proceedings, ^^e t^ll y^u what I k^ew, yet tempered with such
modesty, as shall (I hope) off^nd none, that are honest, if it touch any of any
other kind, let them think it a fault and amend. Those whom it conc^rnes not,
I know will commend me.

You talk of preferring a supplication to your Justices, and Lawyers, for
their own parts no doubt, as they are bound both by allegiance and place, they
will do you right, but th^^e is none or very few of th^se, into whose
services, Corruption has not secretly ingrafted some Intellige^c^^, as all
(...), that by one sallary, or another, will so mangle the true f^ce of your
proceedings, that you shall fall short of your expectations. As that you seek
to wound some honest man's credit out of hate: Or, for some inueterate grudge,
se^ke the undoing of harmless gentlemen: Or if it be so aprarantlie manifest,
that no color can show it contrary: Why, he is my friend, Let me meditate: He
hurts not you: Every one would live: Blame him not to raise his fortunes, Et
caetera, quis nescit? So by this means Justice that should raze and pluck up
sin by the root, is either for kindred, love, affection, or oil of Angels
blinded, and by his means made the bawd, and dorekeeper of villainy. If it be
so, as it has been so where Corruption dwelt, true Justice will see it
amended.

I says (quoth Sir Simon) this goes with me, I Will neither eat, nor drink, till
our Justice knows this? with all my heart (quoth Nemo) if he be one of that
sort, i will to his teeth tell him much more? if he be a true Justice, i will request
him to see the aduse reformed in others, and I doubt not but he will thank me.

Gods blessing of thy heart (quoth Conscienc^) we have few such as thou art in
our Country: For when our meadows are enclosed, and our Commons made several
by the Lord of the soil, we have not a Man in the Town dares say ^o to a
goose. The reason is, we are poor, and they are rich, and one or two Terms
suite at law, would eat up a whole Towneship of us, poor snakes of the
Country, Lawyers take such unmerciful fees, and use such protracting of
causes, we can hold no tacke with them. Again most of our oppressors, are
either Lawyers themselves, or have Lawyers to their Sons, Nephews, or
acquaintance, so that we had as good loose somewhat, as undo our selves by
law, and then loose that too.

Lord (quoth Nemo) what is the reason that the world is at so bad a pass, we
never had more teaching then is now adays: never more warnings, nor more laws
established.

Conscience. Whence comes it (say you) that the world begins when each has
caused an other to reprehend, to wincke at follies, and to sooth up sins; and
draw their days to disaster end? can better reason be alleged then this,
The world sooths sin because it lives in sin.
HE that does live by bribes and usury,
And filles his purse by such unlawful gain,
Does Fox-like wincke at loathsome leachery,
Till such harme-breeding pleasure prove his pain.
Craft gives Ambition leave to play his plot,
And cross his friend because he sounds him not.
All men are willing worse and worse to grow,
And world-like lull themselves in vain delight:
But no man pleasure takes his faults to know.
Or to prevent mishap with true foresight:
But he is a Trojan, he is an honest man
That with the world dissemble will, and can.
He that can cogge and lie shall have rewards,
He that to feign and flatter will not fear,
He shall maintain his wanton wife in gards,
And spend his master forty pounds a year:
But trueth's pursued by hate, and he is held wise,
That to the world; his worldly wit applies.
For folly is both guerdon'd and respected,
And self will frowns when friendship does reprove,
Where honesty is hated and rejected:
For he that erres, and counsel does not love,
He thinks his best, an others wits but dull,
Until at last he prove himself a gull.
And with free heaps of mischeeuous intent,
Against wisdom does rebel unbridled will,
Which hurts himself, neglecting to prevent
Unhappy hap, by trusting to selfeskill:
But are such wise? I, as Amplestus strong.
That burnt his face because his beard was long.
The wicked man repines to hear his fault,
And folly flings, if good advice come near:
But he is best likt that with the world can hault,
And with her imperfections best can bear:
For cunning sin is deemed but a shift,
And covetousness is held an honest thrift.
If thou tell Shunes that his breath does stink
And do not cogge and say it is sweet, and clear,
Heel let thee pass, and never bid thee drink,
When as Amphidius shall have good cheer.
For now who loves to play a worldlings part,
Must teach his tongue refrain to tell his heart.
Thus ^an with man strives to dissemble still,
And wends from good to bad, from bad to worse,
And to his own confusion follows ill,
Shunning the seeing eye, not sinful course,
Holding the mean to make him fortunate,
Is in this world to wink at each estate.
He is a fellow polliticke and rate,
That with a seeming love can color hate,
Whose courtly kindness gives a Congie fair,
When as he aims to overthrow a state.
For most men now in private will defraud
Them, that in public they do most applaud.


Me thinks (answered Nemo) if abuses be so gross, so palpable, and so
genera^l; they should be complaind off to the Prince. Much the better (quoth
Conscience) our petitions go through so many hands, it is either lost, or
torn, or comes to some of their friends hands, against whom it is preferred;
then are we checked, called seditious knaves, and go home perhaps an hundred
miles with a flea in our ear.

I must confess (quoth Nemo) this has been a fault, but fear not, we have now
both a skillful and a pain^full gardener, that will not lay the whole care of
weeding his kingdom upon others, but himself in person will hear; and if he
find it true, root out those rank weeds, that have heretofore ouershadowed,
and with their broad and bushy tops, hindered the growth of other better and
more wholesome herbs. God long maintain his health (quoth Conscience) that
has such care of his wronged Commons, and I beseech you stand our good friend,
that this superfinitiue gallant knave Corruption, grow not inward with those
that are the means to that sacred majesty, that bears such a respective care
over our Weal.

I Will give you my word for that (quoth Nemo) for I know them so well tempered,
that neither fear, nor love, gold, nor hate can stir and draw their
affections from the true course of Justice.

Marry (quoth Feedewell) would we had one of those Gentlemen in our Country,
for we have fellow^ that by means of friends, as they say, keep the living of
a whole Towneshippe in their hands, and they but get the Countenance of some
Noble man on their backs, they are so proud, a poor man may not speak with
them under a couple of Capons. For example sake, heeres Sir Simon Saywel, no
Clergy man, for he can neither write, nor read, and yet he has at this hour
three or four Parsonages in his own hands, the least of them worth forty or
fifty pounds a year, and keeps honest poor Scholars to read under him,
where he purses up some two hundred pounds for a long in a manner, and hires
but a Preacher to make four sermons in a year. Now the poor men that take
all the pains, are scarce allowed five pounds a year. I think some honest
Gentleman like you Mr. Nemo, might do God good service to see these abuses
reformed, that Lay men should not bear such sway in the Church.

Fear not (Father Conscience quoth he) gather a short note of all corruptions
and abuses in their kind, against the next Term, and i will have him known for
a crafty knave, you shall hear how i will handle both him, and his Appendixes.

I marry (quoth Feedewell) but while the grass grows, the steed star^es. But
as I remember Sir Simons Mountchanking. I Will no^ forget how a couple of Turuers
served two k^nsmen of mine the last Term, Atturneys thou would say.

I cannot tell how you call them, but I think they cannot have a ^^tter name
then Turners: for if we go to law once, be our cause good, or bad, they will
so turn and wind it, that we turn the bottom of our purses up, and find
nere a cross. And since you are so kind a gentleman, i will not be meal
mouthed to tell you a merry, yet a true tale.

A merry tale how two Attorneys iugled together to fetch off their Clyents.
A couple of near kinsmen of mine, called Pigeons, went to Law, and fed
their Attorneys: Either persuading their Clyents their cause was good, and kept
them so long in hope of had I wist, that they were feign to sell their horse to
continue law for the bridle. To be short, one of the Brothers going to carry a
couple of Capons to his Attorney to seek speedy dispach of his suit, he told
him that for a couple of Angels extraordinary, he would assure him of
judgment on his side the next Court day: The poor man glad of that news went
home, sold a couple of pretty heyfars to provide the money, and carried it
home. His Attorney to manifest how forward he was in his behalf, writ a
letter to his adversaries Attorney to entreat him the cause might come to
present dispatch; and who should carry it but this Pigeon: well glad was he of
his good success, and to the lawier he goes; and by the way he proved
exceeding drowsy, and fell a sleep: In his sleep he dreamt that he saw the
two Attorneys drinking, and exceeding merry in a stately Gallery, and two tame
doves came flying in at the Casement, houering about them: And whilst they
sat laughing the poor tame birds, flew about into the fields, and gardaines
adjoining, and in their beaks, brought wheat, peass, and such grain, as by
their industry they could find, and presented it to the lawiers, who still as
they were gonne for more, laughed at their folly: At last the poor birds being
tired, would have eaten some of the grains they had brought: But the covetous
Attorneys shouted then away, and (not able to bring any more) shut the
casement. At their unkindness he awaked, and comparing the kindness of the
two doves to his brother and him, thought it might be a Morrall of their own
folly: But then calling to mind his Attorneys promis, and hope of his suits
dispach, he beegan to check his rash judgment. Notwithstanding he concluded
with himself to see the contents of the letter: with that vnripping the seal,
he beegan to read, and found the letter written to this effect* The nest of
Pigeons are ripe; do but you pluck the one, and i will pluck the other, and weel
not leave them a feather to their backs. This unexpected news struck the
fellow into such a quandary, that for a good while he stood like a man parted
from his senses, at last coming to himself, ^e began thus;

Why how now Pigeon? are thy wits a woolgathering? have thou been once scorched
in the fire, and will thou still dally with the flame? No, though thy Attorney
has built his nest with some of thy feathers, i will reserve the rest to keep me
warm. In this resolve, he laid his staff on his neck, and his hand under his
side, and setting the best foot before, homeward he went: whom should he meet
by the way, but his brother, (betwixt whom this deadly fewd was) who perceiving
it was he, forsook the path, and crossed over the Fallowes, and summer leas, as
if some occasion of business had called him that way: but the other knowing
the length of his foot by his own last, guest where his shue pinched him,
though he complained not, and though he knew him full of stomach, and that he
had rather spend half his land, then any way come to agreement, yet he out of
his brotherly affection determined a ne^rer cut to the matter: whereupon
mending his p^ce, not in hope to have his wages mended (as the fellow says)
but with an intent to amend somewhat amiss, and set love where none was. Having
ouertooke him in a green Lea, as he stood giving directions to his Reapers,
he plucked him by the steed, and very kindly gave him the time of the day, and
related unto him what had happened. He careless either of him, or his
discourse, ere he had ended his aue, gave him the vale, and prepared to
depart: but he not willing to give over so good an occasion in the plain
field, seconded his first assault with the sight of the letter, which drove his
brother into such a maze, that taking him by the hand, after pardon craved for
his strangeness, he led him into a shadie brake, where he told him the
Lawyers proceeding from the beginning to the end: whereupon they determined to
let the matter slip until the next Court day, to try if there were any regard
of conscience, or respect of humanity in them. The Court day come, they
attended from s^x in the morning, till eight at night, but as the proverb is,
They ^ere early up, and nere the near: whereupon they complained, and had
brought it to this pass, they should both have been discarded, and pitched over
the Bar for wranglers: but in the mean time, being (as it seemed they were)
very inward with Seigneiour Corruption, that was Broker sufficient craf^y to
make good both his own, and others proceedings, he undertook their causes,
and made them clear: the poor man had had words, and their labor for their
pains, and the Lawyers in as great credit and estimation as before.

At this Nemo interrupted him, and asked if the men were yet living? No,
replied Conscience, they died long ago, but I fear me some of their lineage
live to continue their hellish and uncharitable beginning. Nemo began to speak
bitterly against the unmerciful proceedings of the Lawiers: but Conscience did
thus interrupt him, Temper your anger good Seignieur Nemo, and let me speak
impartially for all; Though I have had much wrong by Law, yet I condemn not
altogether the professors, they are but the hoof and Iron feet that Bribery
uses to tread upon the naked bosoms of poor resistles people: therefore to
rail against them, were as if a dog should bite the sword he is stricken with,
which of it self is altogether harmles: So are Lawyers like swords or staves
wherewith bribery strikes the resistles Comminalty: For till he had a hand in
buying and selling offices, the Lawyers both would and could have done mo^e for
an Angel, then they can since with two. I have heard (and as I dare not
affirm it for truth, so I cannot condemn it for a lie) that there are none
(or at the least very few) O^fices beelonging to the Law, from, and out of
which bribery does not fetch some tribute and annual stripend. Hence then I
gather bribery or corrup^ion being the cause of oppression in that kind, his
power being removed, it necessarily follows that the effect must die.

Why then (quoth Nemo) it seems you envy not the honest gain of painful
Lawyers? No, answered Conscience, I speak impartially: neither for love of the
one, nor fear of the other. I pity the state of wellminded Lawyers, as much
as any one, and grieve that ever I lived to see that malapart Jack Corruption
to have such a hand over them.

How Corruption being once exiled this Kingdom, sent Emulation and Fashion to
make way for him again.
Then thus for Emulation.
I Will tell you my poor opinion (answered Nemo) This crafty knave being expulst
this Kingdom, sent his insinuating children Emulation, and Fashion to make way
for him, who intruding themselves by degrees into all societies, like toward
impes to practice and effect his will that sent them. Emulation, he as he spies
occassion, thrusts himself into the company of men of the better sort, and
filles their heads with proclaimations, what a rare Lordship such an one has
purchased* what a sumtuous house another has builded, and vrges him to cast
about ^or the like, intimating his means to be as great, his friends as many,
and his hopes as possible.

The well minded gentleman (before perhaps not dreaming of any such matter)
lending an ear to his idle discourse, by his persuasions, determines to use
all means to put his words in practice, and aske's his further advice in
attaining it. He glad of that, ioynes with Occasion, tells him of Siegnior
Bribery: by whose acquaintance and furtherance, he shall easily attain his
purpose, marry it will cost him some few Angels, to buy his assistance. Being
tickled with this news, he spares no cost to purchase his acquaintance, keeps
him close in his house, and gives him the best entertainment he can devise.
Being once entered his society, he clean forgets the modern state of his
Ancestors, and mak^ his flight seven miles beyond the man in the Moon, and to
maintain Corruption in his higher matters, uses him his president in lower;
rackes his poor tenaunts, rayses his rents, and says he has made a Lease out
to a poor man for three lives. Let but an other come, and give his wife a
velvet Gown, his son a horse, or his daughter a Taffety Peticoate, and
himself an unreasonable sine, or incomb^, and there shall be some imperfect
clause found in the lease to color, and face their pract^se, and the poor man
(that perhaps sold all his means to purchase it, not two years before) shall
by violence be thrust out, and lose all, I though his wife and children beg,
he shall find no remorse but the Law, where he bids the poor man seek his
redress. He knows that Bribery, whom he fees, will maintain his cause: and
the poor oppressed man must either be glad to put finger in the eye, and live
by the loss, or seeking redress, be clapped in Limbo patris, and after a
twelve months imprisonment be inioynd to ask his merciless Landlord
forgiveness.

I faith (quoth Feedewell) have they such tricks in their budgets? Well, you
show directly the proceedings and effects of Emulation: and what way he makes
for his Father Corruption his entrance into the Land. Now is his other son
Fashion employed?

By what ways Fashion the second son of Corruption makes entrance for his
Father into this Kingdom.
I Will tell you (quoth Nemo) and yet perhaps I shall purchase the ill will of a
s^xe that I much reuer^nce and honor. Fashion is second son to Corruption,
borne (as I have read in Italy, nursed in France, and in his childhood brought
over into England, by certain, more humerous then truly honorable gentlemen,
and yet no enemies to his Father. Coming into England, being a very forward
weed, according to the proverb, An ill weed grows a good speed: he was
preferred to attend diverse gentlewomen, with whom he proceeded as his elder
brother had done with their husbands, though by an other course. After by his
dutiful service, he had ingrafted himself into their good opinions, he began
to discourse of the strange and rare fashions used in his Country. As if a
gentlewoman were borne with hair as black as iette, he could by Art
frustrate the workemanshippe of Nature, and color it as yellow as gold: if time
(enemy to beauty) had by continuance writ down his caracters of age in their
foreheads, he could by the means of Art help, and make good that defect: make
a brow of sixty, as smooth, and able to show, as one of sixteen. On him
attending Mounsieur Shred, an Italian Tailor, snipt out of a piece of
Devonshire Carsie, who with the sheeres of preferment, could at his pleasure
cut out a shape of a new fashion, ad placitum, in an hours warning. These
fellows with their ginny phreeses, and Italionate discourses, so set a fire
the brauing thoughts of our young gentlewomen, that what soever new fashion,
Shred invented, they would have, or their husbands shall here out, on both
sides of the head: yet some more respective then then the rest, would out of
better consideration, cast with themselves, My husbands means are but weak,
and his charge of housekeeping great and if I stretch his living to his
breadth, it will not hold out: Tush (quoth Fashion) the French is your only
garb, break up housekeeping, turn away those Beefe-eating swains, sell away
your great horses: a Coachman and a Page are attendants enough. As for your
offices of service, let me alone, I could supply five or six of them my self,
and will be less charge to you, and perhaps more gains to me. Then will I
bring your husband acquainted with a gentleman my father Corruption, that shall
direct him a course far less troublesome, and much more commodious. Thus by the
means of his forerunners Fashion, Pride, Emulation, etc. he became great, and
drew the most part of this I Will to his acquaintance. Now I cannot rightly blame
any one sort more then an other, since his familiarity is general, and equally
embraced of the most, only those true temperd spirits of Nobility excepted,
who from time to time since his first discovery, have made it their chief
labor to spend their utmost endeavors in rooting of him out: But he having so
many heads, that as fast as one is cut off, there springs up more in the
room? The only way that I can prescribe for his final remove, is that every
man should take adaduice of Conscience, and put themselves to the true taste of
his touch, and finding how far he has drawn them from the end of their
Creation, utterly Casshire, and for ever abjure his hellish society.

This is the easiest and nearest course* and thus much I divine, that
whosoever, either upon hope of private pain, or presumtion of friends, conceal
or harbor that Arch Caterpiller of England, will by the careful industry of
vigilent Arethe be found out, and either hang with his welthy hopes about his
neck, or like a vagrant wander into his own Land with him for company, where
all good minds hope they shall meet entertainment fitting such inconstant
fugitives.

You may see (quoth Feedewell) the longer a man lives, the more he may learn:
I might have lived till all my friends h^d been weary of me, ere I should have
found out this: but some reason there was that the cat winckt, when both her
eyes were out. I blame not our Landlords to keep such racket ith Country,
when this vile Italian varlet has his agents in the City: For I knew a man of
good worship my self, give away as much Velvet in gowns and fore parts about
an office, as would have made a Steeple a nightcappe. But (quoth Nemo, cutting
him off) whom do you blame for that, the beggar, or the Patron? Marry (quoth
Feedewell) the Patron: for I will count him a fool that will not bestow twenty
or thirty pounds in guists, to get an Office worth thirty pounds a year.

You speak out of all discretion (answered Nemo) and such gross and
insensible parts as yours, cast scandal, and reproach without respect, or
difference: as a curre having been cast into a puddle shakes himself, and
casts his filth upon all that stand within his reach: so you having your Ass
ears filled with maddy and scandaling reports, cast them forth, commonly as
the blind man shoots at the Crow.

Thus much let me (not for fear, but out of reverent modesty and equity)
speak in the behalf of wronged Patrons. Suppose your self or any other,
belong, or follow some worthy Gentleman; an Office under his gift stands
void, which he neither knows, nor respects: having received some kindness
from him before, presumes if you can make some friends to the Patron, you may
obtain i^* In this resolve you out of your free will, and rich hope of their
assistance, give a Lady velvet for a gown, silk stockings or so: they receive
it, and work means for the obtaining of your suite: You are possessed of it,
where before perhaps it was an hundred pounds a year, you raise it to two
hundred pounds, whose fault is this? Or say you had two or three Offices
before, yet your petition is, that you are a poor Attendant of his Fortunes,
and wanting means, such a piece of wast ground or so, to such, or such a
value, lies void, and would stand you in some steed: you get it, he gives it
with a free heart, and to a good intent: ^ut you contrary to his intent, and
all honest proceedings inuert his meaning, and abuse his bounty. But knew such
Patrons, or giuers of Off^ces, what inconveniences they bred, they would keep
their credits from your scandal, and your greedy avarice from such preferment.

Indeed (answered Conscience) there are a number of this condition, that
walking in the shade of some great man, like Aesops Storke, care not how many
poor men they eat up and devour: But to quittance your fale of Corruptions
first arrival: I Will tell you one man prancke a Follower of his did in our
Country.

A fine piece of knavery done by a Churchwarden in show of piety and religion.
THere was a man of good credit, and no-small honesty reputed: for we now a
days value men's honesties by the Kings book, so much in the pound: so that if
he be weighty in the purse, he must needs be honest. He shall be namelesse in
this place, and yet for a groate matter you shall find him registered in Bulls
Kallender, amongst the rank of his best Benefactors. This Francklin (I scorn
to do the attribute of gentility so much wrong, as to lay it upon him) being
one of the head men of the parish, and having past thorough many under Offices
of Sir Reuerendshippe, as Scauenger, Sideman, cum multis alijs, he was by the
general consent of the Towneshippe elected Churchwarden, and to win the name
of a Benefactor to the Church, and have his name writ up in Roman letters over
one of the glass windows. The boys playing at stooleball, by chance broke a
quarry of the glass, whereupon he complained to the Towneship, and tither had,
or did his utmost to have the poor boy whipped, and under show of zeal (which
had a little before schorcht him, he took me down the whole window, and at his
own proper costs and charges built up an other in the place: But by report of
the workmen, the new was too foot every way less then the old. And the same
Churchwarden two months after built him a new window in his Parlor, with the
same glass he took down at the Church, yet stands his name in villainous Roman
letters over the window for a good Benefactor. The same year the foresaid
Founder continuing his ancient care of maintaining the Church, one part of the
Leads being faulty, and a drop or two of rain falling through, looked up,
and spied the Church well leaded, presently had a knauiske Crochet in his head,
a note beyond Ela, and with a zealous verily, broke into these words, Have we a
care to cloth our pampered bodies, and see the Church v^apparrelled? this must
and shall be remedied: whereupon wtthout any more words, he sent for workmen,
and the next day set them a work, to vnlead the Church clean. That day he set
Thatchers a work, and in steed of the Lead coat, clapped on a ierkin of straw:
according to that of Dionisius, who coming into a Church, he saw many Idols
richly clothed, some in gold, and some in silver: he disroabed them all, and
made them good hansome suits of Linsey-wolsey. Being asked the reason, Oh (quoth
he) these golden coats in winter were so could, that the Saints were fain to
blow their fingers ends to catch them a heat, and in summer so heavy, they
could not walk abroad for heat, privily checking the vain superstition of
those that were prodigal in bestowing such bounty upon a stone: but (quoth he)
I out of a tender respect of their healths, have made them good Linsey-woolsey
cassocks, good and warm for winter, and exceeding light and cool for Summer.
So this Churchwarden feeling the foundation of the Church too weak for the
Leaden cover, clothed it in straw, and turned the lead to his private use,
which by the judgment of the workmen, trebly equalled his stubble upper
garment, besides the parishes allowance which was not little. About the same
time, a friend of his, as I remember, his brothers son, for some trespass
against the Law lay in prison upon a repriue, and some ten pound matter would
have purchased his pardon. He having none, or very few friends of ability to
disburse so much money on the sudden made means to him being his uncle, and
sent his letter by two sufficient poor men, to enter bond for the repayment of
it, his answer was, he would do any reasonable matter for his kinsman, to his
power, but he was employed about building, and repaying the Church, and not
having of his own to finish it, he was feign to strech his credit to borrow.
The poor men vrgd in what a desperate estate his kinsmans life stood, and past
all recovery, without his aid, but all in vain, they had a cold suit of it,
and as far as I could learn, the uncles unkindness cost the poor young man
his life.

At that they all interupted him, saying, it was pity he lived, nay more then
that (quoth Feedewell) I have been credibly informd, that unmerciful uncle had
in his hands a will of that young man's Fathers, by virtue whereof he was to
receive at the death of his mother, being an aged and impotent woman, a Farm,
rented at thirty pounds a year: and a quarter of Wheat will not stop their
mouths that say, he was the chief man that incited the young man's enemies to
seek the extremity of Law, in hope to possess^ the same land, which came
rightly to pass, for the young man dead, his careful mother lived not long
after, at whose death for want of heirs, the land fell to him as next of
kind. The Devil helps his servants still (quoth Nemo) but your tale tends
nothing to the Theme we handle, and your close com no nearer then your
Exordium, you will have villainous battles made against you: Our purpose is to
talk of Corruption, and heers nothing of that relish yet. If I might (then
answered Feedewell) i would come over some of their thumbs, with Gammer Gurtons
proverb, and request them either to hear out my tale, or kiss the backeside
of the book, and trade it ou^ for their labor.

But to the matter, no sooner were the two honest Soliciters of the poor man's
suit departed, but this zealous Church-builder, that had not a penny to cast at
a dog, could find two hundred pounds to buy the reuersion of an Office for
his Son. and for twenty nobles given him of an other, made suit to a friend
of his, and got a repreeue for as honest a man as ever cried stand. This was no
branch of Bribery, but one man's tale is good, till an others be heard. He is
repriued, (and for bribes and gifts that he received from his friends, being
Foreman of the Jury, contrary to all Conscience) saved his life. But his his
poor kinsman passing under the same Jury, came to his long home. Within short
time after this most charitable deed, it was his fortune to stay in Kent, and
there came to be head Constable, during which Office he continued and
strengthened his former acquaintance with the company of Saint Nicholas clerks,
and now by reason of his Office could do them much more good and favor, then
before: For had they taken any prize, his house was their harbor, and his
credit their cloak, till the heat of the hue and cry was over. And I pray you
what under Constable or Headborow durst be so saucy as to search there?
Besides, it was evidently proved, diverse gentlemen of his acquaintance
traveling with any charge of money about them, would make his house their
Inn^, and request his company and aid for their safe passage, being reputed a
very virtuous man. But mark how kindly he used them, or at least some of them;
It fortuned a young gentleman, a friend of mine, from whom I learned this
intelligence, travailing that way, with some hundred pounds or more, and having
sent his man back to dispatch some other business at home, he requested him
to favor him so much, as to let a servant of his bear him company, telling
him that store of money he had, and that he was next to tender it at London
upon a bond: he very car^full of the young gentleman's safety as it seemed, told
him the day was old, and the wa^es dangerous, and should by no means leave his
house that night, but in the morning (as early as he pleased) not only his
man, but he himself for the more security would bear him compa^y: which
kindness the young man accepted very gratefully. Hereupon our High Constable
intending to be well paid for his nights lodging, sent to three or four of
his consorts in these actions, and appointed in what place, and in what hour
they should meet their prey, which took effect: For the next morning very
early our civil high Constable called up the young Gentleman, and he, and one of
his men rod to bring him the safest and nearest way: Scarce had they rod the
quantity of a mile, but under a wood side they were set upon by three or four
Gallants, who not only made the young Nouice an hundred pound lighter, but with
vile words abused our honest Constable, took away his money, and were very
hardly entreated to let him escape with life.

There was no knavery (quoth Conscience) but how came his villainy discovered?

I Will tell you (quoth Feedewell) the Gentleman's man, whom I told you before he
sent back upon some business, was by this time returned, and come to the
Constables house, thinking to call his master, and being there these three
gallants, not dreaming of any such matter, came gallopping into the yard, turned
their horses in to the stable, and through a back garden, to which themselves
had keys, went to their chambers. The ^ellow noted all this, but neither knew
nor suspected what had happened till he met his Master, whom Mr. Constable had
sent an other way. The fellow hearing his Master describe the color of their
horses, and attire of the men, strait saw a pad in the straw, and told his
Master what he had seen, who seeing how unkindly they had used the Constable,
and taken away his money, would by no means be won to credit him. The Fellow
grounded in the certainety of his resolve, quite contrary to his Mast.
knowledge, went to a Justice, acquainted him with that he saw, and requested
his aid and authority for the trial of his suspect, which he granted, and
sent to beset the house: where to be short, they were all taken with the money
about them: and the next Assizes made their several recantations out of a
hempen pulpit.

Believe me (quoth Conscience) they met but their deserts, but to quittance
your tale I Will tell you an odd jest, played between a cowple of crafty knaves:
wherein one deceived the other.

How one crafty knave cunningly ouerreacht an other.
SVspend your judgments till you hear this discourse following, and then as
you please censure of a couple of knaves that deceived one an other: for it
has been used a common byword, A crafty knave needs no Broker, by which it
should appear, that a c^aftier knave then a Broker can hardly be found.

A Country Lady sent up a servant, whom she might well trust, to provide her
a gown according to some directions which she had given him, and the outside
and lace (every other thing no doubt being answerable) show that it was of good
price: for the Tailor had no less then seauenteneene yards o^ the best black
Satin could be got for money, and as much gold lace (beside spangles) as cost
thirteen pounds, what else I know not: but let i^ suffice; thus much was lost:
the manner how, follows ^hus,

The Satin and lace being brough^, to the Tailor that should make the Gown,
and spread abroad on the shopboord to be measured; certain crafty knaves
chanced to to go by, who seeing so rich a lace, and so exce^lent good satin,
began to lay their heads together, and devise how they might make purchase of
it: and quickly they thought it was to be done, or not at all. In a crew of
crafty knaves there is (for the most part) one more ingenious and sub^le then
the rest, or at least couets to make himself more famous then the rest: as in
this company there was one at that instant did swear his cunning should
deeply deceive him, but he would have both the lace and satin: and having
laid the plot with the rest, how their help might stand him in steed, they
proceeded in this manner:

They noted the Seruingm^n well that stood in the sho^ with the Tailor, and
gathered by his diligent attendance that he had some charge of the gown to
be made there: By him therefore they purposed to work their treachery, and to
use him as an instrument to beguile himse^fe.

One of them sitting on a seat near the Tailors st^le, could easily here the
talk that passed b^tweene the Seruingman and the Tailor, w^ere amongst other
communicatio^ it was concluded that the gown should be made of the self same
fashion in every respect, as an other Ladies was not far off, and that measure
being taken by her, the same would fitly serve the Lady for whom the gown was
to be made. The Seruingman intended to speak wi^h the Lady, and upon a token
agreed between them (which he carrlesly spoke so loud, that this crafty knave
heard it) he would as her leisure served, certify the Tailor, and he should
bring the stuff with him, to have the Ladies opinion both of the one and the
other.

The Seruingman being gone about his business, this subtle mate tha^ had
listened to all their talk, acquainteth his Companions both with the
determination, and token appointed for the Tailors coming to the Lady. The
guide and leader of all the rest for villainy, thought there was no one but was
better skilled in such matters then in honesty. He appoints that one of them
should go to the Tavern, which was not far off, and laying two fagots on the
fire in a room by himself, and a quart of wine f^lled for countenan^e of
their treachery. An other of that Crew should give attendance on him as, if he
were his master, being bare headded, and humbly answering (Sir) at every word.
To the Tavern goes this crafty counterfeit gentleman, and his servant waiting
on him, where every thing was performed, as is before rehearsed. When the
Master Knave calling the drawer, demanded if there dwelt not neer^ hand a
skillfull Tailor, that could make a suit of velvet for himself, marry it was
to be done with very great speed.

The Drawer named the Tailor that we now speak off, and upon the Drawers
commendation of his cunning, the man was sent for in all haste to the
gentleman, for whom he should make this suit of Velvet. Upon talk had of the
stu^fe, and how much was to be boug^t of every thing: he must immediately take
measure of this crafty knave: this counterfeit gentleman, because he knew not
when he should return that way again, and afterward they would go to the
Mercers,

As the Tailor was taking measure of him, bare headded, as if he had been some
substantial gentleman in deed: This crafty mate had c^nningly got his purse
out of his pocket, at the one string whereof was fastened a little key, and at
the other his scale ring: whether he got any thing thing else or no, he was
sure of this booty already, and stepping to the window he cuts the ring from
the purse, and by his supposed man (rounding him in the ear) sends it to the
plot layer of this knavery, minding to ^rame the Tailor along with him, as it
were to the Mercers, while (he the mean time) took order for the other mat^er.

Afterw^rds speaking loud to his man, Sir (quoth he) dispatch what I bade
you, and about four of the clock meet me in Paul's, by that time the Tailor
and I shall have dispatched. To Cheapside goes the hone^t Tailor, with a
notorious dissembler, not missing his purse for the space of two hours after.
In less then half which time, the Satin and gold lace was likewise gotten by
the other Knave from the Tailors house in this order;

Being sure the Tailor should be kept absent, he sends an other mate home to
his house, who abused his servants with this devise; That the Ladies man had
met their master abroad, and had him to the other Lady to take measure of her,
and least they should delay the time too long, he was sent for the Satin and
lace, declaring the token appointed, and withal giving the Masters seal ring
for better confirmation of his message. The servants could do no less but
deliver it, being commanded (as they supposed) by so credible testimony:
neither did the leisure of any one serve to go with the messenger, who seemed
an honest young gentleman, and carried no cause of distrust in his countenance:
wherefore they delivered him the lace and Satin, foulded up together as it
was, and desired him to will their Master to make some speed home, both for
cutting out of work, and other occasions.

To a Broker fit for the purpose, goes this knave with the Satin and Lace, who
knowing well they could not be com by honestly, nor any thing else he brought
of that crew, either gave them not so much as they would have, or at least as
they judged they could have in an other place: for which the Ringleader of the
Knavery vowed in his mind to be revenged on the Broker. The Master Knave who
had spent two hours and more with the Tailor, and would not like of any
Velvet: when he perceived that he mist his purse, and could not devise how, or
where he had lost it, skewed himself very sorry for his mishappe; and said in
the morning he would send the velvet home to his house, knew where to speed of
better then any he had in the sheps; home goes the Tailor very sadly, where he
was entertained with a greater mischance: For there was the Ladies seruingman,
swearing and stamping that he had not seen their master since the morning they
parted, neither had he sent for the Satin and Lace: But when the servants
justified their innocence, beguilded both with the true token rehearsed, and
their masters seal ring, it exceeds my cunning to set down words answerable
to the exceeding grief and amazement on either part: but most of all the
honest Tailor, who sped the best by the Brokers wilfulness as afte^wards it
happened, which made him the better brook the loss of his purse. That night all
means were used that could be, both to the Mercers, Brokers, Goldsmiths,
Gol^finers, and such like, where happily such things do come to be sold: But
all was in vain, the only help came by the inuenter of this villainy, who scant
sleeping al night, in regard of the Brokers extreme gaining both by him, and
those that he knew practiced the like kn^ueries. The next morning he ca^e by
the Tailors house, at what time he espied him with the Ladies Seruing-man
coming forth of the doors, and into the Tavern he went to report what a
mishap he had upon the sending of him thither the day before.

As he was but newly entered his sad discourse, in coms the party offended wihh
the Broker, and having heard all, (whereof none could make better report of
then himself) he takes the Tailor and seruingman aside, and pretending great
grief for both their causes, demaundes what they would think him worthy of,
that could help them to their goods again. On condition to meet with such a
friend, offer was made of five pounds, and after sundry speeches passing
between them alone, he seeming that he would work the recovery of them by
Art, and they promising not to disclose the man that did them good, he drew
forth a little book out of his bosom, whether it were lattin, or English it
skils not, for he could not read a word on it: then desiring them to spare him
alone a while, they should perceive what he could do for them,

Their hearts enco^raged with some good hope, kept all his words secret to
themselves, and not long had they sitten absent out of the room, but he called
them in again, and seeming as though he had been a Scholar in deed, said he
found by his Figure that a Broker in such a place, had their goods lost, and in
such a place of the house they should find it; bidding them g^r thither with
all speed, and as they found his words, so (with reserving to themselves how
they came to knowledge thereof) to meet him there again in the Evening, and
reward him as he had deserved.

Away in have goes the Tailor and the Seruingman, and entering the house with
the Constable, found them in the place where he that revealed it, knew the
Broker always laid such gotten goods. Of their joy again, I leave you to
conjecture and think you see the Broker with a good pair of bolts on his
heels, ready when time shall serve, to take his turn in a halter. The cunning
crafty knave went thus far beyond the Broker, and (as I have heard) was paid
his five pounds that night. And thus you may see the old saying ver^fied, That
a crafty knave needs no Broker. One crafty knave having thus beguilded an
other, that he brought him in danger of the Gallows. And here Conscience
brings in an other jest that happened during the time of his imprisonment,
wherein Corruption played the chief part.

How a Iaylor was corrupted to give certain prisoners leave to go abroad
without Keepers.
BEing (as I told you before) arrested, and clapped up in the Iayle, from whence
you baild me, I saw and observed many strange, and almost incredible practices
of our Keeper, a good com^y proportioned man, and fit for all companies but
good men's, to whom he was a mortal enemy* Cut purses, and men of that qu^ll^ty
that wanted no money, were debarred of no liberty: the Orchard to walk in, the
Gardain to shoot or vowle in: Provided their fellows abroad, now and then
visited them, and forgot not the Keeper, they had al things at command. Amongst
man, of these (to a well known, yet wi^ckt at) I observed one notable piece of
villainy, and that was this.

Our Keeper (as I said) being a b^^n Companion, as they term it, and one that
would rather take two purses, then loose one, was in leagued with all the night
wanderers of the Country: And it happened a couple of rank riders, that lived
only upon Mooneshine Euenings, and misty mornings for bidding a gentleman
stand instead of good morrow, were apprehended, and committed to prison: where
having store of Crowns, the Keeper and they were hail fellow, well met, which
continued till their gold fell to an ebb: well, live they must, and fare of
the best they will, and money they have none: Now mark how ready this crafty
Arch-uillaine Corruption is, to take hold upon the least occasion that makes
for his benefit.

They seeing the condition of their Keeper to be as most men are, covetous of
Crowns and on that thought the savor of gain sweet, though gathered from the
smoke of Chimneys. One day trayning him into the Garden, began to break with
him to this purpose; Sir so (...), we are Gentlemen, and hold you a man of so
good an^ well t^mper'd constitution, that we intend to trust not only our hope
of life, but very heart and soul of our secrets into your bosom, and will you
but observe one course that we have plotted in our thoughts, you shall not
only highly pleasure us, but without any noted prejudice, much advantage your
self: The Keeper ready of ^referment, took hold of the last word (vantage) and
his greedy thougts like a woman with child, longed till they saw their dear
begotten babe Commodity borne.

Therefore in a resolve, not only to conceal, but with the utmost strength of
his endeavors, to assist and furth^r their proceedings of what condition
so^uer. After a pottle of wine sent for into the Arbor, he desired them to
unpart their secr^ts, which briefly tended to this effect; Sir (quoth one of
these goodfellows) you see our means begi^ to grow shor^, and by reason of our
restrained liberty we cannon get abroad to increase it: would it lay in my
power (quoth the Keeper to help it, why so it does, quoth the other, and that's
the very end of our suit, I know you have a couple of good geldings in your
stable, l^nd us them for a day or two, and to color our absence, give it out
that we are sick, and keep our chambers, and let us alone, there shall not a
passenger of any sort pass, till his purse has paid us tribute, If we fear
any pursuit, your Iayle is as safe as a Sanctuary: Grant but this, and you
shall have your full share, absent, or present, as deep as any. The Iaylor in a
full carows of the best blood of the grape, swear to conceal, and what in him
lay, to aid their attempt. It Was pity of his life (answered Feedewell) but
what success had they in their practice? Long they continued that hellish
exercise, and so much they presumed upon their unexpected Sanctuary, they would
not let any pass, but as the proverb is, All was fish that came to the net:
sometimes they staid out a week, sometimes more, or less, but still their
coming home paid for all: for they never came empty; but laden with golden
bags, like bees to the hiue. At last (for so long goes the pitcher to the
water, that it comes broken home) it was their chance to meet, and set upon a
Gentleman and his two men, fitted with a thousand marks, which was the same
man, that at first was the cause of their imprisonment, and in the hurly burly
one of their vizards fell off, by which the gentleman presently knew him, and
had a shreud guess at the other. They not regarding any such matter, being sped
of their purpose, set spurs to their horse sides, and by some od by-waies,
rid a full fling to their Randeuow, the Keeper himself being at that instant
in their company. They gone, the gentleman straight imagined by the smoke
whereabout the fire was, sent his man to the next Justice for a warrant, to
call such prisoners before him, to answer to further objections, by him to be
alleged. The Fellow spared no horseflesh, but having got the warrant drawn,
ouertooke his Master entering the Iayle door, ^ug in the edge of the evening:
^ell to be short, they knock at the Castle gate, called for the Keeper, word was
brought he was cod from home, well, out he draws the warrant, and by virtue of
the contents, commanded two such prisoners at such a time, and by such a man,
for such an offense committed: should without any stay be brought that present
evening before the Justice, Answer was made, the two Gentlemen (with grief as
it seemed, for their offense) were sorely sick, and had for two days together
k^pt their beds: This report gave full shape and proportion to his former
suppose: well they knocked at their Chamber door, no answer was m^de: with the
aid and authority of the Constable, they broke it open, but the Prisoners could
not be found. the good wife and servants were questioned about their depart,
they knew nothing, but imagined the thieues had secretly broke prison. Upon
this search has made round about the chamber, but no likely means for their
escape could be found, which confi^med the Gentleman's thoughts. Well down they
went with an intent to place a strong watch about the Iayle, and whom should
he meet at the stayers foot, but the honest Keeper, and his two sickly
prisoners, whom no sooner spied the gentleman, attended by officers, but their
blood left their faces, and their hearts fell into their heels, as the proverb
is. Well, the Constable by virtue of his authority, arrested them all of flat
felony. At which the Iaylor began to storm, and told him both he and the
gentleman should deerly repent his wrong, being as honest a man as himself,
and began to relate how the two Felons (unknown to him) brake Prison, and stole
his geldings secretly out of his stable, and that he had spent so many
crowns, and rod so many horses to death in their quest: and if they had before
his coming robbed him of his money, he was sorry, but there it was, and what was
diminished should be restored, and they satisfy his wrongs with their lives,
this bold or rather impudent excuse (the Constable having a good opinion of
his former conversation) past with them for current, and seeing their
Commission strecht no further then these two, they would by no means take
charge of the Keeper: the other two they carried to the Justice, who (as it
seemed) touched with the singer of remorse, confessed the just manner of their
proceedings. And what (quoth Feedewell) became of the Hoa^^? Fearing (as indeed
it came to pass) that they would reveal his practice, he put money in his
purse, and offered to fly, but was quickly surprised, and at the next
Sessious, out of his own Office condemned, and most worthily hanged. They all
replied that it was too favorable a death. At the end of this tale they were
all about to sing Loath to depart: Nay stay (quoth Nemo) and for a parting blow
i will tell you one mad pranke more of a Searcher, done not long since at London:
but because I will not be troublesome,, i will knit it up in three words, etc.

How certain Searchers made prey of a Fellow, that hid vncustomd goods in a
private place of the Ship, and how cunningly they wrought upon him.
THey have an order amongst them at London, that no Merchandise must be carried
out of the Land, til it be customd, as they term it. Now to the maintaining
of this decree, are certain Searchers appointed: and any such unwarranted
goods, by their authority and place, they may seiz to the Princes use, and part
to themselves. Amongst many other, one honest fellow going to Sea, and willing
to make the most he could of his small stock, had bestowed to the value of some
twenty pounds, even al he had, and because he would not go to the cost to
customett, hid it in a private place of the ship, and intended to stand to the
courtesy of the Searchers: So it chanced, a Searcher more in hope of some small
Bribe, then any care of his duty, came aboard, and found this vncustomd
commodity, and as his Office warranted, might have seized it to the Princes
use, but the owner acquainted with their dealing, came, and put a couple of
French crowns in his hand, which so dazzled his sight, that he winckt at his
small fault, and departed: but mark the profound knavery of this fellow, he
was no sooner a shore, but the first man he met was a fellow officer of his,
to whom he imparted this news, and half his gain, urging him to go aboard the
same ship, and in such a place he should find a forfeit commodity, and except
he would give him the better consideration, he should (as he might by his
Office) seize it to the Princes use, which took effect: for the poor fellow,
rather then he would hazard the whole stock, was content to give the second
Searcher five pounds, for which he was content this custom of the country
should be broke, and the Prince robbed of his due, but mark how this fellow was
rewarded, A third searcher came, sent by the means of the other, and without
more words took it clean away, and in steed of converting it to the Kings use,
sold it amongst themselves. He was well enough served (answered all) that for a
private commodity would go about to wrong the state public, but they were
worthy all punishment possible, that being Officers, and sworn to do equity,
should attempt to do such a notable piece of vilany, that may bring them to
the Gallows their lawful inheritance, without the speedier amendment.

Well (says Nemo) seeing the night steals hence, and we have several business
in the morning, I will proceed to some of Corruptions injuries. I left at the
great thieues, and the little, some judging, others hanging, but if you shall
ask how the King is deceived of his customs, the Country wronged by convey of
forbidden Commodities? I answer, that it is only by Corruption, who blindes
the Serchers, begs Licenses. does all injuries: and till he and all his
Officers be cut short, there is no help to be hoped for.

Therefore Nemo let it be your work to draw an indictment against Corruption
at the next Sessions, and prefer it to the great inquest of Honesty, what
though they be for the most poor, that's the better for our purpose. Some of
the old inquest were mixed with Asses, that had no more wit then the gold that
loaded them, others were only forenoone men, and fitter to ly and sleep after
drinking, and their dinner, then sit or stand on causes between the innocent
and the guilty: diverse, or the most part were cherishers and servants of
Corruption, and except some very few, they were hard-hearted cowardly fellows,
that for fear of Commitment, durst not speak their consciences: but our
inquest of Honesty are confident men, and will rather die then deliver
untruths: as for example, Mr. Humf. Honesty ye Forema^. Thomas Teltroth.
Daniell Dread-naught. Samuel Sufferance, Peter Pay for-all. Clement
Consideration. Gabriell Goodman. Jonas Judgment. Bartholomew Bettercause
Francis Free-heart. Nicholas No-lyer. Marmaduke Man-loue^


Twelve good men and true: but if any of these should be out of town, or
otherwise employed, there is, Ferdinando Fearelesse. Henry Hate-hurt. Leonard
Loue-trueth.


With sundry other, that Honesty will inform you off, who are no less
careful for the wrongs done to virtue, though they be but a few, and poor,
then the proudest oppressors are sorry to see the times changed, wherein they
think to be called to account for their corruption, and wrongful extortions,
from the sweat and travel of the painful labourer.

On this resolution Conscience, and Nemo agreed, and Feedewell said, he would
be glad all were well, so twer not long of him, for he was not able to endure
travel by any means: he must feed, and be fat how ere the world wagd. Sir
Simon Saywell said, he spoke honestly, and like a wise man, and a welthy
politician, whose part it was to meddle with nothing but their own ease, and to
seed of what they had, and still to follow the faction of the strong.

At this Conscience and Nemo in great anger parsed with them, calling them
Temporizers, belly gods, and I not not what, but they went laughing away hand
in hand, to the next Tap house, there to determine deeply of the matter, by
which means I was left all alone, whereupon I took pen and ink, which I had
by great chance about me, and sitting upon the side of a green bank, having
no deske but my knee, set down so near (as I could) the meaning and drift of
their several discourses, and the rather, for that laying open some part of
Corruptions enormities, you might judge with me, whether he be not that crafty
knave, that needs no Broker, and such an one as is able to confound the common
estate and condition, both of City, and Country.

Pardon me if it answer not your expectation, being it was done in have, and
but the indigested remnant of a dream: but if you favor this, i will ride my
horse to death, but i will get you a true copy of Corruptions indictment,
answers, arraignement, sentence, and execution: and labor to frame all to your
g^nerall good likings.

FINIS.

