AN EPISTLE SENT UNTO TWO daughters of Warwick from H. N. THE OLDEST Father
of the Family of Love.

With a refutation of the errors that are therein; by H. A.

Rescue me (Lord), and deliver me from the hand of strangers: whose mouth
talks vanity; and their right hand is a right hand of falsehood. Psalm. 144.
11. Imprinted at Amsterdam by Giles Thorp. 1608.

To the Christian reader, wisdom and grace.
AS there are many enemies of the truth of the gospel, and many that write to
broach and spread their errors: so is it needful that some write against them,
least trodden truth be quite forsaken; and silly sowles be wrapped in error,
unto perdition. It is not easy for all men to epsy Satan's subtilties, nor the
deceitful sophismes of his ministers: both he and they, can tra^sforme
themselves like Angels of light. Such therefore as discern them through the
grace of God, should give warning unto others; that as the foolish woman is Pro
7. 11. and 9. 13. 18
troublesome, babbling and loud, inviting her ghests to the depth of hell: so the
Pro. 9. 3.
maidens of wisdom, may lift up also their voice; and make their cry be heard,
on the highest places of the city.

What wormwood and bitterness and even deadly poison, is sparsed abroad in Henry
Nicholas his writings, (who caleth himself the 1 Exhort. cap. 11. See. 1.
Father of the Family of Love;) the children of wisdom that do read the same,
may by the light of Gods law soon perceive: yet with fair and flattering
speeches, he has beguiled many unstable sowles; and such as have had no love
to the truth, have been give^ over unto his lies. And never had Satan a fitter
time to work his malicious will on the sons of Adam: then in these last evil
days, when Atheism and iniquity, do so much abound. Never had he a fitter
religion for Atheists and carnal hypocrites, then that which H. N. out of his
corrupt and fleshly heart has set abroach. It takes away the cross of Christ,
and persecution for righteousness sake: and teaches men to communicate with all
religions, services and ceremonies; so as they cleave in heart to his feighned
service of the Love; It makes them pure and without al syn, in their own
foolish imaginations; yea (more then which the Serpent himself did never
teach,) it deifieth them with God. In a word, it brings a fretting leprosy
upon al religion, and overthrows the grounds of faith laid in holy
scriptures, which H. N. by foolish allegories, perverteth to the destruction of
himself and his Family. And for the principles of theology, he has written
more blasphemously and absurdly then ever did Mahomet in his Alcoran. For this
cause, in answering this his letter, (as I was requested by some that heard how
much it was boasted of, among the Nicholaitans;) I have touched by the way some
of the impious heresies that are in his other writings, without knowledge
whereof, his frawd in this Epistle cannot easily be perceived. For as a child of
darkness, he labors to be obscure in his words, yt men may admire the deepnes
of Satan by which he speaks; and himself when he is followed, and can no other
way escape, may have this for his last refuge, that men understand him not. But
Ephe. 5. 13.
al things when they are reproved of the light, are manifest: for the light is
that which makes al things manifest. Now the Ps. 119. 105 Pro 6. 13.
word of the Lord is a lantern, and his Law a light; by it therefore have I
assayed to discover the snares of this seducer: not doubting but God, who
causes the Morning to know his place, that it may take hold of the corners of
the earth, Job. 38. 13
and that the wicked may be shaken out of it; will, notwithstanding all the dark
delphick speeches, and glozing allegories of these falsers, declare their works
and manifest their impieties, and will Job. 34. 25.
turn the night, (in the darkness whereof they think to be shrouded) and they
shall be destroyed.

Let therefore the prudent reader, make trial of that which on both sides is
said, by the word of truth: least, as the serpent beguiled Evah through his
subtilty, so their hearts be withdrawn from the sincerity of Christ. And the
Lord give them understanding in all things; and preserve them Ps. 12. 7. 8.
from this generation for ever; for the wicked walk on every side, whiles
vileness is extolled among the sons of Adam.

Henry Ainsworth.

The preface, made by some of H. N. his disciples.
THis Epistle was written by the author unto two maidens that were before
purposed out of zele to have suffered death for the confession sake of the
Christian ceremonies, which as he says in diverse places of his works, are no
more but outward means set forth by God and his ministers to direct people to
the inward righteous life of Christ in the spirit;) supposing therein that they
should rightly have obeyed and fulfilled the commandment of Christ, who
wills us to forsake our own lives for his sake. But upon better consideration
thereof, through the grace of God, and these distinct godly testimonies and
reasons, (both touching that point and diverse others) herein contained; their
minds as it has been reported by some of that followship were altered herin to
an other understanding of the matter, and they did willingly endeavor
themselves afterward, to follow his good counsel.

Answer.
THe drift of this Epistle / being (at the best) to dissuade from the pacient
and constant witnessing of the truth of Christ / especially in the outward
ordinances of the gospel and open profession of the same, Under a color of
inward and spiritual confession / and service of God in the holy Ghost it shall
not be amiss to look a little into the sleights of Satan / whereby (as it
seems) he has deceived / and would still deceive the simple; and to show the
weakness and insufficiency of the reasons alleged in this Letter: as also to
manifest / how the outward obedience of the body / must be conjoined with the
inward of the mind and spirit; and the external ordinances of Christ's testament
professed and practiced; if we would have the spirit and life which is of God.
And howsoever H. N. accounts the ordinances of the gospel but ceremonies; yet
in that he confesses them to be outward means set forth by God, to direct
people to the inward righteous life of Christ in the spirit, he manifests
himself to be but a seducer / in persuading the two maidens not to suffer death
for the confession sake of them: seeing the outward means of man's salvation and
of the righteous Christian life / is to be stood for unto the death / as in
handling the particulars shall by Gods grace appear. And if by the authors
counsel / those daughters were drawn (as here is insinuated) from their outward
confession and suffering affliction for the ordinances of Christ / against the
Romish Antichristian doctrines and ceremonies; their faith was but weak / they
forsook the inward righteous life of Christ in the spirit / and their minds
were perverted to a very evil understanding. If also they assented to other
points of H. Ns. heresies / and followed his corrupt counsel: then were they led
2 Timothy 3. 6. 7.
captive / (as the Apostle says /) being simple women / laden with synns and
led with diverse lusts. From which estate / God keep al his people / and direct
their feet in the ways of life and peace.

AN EPISTLE. Sent unto two daughters of Warwick.
From H. N.
THe wisdom of the Father, through the Love of Christ in the power of the holy
Ghost, in the second birth out of the new life, of the heavenly being, be unto
every one which with an impartial heart seeks the godlynes in Jesus Christ, to
a hearty salvation. Because that every one which seeks God with heart, might
know the right diversity betwixt the heavenly and the earthly, betwixt the
spirit and the flesh, betwixt the light and the darkness, betwixt the death and
the life, and betwixt the righteousness of the spirit, and the righteousness of
the elementish things; and then to love the same. That grant us the Almighty
God through his love, Amen.

1. Because ye might through the spirit of Christ inherit the same gift and
mere affection or goodwillingnes to the godly life: I do bear or carry the same
gift, (God is my witness) before al men. But now am I compelled through the love
of Christ, severally to open the same gift unto two young daughters of a certain
place named Warwick. The Lord give his prosperity and grace thereunto; for that
his righteousness which is wrought through the Spirit of Christ, might be
known of them, and that the life of Christ which by many is sought after the
flesh, might be known and inherited of them according to the spirit, even like
as God which is blessed is a Spirit. Ioh. 4. 2 Cor. 3.

H. A.
OUr savior Christ / the 1 Cor. 1. 24.
wisdom of the Father / has warned us to beware Math. 7. 15.
of false prophets / which come unto us in sheeps clothing / but inwardly are
ravening wolves. The Apostles / through the love of Christ in the power of the
holy Ghost, have foretold us / that Tim. 4. 1.
in the latter times / some should depart from the faith / and give heed unto
spirits of error and doctrines of Divils, speaking lies through hypocrisy /
and having their consciences burned-with-a-hot-yron; and therefore counseled us
/ 1 Ioh. 4. 1.
not to beleev every spirit / but to try the spirits whither they are of God /
because many false prophets / were even then gone out into the world. The evil
that they should enterprise / is 2 Pet. 2. 1.
privilie to bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that has bought
them: the manner of their carriage should be to use verse. 3.
feighned words, Romans 16. 18
fair, flattering and good speech, 2 Pet. 2. 18.
swelling words of vanity verse. 19.
promises of liberty, and the like. The effect of their doctrine should be /
Romans 16. 18.
deceiving of the hearts of the simple, even of Mat. 24, 5.
many / yea / if it were possible / of verse. 24.
the very elect; and by those many that follow their damnable ways / 1 Pet.
2. 2.
the way of truth should be blasphemed. The end of al which (touching
themselves) is / that because such reprobates / receive 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. 11. 12.
not the love of the truth / that they might be saved; therefore God sends
them strong delusion / that they should believe lies / and they al may be
damned / which believe not the truth / but have pleasure in unrighteousness.
These things considered / it stands us upon / to look well to our selves /
least we be carried away with the error of the wicked. This author H. N.
begins (as was foretold) not only with fair and flattering speech / but
also with swelling words of the second birth, out of the new life of the
heavenly being, and sundry the like. He boasts of the gift / of the godly
life / which he bears before al men / and here severally opens unto two
young daughters: and of this he takes God to witness: He tells them / (in
the 2. section following /) that the Christ of God was not yet declared unto
them according to the heavenly truth. Thus promises he great matters / and
seems to be a setter forth of a new Christ / and consequently of a new God.
Very needful therefore it is / to attend unto his doctrine / and if it be true /
for to receive it; if false / for to abhor it / and to hold the author thereof
accursed. And hereunto the Lord enable and guide us by his grace.

1. First where he vaunteth of the gift borne before al men / (in his other
writings /) opened to these daughters / (in this Epistle;) let us bring it to
the trial / by the word of God, who (he says) is his witness. For we read of
some / that have Ezekiel. 16. 33
given gifts unto their lovers / that they might come unto them on every side
for fornication: and whither this writing / and other pamphlets of H. N. be not
gifts sent abroad for such evil purpose / let the godly reader judge. If his
gift have wytnes of God / it has witness of his written word / as the prophet
says / Isa. 8. 20.
to the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it
is, because there is no light in them. Is H. N. willing to come to this trial?
it seems far otherweise; for in all his writings he much inveigheth against
scripture-learning; contrary to the true prophets and Apostles / who highly
commended this / as being 2 Timothy 3. 15 16.
able to make men wise unto salvation / and profitable to teach / to improve /
to correct / to instruct in righteousness: and never did any of them entwite the
learning or knowledge of the scriptures; as the reader may see H. N. to do in
this Epistle and his other pamphlets. Our savior Christ / willed al men / even
his adversaries / to Job. 5. 39.
search the scriptures / for they testified of him. If they testified likewise
of H. N. and his doctrine; doubtless he would not despise (as his manner is)
the scripture-learning of others; especially whiles he will seem to rely upon
the testimonies of the same for himself. But if we may not learn the truth of
religion / out of holy writ; how then may we attayn it? H. N. tells us in
his First exhortation to his children, thus 1 Exhort. chap. 6. sect. 7.
My beloved children, like as the true Communiality of holy ones, and Elders of
the house of Love, confess, under the obedience of the Love, the belief in
Jesus Christ, and the Christian baptism; and like as I express the same here
unto you, and confess or acknowledge it before al men to be the true faith,
and the upright baptism; even so ground with fast belief, your hearts likewise
therein. So then the doctrine of H. N. and his folowers must be the ground of
our faith: as they confess and beleev / so must we. And herein the Familists
religion accords well with the Turks, whose great prophet Mahomet in his law
or Alchoran / to draw disciples after him says thus; Alchoran. Azoar (or
chapter) 18.
They that worship God, let them if they be good, beleev his Messenger
(Mahomet:) and again; O ye good men, be followers of God and of his messenger,
and never wittingly depart from them. But may we not our selves / by the light
and grace that God gives us / make trial of H. N. his religion by the word of
the Lord? No: for in his First exhortation he says; chap. 16. sect. 16.
no man can rightly according to the truth of the holy scriptures nor according
to the spiritual understanding of the godly wisdom, deal in, or use the true
God-services, nor the services of the holy word, (it becomes not likewise,
that any man should take in hand to busy himself therabout,) but only the
illuminated Elders in the godly wisdom, which walk in the house of Love. But
what if H. N. with his coelders / be but deceivers of men's sowles / seduced
themselves and seducing others? for be they not men as others are / and subject
to error? He tells us no / for ibidem.
they have received the word of life, through the power of the most highest,
out of his holy heaven, from the living God, and are even so through the same
word, Godded with God. Therefore in an other place of that book / he says men
chap. 13 sect. 11.
ought to beware that they distrust not the Eldest in the Family of Love, nor
suspect any manner of evil or vnwisdom by him: nor yet also in anywise persuade
themselves yt the exercises, documents and instructions which are taught or set
forth before them, by the Father of the Family of Love, or oldest elder, are
too slight, too childish, or too unwise for them to follow after or to obey.
But with perfect hearts, humbly and single-mindedly, even as good willing
children unto the Obedience; to receive the same instructions, proceeding out
of the wisdom and counsel of the Eldest. And must we needs put out our own eyes
/ that H. N. may lead us? may we trust him that he himself is not a blind guide
/ and false prophet / such as Christ foretold should come in this last time?
For this matter he has given us his warrant thus / First exhort. Cap. 11.
sect. 1
My loving children, and thou Family of Love, give ear to me your Father, and
live according to my doctrine, that it may go well with you: For the Lord will
have the Father honored of the children, and what the mother bids or
commands the children to do, that will he have kept. Sect. 2.
Take heed to my doctrine; and all what I out of Love, do set forth, teach, and
exhort you unto, that print to a seal of life, or a witness of the truth, in
your hearts. For it is your life. By this we may see what a good ground H. N.
has laid for himself and his cause: that men should receive his word and
doctrines / for Oracles of God. He saw that his brother / the Antichrist of
Rome / had much prevailed in the foolish world / by making men beleev / that he
and his church could not err: he minded also (perhaps) the glory that Mahomet
has among Turks / by persuading them / that the Alchoran (his law-book) Azoar
20.
is without all falsehood; therefore H. N. will sail by that compass; and make that
the foundation of his work. And coming as an enemy to war against Christians /
he is much more malicious then Nachash the Ammonite / who would have 1 Samuel 11.
2
thrust out but one ey of the Israelites / whereas this tyrann would thrust out
both; and that not of the body / (as Nachash would) but of the mind and
understanding; that having bereft men of their wits / he might keep them
prisoners under his heresies. For in his Crying voice, he has proclaimed
saying / Crying voice chap. 3. sect. 11
Let your selves now in all your Being, nature, mind, and disposition, become
renewed through the Love, in her service; and give al your understanding
captive, under the obedience of the Love. Thus H. N. will be jailer and keep in
captivity the minds of al men; til they bow unto him and say / as he has
taught his children (or rather his s^laves) in his First exhortation, chap. 13.
sect. 2.
O my father in the Love, I submit my self, and al mine understanding, under
the wisdom of thy doctrine. And when he has gotten men's minds this captived;
he may lead them whither he list / though it be into the deepest dungeon of
hell. We find in Christ's Testament the Beraeans commended / that tried the
Apostles doctrines by the scriptures daily; Act. 17. 11. and other Christians
also / that took heed to the most sure word of the Prophets / as to a light
shining in a dark place; 2 Pet. 1, 19. Howsoever therefore H. N. would
extinguish the seven lamps of the golden candlestick of Gods law / that men
might see by the smoke of the fire which he has kindled: we mean not to trust
his pretended light / but to bring to the trial both his spirit and his gift.
For the serpent by his subtilty / brought Evah unto death / whiles he took away
Gods plain word / and set his own in the place: like may be our end / if we
submit our selves / and all our understanding / under the foolishnes of this
man's doctrine.

H. N.
2. See my beloved in the Love of Christ, I must speak unto you even like as
Paul spoke unto the fleshly Israelites, where he says, I bear Israel witness
that they stand fervently minded toward the lov of God, but not according to
knowledge; for they seek to set up their own righteousness. Romans 10. So is now
the witness of God in our spirit with the holy Paul toward you, that ye
likewise stand fervently minded toward the love of God, but not according to
knowledge, because that the Christ of God is not yet declared unto you
according to the heavenly truth, but well according to man's wisdom or industry,
which to the literal scripture, add their own prudencie, and even so go forth
withal, or occupy their own righteousness without the spirit of Christ, which
is a miserable doctrine, being taught without the spirit of Christ.

H. A.
SOlomon warns us of an heretik under the figure of a foolish woman / that
calls unto her / Pro. 9. ver 13. 15.
them that pass by the way: yea such as go right on their way / saying / verse.
16.
who so is simple let him come hither. And in this her call / she counterfeiteth
Wisdoms words / for even so had her maidens spoken: verse. 4.
before to the sons of men / that went astray. The Apostle Paul / found fault
with the Israelites / that for want of knowledge did seek to set by their own
righteousness / by the works of the Law: neglecting the righteousness of God /
which is by the faith of Jesus Christ. H. N. here comes / like the troblesom
woman / and calls these two daughters / which went right on their way / even
in the true path beaten by Paul and the other Apostles. And the more to allure
them / he uses Paul's words / and pretends his affection: but his drift is to
draw them quite awry / from the true way of righteousness / which Paul did
preach / unto a false righteousness by the works of the law / a miserable
doctrine which H. N. in his writings has taught without the spirit of Christ.
These two daughters of Warwick, did (as I have heard) so know and beleev in
Christ and in God / and seek the true righteousness / which is by faith; as
other true Christians of our English nation have done and do. But the Christ
of God was not yet declared unto them, (as H. N. says) according to the
heavenly truth. Whereas that which he means by heavenly truth / will be found
indeed to be hellish error; he teaching such things of God, and of Christ, and
of man's righteousness; as the prophets and Apostles have every where condemned:
which anon will appear.

H. N.
3. Because that the same miserable doctrine and false wisdom of the flesh
which gendreth her own righteousness, might be made known, and even so then to
be forsaken, therefore has God now in the same last day showed his grace and
mercifulnes on us poor and wretched ones, and has declared unto us through his
holy spirit, his service of Love, for to declare unto al good willing ones
through the self same service, which is the true way to the everlasting life.
Therefore let every one now through the same service of love be warned that he
look well hereto, that he boast not himself in any of the works of righteousness,
or take on the same to salvation neither to condemnation, before that he in the
spirit of Christ through the love of the Father be renewed in all righteousness
of life. Not that I mean in the elementish ceremonial righteousness, which the
man sets forth or occupies out of his own prudencie, but I mean in that
righteousness which according to the heavenly truth is in the being of Christ,
and is set forth through the spirit of God. For the Father is not honored but
through the Son, that is, no man may know, either serve God, but that he must
be born out of the spirit of Christ, even like as there stands written; There
avails before God neither circumcision nor uncircumcision, but only a new
creature in Christ Jesus wrought through the Love, Gal. 6. Therefore shall Christ
in the day of judgments, accuse and find faulty a flesh in their
righteousness, even like as he says, I shall reprove or rebuke the world of
their righteousness. Ioh. 16. That this is al what the man out of his first
birth, has set up for a righteousness, which is an enemy unto God, even like as
he says, Ioh. 10. They are al thieves and murderers which are come before me:
that is, whosover lets himself think, that he is a Christian before the
spirit of Christ be born in him, that same is a thief and a murderer. For
whosoever has not the spirit of Christ, the same belongs not unto him. Romans
8. Even like as Paul has witnessed where he says, I durst not speak any word,
unless that Christ had spoken the same in me, or through me. Romans 15. yea no
man (says he in an other place) can name Jesus to be the Lord, but through the
holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 12. A natural man (says he) testeth not the spirit of God.
1 Corinthians. 2. My children (says Paul to the Galathians) with whom I travel
again in birth, until that Christ be fashioned in you. 1 Gal. 4. Here may we
mark that without the Spirit of Christ, there is no knowledge of God, And vvher
God is not known, there can there not any doctrine be occupied to the man's
salvation. It is very true.

H. A.
THe author pretending to deal against that / which he would faynest establish
/ to weet / the miserable doctrine and false wisdom of the flesh, which
gendreth her own righteousness: first draws the readers to himself and his
family / and the service of Love; as being the declarers of the true way to
the everlasting life, now in the same last day. But this is like the carriage of
the whorish woman who Pro. 7. 13. 14. 15.
caught the young man and kyssed him / and with an impudent face said unto him /
I have peace offerings, this day have I paid my vows: therefore came I forth to
meet thee. etc. and H. N. has no better warrant then his predecessor Mahomet,
who (before him) boasted himself to be the Alchoran. Azoar 77.
Teacher of the nations. That the reader may discern the frawd of this falser /
I will first briefly show what doctrine he has taught concerning God and
Christ; And then I will proceed in answering this his Letter. The God which H.
N. treacheth to the world / is not as the scriptures declare the true God unto
us / One eternal / everliving / infinite / incomprehensible / almighty /
unsearchable and unchangeable Being / who only has immortality / and dwells
in the light that none can attayn unto / whom never man saw / neither can see /
unto whom be honor and power everlasting Amen. 1 Timothy 6. 16 Exodus 3. 14. Rev.
1. 4. Job. 11. 7. 8. 9. and 36. 26. Psalm. 90. 2. and 93. 2. and 102. 26. 27.
and 145. 3. Act. 17. 25. Iam. 1. 17. But H. N. tells us of a God / that
Epistles of H. N. Epist. 3. chap. 3. sect. 3. 3
was in the beginning as a light af life, of one substance with the manly
creatures. For as he says after sect. 22. Genesis 1. and 3.
in this letter, God had created the man, that he should be of one life, one
Being, one Spirit, and of one nature with God. Now the manly creature we know
was finite / comprehensible / not from eternity / but had his beginning in the
sixth day of this world / and soon was changed from his estate and became like
to the beasts that perish. How then can it without highest blasphemy / and
dishonor of God / be said or thought / that God was of one substance with the
man? yet H. N. to bring his blasphemy to a higher degree / if he may; has
further manifested his mind thus: H. N. Man^ falling etc. sect. 1.
See and mark ye beloved, in the beginning, when God made al things well, then
was the Lord one Lord of his kingdom, and one God of his works; there was also
no more but one God and one man, and they were one, and had in all one order,
being and nature, for God was all that the man was, and man was all that God was.
The Divil when he had the Genesis 3.
Serpent for his instrument / (the subtilest beast of the field) durst not
utter such abomination unto Evah / as to say she should be of one substance
with God, or all that God was; but only that she should be like unto God,
knowing good and evil: but here having gotten a new instrument H. N. (which
mystical letters may rightly be read Genesis 3. 1. in the Hebrew.
Ha Nachash, that is / The Serpent, who now is weren more old in evil / more
bold in falsehood /) he shameth not to teach / that God and man were one
substance and being: God all that man; and man, all that God was. By this
doctrine H. N. leads men at once from God to the Divil / and deifieth the
Serpent. For the Serpent was too subtle for the manly creature: the Divil
deceived and overcame the man / with all that he was: his body sowl and spirit.
Now seeing God the creator / and man the creature / had al one substance and
being, and the one was all that the other was; it will follow upon this
blasphemers doctrine / that the man had as much power / wisdom / will and
ability every way to withstand the Divil / as God himself had: but the Divil
was too strong and too wise for the man; therefore also he was too strong and to
wise for H. Ns. God / who had no more of any thing then the man. Now he that is
most mighty / most wise etc. must needs / (even in any Pagans judgment) be
esteemed for God. Mat. 4.
The Divil could not prevayl with Christ / though he proffered him all the
kingdoms of the earth / to fall down and worship him: but he has gotten this
honor and much more from H. N. for far less preferment / that he will not only
worship him / himself; but draw all the world / if he can to do the like / by
his Serpentlike doctrine.

But a man would think / that upon consideration of Adams fall / and al his
childrens misery; H. N. would change his more then beastly judgment / of God
and man to be one substance. No it is far otherwise. For as he has feighned
such a God as never was; so has he begotten and brought us forth a Christ/to
weet / a Lovely Being; or rather a lothsom Idol in his own heart / as after shall
be showed; which Christ, (he says) H. N. Epist. 4. chap. 5. sect. 14.
makes of two that they be one, namely the Godhead and the manhood. By means
of this mediator / ibid. see. 18.
is God the Father one substance, or manned with us through Christ, and is al
in all. Hereupon H. N. (which has written the world a new Gospel / and
begins it with his own praise / as Mat. 1. 1. Mar, 1. 1.
the holy Evangelists begin theirs with Christ's /) tells us of himself / that
he is Gospel of the kingd. Chap. 1 Sect. 1.
Godded with God in the spirit of his Love. And least men should neglect to
worship this beast / and give him his Divine honor; he every where urges his
godhed and authority; one example whereof I will set down. Proverbs of H. N.
chap. 8. sec. 3.
The God of heaven, as the Father himself, is come down, and he brings in the
service of his Love, himself with his Christ and his holy Ghost, and with all
that which with him is Gods: unto his obedient man H. N. and Godding the same
with him, he has Manned him with the same; and his will is, that now in the last
time, through his service of Love, al people or generations of men, which are
good willing to his righteousness, should assemble them unto him and his Godded
man, and even so likewise with them, all that which is manly; to the end that
they al should become of one Being with him and his godded man, and so be al
named Gods, and children of the most highest. For even so in the same conjoined
coming and conformity of being; namely God with all what is Gods, and the man
with all what is manly; it al, what is not Gods nor manly, becomes through God
and the man utterly condemned. Was there ever any trump of Satan / that durst
proclaym such Atheism to the world under color of religion as this man does?
Mahomet was never so gross or wicked to think thus of God / or of himself: He
in his Alchoran every where speaks rightly of God / that he is Azoar ^. 9. 4.
5. etc.
One, immutable, most wise, most high, incomprehensible, omnipotent etc. He was
willed (he says) to say, Azoar 3^.
Nothing is enjoined me, but to worship God alone, and not to esteem any his
fellow (or partner.) and again Azoar 7^.
That thou (Mahomet) may be proved true, call thy self but a messenger only.
But H. N. will be Godded with God, and have all that is Gods, (as himself says:)
then is he doubtless Gods fellow: and has the eternal power and godhead,
which the Apostle says, Romans 1. 2^.
ar seen by the creation of the world etc. Now what can H. N. or any of his
ylluminated Elders, answer to that which the true God propounded unto Job; Job.
38 4. etc.
where wast thou when I laid the foundation of the earth? declare if thou have
understanding etc. Job. 40. 4. ^. 6. 9.
Have thou an arm like God? or do thou thunder with a voice like him? deck
thy self now with majesty and excellency, and array thy self with bewty and
glory. Cast abroad the indignation of thy wrath, and behold every one that is
proud, and abale him etc. Then will I confess unto thee also, that thy right
hand can save thee. We know the true God Job. 42. ^
can do al things / and that there is no thought hid from him. Let H. N. with
his new Gods / show forth their Godhead in their powerful works. Let them (as
the prophet Isaias says) show things that are to come hereafter, that we may
know that they are Gods. Isa. 41. 23. Christ said to the Jews / If I should
bear witness of my self, my witness were not true. Ioh. 5. 31. But H. N.
bears witness of himself / and has no testimony from God / nor his
scriptures / more then had Act. 5. 36. 37.
Theudas or Judas of Galilee. or Mahomet. Christ did confirm his authority Act.
2. 22.
by signs and wonders. He alleged his works for Ioh. 5. 36.
witnesses that the Father had sent him. But blessed be God / who though he
has suffered these idols of indignation (the Familists) to utter the pride of
their arrogant hearts / yet has he not permitted Satan to give them power to
work any miracles / for to seduce the world withal: that such as do follow
them / may show them selves deprived of wisdom and humane reason / in
crediting such an impostor / that has nothing but foolish words to bewitch
their minds withal. The prophet Isaias teaches / that Isa. 40. 17. etc.
Al nations before God are as nothing / and they are counted to him / less
then nothing and vanity. To whom then will ye liken God? verse. 25.
To whom now will ye liken me / that I should be like him? says the Holy one.
H. N. answers / that himself is not only like God / but has one substance
with him / and all that is Gods. But as the prophet mocked those wooden idols /
that were Isa 44. 16. 17.
half burnt in the fire / and the other half worshipped as a God: so may al men
deride these earthen idols / that cannot save their bodies out of the dust or
fire? For go they not down to the grave as other men / and perish like their
doung? Is not H. N. rooted out of the land of the living / and does not his
name rott with him? Can any of his Godded men save themselves from fire or
sword / and escape out of the hand of the hangman? And then may we speak to them
as did the Lord to the king of Tyrus; Ezec. 28. 9.
will thou say before him that slays thee, I am a God? but thou shall be a
man, and no God, in the hands of him that slays thee. The Apostle Paul
shows the folly and blindness of the Gentiles that Romans 1. 23
turned the glory of the incorruptible God, into the similitude of the image
of a corruptible man; and is not H. Ns. foolish heart more full of darkness then
theirs; that after so great light of the scriptures / turns the glory and
Being of the incorruptible God / into (not the image only but) the very Being
of a corruptible man? Doubtless God has delivered him up into a reprobate mind;
that his madness may be manifest unto al men; which thus has turned the truth
of God into a lie / magnified and honored the creature, to the dishonor and
blasphemy of the creator / who is blessed for ever / Amen. To al then that H.
N. can say for his own Godhed/or his disciples / let al true Christians answer
/ as Jeremy taught the Jews to answer the men of Babel; The Gods that have not
made the heavens and the earth, shall perish from the earth and from under these
heavens, Ier. 10. 11. By this the reader may perceive / what a poisoned
religion this Nachash H. N. has brought into the world / concerning God.

Now for his Christ, H. N. teaches us not according to the scriptures / of one
particular man / of the stock and generation of Rom 9. 5.
the Jews / born about xvi. hundred years ago Mat 2.
in Bethlehem; who himself alone (being God Phil. 2. 6.
equal with the Father Ioh. 17. 5.
before the world was / and in that fulness of time Heb. 2. 14.
took unto him our humane nature) 1 Pet. 2. 24.
bare in his own body the syns of al his elect / and by that Heb. 9. 26. 28.
once offering of himself upon the cross / has purged them al / from al their
syns etc. No, H. N regards not (as after in this Letter sect. 11. he shows)
this knowledge / that in times past there was one Christ in Israel which was
born amongst his own etc. but tells us of a Lovely being/and a holy life:
this is his Christ. For in his First exhortation he says / chap. 12. sec. 23.
24.
walk with your spirit in the Lovely and virtuous Being: Fasten your mind
thereto, and build your righteousness thereon. For that is an eternal and fast
standing foundation, whereon al Gods prophets and holy ones have builded, and is
Christ himself. Again / in the same book he says / chap 20 sec. 5.
After a little time of your distress and anguish, or heavines, the Lord will
bring his Christ, (that is his best beloved and most holy being) in power and
glory unto you. In this his Epistle to the two daughters, sect 4.
he expounds Paul's words 1 Cor. 13. though I had al faith, etc. if I had not
love, it were nothing; that is (says H. N.) whosoever has not Christ, he is
with u^ God: th^rf^re also in an other place / he caleth First exh. chapter 12.
sec. 33
Love, the upright Being of Christ himself; And because this Lovely life and
being / appears daily fresh and new / in those that come to the family of
Love / therefore they profess to believe / not that Christ was, but that he
First exhort. chapter 7. sec. 14.
I^ ^^^^eived of the holy Ghost, through the power of the most highest, and
born of the H. virgin Mary. And whereas the scriptures teach that Christ suffered
Romans 5. 6. 8 and 4. 25.
for us/and for our syns; H. N. (...) Christ bears First exhort. chapter 7. sec.
17.
in us our syns. The scriptures teach / that Romans 5. 19.
by the obedience of one (meaning Christ) many are made righteous: he has
washed us from our syns Rev. 1. 5.
in his blood / he was Heb. 9 28.
once offered to take away the syns of many / and with Heb. 10. 14
one offering has he consecrated for ever them that are sanctified: H. N.
teaches us that First exhor. chapter 7. sec. 17.
Christ / under the obedience of the Love of his Father, is gone before us
therein, for that we should, in like manner follow after him, under the
obedience of his Love, in his death of the cross, to the safemaking of us from
our syns. Thus must we save our selves by our own sufferings / and Christ (set
forth unto us in the scriptures) is but an example / to teach us what we must
do. But what should I stand longer upon this point; for the Familists hold and
profess / that Pattern of pres. temp^.
an obedient and godly life is Christ Jesus; and so their doctrine of Christ,
agrees with their former doctrine of God: both being wretched and blasphemous.
Having thus opened the groundwork of H. Ns. religion, it shall be the easyer to
discern his frawd in this Letter / which I now will particularly answer.

Let every one now, through the same service of Love (says this author) be
warned, that he boast not himself in any of the works of righteousness, or take
on the same to salvation neither to condemnation, before that he in the spirit
of Christ, though the love of the Father be renewed in all righteousness of life.
In that H. N. says / before he be renewed, he plainly intimates that his
deadly error / that after men are renewed / they may boast in and take on their
works to salvation; contrary to Paul's doctrine / who shows that not only
Romans 3. 3^.
the uncircumcision, (the unrenewed Gentiles /) but also the circumcision (the
renewed Jews) should be justified of God by faith, which faith excludes man's
verse. 27.
rejoicing or boasting; and verse. 20. 28.
al works of the Law. He confirms it also by Rom 4. 1. 2.
Abraham's example / who though he were renewed in righteousness of life / had
nothing to rejoice of with God; but was justified by faith alone; and as he /
so verse. 23. 24.
we al / shall have faith (not works) imputed to us for righteousness. But H. N.
speaking of the 10. commandments given on mount Sina / caleth that law / Gods
H. N. First. exhor. cha. 1. sec 12. ^4.
eternal, true, and living righteousness; that he would have to be erected
through his people Israel, upon the earth, and wherein all the children of men,
generations and heathen, should live. Wherein his doctrine is quite contrary
unto Paul's / who says / Gal 3 21. 22.
if there had been a law given, which could have given life, suerly righteousness
should have been by the Law; but the scripture has concluded al under syn,
that the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ, should be given to them that
believe. Now the way of life / the Apostle had before showed / in the same
chapter / saying / verse. 11. 12.
it is evident that no man is justified by the Law in the sight of God, for
Hab. 2. 4.
the just shall live by faith; and the Law is not of faith, but the man that
shall do those things shall live in them. H. N. therefore teaching contrary to the
Apostle (as we have seen,) even a miserable doctrine / and false wisdom of the
flesh / which gendreth her own righteousness / is by the Apostles commandment
to be holden accursed. Gal. 1. 8. And this gift of his / has no witness of
the holy prophets or Apostles to confirm the same; but by his predecessor
Mahomet is well approved; for eve^ so did he teach the Turks Alchoran, Azoar (or
chapter) 4. 5. 35. and 42.
That the Law of God is not impossible and intolerable: (howsoever the
Apostles say the contrary (Romans 8. 3. Act. 15. 10.) and that they which keep
the the Law are joined with God and saved.

After this H. N. shows that he means not the elemetish and ceremonial
righteousness, but that which according to the heavenly truth is in the Being of
Christ, (for this we had heard is his heave^ly truth, that every man should
have the Being of Christ / or be Christ himself.) His proof hereof is, The
Father is not honored but through the Son; that is (says H. N.) no man may
know or serve God, but that he must be born out of the spirit of Christ. And
thus he leads the daughters by degrees / to their own new birth / for their
righteousness and salvation: and to maynteyn this heresy / he corrupts and
abuses the scripture Gal. 6. 15. where Paul says (against such as verse. 12.
urged Christians to be circumcised / that they might avoid persecution) that in
Christ Jesus neither circumcision avayleth any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a
new creature; meaning that such as were graffed into Christ by faith / unto
salvation from their syns; they need not care in this estate for having or
wanting the outward Jewish sign of circumcision / but labor for that which it
signified / namely to become new creatures / dying daily unto syn / and living
unto righteousness / which fruits ar undoubted testimonies that they are in
Christ. But H. N. corrupts the words / first saying There avayleth before God,
and then adding, in Christ Jesus wrought in the Love, meaning / that a new
creature / in Christ (which Christ is) wrought in the Love / (for so he
thinks Christ to be the Lovely Being in us / as before is showed;) this new
creature avayleth before God / for righteousness / and safe-making from our
syns; as his words elsewhere are. Thus cares he not / how he wrest / or what he
add unto the scriptures / so as they may seem to serve his turn. That the
reader may see his deceit / I will show what is his veyn and manner of
reasoning. Two things are given us of God through Christ. 1. Romans 4. 25.
justification, and 2. 1 These. 4. 3
sanctification. Justification is by Romans 3. 25.
the forgivnes of our syns for Christ's sake / and for the death that Heb. 9.
26. 28.
he once suffered for us himself alone on the cross; whereupon follows our
blessedness and salvation; and this justification we apprehend by Romans 3. 28.
faith alone. After which follows the work of Christ in us / by sanctifying
our bodies sowles and spirits / and making us conformable Gal. 5. 24. Romans 6.
to his death burial and resurrection / and furnishing us with fruits and
graces of the Spirit: which being Ioh. 15. 5. Colos. 1. 10.
fruits of faith in Christ / following the same; are no cause of our
justification or blessedness / for that we have Romans 3. 24.
freely before given us of grace. Now comes H. N. and he takes this latter
point of Sanctification, and al such scriptures as speak thereof / and puts
it in place of the former / to weet / our justification, making this our new
birth / and these fruits of faith / to be the very cause of our happiness /
righteousness it self / yea and Christ himself. Which deceitful reasoning of his
/ may further be manifested / by a type and shadow of our redemtion / showed to
our fathers / traveling toward their outward rest in Canaan; as we do now
travel toward our eternal rest in heaven. They in their journey were Number. 21.
6.
stung by fyrie serpents / and many of them died. To save them from this death
/ a serpent of verse. 9.
brass was set up / on which who so looked / was (without any other salves or
medicines /) healed of his deadly wound. Then being thus healed, they went
verse. 10. 11. etc.
forward on their way / fought verse. 21. 24. etc.
against the Amorites and other enemies, and won the promised land; and this
they were to do / before they could have possession of the same. If H. N. had
then lived / and should have persuaded the people / that not the looking up to
the brazen serpent / but their after journeyes / and battles against the
Amorites / did heal them of their stings; should he not have belyed the work of
Gods grace / who without any work or war of theirs / did heal them freely? even
so does he in this. The venim of Synn / by the fyrie serpents the Devils /
tormenteth men, and brings them to Romans 6. ^3.
death. Jesus Christ is lifted up unto us / Ioh. 3. 14. 15.
as was the Serpent in the wilderness / unto whom we looking up by Gal. 2. 16.
Romans 5. 1.
faith / are thoroughly healed. After this God unployeth us Romans 6. 1. etc.
in a holy life / and Christian warfare / to subdue our lusts and affections /
and bring forth fruits of the spirit in sanctification. Now comes H. N. and
tells us / this holy life / this Christian warfare / is our righteousness /
our safemaking from our syns / and is Christ himself. Thus is he an enemy unto
Gal. 5. 4.
the grace of God / and hinderer o^^mans salvation; seeking to procure it by
the works of the law / by which no flesh shall be saved; and in stead of Christ /
would give us an idol of his own fiction.

After this / as vnsavourly and to as little purpose / he alleges / an other
scripture / where Christ (as he says) in the day of judgeme^ts, shall find
faulty al flesh in their righteousness, as he says I shall rebuke the world of
their righteousness. Ioh. 16. First it is to be observed that Christ spoke these
words of the Comforter (the Holy Ghost) which he / being gone away would send
to his Apostles / Ioh 16. 7. (as after came to pass / Act. 2. 33.) and says /
when he is come he will reprove the world etc. but H. N. allegeth this / that
Christ himself should do it / and falsifyeth our Lords words / putting I, for
He, the reason whereof seems to be for that H. N. holds not a distinction of
the three persons in the Godhed / as we profess 1 Ioh. 5. 7. Mat 28. 19.
according to the scriptures; but ignorantly shuffleth and confounds al.
Secondlly / he adds to the scripture / saying their righteousness; whereas
Christ says only that the Holy Ghost should convince the world of
righteousness; which may as well / (if not better) be understood of Christ's
righteousness / then of the worlds; especially seeing the reason thereof is
rendered thus / verse. 1^.
Of righteousness, because I go to my Father. Now though one may understand it
otherweise / of the worlds feighned righteousness / yet is it overmuch boldness
in H. N. to put his own understanding in sted of the text it self: for this is
the means to corrupt Gods pure word / even as the man's heart is most corrupt.
Thirdly, he refers this to the day of judgments, which is far from Christ's
meaning; for he promises the efficacy and power of the Holy Ghost in his
servants / whiles he is absent from them / before the day of judgeme^t; as the
text shows to any wise heart. But wherefore does H. N. put in this, may we
think? Doubtless to draw men unto himself / for he is the Comforter promised /
yea he is Christ himself; and this day and time of his preaching / is the day
of judgments. This is evident by his own words otherwhere. For in his First
Exhortation, he thus writes; chap. 16. sect. 10.
According to all the testimonies of the holy spirit of Love, this gracious
word, and his service of Love, is the Light, and the day of the true judgment,
wherewith God with his holy ones accomplisheth, and wherewith also he will
accomplish, his judgment upon the earth, according to the truth. In the Gospel
of H. N. it is also thus written; Evang. chap. 1. sect. 9.
For behold in this present day, the glorious coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,
with the many thowsa^ds of his Saints, becomes manifested, which has set
himself now upon the seat of his majesty, for to judge in this same day, which
the Lord has ordained or appointed, the whole world with equity and with
faithfulness and truth according to his righteousness. And again in the same
book. chap. 34, sect. 2.
Behold and consider my beloved, how wonderfully God works in his holy ones,
and how that now, in this day or light of the Love, the judgment seat of
Christ is revealed and declared unto us out of heaven, to a righteous judgment
upon earth, from the right hand of God, and how that on the same judgment seat
of Christ, (that the scripture might be fulfilled) there sits one now, in
truth in the habitation of David, which judges uprightly, thinks upon equity
and requires righteousness. By this the reader may see / what this man aymeth
at in all his writings / even to draw al men unto himself / as judge of the
world sitting on the throne of Christ / and spares not to apply the promises
of Christ's coming / to this day of his preaching / being a more shameless and
presumptuous blasphemer then ever was Mahomet / or any arch-heretik that Satan
sent to bewitch the world. As he has abused this 16. of John, so does he
afterward the 10. of John. They are al thieves and murderers which are come
before me: that is (says H. N.) whosoever lets himself think that he is a
Christian before the spirit of Christ be born in him, that same is a thief and
a murderer. Where again he intimates Christ and a Christian to be al one: and
if the Spirit of Christ be borne in a man / then though he make himself Christ
/ the door / the shepherd etc. he is no thief / no murderer. Thus H. N.
shows himself to be sold unto syn / and given over to an heretical and
reprobate mind / perverting al scripture unto his destruction. It is very true.

H. N.
4. See my beloved in the love of Christ, even thus stands the fou^datio^ of
ye Christianity, and in such manner of wise hav^th Apostles taught the salvation
in Christ, even like as Paul says to the Corinthes. 13. although I givc al my
goods to the poor, and that I suffer my body to be burned, and although I had
faith (says he) that I could remove mountayns, if I had not love, it were not
any thing unto me: that is, whosoever has not Christ, he is without God, and
without righteousness in this world. I mean the being like Christ, which is
received through the power of the holy Ghost, and not any ceremonial Christ,
which one man speaks of or promises to an other, through the ceremonial
service, which he out of his prudencie according to his fleshly mind has set
up. O no, The work and begetting or procreating of the children of God, comes
not so slenderly to pass, as men now at this time teach each other: out of
their unregenerate spirit, which never proceeds from God.

H. A.
UUHat a sandy foundation of Christianity H. N. has laid / we have see^ before
by his doctrine of God and of Christ / and of man's righteousness. Here / (to
build hay on his rotten ground /) he perverteth an another scripture / and
would father his error on the Apostle Paul / who most of al other did set
against it. For the teaching the salvation in Christ to be by Faith, as before
is showed: H. N. will have him say it is by Love, the Love that is in us; which
Love he expounds (as his manner is) to be Christ himself; so wresting the
word / (as did the old serpent /) unto men's destruction.

The Love treated of by the Apostle / 1 Cor. 13. is a quality in the Saints /
wrought in them by the spirit of God; as it is written / Gal. 5. 22.
The fruit of the spirit is Love, etc. Now this Love which is in us / (whither
it be toward God or our brethren /) is not the foundation or cause of our
happiness / but an effect thereof / as we may learn by the Apostle / that says
/ 1 Ioh. 4. 10.
Herein is Love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his son,
to be a reconciliation for our sins. Which Love / when we perceiv by faith;
then we again do love the Lord; as it after follows / verse. 19.
We love him, because he loved us first. Then from the Love of God / flows
also the Love of our brethren / as is further added / verse. 21.
And this commandment have we of him, that he which loves God, should love
his brother also. And that these graces come not of our selves / (and
consequently are not meritorious in us / nor causes of our salvation.) Moses
taught his people / when he said / Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart and the heart of thy seed, that thou
may Love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy fowl, that thou
may live. As for the cause of our salvation / that it is only Gods Love and
grace toward us / the Apostle Paul shows saying Ephesians. 2. 4. 5.
God which is rich in mercy, through his great Love wherewith he loved us, even
when we were dead by syns, has quickened us together in Christ; (so) by grace
ye are saved. This Grace we apprehend by faith; which faith / if it be alive /
stirs it self / and Gal. 5. 6.
works by love. And thus the Saints do show their faith by their Love and
good works; but in case of justification before God / and man's salvation / al
works are excluded / as the same Apostle proves saying / Romans 4. 6.
David declares the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes justice
without works. This being so / what labor they for / but our curse and
wretchedness / which would have us rely upon our Love, or any good works / for
the saving of our sowles.

His next inference is more mischeevous / when he expounds those words / if I
have not Love, thus: That is (says H. N.) whosoever has not Christ is without
God. Thus makes he Love in us to be Christ; and so the plain doctrines of the
Gospel concerning our Savior shall be but a fable. And that this is his meaning
/ he shows elsewhere more plainly / when he says / H. N. First exhort. chapter
12. sect. 23. 24.
If ye will not that the wrath of God should come or fall upon you, so deal
faithfully before God and his holy ones, and walk with your Spirit, in the
Lovely and verteous Being, fasten your mind thereto, and build your righteousness
thereon, for that is an eternal fast standing foundation, whereon al Gods
prophets and holy ones have builded, and is Christ himself. Here men may see
what a miserable foundation he has laid / for to build our righteousness on /
eve^ our own walking in the lovely and verteous being, and this with him is
Christ. Whereby he proclameth himself to be Antichrist: for the Apostle John
says / 1 Ioh. 4. 3.
Every spirit which confesses not Jesus Christ comen in the flesh, is not of
God, but this is (the spirit) of Antichrist. Now to say that Love (which is an
affection of the mind /) is Christ; is to deny him comen in the flesh / out of
the loins of David and Abraham / of the virgin Mary / in the days of Herod
the King / as the scriptures plainly teach. Mat. 1. and 2. Romans 1.
And by as good reason may H. N. deny that ever there was any such man as Adam,
any such beast as the Serpent, any such creation of the world / as Moses
describes / Genesis 1. or any God: and so by his allegories / overturne al
religion / and bring Atheism in the place; which in deed he has done / with
most high abomination / in deifying himself and blaspheming God. By Christ, or
righteousness, H. N. says he means the being like Christ, not any ceremonial
Christ: so he seems to esteem the plain doctrines of the gospel / to be but
ceremonial, that whereas we read there of one Jesus to be crucified for our syns
etc. this he cou^teth but a ceremony / shadow or figure / such (it may be) as
was the Genesis 22. 13.
ram that Abraham offered / or the beasts that Aaron killed / or (perhaps) the
parable that Judge. 9. 7. etc.
Jotham told: for the true Christ that saves men / is the Lovely being that is
in the Familists themselves: this idol has their god H. N. out of his prudency
according to his fleshly mind set up. And this is a great secret / or mystery
of iniquity.

H. N.
5. Hereupon my beloved might ye or some other say, we learn not, or there is
not any thing taught unto us, then out of the clear scripture, which may not
lie. Yea my beloved the scripture lies not, but al those which are not
instructed through the spirit of Christ, they lie and are beguiled, and signify
or expound the scripture which is spoken through the holy Ghost, and showed out
in the spirit of life John. 6. upon an earthy or elementish foundation,
wherthrough the man can not obteyn or get any renewing of the heart. Even like
as in the witnessing of the scripture there is witnessed sufficiently to those
that can understand the same. Who is there without the word of the Lord which is
spirit and life, John 6. that has atteyned unto the salvation, or who has I
beseech you in any world, brought forth any true witness, unless that he
through the Spirit of the Lord, which is his word, become altogether born anew^

H. A.
UUE are sure the sacred scripture l^^th not / but H. N. which abus^th and
falsifieth the scripture / and denies Jesus to be the Christ / making Love and
the Lovely Being in himself and his family / to be Christ, (as we have heard:)
is by the Apostle condemned for a Liar and an Antichrist, 1 Ioh. 2. 22. and he
not being instructed through the Spirit of Christ, has taught an earthly and
rotten foundation / to the ruin of true religion.

The scripture cannot rightly be understood or opened but by the Holy Ghost,
that is the gifts of the holy Ghost. But some have the gifts of the Spirit /
which yet are not themselves altogether born anew: as had Balaam / the Scribes
and Pharisees / Caiaphas / Judas the traitor and others many / which as the
Apostle says / Heb. 6. 4. were once lightened and have tasted of the heavenly
gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost. Therefore it is false which H.
H. writes / that none in any world, brought forth any true witness, unless
that he became altogether born anew. Again he here brocheth another error / in
expounding the Spirit of the Lord, to be his word; which H. N. in his gross
understanding perversely gathers from Christ's words John. 6. 63. the words
that I speak unto you are spirit, whereby our Lord means that his words were
spiritual, not that they were the Holy Spirit it self. For he uses the like
phrase of a spiritual and regenerated man saying / Except a man be born of
water and of the spirit / he cannot enter into the kingdom of God; and / that
which is born of the spirit is spirit. John. 3. 5. 6 Now seeing H. N. describing
his Communialty of the Love / says / Spirit, land of peace. cha. 33. sect. 5.
Whosoever comes into this good city, he becomes altogether born anew in the
spirit, he may by like reason conclude that himself and his Nicholaitans / are
also the holy Spirit, and so be a blasphemer against the Holy Ghost, as he is
against the Father and the Son. The Scriptures teach us plainly to distinguish
between the word and the Spirit of the Lord / this latter being cause and
author of the former / as it is written / 2 Samuel 23. 2. The Spirit of the Lord
spoke in me and his word was in my tongue: and of all the prophets it is
witnessed / that they spoke as they were moved by the holy Spirit. 2 Pet. 1 21.
The Apostle says / 1 Pet. 1. 25.
this is the word which is preached among you; and how they preached it / an
other shows / when he says / that 1 Cor. 2. 12. 13.
by the spirit of God they knew the things given them of God, and spoke those
things not in words which man's wisdom teaches but which the holy Spirit
teaches. that al men may see how ignorantly (if not worse) H. N. has
confounded the word and the Spirit of the Lord / as if they were one thing.

H. N.
6. Note well, or consider of fellowship, the estate or manner of the Apostles,
how that they, although they went about so long time with Christ, and were
always with him, whiles the power of God was wrought through him, understood
not what the mind of the Lord was, concerning the godly causes, before that the
day of Pentecost or Whitsontide, when that they received the holy Ghost, was
come unto them. Even like as there stands written, how that they said at the
time when Christ was crucified among them, we had hoped or supposed, that he
should have delivered Israel, and it is now the third day, and there comes
nothing of it, we will go a fishing. For they supposed that Christ should have
set up a fleshly kingdom.

H. A.
HEre H. N. to magnify himself / as a spiritual and godded man, spares not to
wrong the holy Apostles; as if they before Pentecost, (Acts. 2.) understood not
the scriptures / nor preached the word truly; whereas it is evident that they
were sent and had preached the word long before / Luke 9. 1. 2. which word
Christ had given them and they received / John. 17. 8. 14. and were made clean
by it / John. 15. 3. and he had opened their understanding to understand the
scriptures Luke 24. 45. though afterward at Pentecost, they received more
plentiful graces of the spirit / when Christ was gone from them. Act. 2. 1. 2.
4. etc.

Again H. N. as if he delited to falsify the scripture / says there stands
written, how that they said when Christ was crucified, we hoped that he should
have delivered Israel etc. whereas these words were spoken by Cleopas and an
other disciple which were none of the Apostles / as appears Luke 24. verse.
18. 21 33. and to make up his patcherie / he adds that they said / it is now
the third day, and there comes nothing of it, we will go a fishing Whereas those
two spoke not at al of going a fishing, but other men at an other time, Ioh.
21. 3. By this the reader may mind what credit is to be given to H. N. his
allegations of scripture / who cares not to profane the holy word / for
maintenance of his lies / and sets things down as they come in his idle
head. But why say I so of this godded man; seeing men H. N. 1. exh. ch 13. S.
11.
ought not to distrust him, nor suspect any manner of evil or vnwisdom by this
Oldest Father; whose eysight (as himself says) Proph. of the spir. chapter 1. s. 2.
was clearer then Crystal, and his understanding brighter then the Sun.

H. N.
7. The whiles then that the Apostles which daily went about with Christ, and
had the word of the Father daily among them, understood not the Spirit of the
Lord: how should then the multitude of these, (which now say that they are
Christians, and yet neither have nor know spirit nor word, but go on with their
fleshly prudencie in the literal scripture, and set forth the same with their
fleshly hearts before the simple people, as it seems best unto them, and say
even so very stowtly, we have the word of the Lord, whereas it is but their own
word, wherein that they through their own prudencie are gendred or begotten,)
feel either perceiv the same.

H. A.
THe application of this invective / belongs to H. N. himself and his
Nicholaitans / who out of his fleshly heart as seems best unto him / though
against the literal scripture / sets forth his forgeries to the simple
people; yet boasts very stowtly / that he is H. N. Gospel. chapter 1. se. 1.
anointed with the holy ghost, in the old age of the holy understanding of Jesus
Christ, godded with God in the spirit of his Love, made heyr with Christ in the
heavenly goods of the riches of God; illuminated with the spirit in the
heavenly truth, the true light of the perfect being: elected to a minister of
the gracious word etc. so that in him and his sect / the prophecy is fulfild /
which foretold how in the last days / men should be lovers of them selves,
boasters, proud, cursed speakers etc. 2 Timothy 3. 1. 2. But if the Apostles (as
he says) understood not the spirit of the Lord; how should then he / (that is
sold into syn / and given over unto heresies which are works Gal. 5. 20.
of the flesh /) feel or perceiv the same?

H. N.
8. It is true they have the scripture, and the same gives witness of the Lord
and of the word, but is not the word it self John. 5. neither yet may any man
understand the witnessing of the same, unless that he has first inherited the
spirit of the Lord in the second birth.

H. A.
ONe evil and heresy draws on another / where God restreyneth not men by his
grace. Here H. N. denies the scripture to be the word of the Lord / saying
that it gives witness of the Lord and of the word. Which he would gather from
Christ's speech John. 5. 39. Search the scriptures for they testify of me; but
he abuses the scripture and concludes amiss / as if because it gives witness
of the Lord Jesus, therefore it is not the word; the contrary whereof is true /
it gives witness of him, therefore it is his word. For Christ plainly calls
that which is written in the Law / the word, John 15, 25. and so does Paul /
Romans 9. 9. 1 Cor. 15. 54. and Peter 2 Pet. 1. 19. The scriptures (for we speak
not here of the essential word of the Father / which John. 1. ^.
is Christ himself) are the word of the Lord written, even as the lively
preaching of the prophets and Apostles / was the word of the Lord spoken. The
beginning of their books shows this; as Hos. 1. 1. The word of the Lord that
came to Hosea; Joel. 1. 1. The word of the Lord that came to Joel; and many the
like. It is said Exodus 20. 1. God spoke al these words; and in Exodus 24. 4. it
is said Moses wrote all the words of the Lord. If then that be Gods word which
is spoken / that also is his word which is written; and H. N. is but an
instrument of Satan / to teach otherwise / that he may bring his own word in
the place. If the scripture be not Gods word, because it is a witness: then
the Holy Spirit, which H. N. made the word (before in sect. 5.) is not so /
seeing that is a witness also; 1 John 5. 6. yea Christ is a witness Rev. 1.
5. God the Father is a witness, 1 John 5. 9. 10. the Apostles also were
witnesses, Luke 24. 48. If then that which is a witness, is not the word, then
none of these / but H. N. and his dreams must be the word, to weet / of the
Serpent; and he indeed is no witness of God / neither do his writings bear
testimony to the truth / but seek to destroy it.

H. N.
6. Oh my beloved look into the same a little with me, what uncertain
witnessings that we out of an earthly or a natural Being, have followed after,
even until this day. We may well say with the Prophet, it is altogether lies
what the scripture learned preach either teach for as much as they do reject the
word of the Lord Ier. 8. Here gives the prophet a distinction or diversity,
betwixt the word of the Lord, and the witnessing of an unregenerated man, which
he brings forth out of the Letter of the scripture.

H. A.
THe more we look / the more indeed we see what uncertain witnessings you H. N.
out of an earthly Being, have followed after, even until this day. This still
more and more appears in your abusing of the prophets and Apostles. Here you
would father a distinction upon Jeremy / as if the word of the Lord, and that
which is written in the scripture / were not one and the same; the Prophet
teaches no such thing; but blames the Jews for rejecting the word in truth
and deed / whiles they boasted to be wise / and to have the law with them Ier.
8. 8. 9. He denies not the written law to be the word; (for I have before
proved / that it was Gods word Exodus 20. 1. and 14. 4.) but shows how
unregenerate men will abuse it / and yet boast of it; as your self H. N. are
found to falsify the word / and yet vaunt your self to be a godded man, and
minister of the gracious word. Every Mat. 5. 18.
jod and title / and consequently every Letter word and sentence of the
scripture / is Gods undoubted word / though you and al Divils should deny it;
the false glosses / and heresies that you and other unregenerated men gather
from it / are the word of Satan; which the scripture it self / by help of Gods
spirit / evidently does disprove / and so the word of the Lord endures for
ever; and that is the word which the Apostles preached / 1 Pet. 1. 25. and what
they did preach / is recorded in their writings.

H. N.
10. Oh if these men, which now so boldly or freemindedly do say that they are
Christians, and will always confess Christ with the mouth; had eyes to see,
and the right spirit for to understand: then should they surely cease or leav
off, for to walk in the strange or erring ways.

11. There is read in the scripture, that Christ should be confessed or
acknowledged; which is a very true witness: but the mind or meaning of the Lord
therein do very few understand. And many suppose (whiles they have read in the
scripture of one Christ, and likewise through their industry or prudencie, they
know that in times past there was one Christ in Israel, which was born amongst
his own,) that the same when they know it, and confess it with their mouth, is
the right confessing of Christ, whereof the scripture speaks. No my beloved,
no, the confession of Christ must stand in greater force or effect, then to be
confessed with the mouth, in the ceremonical service, which is a baptising with
water, or an other elementish confession.

H. A.
HEre H. N. opens his evil mind more plainly to the two daughters; Whom
hitherto he has boarded with feighned flattering speeches. First he is
offended that m^n will so boldly say they are Christians: But we have no cause
to be afraid or ashamed of this name / which is warranted in the word of God /
Act. 11. 26. 1 Pet. 4. 16. But to be caled The family of Love, is a name that
H. N. has invented and taken to himself and his sectaries. Secondly he
speaks of erring ways; when he has not yet showed any one error / that we
walk in; 3 Ioh. 1^.
but pratled against us (as the Apostle said of Diotrephes) with malicious
words.

Then coming to speak of confessing Christ he denies not the thing; but stands
upon the meaning. He inveigheth against the knowing and confessing with the
mouth of one Christ, (whom they read of in the scripture) that in times past
was born in Israel etc. Wherein he teaches open Antichristianity; for our
Savior speaking of his own person that was born in Israel / said / Ioh. 8. ^4.
except ye beleev that I am He, (meaning the redemer of the world which was
promised;) ye shall die in your syns. and again praying to his Father he says /
Ioh. 17. 3.
this is life eternal that they know thee the only very God, and whom thou
have sent Jesus Christ. The Apostles 2 Timothy 2. 8. 1 Cor. 15. 3. 4. Ioh. 1. 1.
14.
preached this one man and no other / who was born among his own / of David's
seed after the flesh / according to the scriptures; they require a confession
of this Christ with Romans 10. ^.
the mouth / as well as belief in him with the heart; and did themselves
confess him with the mouth / as ensamples unto us. Act. 2. 22. 23. etc. and 3.
13. etc.

But H. N. likes not of this Christ, nor of this manner confessing with the
mouth; he would persuade an other Christ bred and borne in his own fancy and
corrupt imagination / as before has been showed; and another manner confession
does he require: which what it is / let us now examine.

H. N.
12. Mark well what I write, No man can confess Christ among al those that will
confess him, unless that he in his like being, have his fashion or shape in
him; not according to the elementish ceremonies, wherewith the one makes
another wise with the historical scriptures: O no, but according to the true
being, or flowing out of the Christian-like nature. Through which
Christian-like nature, there is subdued or brought under foot, among al those
where the same is born, out of grace, the death, Devil and hell.

H. A.
UUE mark well that H. N. writes for truth / his own errors and deceits / out
of his corrupt heart. No man (says he) can confess Christ, unless that he in
his like being have his fashion in him. This is an untruth of H. Ns. fiction;
he writes thus / but in the holy scriptures it is not so written. For to
confess Christ, is one thing / to have his fashion in us, is another thing: the
first may be / where the latter is not; as the Apostle tells us of some that
confess that they know God / but in works do deny him, Tit. 1. 16. The
confessing of Christ is with the mouth; Romans 10. 10. the having of Christ's
shape in us / is by faith; Ephesians. 3. 17. Phil. 3. 8. 9. which faith is in the
heart; and (as The Apostle shows Romans 10. 10.) these both / (confession with
the mouth / and belief with the heart) are needful to salvation. It is possible
for hypocrites to make a good and true confession of Christ with the mouth /
and yet in their hearts not be partakers of the Christian or godly nature; as
Judas Iscariot, Simon Magus, and others that were baptized and made Christ's
disciples by a true outward confession: but it is impossible that any should
have the Christian like nature in him in deed and truth / but he will also
confess Christ with his mouth; or weep bitterly with Mat. 26. 75
Peter / if through fraylty of the flesh he do deny him. Whereas therefore Gods
word requires both these in Christians; and H. N. would draw these two
daughters from the one (namely from outward confessing with the mouth /) under
pretense and color of the other / (namely of having Christ's shape within
them:) he deals deceitfully / and not according to truth. It is / as if he
should allure them to fornication; and when they alleged against him Gods Law /
Heb. 12. 16. Let there be no fornicator etc. he should answer / true, but the
meaning you understand not; many suppose that the chastity of body, is the
right chastity; no my beloved no, the godly chastity must stand in greater
force and effect then to be in the outward or elementish body, for so the
Pharisees understood the Law of old; but Christ applies it against the lusts
of the heart. Mat. 5. 27. 28. If this reasoning be naught / so is H. Ns. about
confessing Christ. For as Gods word requiring chastity / intends it both of
the body and of the mind: so when it requires confessing of Christ / it
means both with mouth and heart / as is plainly set down Romans 10. 10.

Other deadly poison has H. N. here touched / as where he says Christ in his
like Being must have his shape in the man; whereby he means such a kind of
tra^substa^tiatio^ / as that Christ and the man, should be one substance one
being; yea the Lovely virtuous being in man / that is his Christ / as before I
have showed. This opinion is not possible to be warranted by holy writ / but is
the mere invention of this Antichristian. Christ our redeemer / is in his own
substance and person / in heaven at Gods right hand / Mark. 16. 19. Act. 3. 21.
but we are Eccles. 5. 1.
on earth / and Christ dwells not otherwise in us the^ by faith / Ephe. 3.
17. which faith purifieth the heart / Act. 15. 9. and works by Love Gal. 5. 6.
and faith / which is the evidence Heb. 11. 1.
of things not seen / apprehends Gods great and precious promises / which are
given unto us 2 Pet. 1. 4.
that by them we should be partakers of the godly nature / in that we flee the
corruption which is in the world through lust / (not by having the very
substance and Being of God and of Christ / as H. N. grossly imagines /) and
wayt with patience for the second coming of our Lord in the clouds of heaven /
at what time both the dead in Christ / and those that are alive / shabe caught
up in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air / and so shall we ever be with
the Lord / as The Apostle says 2 These. 4. 17.

An other damnable error / H. N. here has / saying that through the
Christian-like nature, there is subdued among all those where the same is born
out of grace, the death Divil and hell. Whereby he would teach us to be our own
saviors / we our selves must conquer the death divil and hell; for as we have
heard our own Lovely Being / that is H. Ns. Christ. And whereas the Apostles
teach us / that forgivnes of syns is by Gods imputation of Christ's righteousness
and death / and not imputing our syns unto us / and that our faith in Christ is
imputed unto us for justice; Romans 4. 6. 8. 24. 25. 2 Cor. 5. 19. H. N. has put
imitation in stead of imputation / saying / that H. N. First exhort. c. 20.
sec. 19.
through the daily God-service and offering in the Holy, in the taking up of our
cross, in the Imitation of Christ in his death, we obteyn the remission of
syns. Therefore he wills us to ibid sec. 26. 27.
follow after Christ in his suffering, for those are the days of affliction
heavines and death, wherein Christ has gone before us in the Holy, for to
prepare us throuh the same death of the cross, the everlasting forgivnes and
redemtion of syns. Again in his book called The spiritual land of peace, chap.
8. sec. 5 6.
he tells us of an Instrument wherewith all enemies be overcome. This
instrument of victory is the cross of Christ; (not that which Christ / of
whom we read in the scriptures / died himself on / and triumphed in the same
over the principalities and powers / Col. 2. 15. but that which we bear in
imitation of Christ /) and it is named patience or sufferance / (such as is
mentioned Heb. 12. 1. Iam. 5. 7.) and it (says H. N.) is the true altar in the
Holy, upon the which the true meat offering is, that is given to the faithful
believing travelers to eat, and also the true drink offering that is given them
to drink, which meat offering is named the flesh or body of Jesus Christ, and the
drink offering is named the blood of Jesus Christ. And the same body and blood of
Jesus Christ, is unto the constant and faithful traveiler in the proceeding on
in his pilgrimage, a true mediator to lay away the syn in the flesh, and to
establish the promises with him that are made to the Fathers. Thus the things
which are spoken of Christ and his oblation of himself / and of our partaking
thereof Ioh. 6. 29. 35.
by faith; this man perversely applies to our own patient sufferings; and makes
Patience to be our victory, contrary to the evident doctrine of the Apostle /
who says that it is Faith, 1 John 5. 4 5. Again, the scriptures teach not that
our Christianlike nature / but that Christ himself in his own person for us by
death destroyed him that had the power of death which is the Divil / and so
delivered al us his children which for fear of death were all our life time
subject to bondage / Heb. 2. 14. 15. but H. N. teaches that Christ's death / is
our like suffering / as appears by his First exhortation chap. 20. sec. 3.
where he says that the man ought in his yongnes, to learn to take up his
cross on him, to follow after Christ, his Savior, in his like suffering and
death of the cross, and to show forth patience with Christ, against all the
assaultings, until that all the enemies or adversaries of the Lovely life,
through the Romans 6. 4. 1 Cor. 15. f.
death of Christ, (that is, in manner of suffering,) be utterly vanquished. By
these words / and the scriptures which he quoteth / it is plain / that he
means our own sufferings in imitation of Christ / to be our vanquishing the
enemies / and our salvation: which heresy he every where out of his own carnal
wisdom urges and persuades / to the dishonor of our Lord Jesus / and
magnifying men's own sufferings and merits.

And if we look further what H. N. means by his Death, Divil, and Hell; we
shall find these also to be idols and fictions of his own; that in deed his
victory / is like his Christ; even erroneous fabulous and blasphemous. The holy
scriptures teach us of a death in syn, (when men are wholly given over
thereunto /) Ephe, 2. 1. contrary to which is a death to syn / by
sanctification of life Romans 6. 2. They teach us also of a death for syn, (that
is a reward of eternal punishment in hell.) Romans 6. 23. Genesis 2. 17. Iam. 1. 14.
called the second death, Rev. 2. 21. and 20. 14. Unto which the Divils and all
reprobate men shall be condemned for ever and ever for their syns at Christ's
appearing; Mat. 25. 41. 46. Now H. N. (playing the part of the old Serpent /
which persuade* Evah that Genesis 3.
she should not die /) persuades his disciples that here in this present world
and life / is death and hell; so the judgment / the fire / the condemnation
threatened in the scriptures; he makes fantastical imaginations or humane
affections. For as with him / the Love / and to 1 Exhort. chap. 12. sec. 23.
24. 33.
walk in the Lovely and virtuous Being / is Christ himself: so on the other
hand inveighing against them that speak evil by the service of Love / and the
minister of the same; he says / their ibid. chap. 15 sec. 17.
false Being is the Divil, the Antichrist, the wicked Spirit, the kingdom of
Hell, and the Majesty of the Divil himself. Now the punishment for this / is
the Sentence which H. N. (who as we have heard / vaunteth that he sits on the
throne of Christ to judge the world) pronounces: his condemnation of the false
Being / is eternal death and hell fire / as appears by his Crying voice, chap.
3. sec. 2. 3. 4.
where he calls al men to himself / to Come al and confess their syns / and
make known vncoveredly the inwardnes of their hearts / to the end that they may
become justified or purged from all their sins, and received into the holy
Communialty of the Love / when as now in thissame day the wicked world
becomes judged with the Lords mighty hand. Which wicked world (says he) is
reserved or kept in store til unto this same day of the Love, to the fire of
hell, for to be condemned in the self same day of the Love, for evermore, to
her eternal cursing and judgment of the fyers cruel vehemency. And a little
after he adds, sec. 4.
Verily, now in thissame day, when as now all ungodly, and all selfwise, with all unrepentant persons, and false hearts of the scripture-learned etc. inherit
with much smart and grief in the vehement cruelty of the fire of hell, the
terrible condemnation: then shall the people of God / namely, the whole
communialty of the Love of Jesus Christ etc. rejoice them in all Love etc.: And
that this their joy / is like Epicures in this present world and life / and in
their counterfeyt regeneration and godded estate: he elsewhere plainly
confirms / saying that in their city of Peace Spirit. land. chap. 27. sec.
11. 12.
there is a watchman on the wall thereof / that has a trumpet named
After-this-time-no-time-more; and that the watchma^ fou^deth out of the same
last time / as out of the last trumpet, the sound of the everlasting life,
after the which there is no life more to be waited for, for the same life
continues for evermore. Therefore in the conclusion of his Crying voice when he
had bidden all sec. 5.
Come now hither to the Love and her service; he adds / sec. 18.
Come now al hither to the Paradise of your Lord and God etc. Come in now all
hither to the Paradise of the Love, and pluck in her garden the tender Olives;
Sec. 24.
Become drunken with the wine of her soon-ripe grapes, and embrace her to al
concordable friendlynes. Thus like an harlot, he allureth men to his religion /
and imitateth the whore of Babylon which Rev. 17. 2.
made the inhabitants of the earth drunken with the wine of her fornications.
For his vain conceyted Lovely Being, with the toys and pleasures that men
imagine in that estate / is a fools paradise, where men become drunken and
besotted in syn / and drowned in perdition. This is H. Ns. heaven; and they
that are not here / he thinks they are in hell; yea plainly says / (in his new
gospel /) Evang reg. chap. 27. sec. 5.
that the second death is come and bears dominion over the world, and all
unbelievers. By this the discreet reader may see / what a Christ and salvation
H. N. does teach, and what a Death Divil and Hell / the Nicholaitans or
Familists do subdue. This wretched man seems to have written his books in
scorn of al true religion, that Atheism and Epicurisme / under show of
religion might reign in the earth.

H. N.
13. Hereupon might some men say, ye would have the man perfect. No, my
beloved, no; I speak not of the perfection of the man, but I speak of the
perfectnes which Christ ought to have with the man, before he can be confessed
or acknowledged. The man in his unregenerated spirit is imperfect, I speak not
thereof, but what he is, that is he out of grace, without cause of boasting.

14. Therefore let every one look well unto it that he be not self-minded in his
uncertain forecasts or preconceiving: but that he take heed, or be well advised,
whither he be worthy to receive the same grace of God.

H. A.
THat which David says of the wicked man / that Psalm. 1^. 7.
his mouth is full of deceit and frawd, under his tongue is mischief and
iniquity: is verifyed of H. N. in his deceitful writings. He seems here at
first / as if he would not have the man perfect; no, my beloved, (cries he at
it) no; but presently from under his tongue flows out mischief and iniquity;
when he speaks of the perfectnes which Christ ought to have with the man,
before he can be confessed* This is a depth of Satan / to bring men into misery
under color of perfection; and to abolish them from Christ / whiles they may
imagine / he is perfectly with them. Though Christ (I mean the true Christ whom
we profess / not the idol which H. N. feighneth of the Lovely Being /) be in
himself perfect / yea perfectiou it self; and though the work that he has done
for us / be also perfect; because with one offering he Heb. 10. 14.
has consecrated for ever them that are sanctified / and his blood 1 Ioh. 1. 7.
has cleansed us from all syn: yet his work in us is yet imperfect even in the
best men that ever confessed Christ whiles they lived on earth; who therefore
were taught every day to pray that Luke 11. 4.
their syns might be forgiven them: and the Apostle Paul / after he had long
confessed and preached Christ truly / says of himself / Phil. 3. 12.
Not as though I were already perfect, and again, Romans 7. 19.
I do not the good thing which I would, but the evil which I would not that do
I; and again / 1 Cor. 13. 9. 10. 12.
we know in part, and we prophecy in part, but when that which is perfect is
come, then that which is in part, shall be abolished; now we see through a
glass darkly, but then (shall we see) face to face etc. But H. N. by an other
spirit which persuades him: that he is Genesis 3.
like God / yea Godded with God; writes of his city or communialtie and those
that are come unto it / that Spirit. land chap. 33. sec. 9.
as then there is no more evil, nor evil suspicion, nor yet sight of evil in
them; for within the same, one does neither see nor think any thing else, but
all good, joy, rest and peace, in the everlasting life. Such a society has
yet never been heard of on earth since Adams fall / neither does the history
of the bible show us any such church; only it tells us / there is a
generation yt at pure in their own eyes, which yet are not washed from their
filthiness, Pro. 30 12. If the Familists be this generation, they may rejoice in
the sparks of the fire that they have kindled / til they shall lie down in sorrow.
As for us / we have learned of a better teacher / that there is Eccle. 7. 22.
no man just in the earth that does good and synneth not, but Iam 3. 2.
in many things we syn all, for syn yet Rom 7. 7.
dwells in us / and if we should say we have no syn / we should but 1 Ioh. 1.
8.
deceive our selves / and the truth were not in us. Yet know we that our
confession of Christ / is acceptable unto him / because he Psalm. 103. 8^.
pardons all our iniquities / and heals al our infirmities / has Rev. 1. 5.
washed us from our syns in his blood / and will not impute them unto us.

Whereas H. N. to help the matter / says The man in his unregenerated spirit is
imperfect / he follows but his wonted course to deceive the readers; for none
are so gross as to think the unregenerated man is perfect; neither is this the
question between him and us; but whither the regenerated be perfect or no /
which H. N. erroneously holds but cannot prove; we contraryweise have proved
that the Apostles and other Christians were regenerated / but not perfect /
whiles they lived here on earth among men / Phil. 3. Romans 7. 1 Cor. 13. Iam. 3.

H. N.
15. Now might ye say, we incline or endeavor our selves thereafter, so much as
we may, for we have given our selves to the Christian-like baptismey and supper
of the Lord.

16. Oh my beloved, that were very well, if it were even so in the truth; for
there ar many that boast themselves of the baptismey of Christ, and they have
not known him in any world. For were they baptized in Christ, then should they
have put on Christ, even like as Paul says to the Galathians 3. so many of you
as are baptized have put on Christ.

17. I would gladly now ask of al those which say they have received the
Christianlike baptismey, how or after what manner Christ has a shape or fashion
in them. I am very sure, that they all for the most part should be deceived,
and should find themselves vnmighty or weak in that Being of Christ, wherein
many should make manifest themselves, that they have not received the baptismey
of Christ, but their own baptismey.

18 Every one therefore that is upright of heart, and seeks the truth in
Christ impartially, let him prove himself how he has put on Christ, according
to the spirit. And if he then find not the stirring of the holy spirit of
Christ in him, then let him advisedly look sharply yea sharply hereunto, that
he boast not himself of the Christianity, but let him humble himself before the
might of the Lord, and trust upon his grace.

H. A.
THe Christian baptism / consists of an outward washing with water by
Christ's Minister; and of an inward washing with the holy Ghost / by Christ
himself. Ioh. 1. 33. Act. 8. 38. and 10. 47. The outward washing of the flesh /
without the inward clensing of the heart, is not avaylable to salvation. 1 Pet.
3. 21. Yet may not the outward action be despised or neglected. For as the true
circumcision was of Romans ^. 29. ^
the heart in the spirit; yet if any had not circumcision also in his flesh, he
was Genesis 17. 14.
to be cut off from his people / as having broken Gods covenant; so is it
likewise for baptism come in place of circumcision. Act. 2. 38. Colos. 2. 11.
12.

The outward baptism many do rightly receive / which have not the inward; as
did Simon Magus, Act. 18. 13. 20. 21. The inward none have in deed and truth /
that do despise the outward; we teach that these both must be joined together
according to the scriptures; and labor for both. The Familists therefore which
boast of their inward baptism / and administer not the outward among
themselves / but present their children to be baptized of Papists or any other
Antichristians / so offering their children unto Levit. 18. ^^
Molech, and persuading others to do the like; show themselves to be far from
true Christian baptism / which defile their bodies and sowles with such
hypocrisy and idolatry. And H. N. which labors here to dissuade these two
daughters from suffering and witnessing against Popery / bewrays himself not
to have known Christ in any world; nor can he show Christ's shape to be in him /
whiles underhand he teaches gross impiety; pretending inward baptism and
spiritual regeneration. But the drift of this man is / by his invective against
others / to allure men to himself; for when he concludes with his exhortation
that every one should humble himself before the might of the Lord, and trust
upon his grace; his meaning is / as elsewhere he explaneth himself, Crying voice
chap. vlt. sec. 11.
Let your selves now in all your being, nature, mind, and disposition, become
renewed through the Love, in her service: and give all your understanding
captive under the obedience of the Love, and humble your selves even so under
her service; to the end that ye all may become washed in the Love, with the
pure water of the Love. For to become washed in the Love with her pure water,
is the upright washing, and the true Font of the regeneration or new birth* Now
seeing thus harlot-like he allureth all men to his Prove. 9. 17.
stolen waters within his lovely Family; for th'vpright washing; let us see
what manner of washing and baptism that is / which he so boasts of. In this
Letter he coucheth his heresy in a word, namely Sec. 17.
that Being of Christ; whereby the means that the man / or the lovely Being in
the man baptized / is Christ himself / as before is manifested / and after shall
further appear. This error he would ground on the Apostles words Gal. 3. 27.
For all ye that are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ; which place this
author thus Sec. 16.
allegeth / so many of you as are baptized have put on Christ. Where first (as
his manner is) he corrupts the text it self / by taking away those words into
Christ / and saying only baptized/whereby he would intimate / that none are
rightly baptized / but such as have put on Christ; contrary to the scriptures
which show that Act. 8. 13. 19. 20. 21.
Simon Magus and 1 Cor. 10. 2. 5.
many others were rightly baptized / as touching the Ministry of man / which
yet had not put on Christ / because they were not baptized into Christ as the
Apostle here adds / but H. N. omitteth. Again / he gathers that which the
Apostle strowed not / namely that to put on Christ is to have the Being of
Christ in us: but this H. N. fansieth to himself; for the spirit of God
speaks not so; yea the Apostle meant far otherweise; as his former words
show / where he said / verse. 26.
for ye al are the sons of God, by faith in Christ Jesus. So Christ is put on
by faith, as also elsewhere he is said to Ephesians. 3. 17.
dwell in us by faith, not by a real or essential Being, such as the Familists
feign to themselves by the spirit of error. Now to Believe in Christ, and to
have the Being of Christ, that is / to be Christ himself: are far differing
things / as all men know. And as well might the Familists plead / that Abraham
was God / because he Genesis 15. 6.
believed in God; and that the multitude of Israel were the Lord because they
Exodus 14. 31.
believed in him; as that men are Christ or have the Being of Christ / because
they beleev in him / and by belief have put him on. Neither can our imitation
or following Ephe. 5. 1. Romans 6. 3. 4.
of God or of Christ in the likeness of his death and resurrection / make the
Being of God or of Christ to be in us; any more then our following of the
Apostles / (which also we are 1 Cor. 4. 16. and 11. 1. ^ These. 3. 7. 9.
exhorted unto;) can make us of one Being with them. How absurd these things
are / any reasonable man may see: Yet such absurdities many / ar the groundly
documents of this oldest Father H. N. touching Baptism and other mysteries of
religion; as is more plainly to be seen in his First exhortatation; For there
treating of Baptism / and having described God to be a might Spirig, a perfect
clear Light, and a true Being; he adds that First exhort. chap. 7. sec. 2.
the same Being, is God the Fathers name, (meaning that Name of the Father into
which we are baptized /) and his Love it self. No word of God tells him this
/ but he forgeth it out of his fleshly heart. The Being of God (as we may learn
by the Scriptures) is such a thing / as neither men nor Angels can know or
comprehend: how then should they Be the same? 1 Timothy 6. 16. Isa. 6. 2. Psalm.
145. 3. Job. 11. 7. 8. and 36. 26. But the Name of God is that whereby in some
sort he has made known and manifested himself in his word and works; Exodus 3.
15. and 6. 3. and 33. 19. Deuteronomy. 12. 8. 11. Psalm. 9. 11.

After this having discoursed of the ibid. sec. 3. 4. etc.
Fathers plucking us to the Love of Christ / and so baptising us into the name
of the Father / and this by the Familists / in the administration of the holy
word under the obedience of the Love / with the Law of the Lord and with his
correction; etc. H. N. tells us that ibid. sec. 9.
God the Father with the discipline of his Law, manneth himself with us, and we
become likewise Godded with him, to the end that we through his own Being,
should bear as men of God, his holy Name, under the obedience of his Law etc.
Wherein this heretik utters double blasphemy; first that God the Father
manneth himself with us; by which doctrine Ath^an like he spoileth God of his
true Being, his simplicity / immutability / infinitenes and the like / which
the scriptures show to be in God; Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Iam. 1, 17. 1 King. 8. 27
Secondly in saying / that men become Godded with him / he wretthedly extolleth
corruptible man into the throne of the incorruptible God; confounding heaven
and earth / the creator and the creatures / between whose Being there is no
comparison. Which things if he would not learn of the H. scriptures / (because
he scorneth scripture learning /) yet might he have learned of Philosophers and
heathen men / who have said / that Galen. lib. 9. de placitis Hipp. et Plat.
though by certain demonstration it is manifest that a divine artizen has
procreated us, yet by no reason or wit can we perceave what his essence (or
being) is. That God is Proclus in theolog. Plat.
One alone separated from all, who cannot be explayned nor perceived, that he
is the first simplicity, incomprehensible, incomparable, uniform; that
Theophrast. in Metaph.
he cannot be known or found out, yea that it Plotin. En^. 6. lib. 8. chap. 11.
is neither possible to find him out, nor lawful to search him out. And many
like speeches have the Pagans spoken of God / more divinely soundly and
religiously a great deal / then this Epicure H. N. (the God of the Familists)
has written in his blasphemous pamphlets.

After he has thus described H. N. first exhort. chap. 7. sect. 10.
the upright Christian Baptism (as he says) or washing in the name of the
Father; he proceeds with his Baptism / in the Name of the Son; of whom he
says that ibide^ sec. 14.
he is conceived of the holy Ghost, and born of the holy Virgin Mary. And that
sect. 17.
thissame Son of God bears in us our sins etc. and that he under the
obedience of the Love of his Father, is gone before us therein, for that we
should in like manner follow after him under the obedience of his Love, in his
death of the cross, to the safemaking of us from our synns: become
incorporated to him with his like death, and baptized or washed under the
obedience of the Belief in his Name or safemaking, and bury even so through the
belief the old man etc. to the forgiving and releasing of our synns through his
name or safemaking, to the end that we might even so through Jesus Christ,
obteyn the renewing of our spirit and mind, in an upright life and resurrection
from the dead with Christ in the appearing of his Majesty. And that sec. 18.
this is the upright Christian Baptism in the name of the Son, and is the true
forgivnes and purging of our synns through Jesus Christ. And all that thus follow
not Christ sect. 20.
are no Christians, nor yet baptized in the name or salvation of the Son.

Here is an other puddle of heresy for men to be washed in / in the name of H.
Ns Christ. Of whom he first tells us / that he is conceived and born; whereas
we believe in that Christ which Mat. 2. 1.
was conceived and borne now many years ago. But the Nicholaitans have a Christ
in them / to weet / their Lovely Being, as page 18.
before is showed; Neither is their faith settled on one Jesus borne heretofore
in Israel, but they themselves are born of the virgin Mary / as their Father H.
N. teaches them in his Gospel / chap. 18. sec. 10.
saying / the upright children of the belief, which had their descent out of
the seed of the faith of Abraham, and the pure virgin Mary, as also from the
holy Ghost, were known to be the true seed of Abraham, because the same seed,
was the seed of the promise of God the Father, and was likewise in his mind,
according to the spirit, the likeness of God his Father; also spirit and
spiritual, of the godly nature and being, and according to the will of God,
wholly minded with God. These upright children of the belief / ar the Familists
themselves / (if we will beleev them /) they are born of the holy Ghost / and of
the pure virgin Mary / and are not only their own saviors / but / as a little
before in the same place he writes / sec. 9.
the seed out of the faith of Abraham, and out of the pure Virgin Mary, is the
true seed of promise, to the blessing of all generations of the earth. Thus do
these caytiffs take to themselves the honor of Christ; and though the Prophet
tells us but of one Isa. 9. 6. 7.
child that is born unto us / which should be prince of peace / should order
and stablish the kingdom of David forever: yet these tell us of many children
of the pure virgin Mary / as being that seed of promise in whom al generations
of the earth should be blessed. How they have this strange birth / we may
gather by H. N. his learned interpretation of the name Mary / which he says
Evang. reg. chap. 18. sec. 3.
signifies a Doctresse; for the doctrine of H. N. is that whereby his disciples
are born anew; as elswher he expounds that to be born of the virgin Mary out
of the seed of David after the flesh / is Docum. sent. chap. 3. sect. 5.
of the pure doctrine out of the seed of Lov. Now Mary caled in Greek (...)
Luke 1. 27.
Mariam / in Hebrew (...) Exodus 15. 20.
Mirjam, I find in the scripture to signify their rebellion; Nehem. 9. 17.
which name very fitly agrees to the Familists Doctrine: but how or in what
tongue it signifies a Doctresse / themselves I suppose can hardly show /
unless upon H. Ns authority / who as he has given them a new gospel / so also
a new language / (far differing from the language Isa. 19. 18.
of Canaan /) whereby they may make what meaning and gather what allegories they
list from words; and none must suspect any vnwisedome to be in them.

Secondly H. N. says that thissame Son of God bears in them their synns;
whereas that Son of God / in whom the scriptures teach us to beleev / has
washed us from our synns Rev. 1. 5.
in his own blood / and put the^ away by the sacrifice Heb. 9. 26.
of himself: for he was wounded Isa. 53. 5.
for our transgressions; 1 Pet. 2. 24.
his own self bare our syns in his body on the tree / and died Romans 5. 8.
for us. How erroneously then does H. N. persuade / that Christ bears in us
our synns?

Thirdly he says that Christ is gone before us / for that we should in like
manner follow after him under the obedience of his Love, in his death of the
cross / to the safemaking of us from our synns: so teaching us to save our
selves by imitation of Christ; this being all the benefit we have by his death
/ that it is an example unto us how to do likewise. Wherein H. N. shows
himself to be a greater enemy to Christianity then was Caiaphas / who said it
was expedient that Ioh. 11. 5^.
One man should die for the people / and that the whole nation perished not; so
prophesying verse. 51.
that Christ should die for the nation; whereas H. N. would have men die
themselves for their own salvation / that so they might all perish for ever.
But we have otherweise learned the true Christ / who was delivered to death
Romans 4. 25.
for our syns / and is risen again for our justification. That as by Romans 5. 1^.
one man / (the first Adam) syn entered into the world, and death by syn / and
so death went over all men; so by one man / (the second Adam Christ) we might
verse. 17.
reign in life / and as by verse. 18.
one man's disobedience many were made sinners / so by the obedience of one /
many might he made righteous.

Fourthly H. N. teaches that men are baptized under the obedience of the
belief in his name or safemaking, and bury even so through the Belief, the old
man etc. to the forgiving and releasing of their synns. Where again he
perversely applies that to obedience and mortification / which is due unto
faith. For when the Eunuch would be baptized / Philip required nothing of him
but Act. 8. 36. 37.
to believe; and Paul says / to him that works not, but believes in him
that justifyeth the ungodly, Romans 4. 5.
his faith is counted for righteousness. Although therefore Romans 1. 5.
obedience to the faith must be given by all true Christians / and they which
are baptized into I. Christ / are baptized Romans 6. 3. 4.
into his death and burial; yet is not this done / to the forgiving and
releasing of their synns, as H. N. Pharisaically infers; but to show forth
the fruit and force of faith / whereby the just Gal. 3. 11.
do live / and lay hold on Christ / whom God Romans 3. 25.
has set forth for a reconciliation though faith in his blood, to declare his
righteousness by the forgivnes of synns that are passed through the patience of
God.

Whereas therefore H. N. does gather from the premises that this (which he has
set down) is the upright Christian baptism in the name of the Son, and is the
true forgivnes and purging of our synns through Jesus Christ; he is found a
false witness against God and Christ / and would give us a synful sink of error
/ even a vayn persuasion of our own obedience righteousness and sanctification /
to wash our selves in; and has royled with his feet / the pure fountayn of
Christ's blood / which cleanses all believers from all syn. That upon himself
his own words may justly be retorted / he boasts himself of the baptismey of
Christ, and he has not known him in any world.

Of like leven / is H. Ns baptism in the name of the holy Ghost; which he
makes to be also 1 Exhort. c. 7. sec. 31.
the second birth out of the holy Ghost, the true love of God and Christ. And
this (even as the former of baptising in the name of the Father and of the Son
/) we must not understand / of any outward action by the minister of Christ /
washing with water as did John the Baptist / nor yet to be done at one and the
same time with the former: but as H. N. says / ibid. sec. 29.
in the oldnes of time, when the days of the patience of Christ, in the
obedience of the holy and gracious word, and his service of Love are fulfilled,
(that is / when men have walked long enough in the Familists religion) that
then the holy Ghost becomes powered forth through Jesus Christ (understanding
/ H. Ns Christ / to weet / the Lovely being;) over them all that have followed
Christ in his death of the cross obediently, (that is / which have saved
themselves from their synns / by their own fantastical sufferings /) and have
kept his doctrine, with the word of his patience even unto the end. Thus has
this deceiver of minds / drawn all Gods ordinance of Baptism / (which with men
is outward / and was by Act. 8. 36. 38. and 10. 47. 48.
the Apostles admininstred with material water /) unto a blasphemous imagined
Being and conformity with God / or regenerated estate: and the holy doctrine of
Justification / by forgivnes of synns through the blood of Christ shed for us /
and sealed unto us in Act. 2. 38. and 22. 16.
baptism; he has wiped away under color of Sanctification or deification by
our own following of Christ. Which things he teaches by the same spirit that
the Serpent taught Evah not to fear the outward eating of the forbidden fruit,
seeing she should be like unto God / knowing good and evil.

H. N.
19. After such a like manner witnesses Paul of the supper of Christ where he
says, so many of you as have eaten of one bread, are become partakers of one
body. Has any man now rightly used the supper of Christ, the same is then
become partaker of the body of Christ, according to the mentioning of the
scripture.

20. Therefore see unto it, yea see unto it, every one which says, that he
has fulfilled the service of Christ, or would be a disciple of Christ. For
those services and ceremonies which are ministered through the commandment of
the holy Ghost, out of a Christianlike Being; they have the promises whiles
they are rightly obeyed, that should receive the pledge of the godly
inheritance, which is the holy Ghost. And where that comes not to pass, unto
them there is not the Christian service ministered; let them make them then so
like fashioned to the scripture as they will. For whatsoever is served without
the spirit of Christ, it is an abomination before God; therein may every one
think freely.

H. A.
That which is here said of the supper of Christ / if an honest faithful man
had written the same; might well be yielded unto / for in the words there would
lurk no frawd. But coming from this old seducer / H. N. and being affixed to
his former heresies / I deny that after such a like manner (as H. N. before
treated of Bapisme) Paul witnesses of the supper of Christ. For Paul says not
that we are one Being with Christ / but that we are the 1. Cor. 12. 17.
body of Christ / and that the bread which we break / is the 1. Cor. 10. 16.
communion of his body; which body we eat and have communion with / by John. 6.
35. 29.
faith / not really and essentially as fleshly men imagine; and we are caled the
body of Christ, not properly but figuratively / by way of 1 Cor. 12. 12
similitude / and in Ephesians. 5. 30. 32.
great mystery; for as a man joined to a woman / is one flesh, so 1. Cor. 6. 16
17.
he that is joined unto the Lord is one Spirit. But as the woman /
notwithstanding her conjunction / is not the man / neither has the Being of
the man; so the church notwithstanding her conjunction / is not Christ /
neither has the Being of Christ but by faith is coupled unto him / as he says
by the prophet / Hos. 2. 2^.
I will mary the unto me in faith.

Now that H. N. has the like gross understanding of the Lords supper / as he
showed before of Baptism; appears not only by his entrance saying After
such a like manner etc: but also by his words in his Gospel where speaking of
the Passover, he says Evangel. reg. cap. 21. sect. 5.
Christ gav his disciples to drink out of the cup, (which is his passion,) his
true blood, which is his holy life of the New Testament. Thus applies he all
things about Christ / to a holy life; even then and there / where it is plainly
spoken of death. For though blood whiles it is in the body / is the life of the
same: yet when it is shed out of the body / (as Christ there Mark. 14. 24.
says his was /) it signifies death and not the life of the party; as also
the Apostle testifies / 1. Cor. 11. 26.
so often as ye eat this bread / and drink this cup ye show the Lords death til
he come. And as David would not drink the water that came out of the well of
Bethlehe^ / because it was 2. Sam. 2^. 17.
the blood of the men that fetched it / that is / because they jeoparded their
lives unto the death to fetch it; so we when we drink the wine out of the cup
in the Lords supper / do drink the blood of Christ, that is his death which
for our synns he did undergo. But H. N. by the spirit of error that possessed
him / he takes Christ's death for us / to be a holy life in us; as before is
more largely showed.

Unsound it is / and savoring of a fa^tastical spirit / that he opposes in the
end / the services and ceremonies which are ministered through the commandment
of the holy Ghost out of a Christian like being, unto the service fashioned
like to the scripture. For there is no service commanded by the holy Ghost, but
it is fashioned like to the scripture, and has the ground and warrant
therfrom; otherweise it comes from the Spirit of Satan / and not from God. For
Gods Spirit leads men into al truth / John. 16. 13. and it is Gods word which
is the truth. John. 17. 17. The three that bear witness in heaven / The Father,
the Word, and the holy Ghost, as they are in Being / so are they also in their
testimony one. 1. Ioh. 5. 7. As the doctrine of Christ was not his own / John.
7. 16.
but the Fathers that sent him: so neither is the doctrine of the holy Ghost
his own / but the sons that sent him / as Christ witnesses saying John. 16. 13.
he shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear he shall speak; and
again Verse. 14.
he shall glorify me, for he shall receiv of mine, and shall show it unto you. Now
seeing the holy Ghost teaches no other doctrine then Christ / nor Christ then
the Father; and seeing Christ himself sends al men to search the scriptures /
as they which John. 5. 39.
testify of him; and his Apostle has taught us / that the knowledge of the
scriptures is able 2. Tim. 3. 15
to make us wise unto salvation through the faith which is in Christ Jesus: we
may verily deem it to be a delusion of Satan / whatsoever any would teach us
towching Gods service / that is not warranted by the scriptures; and that those
are spirits of error / which so disdeyn and scoff at scripture-learning, and
boast of illumination by the holy Ghost.

Unsound also it is / and contrary to the scriptures / that H. N. here would
persuade us / that where it comes not to pass, that the holy Ghost which is
the pledge of the godly inheritance, is not received: unto them there is not
the Christian service ministered. For the Apostle shows / that Israel had the
true Christian service ministered to them / when they did 1. Cor. 10. 3. 4.
al eat the same spiritual meat / and drink of the spiritual Rock which
followed them / which Rock was Christ: yet received they not the Godly
inheritance which is the holy Ghost; for with Ver. 5.
many of them God was not pleased / they were overthrown in the wilderness / and
Heb 3. 19.
could not enter into the Rest of God / because of their unbelief. The
Christian service was rightly administered to Act. 8. 13.
Simon Magus, when he was baptized: yet was not his Verse 21.
heart right in the sight of God; also unto Judas, when he did sit and eat with
the other Apostles; yet even then John. 13. 27.
Satan / (and not the holy Ghost /) entered into him. Even so with us / the true
Christian service in the administration of the word / seals / and censures /
is set forth and practiced: though many receiv it into evil hearts and
unfaithful / to their greater condemnation. But the elect of God / are edified
/ comforted and confirmed in his grace hereby: though these are not many; for
many be called but few elected. Mat. 20. 16

Again / H. N. has here set down that which overthrows the whole scope of
his writing; when he says / Those services and ceremonies which are ministered
through the commandment of the holy Ghost, out of a Christian-like Being; they
have the promises, whiles they are rightly obeyed etc. If thus it be; then
ought all Christians to labor and seek for those services and ceremonies / (as
he calls them) that so they may obteyn the promises: then also must they shun
and refreyn from al false and humane ceremonies or services / which have no
promise / and are but the profaning of Gods name. And this is our cause / faith
and practice / which witness against and absteyn from the Antichristian services
and ceremonies of Popery / for which doing / the world hates and persecuteth
us: from which profession / practice / and patient suffering / this writer
would diswade / and allure to communion with wickedness / by the vayn pretenses
set forth in this Letter: as after more plainly follows.

H. N.
21. Oh, how well should they do, which do now extol themselves before the
simple, and say that they are preachers of Christ, if they would first learn to
know Christ, before they made themselves ministers of him. They will preach the
word of Christ, and yet they have not according to the Spirit, seen the fashion
or shape of Christ, or heard of the same in any world. They say the scripture
witnesses unto us, that we for Christ's cause should forsake our lives, the
which according to the truth, is very true: but the most part which speaks so
much thereof, they themselves understand not the mind or meaning of God, in
that which the scripture says: namely, how that we must hate and forsake our
own life, or else we cannot be the disciples of Christ. Therefore mark well
thereupon; and not only upon that, but also upon all the witnessings of the
scripture.

22, Oh understand advisedly what I do write, of the forsaking of our own
life. When God had created the man, then was the man in subjection to the life
of God, and not to his own life: for thereunto God had created the man, that he
should be of one life, one being, one Spirit, and of one nature with God. But
when the man desired in his heart, to love some other thing beside the life of
God, (namely the concupiscence of the syn,) then went he into his own life, and
contentation, and forsook the life of God, and lived even so his own life, and
the life of the Divil.

23. The whiles now that the office of Christ has his ministration, for to
bring the man again unto God the Father: so cannot Christ bring the man to the
Father, unless that the man forsake his own life, which he has lived so long
to the Devil and to himself, which is all that same wherein he has sought, loved
and lived to himself.

24. Is not this now a great overshooting or misunderstanding that the children
of men, can say and teach, that Christ meant hereby, the natural or elementish
man?

H. A.
IT had been well in deed if H. N. who so extolleth himself before the simple,
and says that he is a preacher of Christ, (yea Godded with God /) would first
have learned to know Christ, before he hade made him self a minister of him.
For now being ignorant of the principles of religion / and a mere stranger from
the life of God; he has perverted al things to his own and there men's
perdition. Witness this his corrupt doctrine about the forsaking of our own
life. Wherein he first and generally seeks to color his iniquity with deceit
and fraud. For / to persuade that we need not give our lives / our natural and
elementish lives, for Christ's cause / at any time; which is a doctrine of the
serpent: he makes a discourse of our spiritual life in synn / and the old man
corrupted with vices / that we ought to lay down and forsake; which we al
acknowledge to be a truth. And from this he gathers a great overshooting and
misunderstanding, of such as say Christ meant the natural or elementish man;
which is a false and deceitful conclusion. We know that these both are required
at our hands; the one (which is the mortifying of lusts and synful affections
/) of al men / if they would be saved: the other (which is a suffering of
natural death for Christ's sake /) of so many as God calls thereunto / in times
of persecution. But H. N. urges the one / that he might abolish the other;
with as good reason / as if one should persuade us not to serve or worship God
with body, because Christ John. 4.
says / we must worship him in spirit; or as if to defend fleshly filthynes /
he should reason in this manner. The wordome which God condemns, is the
whoring with men's own inventions, Psalm. 106. 39. the fornication, with stones
and stocks, Ier. 3. 9. the going a whoring after other Gods. Deuteronomy. 31. 16. Is
not this then a great overshooting or misunderstanding, that the children of
me^ can say and teach of that commandment, Thou shall not commit whordom, Deuteronomy.
5. 18. that God meant hereby fleshly whordom, done by the natural or eleme^tish
man? Lo this is the mould of H. Ns argument / and may as truly be alleged for
defense of carnal fornication / as he allegeth it for defense of carnal
idolatry / which he would persuade these two daughters to commit with the man
of syn, rather then to suffer bands or death for the witness of Christ's truth.
Neither is it to be thought but he thus understands in deed the 7.
commandment; who so erroneously understands / and expounds the second /
for the maintenance of his fleshly ease. But Oh he would have us understand
advisedly what he does write of the forsaking of our own life. God (says H.
N.) had created the man, that he should be of one Life, one Being, one spirit,
and of one nature with God; this he means / as before we have seen / to be
godded with God, and that the man should be all that God was. Which blasphemous
error / I have before by the scriptures refuted. Neither does H. N. confirm his
cursed doctrine here by any scripture; because in deed he cannot. For all that
the scripture says is / that God created man in his own image and likeness,
Genesis 1 26. and 5. 2. but that the man should be of one Being with him; it says
not / but H. N. has forged it out of his arrogant mind / who would thrust
himself into Gods throne. The image of God, is expounded by the Apostle to be
in Col. 3. 10. Ephesians. 4. 24.
knowledge, righteousness and true holiness: and H. N. adds / to be of one
Being. which if it had been true / then could not man have fallen any more then
God himself; and if he had had the same life essentially with God; then should
he have been immortal / and incorruptible / death could never have seized on him
/ 1. Tim. 6. 16. So H. N. must either deny the fall and corruption of man /
whereof not only the word of God / but nature it self and daily experience will
convince him / and himself yields: or else / he must hold a God subject to
corruption and mortality. Which if he do / then is he a monster among men /
and a wonderment to the very hethen. For whereas the Stoiks of old / esteemed
their Gods subject to al humane changes and corruption; a hethen man writing
against them says; Plutarch. advers. Stoic.
It may be one may meet with some barbarous and savage men, that think there is
no god: but there has not been any one man found, who thought their was a God,
and yet the same not free from corruption, and eternal. Let this error
therefore (which draws such hethenish and blasphemous consequences after it /)
return into H. Ns. bosom where first the Serpent hatched it.

The next deceit wherewith he would beguile his reader / lies in this word
Life; whereby he means man's carriage or conversation / according as the Apostle
speaks of walking in newnes of Life, Romans 6. 4.: whereas the Life which Christ
tells us we must be ready to lay down for his sake / is an other thing / both
for Name and signification; For the Name, is (...).
Psuche, the sowl, Luke 17. 33. and 9. 23. 24. which word howsoever we may
translate Life, because the sowl is the life of the body; yet can we not take
it for a Life or conversation, whch the Apostle in Romans 6. caleth (...).
Zoe, Whereas therefore H. N. speaks of the Life of God, and then of man's own
life, and life of the Divil; (as if Christ spoke or meant of it / when he
speaks and means of the Sowl and natural life;) herein he uses fraud / and
not Christian simplicity; or else / bewrays gross ignorance. Which may yet
further be thus proved. Our savior speaks of such a Life as himself
layd-down for us / saying / John. 10. 15.
I lay down my (...)
life for my sheep; now let H. N. say what life that was; whither it were not
his very natural and elementish life; (as he caleth it) for I hope he will not
be so wretched as to say that Christ had any wicked synful life or life of the
Divil in him / to lay down; seeing we know that in Christ there never was synn;
or if he should be so absurd as to say it / yet Christ him self will convince
him saying John. 10. 17.
I lay down my life, that I might take it again; for was he to take again a
synful life? far be it from Christian thoughts. Now from this example of Christ
the Apostle reasons thus / 1. John. 3. 16
Hereby have we perceived love, that he laid down his Life for us: therefore we
ought also to lay down our lives for the brethren. So then what Life or Sowl
Christ laid down for us; the like ar we to lay down for our brethren; and for
Christ himself / (as Peter John. 13. 37
said he would;) but that was no synful life or conversation / but the natural
life which he did lay down; therefore ours must be the like. Again this is
further confirmed by Christ's words saying / he Mat. 16. 25.
that loses his life (or sowl) for my sake shall find it; meaning in the world
or life to come; but I hope we shall there find no synful life, such as H. N.
fansieth Christ here to mean. Again the words following make it more plain /
Christ saying Verse. 26.
For what should it profit a man though he should win the whole world, if he
loose his own life (or sowl.) But it is our greatest profit / to loose our
synful life. Of that therefore Christ speaks not / as any reasonable man may
perceiv. So the Psyche sowl or life, which we must be ready at Gods pleasure to
lay down for Christ's cause / is not only the synful life, but also the natural
life of the natural or elementish man; and H. N. is but a carnal worldling to
love his elementish life more then Christ / and teach men so; under color of
forsaking our own wicked life and life of the Divil.

If the prophets and Apostles had known this deep understanding which H. N.
conceives, and had not thought they were also bound to lay down the natural
and elementish man, they would never have endured such things in their flesh as
is witnessed of them. What needed Dan. 3.
Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, to have changed the kings commandment / and
yielded their bodies to the fire / rather then they would serve or worship his
image; or Dan. 6.
Daniel have jeoparded his life among the Lions; or Act. 7.
Stephen have been stoned to death for confessing of Christ; or Heb. 11. 35.
36. etc.
others to have been racked / scourged / prisoned / hewn asunder / slain with
the sword etc? or what meant the Apostles / to show us these patterns / and will
us to Iam. 5. 10.
take the prophets for an example of suffering adversity? Was is not (thinks
H. N.) a great overshooting or misunderstanding in all these / to teach both by
word and practice / that afflictions should be suffered in the natural or
elementish man? Or rather had not al these holy martyrs / first laid down the
spiritual synful life, and then gave up the natural life also? How contrary
then is this H. N. to al holy men that ever were or wrote / that thus
disswadeth from the outward cross / under pretense of inward holiness? Therefore
let us al yt lov the Lord Jesus / say Gal. 1. 9.
Anathema to such false prophets / as thus teach doctrine contrary to the
scriptures / for to favor the flesh / and avoid affliction / as is best
pleasing to their se^sual minds. Let the same Phil. 2. 5. 8.
mind be in us that was in Christ Jesus / who (besides the troubles and
anguishes in his heart) humbled himself and became obedient unto the death /
eve^ the death of the cross. And he which suffered these things for us / has
1. Pet. 2. 21.
left us an ensample (as says the Apostle) that we should follow his steps; who
his own self bare our synns in Verse. 24.
his body on the tree. And let us learn with Paul, to take 2. Cor. 12. 10. and
11. 23. 24. etc.
pleasures in infirmities / in reproaches / in necessities / in persecutions /
in scripes and prisonment / in hunger and thirst / in cold and nakedness / and
al other anguish for Christ's sake; for when we are weak / then are we strong;
and this is a part of our mortification and denial of our selves: unto which
when true faith and obedience in the spirit is adjoined / Gods work goes
forward in us toward perfection / the end whereof will be everlasting life.

H. N.
25. Oh comprehend I beseech you, the understanding. We our selves have not
made the natural man: wherefore he cannot belong unto us. For the heaven with
the earth and all that is therein, belongs unto God; and it is Gods pleasure
and will; that al shaped creatures, so well the manly creature as any other of
al those which God has created, should live, and that it might go well with
them.

26. What shall the man then forsake, that he might be reconciled to God? not
any thing else but his own life, that is the man of syn, which has so long lien
hidd in the heart of man, which is the temple of God, and has said that he was
God. 2. These. 2.

H. A.
IT is hard to comprehend any good understanding in any thing which H. N. does
write / he is so ledd with the spirit of error in all his ways. yet may we
comprehend that his first reason here is against himself; we have not made the
natural man; wherefore he cannot belong unto us. Very true; but God has made
it; therefore it belongs to him. If he made it / and it be his; then may he
require it when he will / and we must not deny him his own. Now he requires it
/ when for witness of his truth men will shed our blood; though they do it
unjustly / yet his requiring is just; and we may not deny him or his truth /
for the saving of our lives; as before is proved. Of this reason therefore which
H. N. brings / we may say with the prophet / Psalm. 37. 15.
his sword has entered into his own heart.

His next reason is a depth of iniquity; for seeming to plead for God / he
seeks to draw men from God. Gods will is (says he) that al shaped creatures,
so well the manly creature as any other, should live and that it might go well
with the^. So then to save their natural lives / ye Familists think they may
deny and forswear Christ and al true religion; and may communicate with all
idolatry and worship of divils / if Princes upon pain of death / shall so
co^ma^d. This was the intendement of this present Letter / sent to two maidens
/ that refused (as it seems) the idolatrous Mass and subjectio^ to the
Romish Antichrist / with hazard of their lives. This is the daily practice of
the Nicolaitans H. Ns disciples / who rather then they will suffer imprisonment
/ banishment / death or the like / for their religion; will join with Papists /
Protestants / Arrians / Anabaptists / or any religion / if the magistrate
authorize and command it. For though they hold that their Fidelitas. Declar.
chapt. 4. sect. 11.
God of Love (as they call him) is the true living God, and besides him there is
no God more; and his Gods-service of Love, which they minister under the
obedience of his Love, is the true safe-making Gods-service, and besides the
same there is not any Gods-service more, neither in heaven nor yet in earth: yet
will they partake with any of the Godservices used in the world / though they be
contrary one to another. For H. N. in his new Gospel complayneth that Evangel.
cha ^2. sect. 4.
many have unorderly rejected and blasphemed the services and ceremonies of the
catholic church of Rome, rented the concord and nurturable sustentation of the
same, and turned them away therfrom, and even so out of their knowledge which
they took out of the scripture, brought in certain services and ceremonies in
another wise or order etc. But his disciples in England / which land has
rejected / and departed from the catholic church of Rome / (as many other
nations have /) do pretend / in their late supplication to the King, yt they are his true faithful loyal and obedient subjects, to al his laws and
ordinances spiritual and temporal, and do deny that they vary or swarve from
the now established religion in this land, either in services, ceremonies,
sermons or sacraments. Thus either H. N. or these his folowers / or both / must
needs be hypocrites / that so do write and profess of two adverse churches
and religions; when in deed they approve of neither, but think as H. Ns
Fidelitas. Declar. chapter 4. sec 11.
Co-elder avoucheth / that they which remayn without them and their
Communaltie, and without the Requiring of the gracious Word, and his Service of
Love, or withdraw them selves therfro^: have no living God, nor yet true
God-service; but are Ephesians. a. b.
without God, and without Gods-service, in this world. yet notwithstanding this
their judge me^t and profession, rather then the manly creature should die /
they will fall down before idols / will deny their God of Love, and will worship
the Papists God of bread in the Mass / yea will confess or deny any point of
doctrine / and submitt unto any Gods-service or religion. And if they will thus
do / in things concerning God; how much more may we think they will so do / in
things concerning men. That if any Prince should be so wicked as to forbid al
marriage on pain of death / and command or permit a community of women / or
whordome; these me^ rather the^ ye ma^ly creature should perish / would not
spare to defile their bodies (as well as their sowles) in all manner filthynes.
Yet syn they not (as they perhaps think) if their God of Love have their heart
in hold / and they be obedient to the requiring of the service of the Love; for
as H. N. says Spir. land. cha. 39. sec. 8.
They know not of any other religion or godservice, then of the service of Love.

But let us further see / if we can comprehend what H. Ns. position here does
imply. If it be Gods will that the manly creature should live; and this be
absolute and without restraynt; then may not the Magistrate put any to death
for any crime; or make war upon any occasion; for H. N. will tell the
magistrate / he made not the natural man, wherefore he cannot belong unto him;
but unto God, and his will is, that al shaped creatures should live, and that it
might go well with them. This Anabaptistical error / is built on H. Ns. rotten
ground; and that the Familists do indeed deny the use of the sword unto the
Magistrate (contrary to Paul's doctrine Romans 13.) and al use of wars / may
appear by H. Ns. words otherwhere / complaining of the Land of ignorance (which
is every where / but in his Family) that Spirit. land. chap. 5. sec. 9.
they make there many swords, halberds, spears, bows and arrows, guns,
pellets, powder, armor or harness etc. for that the tyrannical oppressors and
those that have a pleasure in destroying, should use war and battle therwithal
one against another. And because the taking away of the sword / is the
frustrating of the magistrates office / (for wherefore serves he / if not as
for the wealth of the good / so Romans 13. 4.
to take vengeance on them that do evil?) therefore it follows necessarily /
that they condemn al magistracy in the church / as do also the Anabaptists;
for H. N. says of his lovely city / that Spirit. land. chapter 37. sec. 2.
no man reigns over an other, and that pleases God well, namely that the one
man of God reigns not over the other. Thus under a color that Gods creatures
al should live / he would abolish Gods ordinances / (who has commanded Exo.
21. 12. 25. 16, 17. etc.
that some malefactors should die and not live) and bring confusion upon civil
polities / as he has upon Christian religion.

Again / in that he says al shaped creatures should live / and then the manly
creature, so well as any other; will it not follow also hereupon that Beasts must
live / and may not be killed for the food of man. For they are shaped creatures
/ and made by God / not by us; and so by H. Ns. learning / cannot belong unto
us; and therefore may not be killed for our sustenance; though God do plainly
permit it in his law / Genesis 9. 3. Deuteronomy. 12. 20. 21. 22. And so here is another
doctrine of Divils, (as the 1 Timothy 4. 1. 3.
holy Ghost caleth it) comprehended in this Oldest Fathers deep head / whiles
by consequence he commands to absteyn from meats; or else his ey-sight failed
him / when he set down this reason. But the Apostle gathers quite contrary to
this man; as namely because / The earth is the Lords and the plenty thereof /
therefore we may eat al flesh / 1 Cor. 10. 25. 26. Accordingly / should H. N.
(if he had savoured the things of God) have reasoned and concluded; The Lord
made our bodies and our sowles / therefore it belongs unto us / to look that
with both we 1 Cor. 6. 20.
glorify him. The body is for the Lord / therefore ver. 13.
not for fornication: the body is the temple verse 19.
of the holy Ghost; therefore it may not be prostrate before idols; for 2 Cor. 6.
16.
what agreement has the temple of God with idols; the body is the Lords /
therefore it may not sit at the table of Divils; and whatsoever the 1 Cor. 10.
20 21. Rev. 9. 20.
hethens or Antichristians offer / they offer unto Divils / and we cannot drink
the cup of the Lord / and the cup of Divils. Thus should H. N. if any Christian
wisdom or grace had been in him / have collected and inferred; and not as now
he does / persuade the two daughters to communion with the church of Rome /
(which the holy Ghost caleth Reve. 18. 2.
the habitation of Divils) because their bodies or lives are the Lords; and it
belongs not unto them / to lay down their natural lives for the testimony of
Jesus at any time.

But if H. N. had known in any world what the true life means; he would not
so have dissuaded from suffering temporary death for the Gospels sake. This
present life (which he so much estemeth) is a 1 Cor. 15. 31
dying daily, as the Apostle teaches: the true life is / when the body having
been verse. 42.
sown in dishonor / shall be raised in glory. Of which raising up / this
Sadducee H. N. is utterly ignorant / as after shall be showed; and in his
ignorance perverteth al religion / and even reason it self / for to maynteyn a
momentany natural life / though it be to the / perpetual damnation of body and
sowl in hell.

His sect. 26.
conclusion what the man must forsake, that he may be reconciled to God? not
any thing else but his own life, that is the man of syn etc. is like his
premises / full of guile and error; and what truth is in it / is against
himself. Erroneous it is / to say or to insinuate / that we may be reconciled
to God, by any thing that we can forsake / be it syn or what else. For our
reconciliatio^ to God is wrought by Christ alone / not by ourselves when we
forsake synn; of which point we have before spoken. Guileful it is to say or
insinuate / that Christ in willing us to forsake our lives for his sake / meant
that by so doing / we should be reconciled to God, or that we do so esteem of
any martyrs death. The man does by it / (as Christ John. 21. 19.
signified of Peter's death) glorify God; unto whom he was before by Christ's
death reconciled. False it is to say a man must not forsake any thing else but
his own synful life; for Christ tells us further of Mat. 19. 29
forsaking howses, brethren, sisters, father, mother, wife, children, lands for
his names sake; and these I trow are not also the Man of syn that lies hid in
man's heart. But it was far from H. Ns heart / to forsake any of these for
Christ; he loved his sensual life so well.

Erroneous it is / that our synful life is that man of synn spoken of 2 These.
2. of which point / is to be spoken in the next place.

And this only truth / that we should forsake our own synful life,
overthrows H. Ns doctrine / and his disciples practice. For syn it is and a
continual synful life / to frequent idolatrous assemblies / hear mass /
worship a God of bread / and the beast Antichrist; observe his wicked
ceremonies / and profess his heretical doctrines; as the Nicolaitans will do /
and H. N. would persuade these daughters unto; whiles yet he pretends to have
them leav syn. Dissimilation and Mat. 23. 28. 1 Pet. 2. 1.
hypocrisy / is a hateful syn both to God and man; wherein they that live / are
altogether strangers from the life of God: and this is the trade of life and
religion among the Familists, who hating all religions but their own; yet will
profess counterfeit and walk in any religion / save their own; for that they
do only in secret / because their works are evil; but God in his time / will
give them their due reward / even openly.

H. N.
27. Oh how grossly then do they comprehend this, which signify or apply this
same unto us upon the Pope of Rome, and say that the Pope is the Antichrist.
Oh, oh, no: the Antichrist is nearer unto us, were it well known. The wisdom of
the flesh, wherewithal the man will judge the godly causes, is verily the right
Antichrist; I say, the wicked nature of the Divil, (wherewith the man is of one
mind; so long as he in the renewing of his spirit, is not incorporated with
Christ,) is verily that same right Antichrist. Oh understand it rightly, with
an impartial heart.

H. A.
HEre H. N. cries out of their gross comprehension, that say / the Pope of
Rome is the man of syn, the Antichrist; in the mea^ time / he shows himself
to be most gross / and carnal in his comprehension / that expounds that man
of syn spoken of 2 These. 2. to be The wisdom of the flesh; the wicked nature
of the Divil etc. The vanity and falsehood whereof / every babe in Christ / that
looks into that scripture / may easily perceiv. For The Apostle speaking there
of Verse. 2.
the day of Christ's coming, teaches them not to exspect that / until Verse. 3.
the departing (from the faith) were first come, and the man of syn, the Son of
perdition were first disclosed. But the wisdom of the flesh and wicked nature
of the Divil, was come already / for Adam and his children had brought it forth
and nourished it in the world / even from the beginning Gen 3. Romans 5. 12. 14.
17. 18. etc. and it was disclosed both by the Law / Romans 3. 20. and by the
Gospel already preached / 1 Cor. 1. 18. 19. 21. 27. and 2. 6. 7. etc. 1 John 3.
8. etc. Wherefore it is but deceiving of men's sowles / to teach them to wayt and
look for that thing to come / which is already come; and H. N. shows how far
he is from understanding the scriptures / which yet so insolently vaunteth
himself over al men. As for us / we have learned of the Apostles / to
understand generally every false prophet to be an Antichrist, 1 Ioh. 2. 18 19.
22. But specially one great Antichrist to come after the Apostles times / whose
mystery began even 2. These. 2 7.
then to work whiles they lived; but something there was which then Verse 6.
withheld his reveling / (namely the hethen monarchy of the Roman empire /)
which at that time Verse. 7.
withheld and hindered (the doctrine of the Gospel) by open tyranny and
persecution; and should let the working and disclosing of that great Antichrist
in the Papacy / until himself (that hethen Empire) were taken out of the way.
Then after him should arise an other Rev. 13.
Beast or Monarchy / with horns like the Lamb (Christ /) pretending his faith
and Religion / (as do the Papists /) though his speech be like the Dragons /
in all damnable doctrines and idolatries. And this Antichrist, should seat
himself 2. These. 2. 4
in the Temple or house of God / (which is the 1. Tim. 3. 15
Church;) and in the consciences of men / by his errors wherewith he should
deceiv men's sowles. A large and lively description of which Beast and great
whore / that reigns in the Rome.
city built on 7. hills / we have in the book of Revelation / the light whereof
H. N. would darken by the foggs and mists / of his own fleshly and allegorical
interpretations.

Now that the reader may see how good a proctour H. N. is for the Pope / and
wherefore he is so nearly affected to him / and denies him to be Antichrist; it
shall not be amiss / to show what pains he has taken / to compare himself and
his society with the Pope / and his clergy: that al me^ may discern them to
be both sworn brothers against Christ.

In his new Gospel / caled Evangelium regni, H. N. has thus applied things /
Cha. ^^. ^.^.
This same foregoing (says he) of the Elders of the holy understanding, and
their anointing of the holy Ghost, to Priests Elders and Fathers, has the
catholic church of Rome, til unto this day, ministered and observed in figures,
as is abovesayd. For to a token of remembrance of the holy anointing of Christ
with the holy spirit, they have used the anointing with oil, and it is a
sacrament of the holy church of Christ, which signifies unto us the anointing
of the Priests or Elders, with the holy Ghost.

5. Of which anointed Elders or foregoers of the co^minalty of the catholic
church of Rome, the cheifest anointed is named Papa, and signifies unto us an
old Father in the holy understanding: also the chief Bishop or high priest
which has his being or conversation in the most holy of the true and perfect
sanctuary, and ministers his office of the holy word therout, and for that
cause is also named The most holy Father. etc.

sect. 8.
Those now that are next to the forenamed Papa, are named Cardinals, which
signify unto us the principallest, which are nearest in the most holy
understanding of the godliness, unto the Eldest or holiest Father; and have
their communion with him in the most holy of the true and perfect being etc.

After this he proceeds to show how the sect. 1^.
Bishops signified the pastors of the sheep and lambs of Christ; sect. 14.
The Parish priests or curats, signified Levitical priests, or adjoined Pastors
and elders of the holy understanding etc. sect. 17.
The Deacons, signified ministers or helpers of the parish priests in the holy
Godservices; sect. 18.
The Sextons, signified conservers or keepers of the holy things. sect. 1^.
The many manner of orders, wherthrough many anointed ones and zealous people
sought the righteousness and holiness, which are named Monks, signified such as
dwell alone, and are through the love of the righteousness Sanctified, and for
that cause also separated from the world, and from al what is worldly and
fleshly etc. And, sect. ^1.
Next unto al these forenamed anointed ones, are the common people, which
beleev and cleave unto the services religions and ceremonies of the Anointed,
and which also humble them to the requiring of those same, etc.

Thus has H. N. fetched the mystery of his Family of Love / from the Popes
forge; that al men may see it is no marvel that he denies the Pope to be
Antichrist; for H. N. (the oldest Father of this Family /) will be the Papa and
great Antichrist himself / and the Pope of Rome / was but his shadow and
figure. Howbeit / herein he was overseen to gather his pedigree from the
Papacy / which he enought much better have fetched from the holy scriptures;
(but that he is an enemy to scripture learning: as he often bewrays.) For H.
N. the greatest in the Family / who is (as himself says) Evan. ch 1. sect. 1.
Godded with God in the spirit of his Love; Because Prove. of H. N. chapter 8. s. 3.
The God of heaven as the Father himself, is come down, and brings in the
service of his Love, himself with his Christ, and his holy Ghost, and with all
that which with him is Gods, unto his obedient man H. N. and Godding the same
with him, he has manned him with the same; This new God of the Nicolaitans is
described in scripture thus; Rev. 9. 11.
They have a king over them which is the Angel of the bottomless pit, (for so
also H. N. says / he was Evang. reg. chapter 1. s. 1.
raised up from the death;) whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in Greek he is
named Apollyon, [in al languages / The destroyer.] The doctrine taught by this
H. N. corrupting and darkning all the holy scriptures / was figured out by the
Rev. 9. 2.
smoke of the botomlesse pit, which darkened sun and aier. And the ylluminated
Elders of this Family / ar pourtrahed out by Verse. 3. 10.
Locusts that came out of the smoke of H. N. his heresies / with stings in
their tayls like scorpions / to wound men's consciences by their deceivable
doctrines. This had been a directer and playner pourtrature of the Familists /
then that figure fetched from the Papists. And thus we may perceiv / it was not
without cause that H. N. cried out / Oh, oh, no, the Antichrist is nearer unto
us, were it well known; when in deed so great a monster of Antichristianity was
hatched in his own bosom / who thus has Deified hmself and blasphemed God?
Neither is he a friend to Popery only / and a Lover of the whore of Babylon;
but of Judaisme also / that he may appear to be quite abolished from Christ.
Paul in his Epistle to the Hebrews / Chapters. 7. 8. 9. and 10.
proves at large the abrogating of the Levitical Priesthood and sacrifices /
by the coming of our high priest Christ Jesus / and sacrifice of his own body /
(according as was prophesied of him / that Dan. 9. 27.
he should cause sacrifice and; oblation to cease;) and for the Jews / that
would still continue their figurative worship / he shows them to have no part
in Christ / when he says Heb. 13. 10. etc.
We have an altar, whereof they have no authority to eat which serve in the
Tabernacle. But H. N. teaches us that the services of Aaro^s priesthood are
yet necessary for some; in these words / Evangel. regni. Chap. 13. s. 8.
Oh alas, how grossly have then certain wise of the world, and scripture-learned
overreached them herein, which have without diversity forsaken the law and the
service of the Elders Testament, and of the Priests office after the ordinance
of Aaron, and set back the same as a thing vnneedful: not once distincting unto
whom the service after the ordinance of Aaron, is yet necessary, nor yet with
whom the same at the appointed time cease or leaves off. Thus H. N. shows
how good a friend he is to Jews and Papists; But his enmity against Christ and
his Gospel / can not easily be opened / it is in so many particulars. He
thrusts himself into Christ's throne / and makes himself the Judge of all the
world; Evang. chapter 1. s. 9.
For behold (says he) in this present day, the glorious coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ with his many thowsands of his saints, which has set himself now
upon the seat of his Majesty, for to judge in this same day which the Lord
has ordained or appointed, the whole world with equity etc. with many like
speeches (as before is showed) wherein the scriptures which foretell of Christ's
coming to judgment at the worlds end / H, N. applies to himself; and so the
plain doctrines of the gospel / are made but fabulous / by this blasphemers
allegory: and he shows himself to be the Father of those 2 Pet. 3. 3. 4
mockers that were foretold should come in the last days / which walking after
their lusts / should say where is the promise of his coming? etc. Now because
at Christ's coming / must be the resurrection of the dead / therefore that one
error / necessarily draws on another / namely that the resurrection is past
already, which was the kanker whereby 2 Timothy 2. 17 18.
Hymeneus and Philetus in the Apostles days / destroyed the faith. This
heresy has H. N. published in his Gospel; saying / Evang. reg. chapter 35: s, 8,
9.
Behold in this present day is this scripture fulfilled and according to the
testimony of the scripture, the raising up and the resurrection of the Lords
dead comes also to pass presently in this same day, through the appearing of
the co^ing of Christ in his majesty. Which resurrection of the dead, seeing
that the same is come unto us from Gods grace, we do likewise in this present
day, to an Evangelie or joyful message of the kingdom of God and Christ,
publish in all the world, under the obedience of the Love. In which resurrection
of the dead God shows unto us, that the time is now fulfilled that his dead,
or the dead which are fallen a sleep in the Lord, rise up in this day of his
judgment, and appear unto us in Godly glory, which shall also from henceforth
live in us everlastingly with Christ, and reign upon the earth. Thus has this
Sadducee overturned that mayn ground and principle of Christian religion /
without which our faith were but 1 Cor. 15. 16. 17.
vayn / and we were of al men the ver. 19.
most miserable; And that his religion might be even a sink of synful errors /
he has taught / that in their Lovely society / they Spir. land. chapter 37. sect.
7.
do not vow or bind themselves in the matrimony of men, nor yet suffer
themselves to be bound therein, but are like the Angels of heaven: to verify the
Apostles words / that 1 Timothy 4. 1. 3.
in the latter times some should teach and give heed unto doctrines of Divils /
forbidding to marry etc. Now seeing he says in another place / Spirit. land.
ch, 36. sec. 6.
that they commit not any adultery, for they are honest and chaste of life, and
clean or pure of heart; what may we think is among them / but a co^munity of al
men and women / yet without syn (as they suppose /) so long as it is not with
them of the World / especially seeing he says also further / Ibid. chapter 35.
sect. 4, and 5.
There is no man that claims any thing to be his own, as to possess the same
to his own private use. For no man (and that out of every ones good
disposition) can desire any thing to be his own, or yet to make any thing
proper to himself from an other, but also whatsoever is there is free, and is
there left free in his upright form. There is also no man denied to use any
thing in freedom, of al what is profitable and needful for him; for they stand
all in the equity as one in the Love; and again / Ibid chapter 39. se^. 8.
That they know not of any other religion or God-service, then of the service
of Love, and to love one an other, and so to keep themselves pure and unspotted
of the world; Which writing of H. N. may give al wise men occasion to suppose /
that he teaches in secret commune filthynes; even the doctrine Rev. 2. 1^.
of the old Nicolaitans, which God does hate. In secret / I say / for his
loathsome carnal abominations he will not openly publish / (though he has
published too much /) either to the world or to his young disciples; but this
caveat he has given to his fautors / Pro. of H. N cha. 22. s. 16.
ye shall not talk of your secrets, either yet utter your mysteries openly or
nakedly in the hearing of your young children and disciples: but spare not the
same in the ears or hearing of the Elders which can understand the same, and
are able to bear or away with the sound thereof. For it is given to the Elders
to understand the privy mysteries of the wise, and to expound their parables.
This is the counsel of H. N. touching the secrets of his religion; quite
contrary to the counsel and practice of Christ / his prophets and Apostles; for
Christ said to his Disciples / Mat. 1^. 27.
what I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in light, and what ye hear in the
ear, that preach ye on the howses; and when the Prophets Psalm. 78. 2.
opened their mouths in parables / and declared high sentences of old / they
would ver. 4. 6.
not hide them from their children / but show the^ that posterity might know it
/ and children which should be born / might declare unto their children etc.
But the deep mysteries of H. N. must not be disclosed / because as it is
written / Ioh. 3. 2^.
every man that does evil hates the light, and / Job ^4. 17.
the morning, is to the^ as the shadow of death: wherefore his doctrine is like
the Pro. 9. 13. ^7.
foolish woman's which said / Stolen waters are sweet, and hid bread is
pleasant; but let al Gods people know / that verse. 18.
the dead are there / and that her ghests are in the depth of hell.

Now though he will not let his yong-anes know his secrets; yet he will be so
bold as to know their secrets; and has taught them to shrive them unto him /
with far greater spiritual slavery / then the Antichrist of Some has done.
For H. N. in his chap. 13.
First exhortation (after he had warned his children sect. 11.
not to distrust the Eldest in the Family of Love, nor suspect any manner of
evil or vnwisdom by him) says; sect. 12.
Fourthly it is expedient, that they should make manifest their whole heart, with all their counsels, minds, wills and thoughts, together with all their doings
dealings and exercises, naked and bare before the Eldest in the Family of Love,
and not cover or hide any thing, (be it what it is,) before him. Also al
whereunto their inclination, kind, and nature draws them, and al wherewith they
become tempted or assaulted in their hearts. The Pope requires but confession
of Council. Trid. soss. 14, chapter 5.
mortal, not of venial syns; But this tyrann H. N. will know al / be it what it
is; yea even men's natural inclinatio^s. Now be it his wisdom was much oversee^
to make such a law: for this may call his Godhed into question / and make me^
think / he is but a Liar / whiles he would be a God* for our Lord Jesus knew
the Mat. 9. ^ John 2. 25.
thoughts of men / and had no need that any should testify of man / for he knew
what was in man. If H. N. be godded with God / what needs he that men should
thus make known their inclinations and actions unto him. But his disciples are
well enough served; that whereas the Romish priests did whip the^ with rods /
these their Godded Priests should scourge them with scorpions.

Finally this H. N. teaches almost every where in his abominable books / the
doctrine of that old Serpent / Genesis 3. 5.
ye shall be as Gods: saying that his people Spirit. land chapter 38. sect. 7.
have their inhabiting in Gods understanding, and stand comprehended in the
light of life, being united in Gods true being: that ibid. cha. 40. sect. 18.
they are one being with each other, namely God and his people of peace: that
Epis. of. H. N 3. chapter 4. se. 5.
God the Father through his only born son Christ, is become of one substance
again with the manly creatures; and to that end also, because that al manly
creatures should through Christ be one substance with God the Father, is Christ
preached; that Epis. 4. c. 5. sect. 18.
when as we are renewed in Jesus Christ through faith / also come to the same
age of the man Christ / so is God the Father the^ likewise one substance or
ma^ned with us through Christ, and is al in all: that it is Prove. of H. N. chapter
8. s. ^.
Gods will, that now in the last time, through his service of love, al people or
generations of men, which are goodwilling to his righteousness, should assemble
them unto him and his godded man (H. N.) and even so likewise with them all that
which is manly, to the end that they all should become of one being with him
and his godded man, and so be al named Gods, and children of the most highest.
These and many the like blasphemies (whereby he quite overthrows the Being of
God / as before is proved /) ar often to be found in his writings. For which
also / (that he might the more imitate the first serpent / which said Genesis 3. 9.
God does know,) he allegeth and corrupts the holy scriptures; that if he be
Antichrist, which should sit in the temple of God / 2 These. 2. 4.
showing himself that he is God / (as Paul warns:) this H. N. may be known to
be a great Antichrist; and all the world may see / John 11. 4^. 50. 51.
Caiaphas prophesied not righter of Christ and of his death for the nation;
then H. N. has spoken / when he cried out of the Antichrist to be so near unto
him. It is very true.

H. N.
28. Oh, what a slight and earthly understanding is this, that God should be
appeased with an elementish body: even like as though that God were fleshly,
even as an unregenerate man.

29. I say on Gods behalf, that God is not in that manner of sort with the man;
but rather the ungodly being or nature, which all unregenerated men do carry in
their hearts, wherout al wickedness is engendered and brought forth. Read Mark. 7.
Mat. 23. and in more other places in the scriptures, where the same is rcited or
mentioned.

30. Therefore my beloved, this is the counsel of God toward you both, that you
should not boast yourselves in such an uncertain confessing; but for the love
of Christ's sake, take it for the best, which I have here witnessed unto you;
namely that you have not confessed Christ according to the truth, but the
elementish ceremonies, even as they out of the darkness, without the Spirit of
Christ, were taught unto you. Not that I therein do accuse or blame any man, as
one that does evil of a set purpose. O no; for they know not any other, then
that they do use the doctrine of Christ. But my hearty desire is toward every
one, which say that they seek Christ, that they might seek and find him aright.

H. A.
OH what a slight and serpentlike subtilty is this / that H. N. should abuse
and deprave the words and actions of Gods servants in this manner; as if by
their meek and patient sufferings for Christ's sake / they thought to appease God
with an elementish body. It is far from the hearts of all the faithful / to
imagine that any thing which themselves can either do or suffer / in body or
sowl / is able to appease God. They have otherweise learned to know the guilt
and wages of syn / the infinitenes of Gods majesty who is angry with the world
for their misdeeds / the weakness and unworthiness of al men's works and
sufferings. To that therefore which H. N. pretends to say on Gods behalf; I
answer with Job / and ask him / Job. 13. 7.
if he will speak wickedly for God; or talk deceitfully for his cause? For we
esteem our sufferings nothing / and all our righteousness as dung. It is the Heb.
10. 5. 6. 10.
body of our Lord Jesus that was hanged on the tree / which is the only
sacrifice for our synns / and appeaseth the wrath of his Father: and the things
that we do or suffer / benifit not him but our selves: for the chastisements
of God / whither on our bodies or sowles / are (as the Apostle teaches us /)
Heb. 12. 10.
for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness. Wherefore H. N. has
Psa. 7. 14.
conceived mischief and brought forth a lie / whiles laboring to abolish the
outward confessing and suffering of Christians / he falsely imputes unto the^
this error / to beleev they appease God with an elementish body, yea the frawd
of this falser is manifestly discovered / as the reader may observe; for the
error which he would lay upon others / is found to be in himself / whose
doctrine is such as teaches men to be their own saviors. By the Apostles
Gospel / we have our redemption and forgivenes of syns through Col. 1. 14. Heb
9. 28.
the blood of Christ once offered; to him also give Act. 10. 43.
all the prophets witness / that through his name / all that beleev in him shall
receiv remission of syns / (says Peter:) but by H. Ns. Gospel / we obteyn it
First Exhor. chapter 20. s. 19.
by our own imitation of Christ in his death / and taking up of our cross. And
many such like deadly venomous doctrines are sparsed in his writings / to
disanull the true Christ / with his sufferings and merits / and to set up a
false and imaginary Christ bred / and born in his corrupt heart / as I have
before proved. Now though we hold not God to be appeased with our sufferings /
as this man cavilleth; yet hold we upon ground from the scriptures / that we
must serve and glorify God both with our 1 Cor. 6. 20.
bodies and with our spirits / because both ar Gods; and therefore are we willed
to give up Romans 12. 1.
our bodies / a living sacrifice / holy and acceptable unto God / which is our
reasonable serving of God. And if by bonds and prisonment / by racking /
scourging / stoning / hewing asundex; or other the like torments of body / as
Heb. 11. 35. 36. 37. and 13, 3. 2 Cor. 11. 23. 25. etc.
others before us have suffered / God also try us: we ought with patience to
bear them / and not to go from the confessing of Christ and his truth / for
avoiding them / as this deceiver would persuade us. His conclusion therefore /
which he makes against these two daughters / namely / that they have not
confessed Christ according to the truth, etc. is yet to be proved / for as much
as he has not by any ground from Gods word / overthrowen their faith or
confession in any point / but only sought to undermine it / by falsehood and
deceyt; abusing the readers / and perverting the holy scriptures; his desire
being to draw others into the same destruction with himself; who in sted of
confessing Christ according to the truth, has like an Antichristian overthrown
the whole Gospel of Christ / denied him to be come in the flesh / and set up an
Idol in his place / even the Lovely Being out of his own fleshly heart.

H. N.
31. God is my witness, that it is true which I here write unto you; and the
occasion of my writing is chanced, for that I bear a sorrowful heart with you
both. But this is my hope over you, that ye will take it at my hands, as out of
the Love of Christ, and not to be in any case obstinate in your selves, for to
wind away your selves from the reading of these Letters with humble hearts.

32. And when ye have deliberately read the same witnesses, and the Lord added
his wisdom thereto, whereby the eyes of your hearts might be a little opened:
then spare me not to be your servant, and give me to understand by the bring
thereof, and there shall yet more be brought unto you, then that which you have
presently.

33. And if you cannot acknowledge this for the truth, yet look well always
hereto, that ye do not blaspheme the same which ye know not. And I likewise
shall not blame you, although that you cannot comprehend the same. For the godly
gifts cannot be brought to any one by violence or compulsion, for they are the
gifts of God.

34. Herewith I salute you both, (whose names I know not,) very heartily through
the love of Christ; and wish unto you, out of the ground of my sowl, the
knowledge of the very true Spirit of Christ, that ye might learn to know
aright, your caling in Christ. That grant us the Almighty God, through his
Love, Amen.

By your unknown friend H. N.

H. A.
IF God were witness, that it is true which H. N. here has written; the
scriptures / which are Gods witnesses or testimonies would approve of the same;
but by holy writ / his errors are disproved; and the evils which he unjustly
lays upon others / are justly returned upon his own head; and found to be in
himself and his bewitched folowers / whom I leav to the done of him which has
said / Mal. 3. 5.
I will come near to you to judgment, and I will be a swift witness against
sorcerers, and against adulterers, and against false swearers. etc. And for all
that shall read these writings / as they ought to be far from blaspheming the
truth which they know not; so should they be far also from approving or
harkening to a known deceiver and blasphemer of God; such as this Henry
Nicolas by this Epistle and his other ungodly writings is proved for to be. His
fawning words and submissive carriage / with promise of more matters after; are
but the behavior of the Prove. 7. 14 -- 21.
Lewd woman / that uses to entise with flattering lips; when her verse. 27.
house is the way unto the grave / which goes down to the chambers of death.
What thank or reward then remaynes for H. N. for all his pains and proffered
kindness / but that which the wise man has appointed saying / He that blesses
his friend with a loud voice, rising early in the morning, it shall be counted
to him as a curse. Pro. 27. 14.

FINIS.
In page 47. lin. 5. before the end, for love read live^


