A PATHVVAY TO PATIENCE, IN ALL MANNER or AFFLICTIONS.

By Io: Norden London Printed By Tho: Harper 1626.

A PATHVVAY TO PATIENCE, IN ALL MANNER OF CROSSES, trials, troubles, and
afflictions* inwardly for sin, or outwardly by sickness, poverty, enemies,
imprisonment, banishment, slanders, disobedience of Children, houshold-crosses
between man and wife, etc. With necessary Prayers for every of them; as also
for diverse other necessary purposes.

By I. N.

HEB. 12. 5. My Son, despise not the chastening of the Lord, neither faint
when thou art rebuked of him.

AT LONDON, Printed by E. A. for T. HARPER. 1626.

To the right Honorable Earl of PEMBROOKE, Lord Chamberlain to his Majesty:
And to his entirely beloved and most loving brother, the Earl of MONTGOMERIE;
health, honor, and happiness here, with all heavenly blessings; and eternal
salvation, when the Lord Jesus shall come to glorify his Saints in heaven.
My good Lords,
ALthough it behooves every man, that undertakes to instruct others in any
Art, Mystery, or Science, to be himself well furnished with knowledge,
judgment, practice, or experience, in the thing he undertakes to teach: yet
for want of the depth and quintessence of that knowledge and judgment; he may
speak, to the instruction of others, by the experience of his own practice. I
have little knowledge to judge, and less judgment truly and justly to censure
other men's virtues or vice;: only having some speculation, in, and some
practice of, and by practice some experience, in that which I am bold (under
your Honorable names) to publish, Concerning that most excellent virtue of the
mind, perfect Patience: I have essayed (partly for mine own, partly for the
comfort of others) what profit I could produce by mine own experience, of the
patient bearing of mine own crosses and troubles; thereby to confirm mine own
assurance, and to intimate unto others, that are any way afflicted, or troubled
inwardly in mind, or outwardly with any cross or trial; that impatience,
murmuring, or grudging, make the lightest crosses and troubles seem more
irksome, more harsh, and heavier, then in deed they are of their own nature:
And, that perfect patience, makes them seem light, and easy to be borne,
being never so weighty in the opinion of men. And therefore I have, out of my
slender experience, endeavored (in this little Pamphlet, rudely digested) to
remember some several occasions (among infinite) requiring this divine virtue
Patience; wishing thereby all men to prepare themselves, to undergo their
troubles, present, or when they come, with godly patience; as David did, who
suffered manifold tentations, yet his soul always kept silence unto God,
assuring himself, that he should not, much be moved: not much; yet the most
godly man may do, as David did in his have; fret at the prosperity of wicked
men, himself in affliction, poverty, and under the cross. But a wise man
soon reformes himself as he did; when he considers, that though many are
the troubles of the righteous, and that it is his lot to suffer, yet that God
will deliver him in the end out of all. Therefore is he patient until his
delivery come. And to the end that such as have, or may have occasion, to make
use of these my weak meditations and prayers; I have in all humbleness
presumed, to publish them under your Honorable names. Entreating your good
Lordships, not to conceive, that I seem thereby, so idly vainglorious, and
so forgetful of your places, wisdoms, and Honorable estates, as to presume
to teach your Honors, the necessity and use of this heavenly, and
(consequently) Honorable virtue. But only that your good Lordships would be
pleased to grace, this my weak labor, with your Honorable countenance; for
the weaker the building is, it requires the stronger supporters: craving your
Honorable favors therein, that Other men that have occasion to use it, may
the more willingly embrace it. For, if men, of whatsoever quality, honorable,
or inferior, truly knew the sweetness of this virtue, though every man has
not one and the same, yet the most of men have, or may have some cause to
practice it, if they will have comfort in their crosses, which are of as many
kinds, as are the several estates and conditions of men, of whatsoever
quality, high or low.

Most humbly entreating your Lordships Honorable pardon, of my rudeness, in
handling of a work worthy the labor of a man of most exquisite gifts; And to
bear with my too much boldness, in using your Honorable names, in a matter
so impertinent to your Honors. But I am so much the more encouraged, to
present it unto your good Lordships, by how much, I conceive (as well by the
approbation of all virtuous men, as by mine own experience) your Honorable
enclinations to the practice of all divine virtues: And do assure my self,
that your Honors will take in good part, that which I have (though weakly)
done, more in regard of my good meaning, then of the thing it self; which I
humbly recommend, unto your most Honorable acceptations.

Ever more bound unto your good Lordships for many your most Honorable
favors, JOHN NORDEN.

To the beneuolent Reader, and especially to such as are afflicted or under any
kind of cross or trouble.
THere is no greater comfort to a Christian man, then here to feel Gods ready
help in his necessities, troubles, and afflictions; every man by nature
desires it, yet few attain unto it, for that they use not the means, which
are faith, prayer, and patience: faith to believe it, prayer to obtain it, and
patience, to wait for it.

Patience is a most especial virtue, the Mistres and guide as it were of all
the affections, and governor of the inward mind; which being thereby well and
constantly settled, will restrain thee from all extrauagant and unruly ways:
It will gently curb all thine ungodly desires; It will withold thee from
taking or seeking rash revenge of them that do thee injury: It will keep
thee in equal temper, as well in adversity as in prosperity. And thou can
not be truly reputed a patient man, If thou show thy self discontent (as to
murmr or grudge) in any outward cross or inward affliction: Or if thou can
not suffer and pass by injuries, wrongs, rebukes, slanders, and abuses
(without indiscreet and peevish passions) with a stayed, settled, and patient
mind, thou can not truly be accounted a Christian valiant man.

Yet true it is, that many think it such a disgrace unto them, to put up any
small injury without desperate and rash revenge, as he loses thereby the
reputation of his valor; but (if it be duly considered*) he is the most
magnanim^ous man, that can best keep under, tame and rule his own passions:
and he that is foiled by his own froward and heedlesse fury, discovers
greatest infirmity, and shows himself unworthy to be called a moral
virtuous, much less a truly religious man.

True Religion is evermore accompaned with a virtuous and valorous mind, which
(if it be perfect) has evermore patience joined with it, as chiefest of all
other mental virtues: and therefore, he that in every injury, cross or
affliction, grossly bewrays his impatience, howsoever he may otherwise seem
(not moved) he is neither rightly religious, nor truly virtuous.

No man indeed, can be truly known to be a religious or a virtuous man,
unless he meet with the contraries of both, and therein show his valor,
constancy and patience, in maintaining the one, and showing testimonies of the
other: for the man that is carried away or shows himself newter, between
true and false Religion, or between virtue and vice, has neither Religion nor
virtue.

Men are not known to be truly virtuous but by trial; for, as there are
certain minerals, that seem to be the very mother of gold or silver, which
being cast into the fire, appear only sulferous, euaporate, and turn to
smoke; so is there a kind of meek and civil behavior in some men, that
gives a certain outward fair luster, and show, that it will bear the test;
but when it is tried by the fire of affliction, crosses, troubles, injuries,
reproaches and the like, it will appear a mere shadow without any true show
of that substantial approved virtue.

Who is not a virtuous and valorous man before he be tried? and who is not a
patient man before he be crossed? there be many seeming very valiant, stout and
strong men, not dismayed or daunted at any peril, yet if but a fever take
them, the gout possess them, sickness befall them, or any affliction cross
them, they will either show their impatience, by murmuring or grudging,
hanging down their heads like a Bul-rush, or sigh and groan under the
burden, as if Maluerne hills were fallen upon them; and this for want of
patience.

A rich man as long as he enjoys health, wealth and honor, wished success
in all his affairs, nothing crossing him; how can he but be patient in show?
But when his wealth turns into want, his health into sickness, his honor
into disgrace; when adverse success crosses his hopes, and affliction seize
upon him (as he is a man without patience) he will change his countenance, and
by his gesture and carriage, show himself ashamed of the change of his estate;
fretting himself in the gall of his bitter impatience, as if God did him
injury thus to correct him: whence also arises to the increase of his
impatience, diversities of men's censures, as they did of holy Job. Surely,
(says one) he is a wicked man that God does thus punish him: Another, He was
very, prodigal, he was proud, vaineglorious, ambitious, and the like; and
therefore has God laid this heavy cross upon him: as though they had lived
in the very bosom of the man, and were privy to the very counsel of God, in
punishing or correcting him.

In like manner does the unadvised multitude commonly censure all men
afflicted, be it by sorrow for sin, sickness, and some lingering disease,
poverty, imprisonment, banishment, enemies, shipwreck, loss of goods, by
whatsoever means, stubbornness of children, disquietnesse between married
couples; and in what sort soever a man is afflicted and visited by the hand of
God (though in his special love) he must look for censures, according to the
perverse cenceits and opinions of such as seem to know the very cause of Gods
punishing and correcting men here below; and yet neither look into
themselves, nor know nor think of the cause of causes.

Seeing then, that the best and dearest children of God are subject to
afflictions, crosses and troubles of infinite kinds, and consequently to the
rash censures of the braine-sicke vulgar, have they not all good cause to fly
unto God for this heauen^y virtue Patience, to support and sustain them, not
only in their proper crosses, but in the unjust scandals of idle men?

But judge thou no man, he stands or falls, he is comforted or crossed
according to the good pleasure of God; and receive thou thy lot whatsoever it
be, prosperous or adverse, as sent of God for thy good.

If he visit thee with sickness, accept it as his fatherly chastisement, to
reform thee before thou go hence, thereby summoning thee shortly to appear
before the Throne of his Majesty.

If thou become poor bereft of all thy goods, and have little or nothing left,
content thy self; and consider, thou have yet more left thee then thou
broughtest into the world with thee: and were thou never so rich, had thou
never so great possessions, never so high place of dignity in the world; thou
must be taken from all, thou must leave all, and all must leave thee: and as
thy life is short, so are thy pleasures, crosses and patience of no long
continuance.

If thou be backe-bitten and slaundered, think thy self no better nor more
worthy the applause of the world, then Christ's own Apostles, and Christ him
self; who were scoffed at, railed upon, and scornefully reviled, yet reviled
not, but with patience endured buffetings, stripes and death, in greatest
meekenes.

If thou be banished thine own native Country, and from thy dearest friends,
enforced to wander from Country to Country, from City to City, remember we
are all strangers and pilgrims in this world, and nothing better resembles our
earthly pilgrimage then does banishment, which may move us to think seriously
and continually of a permanent City promised, after our long and tedious
exile, which endures but a little season, and then we return, ariue, and
shall be received into the Country of peace, and City of perpetual freedom.

If thou be troubled with disobedient and refractarie children, have patience,
remember Adam had a Kayne: Abraham an Ismael; Izaacke an Esaii: David an
Absalon. It is the case of many a godly and religious father to have an ungodly
son.

If thou be troubled with a disquiet, proud, sullen, tarte and taunting wife,
be patient under thine unpleasant yoke; look into the Scriptures, and thou
shall find many good and godly men to have gone before thee, that have showed
thee the way to bear this erosse with patience; as Moses his Zipporah: David
his Michal, and others: and if thou look near at home, thou shall find many
of thy good neighbors sick of thy disease; and nothing can ease it but
patience, prayer, good counsel in the fear of God. These are the salues for
every sore, the physic for every disease, and Antidotes against every
poisonous and pestilent passion of the mind.

And for thy better help, I have (though indeed weakly) in this Treatise,
endeavored briefly to touch many of the crosses that may befall thee; wherein
if thou be ignorant, thou may therein learn in some measure, how to prepare
thee to the patient bearing of them, waiting the Lords leisure and his good
pleasure with prayer, in a lively faith, in true repentance of all thy sins,
which are the cause of all thy troubles, crosses, and calamities whatsoever;
and thou shall find the burden of them light, and the yoke which the Lord,
lays upon thee, easy.

And be assured, that if God correct thee here, he loves thee, and does it to
reform thee to save thee. Jeremy the most famous amongst the Prophets,
confesses, that before the Lord touched him with affliction, he was like a
wild and untamed Colte: and David, the worthiest among the Kings,
acknowledges, that before he was afflicted he went awrye: And Paul the chief
among the Apostles, thought it his greatest glory to suffer affliction for
Christ; and many they were that he suffered, see 2. Cor. 6.

Outward affliction, or inward sorrow for thy sins hurt thee not; the one
argues the love of God toward thee, the other thy desire to obey him. There is
nothing more hurtful to thee, nor more offensive to God then thine impatience,
thy murmuring and grudging at Gods gentle chastisements, which are the evils of
thy mind and most afflict thee: whereas true patience in faith, is as a brazen
Bulworke against all the attemptes and assaults of sin and Satan; the workers
of all the crosses, troubles and calamities in the world: Embrace therefore
whatsoever befalls thee with godly patience; and the Lord assist thee.

Thine in Christian good will: I. NORDEN.

The Table of the perticulars contained in this Book.
A Prayer for the morning. A Prayer before a man goes to his nightly rest.

1 A preparation to godly patience. page 1 2 Touching sin, the cause of all
afflictions, the confession and repentance of them, and patience in troubles.
page 20 3 Comfort for a man afflicted in conscience, by reason of his sins.
page 47 4 A prayer for the forgiveness of most heinous sins that afflict the
weak conscience of a sinner. page 67 5 Comfort for the sick. p. 77 6 A prayer
to be often said of a sick man or woman. 79 7 A prayer to be said for a sick
man; of faithful friends that come to visit him. 105 8 For such as are
oppressed with poverty and want; not impertinent for the rich. 112 9 A prayer
to be said of such as are oppressed, with necessity and want of things
necessary. 133 10 A short prayer to be said of him that is in necessity and
want. 146 11 General counsel and comfort for men imprisoned. 153 12 Against
Treason, for which a man is worthily imprisoned. 168 13 For such as are
imprisoned, as guilty or vehemently suspected of murder. 173 14 A prayer for a
man imprisoned guilty of murder. 179 15 For such as are imprisoned, for
committing any offense against the Laws of the Kingdom deserving death. 185
16 A prayer to be said of a prisoner accused, and like to be condemned to
death, for some fact against the laws; or to any other corporal punishment.
190 17 A prayer to be said of a penitent offender, going to his execution, or
to any corporal punishment. 200 18 For such as are imprisoned for debt. 205 19
A prayer to be often said of a man imprisoned for debt. page 216 20 A caveat
for cruel creditors, that keep poor men in prison, whom they know unable to
pay that, for which they keep them in prison. 226 21 Encouragement for such as
are enclosed, and afflicted with enemies, flatterers, and their slanders. 241
22 A prayer for a man that has undeserved enemies, and is subject to
slanderous tongues, flatterers, and false friends. 253 23 Counsel and comfort
for him that is persecuted, for his constant profession of the Gospel of
Christ. 263 24 A prayer for a man persecuted for his faith, and profession of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ. 281 25 Comfort and encouragement for such as are
banished, or enforced to live out of their own native Country, either for
fear of persecution for Gods word, or of the fury of enemies, that pursue
them without just cause. 292 26 A prayer for a man banished from his native
Country, for some crime committed, or enforced to forsake it, either for fear
of persecution, or of some mighty adversary that does unjustly oppress him.
304 27 Comfort and encouragement for Parents, that are crossed and grieved at
the ungodliness and disobedience of their children: fit for all Parents to
read. page 314 28 A prayer to be used of godly Parents, for the reformation of
ungodly and disobedient children; and for patience: not overmuch to afflict
themselves, for the stubbornness and disobedience of a wicked son. 332 29 A
persuasion to patience in the crosses, that often fall out between man and
wife; fit to be considered of married folks, for their mutual comfort: with
counsel to such as intend to marry. 341 30 A prayer to be said by man and
wife together, or by either of them, at any time in private. 359 31 How the
husband ought to behave himself toward his discontented wife. 367 32 A prayer
to be said often of a man, who has a wife of refractarie conditions. 374 33
How the wife ought to behave her self toward her husband, though he be
faulty, and hard to be pleased. 379 34 A prayer for the wife that is unequally
yoked with an unkind, unthrifty, or an ungodly husband. 385 35 A comfortable
conclusion, showing the benefit of afflictions, to the end we may bear them,
in what nature or kind soever they befall us; with the more resolute and godly
patience. 401 37 A prayer for the forgiveness of sins, and for the neglect of
our duties, in seeking to know God by the hearing of his word, and the practice
of the same: fit daily to be used. 391 36 A necessary prayer for strength, to
bear whatsoever afflictions with patience, and for faith to resist the
tentations of Satan. 418
A PRAYER FOR the Morning.
O Lord GOD, heavenly Father; when I do consider how many ways and by how
many sorts of sins I have offended thee night and day; and do duly call to
mind how graciously thou have kept me this night, and how many blessings and
favors I have received of thee (without number:) I am even astonished at my
great ingratitude, and do utterly condemn my self of highest rebellion
against thee.

Many have been the days, weeks, months and years, that thou have here
afforded me to live; and in all the time of my life hetherunto, thou have
graciously preserved me, plentifully releiued me, and continually kept me
under thy fatherly protection, in all my nights and days; and have been
evermore watchful over me; that I have from time to time, from night to day,
and from day to night, been ever sustained through thy grace, though I have
some times felt thy correcting rod by some crosses for my sins, yet have they
been ever easy, in comparison of my deseruings; and profitable unto me.

Lord pardon and forgive me my sins, forgive my manifold offenses, wash me
thoroughly by the blood of Jesus Christ my Redeemer, and cleanse me from all my
pollutions, for they are many, and I am ashamed that ever I gave way unto them.

But now Lord, now, though late, I pray thee to lead me by thy Spirit in more
obedience; stay me, that I run not this day into any unseemly or ungodly
actions; withholde mine eyes from vanities; keep under the ungodly affections
of my corrupt heart, that though they may begin to work sin in me, Lord
suppress them before they come to execution.

Disperse Lord, and dispell all the clouds of ignorance and errors, that darken
mine understanding, and give me wisdom rightly to know thee, and thy Son
Christ, and what he has done for my soul; and through thy grace restrain me
this day from that thou have commanded me to shun: and let me do nothing, but
what may please thee, then whatsoever I shall think, speak or determine,
shall be to thine own glory, profitable to my self and others.

Preserve me from the secret and hidden snares of Satan, who is restles to
allure me to sin, enticing me to embrace the vanities of the world, and to
yield to the lusts of mine own corrupt nature.

But Lord, as I have by thy providence, past the darkness of this night, and
do now enjoy the joyful benefit of the light of this day: so let me this day
avoid all the works of darkness; and as the day does administer light unto
my corporal eyes, the better to do the works and offices of my calling; so
let the light of thy Spirit, O Lord, shine in my soul, that I may walk in the
light of thy truth in true obedience, to the good example of others.

Thou have allotted me a calling in this life; give me power and wisdom
rightly to perform it: my best endeavors can little prevail without thy
blessing and direction; and therefore I humbly pray thee to prosper whatsoever
I take in hand this day.

Bless mine understanding O Lord, that I may rightly know and be able truly
and faithfully to perform what belongs unto my place and calling.

Bless the health of my body, the strength and continual use of my limbs and
senses, which of them selves are weak, and may soon decay without thy
blessing.

Increase O Lord, and confirm my faith, grace, wisdom, and obedience every
day more and more, that I may every day more and more dye unto sin, and be
made stronger and more perfect in righteousness.

Heal O Lord, all my corporal and spiritual infirmities, and dispose my
heart, that I may be every day more and more mindful, that this my life is
short, and that this day may be my last day: and let me so walk this day, as
if it should be the last day of this my mortal life; that I may be assured of
the immediate entrance into that life which is eternal, with Christ my
Redeemer.

And until that last day shall come, O Lord, I entreat thee in the name of
Jesus Christ, that this day and all the rest of my days and nights, may be
prosperous and blessed unto me; the day for the performance of my calling, the
night for my rest, until I come to my final and perpetual rest with thee and
thy Son, to whom with thy blessed Spirit, I ascribe all honor, praise and
glory. Amen.

Lord evermore increase my faith.
A Prayer to be said before a man goes to his nightly rest.
O Gracious Lord God heavenly Father, the keeper and preserver of all that come
unto thee for succor; I have been through thy great mercy and providence,
kept, preserved, defended, fed, sustained, and relieved this day, now come to
an end; and now as the night succeeds the day, and the darkness the light; so
I know O Lord, that death will succeed my life, and the grave my bed.

Lord, thou made in the beginning, light and darkness, night and day, morning
and evening, and all to thine own glory, and to the use of wretched man, who
in the beginning turned his light into darkness, and that darkness has
ouershadowed all that have proceeded of his corrupt seed; among whom O Lord, I
am so bemisted and blinded with that original darkness, as I cannot see, nor
truly conceive the light of thy most sacred word, without that spiritual
light, shining from thine illuminating Spirit.

Thou made two lights O Lord, to endure for ever, the Sun to govern the day,
and the Moon to give light in the night; yet do not these lights O Lord,
direct our feet in the ways of righteousness, nor our paths in obedience,
but rather lead us to the occasions to sin; but it is the supernatural light O
Lord, that proceeds from the brightness of thy loving countenance, that
directs aright those that are thy children of the light.

By this light O Lord, guide me, that the night of ignorance over shadow me
not from beholding thy loving countenance, which is more precious and more
sweet unto me, then all earthly delights.

The daylight wherein I should only follow with godly diligence in my
calling, and to serve thee, turns into the darkness of my mind without thy
spiritual light: how much more will the darkness of the night miscarrie my
corrupt heart, into idle and ungodly thoughts, especially, by the temptations of
the Prince of darkness, when thy light fails me?

For such O Lord, is the nature of my polluted heart, that it never rests to
infuse evil imaginations into my mind; especially in my night wakings, and in
my sleep to trouble me, with sundry evil and ungodly dreams and wicked
fantasies; showing thereby the fruits of my sinful nature.

Therefore gracious Father, I finding in my self, and thou knowing mine
imperfections better then my self, I come in all humbleness, praying thee to
assist me with thy grace, that I may convert my heart from the evils whereunto
it is inclined, and only incline and frame it to the sincere service of, and
obedience to thee; and to dedicate my mind, will and affections, in my night
wakings, either to meditate of thy word, or in making my faithful prayers unto
thee.

I cannot O Lord, through the weakness of my corrupt nature subsist without
co^petent rest and sleep; yet I know thou slumbrest not nor sleep: but with
thee the day and night are alike light, and in thy providence and love, have an
eye over all that are thine whether they sleep or wake.

Give therefore command O Lord, unto thy heavenly watchmen to keep me, and all
that I have, from danger this night: so will I lay me down under the shadow
of thy protecting wings to take my rest this night; faithfully commending my
soul and body, and all that belong unto me, into thy most powerful and
fatherly tuition; so shall I not fear what Satan or any malicious instrument
of his shall practice or plot against me.

And in this assurance O Lord, confirm my faith from night to day, and from
day to night; that all the days and nights of my life, may be rightly spent in
a holy and sanctified conversation, to thy glory and mine own comfort, unto
the end of all my nights and days, through Jesus Christ my Savior and
Redeemer. Amen.

Lord, increase and confirm my faith, this night and evermore.
A PATH-VVAY TO GODLY PATIENCE, IN all manner of Afflictions.
AFliction here in this life, is unto the Godly, as it were a School to
learn them Patience: A most worthy and divine Virtue; which, adjoined with
true and lively Faith in God, does so season the mind and the affections of
the heart, as it seems not to feel, whatsoever trouble, or affliction
inflicted; or injury offered: But, in prosperity and adversity: loved or
hated; sick or in health; in fullness and in want; in riches and poverty; it
rests in the worst part content, and in the best ever thankful: neither
lifted up for the one, or cast down for the other.

Tribulation may lie very heavily upon a man endewed with this divine virtue,
Patience bears all things.
yet can it never press him down to despair, move him to revenge, or cause
him to seek sinister means for ease: For, he is strong, when he seems most
weak; he goes on most cheerfully, and with ease, when Carnal men (observing
his miseries) think him most heavily and grievously laden.

It is such, and so excellent a virtue, as is not, neither can it begotten, by
friendship or favor: It is freely given, not of Nature, but of Grace: Not
attained unto by Humane learning, but by Spiritual illumination: And
therefore, never enters into a froward, Patience brooketh not a repining heart.
unfaithful, or repining heart: But, in a heart upright, and a conscience at
peace with God and men; humble and meek men and women do only (and none else)
enjoy her.

So precious a Jewel it is, as neither gold nor silver can purchase it; It is
also so victorious, as nothing can overcome it: Seldom moved, yet never
without cause of being moved: for one injury, trouble, cross, or affliction or
another, will daily, nay every hour set upon it to try it. It continually
meets with one occasion or another, Patience is never idle.
to exercise it: And the more it is crossed, the more it increases, and the
stronger and more perfect it waxes.

Where this divine virtue Patience dwells, and has her perfect working, it
is an especial mark and note, that he, or she that truly possesses it, or
is possessed by it, is the true Child of God; Patience a mark of the Child
of God.
yet never seen nor observed, but by injuries, wrongs, afflictions, abuses,
and troubles, the things whereupon it works; and without which it were of no
use. For as Physic needs not, where no disease is, nor Medicine, where no
Malady is; So needs there no Patience, where no trial is.

But it fares not so with Gods Children, they have matter enough to try and
in-vre their Patience (though worldly men, that have all things, and all
things succeed according to their own hearts desires, have no seeming cause,
to use, though they often abuse this most worthy virtue.) The Godly, and such
as truly endeavor to live religiously among the multitudes of men, cannot be
but many ways tried, to prove their Faith, and to exercise the^ to bear their
afflictions without murmuring or grudging, Psalm. 38. 15
Waiting on the Lord with perfect Patience: For where no troubles are, where,
and to whom no injury, abuse, or wrong is offered, and upon whom no crosses
befall, how can Patience appear? Where no trial is, Patience cannot appear.
where no Body is, how can the shadow be seen? And as the shadow appears by
the Body; so in the truly humbled, Patience appears in affliction: According
to St. Paul, who approves that Tribulation in the Faithful brings forth
Patience, Romans 5. 3* 4
and Patience experience of the mercies of God, and that experience produces
Hope (never to be forsaken in what trouble soever) which Hope is so far from
making him ashamed, that is endewed with these heavenly virtues, that he
finds the end of his troubles to be timely deliverance, and finally glory:
How can he but rejoice, rather then to be too much dejected in his afflictions?
For, seeing Hope grounded upon Experience, approves that afflictions work
Patience, through Faith; why should afflictions seem so harsh, Afflictions make
not a Patient man miserable, but rather honorable.
as to make men miserable, when the Patient suffering of the^, brings not
only no shame, but honor unto the Saints of God, that suffer? who^ it
pleases him to use here as servants, intending hereafter to glorify them as
his Sons and Daughters: he abaseth them here, whom he means to advance
hereafter: His crosses here for a time, carries us to a Crown of glory
hereafter. Let us therefore with true and perfect Patience, undergo all our
crosses and afflictions; knowing, that through many troubles and trials we must
enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Carnal men may think indeed, that ye Patient man, and such a one as can
contentedly bear troubles, injuries, wrongs, slanders reproaches, Carnal men
think Patience sottishnes.
and afflictions; to be but a Coward, a Sot, a Silly fool one that has
neither a manly spirit, nor humane Policy to revenge himself, or to make
sinister shifts in the world, to right and relieve himself: and think him mad
or senseless, that he shows no more passion, or impatience, in his wrongs
and miseries, as mere Carnal men do: But that seemingsilly Patient man,
feels far less trouble of mind in his seeming greatest afflictions, then
these Politics of the world do; who are both inwardly vexed and tormented,
and outwardly toyled, in shuffling and tossing their wits, like Flies in a
Spiders web, or Birds in a Lime-bush, to free themselves of small troubles; and
the more they struggle, the more they entangle themselves, As if they were not
blinded with the vain opinion of their own carnal wisdom, or carried away
with the vain hope of (uncertain) success, they could not but acknowledge;
for daily experience shows, that the wisest and carnally Politickst men in
the world, seldom bring their evil enterprises to pass, but with charging
their Consciences, and find at last, that all their inventions and practices,
either end with shame here, or in horror, when they go hence: For it is just
with God to leave them to their own wills and wiles, that wilfully forsake
him, and his wisdom to direct them: And experience likewise approves that the
truly patient and faithful man, depending only upon the Power, Providence,
Wisdom, and Love of God, in his greatest calamities, Patience finds comfort
in the end.
finds ever a most certain comfortable issue of his hope, and holy desires.
In his greatest dangers he passes not the bounds of Gods holy directions. So
all his afflictions tend to his inward comfort, never to his outward deserved
shame or reproach: He does consider in true wisdom, that the time of his
suffering is here but short, but the time of his Triumphing shall be perpetual.

And therefore, whatsoever the malice of Satan or his Instruments can practice
or purpose against a man, truly indewed with this divine Virtue Patience
(which through Faith having it perfect operation) he daun^eth not. 2. Kin 18.
(...)
Let Rabsach: rail and blaspheme: 2. Sa. 16. (...)
Let Shemie curse and cast stones: Let the world and all the wicked therein,
work what they can: let them vomit out their venomous Gall of malice, and spew
out their most envious hearts in most ignominious slanders against him; he will
yet keep silence in his heart, to God; who searches every heart, and tries
the Reins of every man, and will give unto every man according to his ways:
And it is he that sends us troubles to keep us in obedience: Why God sends
his children troubles.
And it is he that works Patience to bear them; and nothing hinders inward
comfort in outward crosses, but murmuring, grudging, and impatience in them.

Afflictions (indeed) though they do proceed of Gods favor, seem nothing
pleasant to the fleshly mind: yet (as St. Paul says) they bring in the end,
Heb. 12. 11
the quiet. and comfortable fruit of righteousness, to them that are
exercised with Patience to bear them; They bring, through faith, eternal
glory in the end; not as the cause, but through Faith in him that suffered for
us, and before us, a testimony, that God so loves us in his Son, as to make
us in some measure like him, by suffering with him and for his sake: And when
we have suffered, as much as the malice of Satan or his Instruments (by the
permission of God) can inflict upon us, yet cannot our sufferings amount to the
thousandth part of the best man's evil deseruings: And yet many complain of the
greatness of their troubles, that never, either examine the haynousnesse of
their sins, or that they are sent of God, to make them to know that God is
angry with their sins; and by his corrections seeks to draw them to
repentance, and amendment of life.

If we did truly consider, and duly weigh, that it is God alone that measures
out all our afflictions; God limiteth our afflictions.
the length, breadth, and depth of them by his own hand in his absolute
wisdom; and that neither Satan nor the malice of man, has any further share
in inflicting them upon us, then they are limited in his providence, and did
consider (as I^b says) that afflictions spring not of the ca^^h, Job 5. 6.
though many times by earthly men (yet all of God) we could not but with a most
lively and firm Patience embrace them as sent from him.

What are the afflictions which can befall us in this life? They are indeed of
many and sundry sorts; Several kinds of afflictions.
yet may be all reduced into these heads: The grief of the mind for sin,
sickness of the body, enemies, loss of goods, slanders of our good name,
imprisonment, banishment; and which is the most heavy, yet most comfortable,
persecution for the constant acknowledgement and profession of the Gospel of
Christ: ungodly children not the least cross, and household disquietnesse
between man and wise, the most ungodly: many other branches are dependant on
every of these: But what, and of what nature or kind soever they be, they are
all determined by God, so to befall us as he has limited, and none of them but
have befallen Gods dearest children: And therefore let no man attribute
whatsoever befalls him, to Fortune, Chance or Ill-lucke, common ungodly phrases,
used not by the ignorant only, but, too often, by such as stand much upon
their divine knowledge. Luc 21. 1.
A hair falls not from our head by chance, but by the providence of God: And
shall we ascribe matters of far more, yea of greatest moment, unto a cause
that is not? for there is neither fortune, chance, or luck, as they are
commonly taken, that have any share in these things; and therefore can they not
be the cause of our troubles, to which there can be no certain event ascribed:
But the will, wisdom, power and providence of God, works according to his
own good pleasure, all things under the Sun. Therefore ought all men to
reverence him, and to suffer themselves to be guided and governed by him: and
not only, not to murmr and grudge, at his corrections, but to embrace with
an humble heart and patient mind, We ought to embrace whatsoever God lays
upon us.
whatsoever he in his wisdom shall think sit, to be laid upon them, using
no sinister, violent, or forbidden means to be eased; and not to go before
the good pleasure of God to be eased: for as he lays them upon us, he knows
the time and means to remove them: wherein we are to follow the example of
Noah, who, as he was shut up into the Arc by God; so would he not come forth
without him: neither should we that are afflicted by him, seek to be eased but
by him.

Affliction in it self, and of it own nature is indeed a heavy burden, even
to a mind well qualified, as it is the punishment of sin: But as God
changes the nature of it, in making it the medicine to cure the sins of his
children, Afflictions, Medicines for sins.
they become light, whose crosses and corrections he sanctifies by his grace,
and makes those bitter waters sweet. So that through faithful patience, his
dearest children can with comfort digest them.

But contrarily, they bring forth in the wicked, the poisonous fruits of
impatience, murmuring, grudging, and many times very blasphemies; Good things
become evil to the wicked.
In so much, as to them, even good things become evil: and they become worse
by that, whereby the children of God are made better; and therefore says God
unto the wicked (that through punishment would not amend) Wherefore should ye
be smitten any more? for ye fall away more and more.

Whereby we are taught not to repine at the continual prosperity of the
wicked, that suffer not like troubles as the godly do here; for God seems to
wincke a while at their wickedness, and forbeares to punish them, suffering
them to enjoy their profits, their pleasures and carnal delights here, that
he may give them their just recompense of condemnation hereafter, that refuse
his chastasements here.

Happy are they therefore that suffer here, with faithful and filial
patience, though in show it be ignominious, Afflictions the crown of the
godly.
and in the censures and opinions of carnal and worldly men base: yet is it
indeed the Crown of their glory here: howsoever they seem to be neglected
and rejected in the world and worldlings, by their true faith, perfect
patience, humility and prayer: they are sustained, supported, and in their
greatest troubles, deepest dangers, distresses and wantes, comforted and
relieved: and obtainning at his hands whatsoever small comfort, they atribute
it wholly and altogether to his mere mercy, goodness and providence, not unto
self wisdom, policy or fortune.

They acknowledge their own wisdom to be but foolishness, their policies
frivolous; and, fortune a mere heathenish invention: They see and feel their
own weakness; they observe their own blindness; they find they can do
nothing of themselves, toward the removing of their miseries, nor supplying of
their wants; but repair unto, and rely only upon God, in faithful prayer,
and wait with patience, for, and receive timely supply.

By troubles and afflictions, they find the worlds inconstancy, humane
fickleness; Gods children have least rest in the world.
and that in the world the dearest children of God have least rest. They are
tossed hither and thither; one trouble follows another as the drops of rain;
whereby also the pride of corrupt nature, in the godly, is humbled, their
confidence in worldly means abated, their security abandoned. They find, that
fullness bred sin, and sin procured Gods displeasure, and in his
displeasure he punishes the wicked, and corrects the godly; and neither but
for sin: yet the one in his Justice, the other in mercy: And therefore says
Job, to encourage the godly to patience, Job 5. 17.
Blessed is the man whom the Lord corrects: refuse not therefore the
chastisements of the Almighty: Though therefore we be compassed about on all
sides with many miseries, let us not fainte, Luke 21. 19.
but in patience possess our souls, As Christ himself teaches, Heb. 12. 6.
for Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth: and scourges every son that he
receives. Then are chastisements testimonies of Gods love toward us: and
therefore they that cannot abide to be corrected, show themselves bastards,
and not the sons of God. Reu. 3. 19.
As many as I love I rebuke and chasten. Revel. 3. 19. Does a father correct
his son without a fault? it were injurious: God corrects none but for
sin.
and does God correct his children that sin not? there is none but sins,
therefore none but deserve correction: seeing then that sin is the cause of
Gods corrections; let every man examine himself, and take with thankeful
patience, his Fatherly chastisements, in what manner soever they befall him.

Touching sin, the cause of all afflictions; the confession and repentance
thereof, and patience in troubles.
FOr as much as sin is the cause of all our afflictions, and that there is
neither cross, or any kind of trouble that befall us, Sin causes
afflictions.
but sin causes it: In vain it is to hope for remedy, relief or ease,
until we have in some measure unburdened us of our sins: for, as an old
house pulled down to be rebuilt, must be rid of all rotten materials and
rubbish, before any good and sound foundation can be laid: so before we can
receive any inward comfort, or outward release of our troubles; we must cast
out of our hearts, and cleanse our souls, of all the filthy and loathsome dregs
of sin, that lurk in them: and that can we not do but by a strict and
serious examination of our hearts; and to call to mind how we have spent the
time past; and then shall every man find cause enough, why God in his Justice
might inflict upon us, in steeede of our light afflictions (which are but his
Fatherly corrections) his most heavy judgments and seuearest punishments; and
in steed of our temporal and momentanie miseries, cast us into perpetual
torments.

Knowing then that the cause of our calamities, to be our sins, and having
upon due search found out our long hidden iniquities, can we but acknowledge;
No man is here punished according to the merit of sin
that God has not dealt with us, nor afflicted us according to the measure and
multitude of our wicked deseruings? But as a loving father, he has by his
gentle chastisements, as it were only wincked at, and beckened unto us, to put
us in mind only of our faults; least by continuing in them, and multiplying
of them, he should have cause (in steed of gentle corrections) to use his
Justice: therefore having found in our corrupt hearts, our ungodly and impious
inclinations, which have begotten in us infinite actual sins; we may not any
longer covet to conceal them, but heartily, plainly and faithfully,
acknowledge them unto God: (though we cannot call all our ancient sins and
the faults we have committed long ago to our remembrance) for Who can
understand all his faults? Psa. 19. 12.
says David, yet David him self confessed his sins to God; sometimes in
general, sometimes in particular: he did not hide his iniquities, but
confessed them against himself, and was not ashamed to set them down in many
of his Psalms: to teach us (if occasion be) to discover our sins for the
satisfaction of men, but especially unto God, Psalm. 32. 5.
as David did, who forgave the punishment of his sin: Yet had he afflictions
still, not as punishments, but as fatherly physic, to keep his heart and
affections in more due obedience: and though David said he did not hide his
sins from God; it is not therefore to be collected, No man can hide his
sins from God.
that he could, or any man can hide his sins from him, howsoever covertly and
secretly they commit them: But who so confesses them not, he intends to hide
them as much as lies in him from God that sees them, and thereby doubleth his
offense: 1. Io. 1. 9.
But who so acknowledges his sins unto him, he is faithful and Just to
forgive them, and to cleanse him from all his unrighteousness.

To acknowledge our sins then, The entrance into Gods favor is to confess
our sins.
is the very entrance into Gods favor; which being obtained, (not by the
confession of our sins,) but in, and through a firm faith in Jesus Christ,
through whose merits we may freely ask, and assure our selves of the
remission of our sins: for he has promised to do it, who is most faithful
and just in his word, and that does David approve; saying: I confessed against
my self my sins unto the Lord, and he forgave the punishment of my sin.
He forgave him, as not to punish him in the severity of his Justice, though he
remembered him with his gentle corrections often, as he does his dearest
children; yet not all a like: God does not punish every man a like.
some he chastises after a most mild manner, some more sharply, yet
fatherly; as he finds men docible and tractable, or refractarie and hard to
be reformed: for, some are more and sooner reformed, with a sharp look of
the Lords countenance, then some with many stripes; Mat. 26. 75.
As Peter, when he had thrice denied his Master Christ: Christ but turned his
face toward him at the crowing of the Cock, it was rebuke enough; he went
suddenly forth and wept bitterly, in token of his repentance. Some again, will
hardly remember their sins, until it be said unto them, Thou art the man, as
Nathan, told David; who before that, had slept in his sin of adultrie and
murder, a whole year, never thinking of it: But when he was admonished from
God by a parable; then he confessed his sins, and repented them; saying I
have sinned against the Lord: Joining with his confession, sorrow and
repentance for his sins. And the same mouth that reproved him for his sin,
and that he should dye for the same; pronounced the forgiveness and pardon of
them; The Lord has put away thy sins. 2. Sam. 12. 13.


Whereby we may learn, that the Lord seeks no seue^r^ revenge against a
sinner, Though God forgive our sins he keeps us in awe by some cross
confessing and repenting his sins, though he leave some token of his
displeasure against sin, and of his love to the sinner, in keeping him in
future obedience by his fatherly discipline, least he should too much presume
of pardon of second sinning, by the mercy of God declared by the remission of
the former: And therefore, although he had pardoned David his sin, and had
forgiven him the punishment of it; yet David went not without a token, that he
should remember that he had offended, and given the enemies of God occasion to
blaspheme: Ver. 14.
God pronounced the death of the child.

God sees it necessary, and we cannot but think it expedient even for us,
That although God do assure us that our sins (sincerely acknowledged) be
forgiven us; yet that he bear a kind and fatherly hand over us, to retain us
in future obedience, by some daily unsavory potion, to cure and to keep our
carnal apetite in order, that we return not to our former iniquities: And
therefore not to think it strange, when any cross or affliction befalls us; But
rather thereby to take occasion to call our selves daily to account what we
have done against the Commandments of God, and to acknowledge that for those
sins that we have done, God corrects us.

Let us beware that we be not found of the number of those, Beware of hardness
of heart.
whom neither Gods angry countenance, which appears in the severity of his
punishments; nor his fatherly chastisements, and instructions, contained in his
word, can reclaim from committing sin, nor from whom Gods gentle correction
can draw hearty confession of them, and true repentance for them.

We must also consider, that it is not enough for us to confess our sins
barely to God; for he knows them better then we our selves: but with our
confession we must acknoweledge that God may justly condemn us for them. We
must with confession of our sins join repentance in faith.
And therefore we must join with the confession of our sins, true and sincere
repentance for them; which yet avails not, without a lively faith, in taking
hold of the blood and merits of Jesus Christ, in whom, and for whose, sake
our sins are pardoned: And this faith must be certain, it must be an assured
confidence of the promises made in Christ, in whom a sinner (truly penitent,
and faithfully confident) is justified: and neither by our bare confession, or
best works, but by the mere mercy of God, in his Son.

As there is no man but sins daily; Math. 27. 34.
So he must daily confess his sins to God, and truly repent them; not as
Judas and Kayne: Judas confessed he had sinned; We must daily confess our
sins because we daily sin, but not stay upon confession as Kaine and Judas
did.
betraying the innocent blood, and repented, but not in faith; his repentance
was a desperate sorrow, not for the sin he committed, but for the horror of
his reprobabation: So did Kayne confess his sins, My sins are greater then
I am able to bear; but he tepented not to the obtaining of mercy: Confession
of sins, and repentance (without faith) avails not. It auailed not Pharaoh,
though he confessed the righteousness of God, and his own, and his peoples
sins: But Peter confessed his sins and repented with tears: Pro. 9. 27.
So did Marie Magdaline, and their repentance is recorded by the holy Ghost;
Io. 11. 2.
to teach all posterities, how to bewail their sins a right: They were great
sinners, yet through faith and repentance obtained pardon; which to the comfort
of greatest sinners, shows, that there is yet place of repentance, and
acceptance into Gods favor for them, upon sincere repentance.

God himself affirms, that He desires not the condemnation of a sinner,
Ezec. 18. 32.
but rather that he repent and be saved: And again he says: Have I any
desire that the wicked should dye, Ver. 23.
or shall he not live, if he return from his evil ways? And what is it to
return unto God, but true repentance for our sins? And we are to consider,
that, that repentance which is perfect indeed, What true repentance is.
is joined with the keeping of Gods Commandments: and none can say or assure
himself, that his confession of his sins, and his repentance, is accepted of
God; unless he add all his desires, to fulfill the Law of God: for the
breach whereof, God afflicts his own dearest children with sundry crosses
to prevent his cursses which he inflicteth, either here upon the disobedient
and unrepentant; to cause his own to avoid sin, by the example of his severe
judgments, whereby he begins here to punish them; or reserueth his
punishments of them, until his final condemnation of them.

Marks of repentance, Marks of true repentance.
are contrition and unfeigned sorrow for sin committed, joined with a lively
faith in Christ, for pardon of them, and a settled desire and purpose ever
hereafter to walk in a holy fear, to displease God again by our sins;
namely, by the outward breach of Gods Commandments: for the committing of
things contrary to the Laws of God, is that sin we should repent us of; which
by reason of our corrupt nature, we cannot, but commit, without the especial
grace of God; which although it be the free gift of God, it is not obtained
without lively faith and prayer in Christ; by whose stripes we are healed, and
for whose sake we are heard, and in whose blood we are washed from our sins.

But sorrow of heart, may be great and yet avail us nothing; as it did not
Kayne, Judas, Esau; unless true faith be joined therewith: Sorrow indeed may
cast us down, which if it be not in an humble and faithful acknowledgement
of our unworthiness, to be called or accepted as the children of God, Sorrow
for sin and faith in Christ must go together.
by reason of our sins; it may prove desperate. And therefore sorrow for
sin and faith in Christ to be pardoned, joined together, will assure us, that
God is our God and that we are his people; that, he is our Father and that we
are his sons and daughters.

If then we find in our selves the burden of our sins; truly and plainly
confess them to God, and heartely repent them; we cannot but through faith in
Christ, assure our selves that our sins are pardoned: and having an inward
assurance thereof, It is only the grace of God that works repentance
we must acknowledge, that these graces proceed of no other thing, then of the
mere merits, and mediation of our alone and only Savior Jesus Christ, Romans
8. 29.
who disdaineth not to call us (thus received into the Communion of the Saints
of God) brethren, whom God knew before the world was; predestined, to be
made like to the Image of Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1. 5. 6. 7.
adopted in him; and by whom, we have redemption in his blood, even the full
forgiveness of all our sins, through his grace, wherewith he has made us
freely accepted of God.

Now then, we being through the grace of God, made the Sons of God, We be
made the sons of God in Christ, in and by whom we have power to pray unto
the Father
brethren and coheires with Christ; shall we think that he will not also
furnish us, with the spirit of his Son, which dwelling in us? we shall be able,
faithfully to cry Abba Father; and what is that, but to teach us how to pray to
God his heavenly Father, in his own name. 1. Io. 5. 14.
Therefore Whatsoever we shall ask the Father, he will grant it us, for his
sake: so we ask according to his will in a lively faith, and wa^^^ not; Iam.
1. 6.
for he that wauereth, is like a wave of the sea tossed with the wind.

Though therefore our Tribulations be great, and our afflictions many ways
grievous; We ought to take our afflictions patiently because they are sent of
God.
yet seeing they proceed from so loving a Father, we may not think them to be
inflicted upon us in displeasure, but in a Fatherly regard of our souls
health: Which as sin has impaired, so his gentle chastisements, are as
wholesome medicines to heal it. And as no Physic, be it never so salutarie
for the health of the body, is sauorie to the Palate; So Gods corrections,
howsoever they are sent, as either Antidotes to prevent sin, or Medicines to
cure it; They are not pleasant to Flesh and Blood for the time: But as
corporal physic, though harsh in the taste, having it working in an unsound
sound body, begets health; and is then much commended, with many thanks to
the Physician. So if we can well digest our troubles and afflictions here, for
a little while, and by virtue of them (seasoned with Faith and perfect
Patience) euacuate our gross and filthy corruptions, that suffocate our hearts
with sin; we shall feel a most wished renouation of the health of our minds,
and find our affections changed; even as a body distempred with a Fever,
distasteth the most sauorie things, as long as it possesses the Body; and
afterward becomes to it perfect taste: So, although, as long as we be holden
with the corrupt infirmity of our natural wills, no good duty, or heavenly
grace, can be so toothsome unto us as pleasure, and the sins we delight in:
But being purged and dieted, by the afflictions that our loving Physician does
compound for us; we shall find sin, and pleasures, and all carnal delights,
to become bitter and harsh unto our hearts.

God many times sends us troubles and afflictions, that by easing us of them
again, God sends sometimes afflictions, to make us to acknoweledge his power
with thankfulness in remoouing them.
we may know, that as he can correct us, so he can comfort us: He never
makes a wound but he heals it: nay such is his mercy, power, and
providence, as he cures the most deadly wounds that our selves do make upon
our selves, through our sins, by his own free mercy in his Son; and the
medicines he uses, are his fatherly chastisements.

Should we not therefore take his salutarie, and gentle stripes with patience,
Gods stripes hurt us not but heal us.
that do not only not hurt us, but heal us? If we were indeed the first of
Gods children, that have been afflicted and troubled in this life, we might
stagger at our crosses and calamities, that are so infinite; But, if we set
before us the worthy examples for our imitation, which Saint James sets before
us, even our brethren the Prophets, Apostles (and such as were the most beloved
of God) for an example of suffering, Iam. 5. 10.
and their patience, such as have spoken and taught in the name of the Lord,
and his Christ, who endured most ignominious tortors, and most cruel
afflictions; for his sake of whom the world was not worthy; being the
Ambassadors of the eternal God: we could not but bear our light and
momentanie afflictions, with most resolute, and godly patience, and as we have
heard, so if we believe the patience of Job, and what end the Lord made with
him, namely, in not only removing his miseries, but in restoring him to
greater glory, even here, then he had before; and which was greatest of all
and the end of all, the Crown of life; we should acknowledge with holy Saint
James, That we are blessed that endure here, the chastisements of the Lord.

If then it be a blessed thing to endure troubles, They are blessed that suffer
with Patience.
he must needs be the child of God, that is here corrected, and does suffer it
with patience, though the fault be in our selves, for which we are afflicted;
and therefore to impute it to no other cause but to our sins.

There is a kind of suffering indeed, covered with a kind of counterfeit
patience: Counterfeit Patience.
As when men are enforced to undergo the inevitable torments of death, for
capital crimes, committed against the Laws of Nations, or suffering things
they cannot avoid: as there (...) to show their impious and vainglorious
valor, and ungodly resolution at their unavoidable executions, undergo them,
as if they were nothing daunted therewith: yet were their inward hearts seen,
they would appear, fraught and full of horror. But we are to learn of Saint
Paul, who had his tribulations and rejoiced in them, affirming, that
tribulation brings forth patience, and patience, experience, and experience,
hope; which hope makes not ashamed: for, through the love of God, which is
shed abroad in our hearts, by the holy Ghost; patience becomes an assured
testimony, that they that thus suffer, are beloved of God.

We need not therefore think or conceive, Afflictions here the livery and
badge of Gods children.
that our afflictions here to be any disgrace unto us; f^r they are the livery,
and badge of Gods dearest children. It is a glorious thing to be adorned with
the note of the honor of any great man's service; and shall we think it a
base thing, to wear the cognizance of the King of Kings, and which our Savior
Jesus Christ himself, has worn before us? yet without sin in himself, but
bare the curse for ours: we suffer for our own sins, he endured all and
more; and more heavy crosses for us, then we are able to bear for him. What
torments endured he not? Christ afflictions here in the world.
he was poor, though all the world were his: he had not a house to hide his
head in; he had enemies more then we all; he was slaundered, railed on,
buffered, spet on, crowned with thorns, besides infinite and unspeakable
injuries; and finally, put to a most cruel, shameful, and ignominious death:
a death invented for thieves and murderers; and hanged as so capital a
malefactor, being altogether in himself innocent; Lord and Creator of heaven
and earth: and shall we most wretched sinners, guilty of ten thousand
impieties, worthy for the least of them to be utterly confounded, repine at
the good will of God, in sending us so favorable tokens of his displeasure for
our sins, and love of our salvation? God forbid! knowing, and being so
sufficiently instructed, Nothing befalls us but by the providence of God.
that nothing does or can befall us, but by the mere providence of our most
loving Father; neither sickness, nor poverty, nor enemies, nor any whatsoever
cross: which he does also so graciously temper in his mercy, as they are
never more heavy then he makes us able to bear them, with his own guifte of
settled patience, through the free gift of faith.

Wherefore let us apply our hearts to wisdom, and learn to know, and to
acknowledge, that all the troubles and afflictions that fell so heavily upon
innocent Christ, Christ suffered not for himself but for us.
were not for sin in him, but for ours; and were most heavily laid upon him,
to make ours light: And that whatsoever cross, affliction, or trouble,
befalls us, our sins procure them and yet there is no more required of us for
the mittigation of them, or removing them from us; What is required of us for
the release of our sins.
but a full acknowledgement of our sins, unfeigned repentance for them, faith,
in, and obedience to God, and patience for a little space to bear our
corrections: If these things be not in us, how can we think our selves, or be
thought, in the least measure to have our troubles removed or mittigated, but
rather to acknowledge our selves worthy to be more severely punished in his
Justice?

Let us therefore before all things, How we ought to make peace with God.
make our peace with God, which by no other means can be, but only by the
merits and mediation of Jesus Christ; which we must apply unto our selves,
through a lively says: praying in the same (with a godly fear, and feeling of
our sins) for remission and pardon of them: and that he will so arm us with
his heavenly graces, as we may be able to beat down all impatience, and to
give us power to resist that armed enemy Satan, who endeavors to make us to
think, that our crosses are the curses of God, and that our afflictions proceed
from his final anger, never to be appeased; but these his sugiestions are
false; let us not believe them: let us believe, that whom God does chasten, he
loves: and therefore we may assure our selves so much the more, that we are
the children of God, by how much we find these tentations in us: for if we
were his, as he would sugiest unto us, that God is angry with us, and we not
his; he needed not to trouble us: but he knowing, that we are the Lords, he
works by all means to draw us to distrust in God, and that the merits of
Christ cannot avail us. But let us be strong in the Lord; let us trust
constantly and confidently in the merits of his son, armed with the shield of
faith; and buckle unto our selves the sword of the spirit, which is the word of
God; which does contain most sure promises that he will never leave us, nor
forsake us: let us pray always with all manner of prayer and supplication in
the spirit; and watch thereunto in a holy patience with all perseverance: So
shall we see the salvation of God, his power and providence, in delivering us
out of all our troubles, of whatsoever kind; or such inward comfort, as shall
make our most bitter and sharpest afflictions, sweet and easy.

And for as much as sin, Sin the greatest affliction that can befall a man.
is the greatest and most heavy burden of misery, that any poor child of God
can be afflicted with: It is the principal part of a Christian, to seek to be
unburdened of the same; not as to be careless in the search of his sins,
and so to feel no burden; for he is like a man sick unto death, and yet will
acknowledge he feels no sickness at all: but he that finds his sins
most grievous unto him, and most dejected for them, is nearest unto pardon; so
he acknowledge them, and in a lively faith in Christ repent them.

Comfort for a man afflicted in conscience, by reason of his sins.
COnsider first, whosoever thou art that art troubled in mind (...) thy
conscience afflicted by (...) ^f thy great sins, (...) not thy case alone to be
a sinner: Sin a common disease and sickness of the soul of every man.
it is a common disease and sickness of the soul; originally derived from
the transgression of Adam, and remaining in the nature of all his posterity;
outwardly showing it self in ungodly words and deeds, spoken or done against
the Law and honor of God; and inwardly, by the thoughts and desires of the
heart, conceived against the Law of the spirit. And happy is he, that can
consider his own ways, and that can and does examine and find out the sins
which are hidden in his own heart; which to all other men are concealed, but
not from God. The heart is an vnfadomable depth of sin, and rebellion against
God: and the best man by nature, is guilty of many secret and hidden, as well
as open and known sins: for, The imaginations of man's heart are only evil
from his youth: Genesis 8. 21.
And many odious sins proceed from that corrupt fountain; All sin
proceeds from the corruption of the heart.
Such, as men are ashamed to reveal; and were it possible, they would conceile
them from God him self: and therefore they often strive to keep them in their
private bosoms, until they become so heavy and burdensome, as they can no
longer bear them, without unspeakable horror, and vnquietuesse of mind;
until they become as a worm, so venomous in the Conscience, as eats and
deuoureth all peace and comfort of the heart; which the Devil seeks
continually to feed, and agrauates the sins grievously in the mind of a
poor sinner, that he begins to fainte, and as it were to sincke under the
burden of his afflicted conscience; which is the most heavy cross of all
crosses; a burrhen importable, where it lights: and it seems to be in some
measure thine own case, and is indeed dangerous: for, that soul that sins
(and perseuereth therein) shall dye: and it seems, thou feel the weight of
grievous sins; which makes thee sad, melancholicke, and heavy; which is yet a
token that thou art not so dead in sin, as that there is no feeling of sin in
thee; which may be an argument that there is some life of grace yet in thee,
and that the spirit of God is not altogether dead in thee: for, if thy
conscience were so feared up and hardened, that there were no sin felt of
thee, thy case were far more dangerous: and though thou groanest, and
grieuest under the burden of thy sins, it may be only for fear of the
Judgment of God, and his punishments due for thy sins, A servile fear.
which is in it self but a servile and slavish fear: But if thou grieve, that
thou have offended God by thy sins, and dishonored him by thy
transgressions; this proceeds of a godly sorrow, and so a sign, that there
is yet place and time for thee to repent and turn unto God, and therefore
despair not of the mercies of God in Christ, who through thy faith (if it be
lively and steadfast) will be thine Advocate, by whom and by none other, 1. Io.
2. 1. 2.
or other means, thou shall be reconciled to God, and not dye in thy sins.

Thy sins are great, Gods mercies greater then our sins.
and great and fearful the judgments of God for sin; yet greater then
both, is the mercy of God, toward a truly penitent sinner: he is much
displeased for sin, yet retayneth not he his anger, long, against a sinner,
if he return unto him; Micah 7. 18. 19.
for, mercy is more pleasing unto him then Justice: And though he seem to
turn away his loving favor from thee (being a notorious sinner) and suffer
thee to lie plunged, and as it were wallowing in the blood of thy sins, and
leave thee destitute of all inward feeling of comfort; yet, if thou were the
most heinous sinner, and have but an inclination, and an inward true desire to
regaine his favor, and be truly sorry that thou have offended him, he will
turn again, and have compassion upon thee; he will put away thine iniquities,
and cast thy sins into the botome of the Sea: for, as high as the heaven is
above the earth, Psalm. 103. 11.
so great is his mercy toward them that truly fear him. God is just, in
deed: But, if it may be so said, he is more merciful then just; but to none,
but to such, as do not only fear, and grieve for their sins, as did Judas
and Esau: But to such alone, God died for sinners, but not for such as dye in
their sins.
as in a lively Faith take hold of the merits of Christ; who in deed died for
sinners, but not for such as die in their sins, as they did. There must a
reconciliation be made, between God and a sinner, before he can assure
himself of pardon and remission of his sins, and that must not be delayed:
it must be to day before to morrow; for, as life is short and uncertain, and
repentance requires some time to be perfected (though there be one example, as
of the Thief upon the Cross of sudden repentance) it is not so easy or
speedy a work to be well done: there be many lets, which you shall find in
your self, and many blocks Satan will lay in your way; therefore what you
purpose to do, do it speedily, willingly, faithfully and fully.

There is no means for you to be eased of the burden of your sins, The
means to be eased of sin.
but to cleave unto God in the merits of his Christ, whom God the Father has
sent into the world, to save all those (be they never so great and grievous
sinners) as do truly confess, 1 Ioh. 4. 14.
heartily repent, and faithfully believe, the pardon of their sins; and that
they shall be saved through him.

If therefore thou truly beleeuest in Jesus Christ, and appliest his death and
merits, unto thy self, in a full assurance, and a settled persuasion that he
dyed even for thee; The blood of Christ is able to cleanse the greatest sinner.
then were thy sins never so great and heinous in quality, never so many in
number, were they as red as scarlet, or colored as purple; his blood, even the
blood of that Lamb shall make them as white as snow: And therefore did David
cry, wash me, O Lord, Psalm. 51.
wash me and make me clean: And what should he wash, but his sins? And
wherewith, but with the meritorious blood of Jesus Christ? And before you can
be thus washed and cleansed; before you can have the terror of your conscience
eased, and appeased; You must confess, and lay open your sins before the
Lord, and say with a feeling, and faithful heart, Ver. 3.
Against thee, against thee, O Lord, only have I sinned and done evil in thy
sight. It must not be a lip confession: What confession we must make.
as to acknowledge thy sins with thy mouth, and to retain them in thy heart:
Such a confession is hypocritical, and increases thy sins: were thy sins
never so small in thine own opinion, yet ought thou to think them great,
and grievous, and so they are; for, the least sin that a man commits, is the
breach of the Law, and he that breaks the least, Iam. 2. 10.
is guilty of the greatest: It seems, thou do in deed feel already the
grieuousnesse of thy sins, by thy heaviness and mourning: Sorrow for sin a
good beginning of true repentance, yet, not perfect without perseverance in well
doing.
which is a good beginning of repentance; but unless thou do therewith,
conioyne Faith in the merits and blood of Jesus Christ, and do truly purpose
and endeavor to lead a new life; thy repentance will be still imperfect. Thou
may also fear God, and yet little profit thee, except thou believe in the
mercies of God in Christ; for the devils themselves fear and tremble, at their
final sentence of utter condemnation. To fear God, as a Son, is in deed a
most heavenly virtue, and is found in none, but in the very sons and
daughters of God: for their fear is not so much of the punishment for sin,
as for that they have offended so loving a God by their sins: But to fear
God, for the first, is to fear him as a Slave, that fears more the whip, then
to abuse his Master. And this fear proceeds of the suggestion of Satan,
Satan's illusions.
who tempts and allures thee to sin; persuading thee that thy greatest sins
are but venial, and easily pardoned, by saying only Lord have mercy upon me,
or by some superficial and light confession. And when the sin is committed,
he tells thee that thy sins are so great and heinous, as they can not be
forgiven: Agrauating that servile fear, which often draws silly weak souls,
to despair of Gods mercies.

Thou grieuest that thou have sinned, because thou hear that every sinner
shall die: And yet thou think it sufficient, to think, yea and to confess
thou art a sinner; and Satan would have thee go no further: And so far he
will permit thee to go, without hindering thee, as he did Kayne and Judas; but
when he sees thee begin to lead a life, contrary to that he has led thee and
lulled thee in; when he observes thee, to show any fruits of true repentance;
(...). 4. 14.
he will then tell thee, it is a needless labor; for thy sins are so
great, as God will never forgive them, though thou repent never so much.

Believe not this ancient liar, Not to believe Satan's suggestions.
though he do persuade thee, that thy sins are so great, as the blood of
Jesus Christ can not prevail to heal thee of them; believe him not, I say,
for he himself knows, (though to the agrauation, and ^ncrease of his own
torments) (...) Jesus Christ came into the world to save greatest sinners, that
repent and believe in the merits of Christ: of which number, because he
knows he cannot be, he labors, and uses his infinite infernal Ministers,
to draw as many as he can, to his disobedience and condemnation. Believe him
not, nor fear him not, he is a liar in his suggestions, S^^ Iusi^
and weak in his power: and though he do persuade thee, that thy sins are so
great, as cannot be pardoned in the blood, and by the merits of Jesus Christ,
believe the contrary; for, he himself knows, and has confessed, Christ to
be the Savior of the faithful, and he that shall finally condemn him, and
all unbelievers. Math. 8. 29
Art thou come to torment us before the time, says he? foreshowing, that there
is a time appointed for his utter condemnation at the last day. He knows,
that Christ came to save sinners, and that without exception of any sin,
Satan guilty of the sin against the holy Ghost
(the sin against the holy Ghost excepted) of which sin he is highly
guilty, and therefore never to be forgiven.

Take unto thy self therefore a spiritual courage, and defy this reprobate
liar, this malignant adversary, to his face; and tell him, in a lively feeling
of the spirit of God, in a true and firm faith, 1. Ioh. 4. 14.
that thou beleeuest in Christ thy assured Redeemer, and he shall not only
not prevail against thee, Iam. 4. 7.
but he shall fly from thee: And for thy more strength put on the whole armor
of God, and he will buckle it unto thee, that armed Christ against this common
and mortal adversary; As Christ triumphed over Satan so shall all believers.
who overcame him, and triumphed over him: he will arm thee so on all parts,
that thou shall not fear to encounter him hand to hand, as Christ did: Thou
shall combat with him, and conquer him as David did Goliath; and therefore
yield not to his tentations, fear not his suggestions: Look up unto Christ
thy Savior, though he be in the heavens glorified, and has his Throne of
glory there; he will yet be thy safe second here; Every faith full Christian
combating with Satan, has Christ his second.
he will be ever on thy side: therefore, if through frailty thou should be
in some measure foiled (as it seems thou art) be not discouraged, he will
enter the List for thee, and in thy behalf: And as soon as that infernal
Champion, does but observe, that thou art seconded, by him, that has already
conquered him, he will not abide the field, he will fly and forsake any
further pursuit of thee. Satan noting whereunto man is inclined, feeds him
with occasions to offend.


Yet remember, that this enemy will seek and spy all occasions, to take thee
at any advantage; and will mark whereunto thou art still inclined; and
according to thy common course of siuning, he will feed thee with occasions,
to move thee to offend thy loving God and Jesus Christ: and therefore must thou
continually wrestle (as long as thou live here in the flesh) not only, with
the infirmities of flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers,
and against spiritual wickedness; against worldly governors, the Princes of
the darkness of this world, Ephesians 2.
all invisible: And think not thy chiefest conflict, We are never free from
trials.
to be with the visible men of this world; but look every hour to be assailed
by one spiritual enemy or another: and when thou feel any motion in thy
heart, to any kind of sin; think thou presently, Satan has swift wings to
follow, and to tempt sinners.
now I must either fight or be foiled, for there is no string away: Satan has
swift wings, he will overtake thee, and find thee out go where thou will; and
that thou find in thy self, by the present horror of thy conscience for
thy sins, which he lays before thee as in an ugly glass; showing them to
be so monstrous (as they be unto thee) as hell it self: Be not yet dismayed,
take hold of Christ, though not with thy hand (as the woman in the Gospel) yet
with thy heart; fasten upon him with a lively faith, and hold him fast, for
nothing preuailes with him, nor against Satan and sin, but a strong and
lively faith in Jesus Christ.

In this assurance stand fast, be not afraid, Most worthy men have been
guilty of great sins.
though thou be guilty of many and great sins; so was David and many worthy
men of old, yet they obtained pardon, and were (through the merits of Christ
imputed righteous. The mercy of GOD wrought upon their sins; for, if all men
were of them selves righteous, needing no repentance, how should the mercies of
God appear? what auayled then the death and merits of Christ? If there were
no sin, there needed no Redeemer.
Why should he be reputed a Redeemer, a Savior? or wherefore should he be
called a Mediator if there were no sin, or sinners? He came not to call the
righteous, such as feeling no sin in themselves, hold themselves just; but
he came in deed to call sinners to repentance, and to save (through his
blood) such as feel and acknowledge their sins: Therefore be thou not
afraid, though thou feel thy sins burdensome unto thee; he, even Christ,
came to ease them, if thou faithfully believe in him: And think not but faith
and true repentance can and will turn Gods justice into mercy; his anger into
favor; and his most heavy displeasure into love; even into that love
wherewith God loves his dearest children freely; for he loves none; None can
love God, but such as he loves.
that love not him, and none can love him, but such as he loves; for, to love
God, and to be beloved of God, are of God alone: And they to whom he
vouchsafes this heavenly favor, to love him, are filled with all fullness of
whatsoever may make them assured of their salvation, quieting and pacifying
their afflicted consciences, and giving them, inward settled peace.

Therefore, if thou have, and feel an inward godly sorrow that thou have
offended so loving a God, and have in thy self a desire to be reformed, and to
be reconciled to God; Thou need not fear, for the love of God toward thee;
is not absent, neither are thou altogether destitute of thy love toward him:
And therefore whatsoever Satan does suggest against thee, believe him not,
believe thy Redeemer; he is the truth, he (even he) does assure thee, that at
what time so ever thou shall repent thee of thy sins from the bottom of thy
heart, the Lord will put them out of his remembrance. Christ is the truth, the
way, and the life.
He is the truth that has promised this, and he will assuredly perform
salvation, even to thee; though thou be a grievous sinner, if thou truly
repent, and faithfully believe, that thy sins are pardoned in his blood; who
is also the way: he has traced out, before thee and for thee, a perfect
example of righteousness, patience and obedience; walk in it; then, as he is
also the life, he shall be thy life: and mauger sin, Satan, and death, thou
shall live, and live for ever.

Pray therefore unto GOD faithfully and fervently, Pray.
and he will assuredly ease thee, even here, of that heavy burden, wherewith
thy conscience seems to be grievously afflicted, and oppressed.

And for thy further instruction and help, if thou be so ignorant, as not
knowing how to pray to thy comfort, thou may use the Prayer following; God
accepts inward sighs for sin.
or according to the measure of that grace, which God has given thee, sigh and
groan, inwardly to God, who accepts even inward desires, to repent and to be
reconciled to God, as if they were prayers in deed, so it be in faith from the
heart: or thou may use any other godly prayer, which may best express the
sorrow of thy heart for thy sins, the forgiveness of them, and the assurance
of thy salvation.

A Prayer for the forgiveness of sins, that afflict the weak conscience of
a sinner.
OEternall, everliving, and most loving Lord God, in Jesus Christ, toward them
that fear thy name, and walk uprightly before thee; and a severe Judge unto
impenitent sinners; who only know the thoughts and secrets of all hearts:
from whose allseeing eye no sin or sinners can be hidden. Consider Lord, that
I was originally made to thine own Image, in righteousness and holiness: and
that I became corrupt, and consequently sinful by his transgression, in whom I
was first made holy; and do confess my self O Lord, one of, and the worst of
all the cursed seed of him, in whom all posterities became accursed; and I
cannot conceal the corruption which I have had and received from them, by whom
I was begotten, and borne: and that this corruption (now become mine) has
begotten, and brought forth so many and monstrous sins in me, as I am not
only, not worthy to be called thy Son, but ashamed to be known to be the
work of the hands of so great, so gracious, and so righteous a God; for, my
sins (O Lord) are so great, so heinous, so odious, and so many in number, as
have so far ouergorged my corrupt heart, and so infected my wretched soul,
with the filthiness of them, that I feel even the stink of them, so loathsome
unto mine own guilty Conscience, as I cannot but hold my self detestable in
thy sight; Mine Iniquities are gone ever mine head, a burden too heavy for me
to bear.

O wretch that I am, how dare I come into thy presence, such a train and
troop of intolerable sins accompaning me?

Thou can not Lord, but observe and see, and seeing and observing, my heinous
sins, how can I but fear, that thou in Justice, wilt, not only put me back
and reject me and my prayers, but worthily and deservedly confound me?

I have an accuser, a Judge and an executioner within me: I am Arraigned, and
condemned, even by the accusation and witness of mine own guilty Conscience;
the horror whereof, has been, and is such, as has made me afraid to seek
to thee (whom I have so deeply offended) for pardon, lest that in thy fury,
and in the severity of thy Justice, thou should leave me to the will of him
that has been the principal instigator of me to sin, and now the chief
accuser of me for sin; and thinks that he had, and has such a share in me,
through my former often consenting unto his inticements, that thou my God, were
not able to take me out of his hands.

But now, holy, heavenly and merciful Father, in Jesus Christ, through thy
grace (undeservedly) working in me, I have found him a deceiuer, an imposter,
an enemy; who has done what lies in him to work my ruin, by my rebellion
against thee, through his continual tentations; using all his impious
Instruments to deceive me: the pleasures of the world, the lust of mine own
flesh, which has bin ever prone to be allured by him: And I, wretched
creature, blind in all good things, never observed, what a dangerous course of
life, I have (to this day) walked in, until now.

Now dear Father, as it has pleased thee, of thine own free mercy, to open
the eyes of my sinning soul, to see that I have long erred, and that all that
I have hitherto done, has been evil: So now, seeing mine own wicked
deseruings, give me power to repent me for all my sins.

Reform me, O gracious Father, reform me, and by thy grace, ease and comfort
my grieved heart, through the powerful and effectual working of thy spirit
henceforth in me; that now at the last I may taste of thy goodness and rich
mercy, in Jesus Christ: Though I have nothing in my self to move thee to have
compassion upon me, yet remember, that I have a deserving and a prevailing
Advocate with thee, whose merits may move thee, and his mediation prevail
with thee for me: And therefore I have hope, that I shall be pertaker of his all
sufficient satisfaction, made for all sinners, among whom I cannot but
acknowledge my self the greatest; and least deserving thy favor.

O my God, I feel my miserable estate, I acknowledge the grieuousnesse of my
sins, and that for them thou may justly condemn me; but that I have
learned by thine own promises, that there is mercy with thee, and that thou
delightest not in the condemnation of a sinner, but rather that he should
repent, and turn unto thee, and live.

Lord have mercy upon me; have mercy upon me, for I am weak: I feel a
burden of my sins, that presses me down, and nothing can raise me, but thy
mercies in Jesus Christ.

O give me a lively faith, that I may apply the prevailing merits of that
sacred Lamb, crucified for all believers, to the washing away of all my
sins, and to the ease of my guilty conscience, heavily burdened therewith:
so shall my poor afflicted and distressed soul, be refreshed my heart now
grossly defiled, shall be made clean, mine affections, now altogether ranging
after unholy things, shall be changed into perfect obedience unto thee; and
Satan that has long and maliciously pursued me with his most violent
tentations, shall fly at the presence of thy holy spirit in me: and all my
thoughts, imaginations, desires, words and works, shall be sanctified and made
holy by the same Spirit.

O hide not therefore gracious Father, hide not from me thy loving countenance:
but turn away thy face from my sins, blot out all mine offenses out of thy
remembrance: create in me a clean heart, restore to me the joy of thy
salvation, and stablish me with thy free spirit, and let me never return again
to my former slavery of sin; and I shall offer unto thee, the unfeigned
sacrifice of praise, for thine unspeakable mercies: All honor and glory, to
Christ my Redeemer, and to the holy Ghost, the obedience of mine unfeigned
heart, for that he assures me of all these incomprehensible blessings. Amen.

Lord ever, more and more increase my faith.
Comfort for the sick.
THe miserable estate of a man perplexed in conscience for his sins, is the
greatest affliction that can befall a man in this life, which is the sickness
of the soul: for, a wounded conscience who can bear? Sickness of the soul,
and sickness of the body great afflictions.
And next to it, there is not a greater, then is the extremity of the
sickness of the body: and therefore need these two sicknesses above all other
crosses, to be especially sought to be eased: the first, with spiritual, the
next, both with spiritual and corporal comfort. They are Twinns, borne
together and live together, though the one by inspiration, the other by
propagation: And therefore, if the soul be diseased, the body can not (though
it may seem contrary) be in perfect health: The soul and body feel one the
others sickness.
It will show apparent tokens of the sickness of the mind; and, if the body
be overmuch tormented with the grieuousnesse of sickness, the soul cannot but
feel, (through a mutual love, which is between the soul and the body) a
kind of grief and sorrow.

I will therefore apply unto thee (whom I see to be cast down by thy bodies
infirmity) the counsel and comforts, which may first ease thee of thy inward
fears and troubles; for it can not be but that Satan, that ancient enemy of
al mankind, Satan in our health tempts us to sin, and in sickness
presents it unto us.
has been busy in the time of thy health to draw thee to sin; that by sin
thou might offend God; that by offending God, thou might be rejected of
him: and now, finding thee visited by the hand of God, with grievous sickness
(fore-showing, either the speedy approaching of death, or a gentle forewarning
thereof) he cannot be less watchful, and diligent, in this thine extremity,
(nay far more then he was in thy most healthful estate to trouble thee)
for, when thou were healthful and strong, thou could nor but be, by the
corruption of thy own nature, proane to sin: And this common enemy of man's
salvation works upon our corruption, and our ableness to sin: And when he
finds us most weak in our bodies, and our senses, and powers, laboring
against the violence of our infirmities; then he comes, and presents unto
our guilty consciences, the sins which he before provoked us to commit.

In the sickness of the body, he finds fit opportunity to trouble us; for,
although he knows not the time which God reserueth in his own wisdom, and
power, when any man shall dye; yet when sickness comes, he knows it is the
forerunner of death; and therefore he knows that then or never he must
employ all his Engines, Satan is most busy to tempt us, to distrust God, when
we are nearest our death.
and batteries, or else for ever rest frustrate of any hope to prevail. And
therefore, he will solicit thee, now to distrust in the mercies of God in
Christ, and will suggest unto thee, that now thou see and feel that GOD is
displeased with thee, and that he has no delight in thee, (as if thou were
his, he would have) he would not torment thee as he does: and that thou were
as good to cast off all thy hope in him, as to deceive thy self, vainly
trusting that he will yet show thee any mercy or loving countenance.

These fearful assaults, it cannot be but thou do, or may endure at this
thy capital enemies hands, The true child of GOD, is most tempted of Satan,
whereby he may know that satan has no share in him.
if thou be in deed the true child of God: for, if thou were one, whom Satan
had in his own power, he would permit thee to rest quietly, he would not
disturb thee: but finding thee to be inwardly inclined to seek the Lord,
praying for pardon in his Sons merits, which he cannot endure, without
roaring and raging against thee, suspecting that he has lost thee now
altogether, though thou were sometimes something serviceable, or rather
(according to natural corruption) slau^shly inclined to his works of
darkness, before the Lord in favor visited thee with his fatherly
corrections, to reclayme thee from Satan and sin, to make thee his obedient
Son; and the more thou declinest from him and his tentations, and the more
thou love and enclinest to serve God, with a pure heart, the more will he
ever seek to molest thee, and if it were possible, to drive thee to despair.

But fear not whatsoever he shall object against thee, or lay unto thy charge,
though when he sees thee weakest, he will try his strength against thee
most: When we are w^akest, and Satan busiest, God in Christ is strongest for
us.
Believe, that when thou art weakest, God is strongest for thee; and Satan,
though he dare to tempt the dearest children of God, as he did Christ
himself; yet he trembles, when he sees Christ, with his holy Spirit
assisting thee, and by his merits laid hold on by a lively faith comforting
thee; fear him not therefore, but incline thine heart unto God, and know that
this thy sickness, has not fallen upon thee by chance, or by Satan's malice:
It came even by Gods mere providence in love, to correct thee here in the
flesh, to call thee home unto him, that thou perish not with them whom Satan
has subdued, that have not walked in the fear of the Lord, whom Gods loving
corrections could not reform.

A greater mercy of God can not be observed, God shows great favor by
drawing us out of the power of Satan by sickness.
then to draw a sinner out of the power and slavery of sin and Satan, by a
gentle hand, to make him hi^ own Coheire with Jesus Christ his Son; and it
is the end of this his correcting thee.

Repent thee therefore of thy former sins; and believe sted fastly, that in,
and through the blood and merits of Christ, thou shall assuredly be saved; and
so shall thou find that this enemy of thine, will give over further to pursue
thee.

As touching the forgiveness of thy sins, how heinous so ever they be in
quality, or how many so ever in number, they shall not be imputed unto thee.

Thou have been already taught, that all afflictions of whatsoever kind, do
proceed, and are inflicted upon us for sin; and especially, for the neglect
of hearing the word of God, Exo. 15. 26.
and practicing what it teaches: The neglect of the word and service of GOD, a
great sin.
And yet not always simply for sin, but sometimes that the glory of God may
the more appear, especially in healing the sick: Lazarus dyed, and yet Christ
said, Ioh. 11. 4. 15.
that his sickness was not unto death; not so unto death, but that he knew
he could, and would raise him again, though he were four days dead and
buried. And therefore was his sickness and death, only, that the glory of God
might be seen, by raising of him; and the faith of his Disciples be the more
confirmed: but we must impute our sicknesses, and all other crosses, as laid
upon us for our sins; and learn by the example of good Hezekias, to turn
our selves unto God, and to mourn, not so much for our sickness as for our
sins.

Thou therefore that art thus afflicted, in body, and no doubt in mind also;
repair unto God, in lively, faithful, and earnest prayer, above all things
for the pardon of thy sins: Prayer an argument of the child of God.
for, prayer (if it be fervent) is the most evident argument, that thou art the
child of God, and prevails much; for, where true says is, there necessarily
follows, true repentance: faith, and repentance for sin, and offending God,
are inseparable: And if thy repentance be serious, it will either produce
outward tears, The effects of true repentance.
or inward grief for your sins; though tears be not always ready, not
verbal prayers powerful; especially in a sick man, whose powers are commonly
so shaken, with the force of the disease, as grief of the heart, can hardly
wrest tears from the eyes, or words from the lips: yet, with God it shall be
accepted, both sufficient prayers, and prevailing tears: if thou find such
grief in thy heart for thy sins, and such a desire to be reconciled unto God
in Christ, as may but move inward, and silent sighs unto God, who respects
more the holy disposition of the heart, then any outward action or gesture of
the body; it shall be sufficient: though some outward show of faith and
repentance be necessary, for the satisfaction of such as visit a sick person,
Fit signs of repentance in a sick man.
if he can but show it by the tongue in speaking, though weakly, confessing
his sins, lifting up his hands, or eyes; it may argue the inward heart well
prepared, and that he wants not the spirit of God.

And therefore if your sickness be so violent, as that you cannot show
verbal tokens of the working of Gods spirit in you, whereby they that come to
visit you, cannot witness for you, your sorrow by your outward confession; It
is enough that God knows it by your inward true sorrow of heart.

It was enough that God saw that good King Hezekiah, in his sickness, inwardly
bewayling his sins, though he could not with plain terms vocally, and with
fluent words, as he was wont; but inwardly, to mourn, like a Dove, and to
chatter like a Crane very weakly and obscurely; yet God understood him, and
accepted his weak utterance, as a most earnest and effectual prayer.

So that, if it come to pass, that thy weakness become such, as thou can
not vocally and verbally pray (as by thy sickness it may come to pass, though
thou be in present perfect memory) thy heart (though never so faint) may yet
have a feeling of Gods mercies; A sick man may inwardly pray, though standers by
observe it not.
and may show it self powerful to God, though it seem weak unto men: for,
God is absolute in understanding; can, and does conceive the meaning of thy
heart, We may pray for health in our sickness, and seek to the Physician, so we
depend not more upon his ^rt, the^ upon Gods blessing.
far better then in thy best strength thou can thy self understand it.

As for thy present sick estate, thou must not be careless of it, but after
prayer for pardon of thy sins, thou may crave restitution of thy bodily
health; if God, who can restore it, think it fitter for thee then death: and
thou art not only not forbidden, but commanded, to seek the lawful help of
the Physician; provided that thou depend not so upon the Art of the Phisician,
as to exempt and neglect thy prayer to God for a blessing upon it; for, if God
give not a Divine working unto the physic (howsoever it may seem to work) it
may help one part and hurt another: A cluster of Figs healed Hezekiah; and
the washing in Jordan the Leaper: yet neither the Figs, nor the water of
their own nature cured their diseases; it was God gave the virtue to both; and
therefore whether thine infirmity be inward or outward, with the means use
prayer, that God may give a blessing.

Beware thou seek not to the reputed cunning men and women, To abando^ cunning
men and women* so reputed.
who are supposed to heal by their Charms and Spells; who if they prevail in
any cure, it is (by the permission of God) by the devil. The surest remedy
is, to have thy recourse to God, 2. Kings.
and not to Baalz^b^b: as Ahaziah, who dyed the death, for running to Witches
and Wizards, the limbs of the devil: but put thy trust in the all-sufficient
God alone, using such lawful means as he has appointed, both for the ease
of thy soul, and health of thy body; and then recommend the issue, to him with
godly patience; committing thy will to his will.

If he restore thee to thy former health, be thou thankful to him, and let thy
thankfulness appear, by a new and godly course of life, and true obedience. How
thankfulness should appear upon recovery.
If he have otherwise determined of thee, namely, to call thee out of this
miserable mortal life, rejoice, and be glad; for thy soul, now sick in sin,
shall suddenly receive a new and glorious life; thy body now oppressed with
grief, shall be at rest; Comfort* against death.
though it perish and rot in the grave, it shall rise again, and meet the
soul, and be thereunto again united with far greater glory then thy heart can
think: In the mean time, seek or think of nothing, but of the things that
are above; and endeavor to have thy heart, thine understanding, thoughts, and
affections, so qualified, and the Lamp of faith in the merits of Christ, so
lively enlightened, that thou may joyfully meet the Bridegroom Christ, in
soul and body, when he shall appear in the clouds, in glory and majesty,
to give every man according to his works.

Be not afraid therefore of Death; Not to fear death, for it frees us from
many troubles, and brings us many blessings.
it is but the separation of the soul (now, as in a prison) from the body,
which is but a carcass full of natural infirmities, which the soul
possesses for a little time, fraught only with miseries, with grief and
fear; which, being dissolved, shall bring end to all thy cares, dangers,
fears, miseries and afflictions; and bring thee to the Paradise of God, where
thou shall feel no more of these unsavory things of the flesh; for, the Lord
will transform, this thy vile, base and corrupt body, and make it like unto
his most glorious body. Then shall thou be no more subject to sin, or
sickness; no adversity, nor anguish shall afflict thee, no enemies shall
trouble thee, no slanders disgrace thee: And where thou art here mortal,
subject to all the former evils, thou shall be there immortal: The face of
God, which is the fountain of light, shall there shine upon thee; and no
darkness shall ouershadow thee: all perfection of joy, glory and gladness,
thou shall find there; and be so plentifully filled with the contemplation of
the abundance of those heavenly pleasures; that you will or can delight in
nothing, but in the beholding of the most glorious face of Jesus Christ, and
only delight in the association of that heavenly company: which joys, if thou
truly knew here, as thou shall enjoy them there, Thou would be content,
rather to endure a thousand deaths, then to be deprived of them.

Prepare thy self therefore, How to prepare us for death.
with all divine furniture; with faith, hope, love, and all other holy and
heavenly affections; to go the way of all flesh. Lay willingly down thy
carnal part in the grave, to become dust, whereof it was made, and commend thy
soul into the hands of God that gave it, and of Jesus Christ who redeemed it:
And according to the counsel, that God gave to Hezekiah, set thy house in
order. And above this thy corpora^l habitation, set thy soul in order; and as
much as in thee lies, have peace with all men: Depart in the love, of, and to
thine enemies.

And, as far as the possibility of thy earthly substance, How to dis^ose of
worldly things before we die, and how to leave all.
will extend; owe nothing to any man, when thou departest hence, but love: and
think not much, neither let it grieve or trouble thy mind, to leave thy
worldly wealth, which was but lent thee; thy father, mother, wife, children,
lands, possessions, silver, gold, and the things that have been, or are, most
dear unto thee; to hasten to this heavenly habitation; where eternal glory
shall be thy wealth, the eternal God thy Father, Jesus Christ thy brother,
all the Saints and Angels, and all the holy and most glorious heavenly
company, shall be far more comfortable unto thee, then all the former, who
were both mortal and inconstant: And in steed of the base and uncertain
possessions in the earth, thou shall possess a Kingdom, The joys of heaven
are inexpressible.
for ever: In steed of thy gold and silver, and thy most precious Jewels, thou
here, for a moment enioyest; thou shall enhabite a City, whose walls are gold,
garnished with all manner of precious stones, far excelling the rarest and
richest that ever the earth yielded; whose beauty, and excellency, the tongue
of man, no not of an Angel, can truly express, to our apprehension; But
shadowed out unto us under these most precious ornaments, incomprehensible.

Should any carnal consideration therefore hinder thee, from a willing mind,
to change this thy mortal and miserable life (as short, as evil) for a life
so glorious and permanent? The longer thou continuest here, Why we should
desire to dye.
the more cause thou have to desire to be dissolved; for that thou here do
augment daily thy sins, and every day brings new grief.

Prepare thy self therefore without delay; make thee ready, that when GOD
shall call thee, thou may be willing to go: And for thy better preparation,
use prayer often, in a lively faith; and if thine infirmity will permit thee,
use this prayer following, or any other godly prayer, with holy meditation, to
season thy soul through the holy Ghost, commending thy spirit unto God in
Jesus Christ.

A Prayer to be often said of a sick man or woman.
O Lord my GOD, and my most loving and merciful Father, in thy beloved Son
Jesus Christ; I, thy most unworthy creature, heavy laden, with the burden of
my manifold and grievous sins; much oppressed, with the infirmity and
sickness which thou have justly inflicted upon my corrupt and weak body; do
humbly pray thee to pardon my sins, and give me patience to bear this thy
gentle correction; in which I do heartily submit my self unto thy heavenly
will; whether it be thy pleasure, to permit me yet a little while, to enjoy the
health of my body, to serve thee; or to take my soul out of the loathsome
prison of my sinful carcass into thine own hands; where I know it shall be
safe, and not perish: And therefore Lord give me a godly contented mind, to
suffer my body, to return unto the earth, from whence it was taken, there to
rest until it shall please thee to raise it again, at the last resurrection,
and to make it, of a mortal, an immortal; and of a corruptible, to make it a
perfectly glorious body. In the mean time, O Lord, I do beseech thee, to
fortify and strengthen my soul, against all tentations, that I may be able to
resist, whatsoever* assaults of the devil, and his Ministers. As for mine own
power, alas it is even weakness it self, but my hope and strength is of thee.

I can allege nothing, neither can thou find any thing in me either
worthy or acceptable, whereby I might have hope, either to have my sins
forgiven me, or to be released, or eased of my sickness; or to be restored to
my former health or strength: yet I have hope (O Lord) that thou in mercy wilt
pardon my sins, in the merits of my Redeemer, and that for his sake thou will either restore me to health, or speedily to end this my grievous
infirmity; which, if for the grieuousnesse of my sins, thou think sit to lay
yet more heavily upon me, strengthen me so much the more with perfect faith and
godly patience, that I may bear it; that the apprehension of death, which is
something terrible to flesh and blood, daunt me not: But that I may rest
assured, that thou thus rebukest me not in thine anger, nor that thou
chastisest me in thy heavy displeasure, but rather of thy love which is better
unto me then life.

O Father, what shall I render unto thee, for all thy benefits? for they have
bin infinite toward me: And even this thy fatherly correction I acknowledge
not the least; for hereby Lord, I find thy gracious purpose to be, to reclayme
me from my wonted sins, which without thy mercy, cannot but procure, not the
death of my body only, but of my soul also; so dearly redeemed, by the blood
of thy dearest Son.

O strengthen Lord, strengthen my faith, that I may now at the last, take such
firm and assured hold of the merits of Jesus Christ, that all my sins and
ungodly deseruings, may be covered, and that his righteousness, may be imputed
unto me.

I do confess, O Lord, to my shame and grief, that before thou did
correct me, I went awry; I followed too much the desires of my corrupt heart:
But now Lord, I do heartily repent me, that ever I offended thee: but, if it
be thy gracious good will and pleasure, and if in thy wisdom thou think it
fit, to restore me to my former health, which I humbly leave unto thee; I
shall endeavor by thy grace, to walk more warily, and shun the enticements
that have seduced me; and the allurements of Satan, that have deceived me.
But, if thou have determined, this my sickness, to be my last and final
trouble, I shall most heartily embrace it, with a longing expectation, for the
time of my dissolution: And when the time comes, accept it, with a joyful
and glad heart, and that I may be the more truly and readily prepared, at the
instant of the departure of my soul from my body; wash me thoroughly, and make
me clean, that I may appear before thee, in the immaculate roabes of Christ's
righteousness; and not in mine own polluted garments of corruption: That I may
hear that most sweet and comfortable voice of my Redeemer; Come thou blessed
of my Father, enter into, and possess the joys prepared for thee, from the
beginning of the world: which grant gracious Lord God, for Jesus Christ's sake,
to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all honor, praise, and glory, for
ever.

O Lord increase, and evermore and more strengthen my faith, and fill my heart
with unfeigned godly desire, to be speedily dissolved, that I may live with thee
in heaven. Amen.
A Prayer to be said for a sick man or woman, of faithful friends that come
to visit him, or her.
LOrd God Almighty, and Father of incomprehensible mercy, we here assembled,
before thy Majesty, in the name of thy most beloved Son Jesus Christ, are bold
to present our humble petitions unto thee, in the behalf of this sick person,
lying here visited with sickness, which thou might* justly have laid, and
inflicted upon any of us, as great sinners; and have spared him (or her:) but
such has been thy mercy, hetherunto toward us, as to afford us health,
expecting the time, wherein we cannot avoid, but must taste of the same cup.

We acknowledge Lord that thou never sendest this, or any other cross or
affliction, to any, no not to such as thou love best* but the end thereof
(though bitter for the time, to flesh and blood) is happiness; yet do thou
justly whatsoever thou do: and we acknowledge that sin is the cause, of
all thy fatherly visitations.

And forasmuch as it cannot be, but that this sick party, is oppressed in the
weakness of his body, by the strong tentations of that common enemy Satan,
who endeavors so to lay his sins to his charge (whereof no man is free)
that if it were possible, he might so far fear him with thy severe Justice
for the same, as that he might despair of thy mercies, and consequently of his
own salvation.

Wherefore, we thy weak servants here assembled, do humbly and heartily pray
thee, to abandon and abolish that infernal Serpent, that his false
suggestions, creep not into the heart of this sick party, but arm him (or
her) so with a lively faith, that thy holy Spirit may so possess his soul,
that the enemy may find no place for his tentations: Besprinkle his heart so,
with the meritorious blood of thy Son, that the devil, seeing and observing
a stronger then himself, to possess the house of his soul, he may be
enforced to fly, and no further to pursue him.

Cause Lord that some tokens, may appear in this sick person, that his soul
and conscience are quieted by the presence of the holy Ghost, in him, whereby
we thy most humble suppliants, may receive some comfort, in the fruit of our
prayers for him.

And, as touching his sickness, we submit our desires to thine own will; yet,
if thy good pleasure be so, as to restore him to the former health which we in
his behalf entreat thee; to the end that he and we may glorify thee, for
thy great mercy in healing him; and that he by this thy fatherly correction,
may learn to live the residue of the time that he shall here enjoy, in new and
more perfect obedience: But, if otherwise thou be pleased to dispose of him,
namely, to take him out of this mortall-life; give him we humbly pray thee, an
understanding heart, to know, and to consider his mortality, and the glory to
come; a sound mind, perfect memory, with a feeling faith, patience and
obedience; that without fear, with cheerful alacrity, he may surrender his
soul unto thee. Receive it good Father, as the soul of an Elect Saint, and
send his body (which must rest and remain in the earth until the general
rising again of the dead) a most joyful resurrection, that he may then enjoy
the full perfection of glory with thee, both in soul and body, which we humbly
pray thee, (in the name of Jesus Christ) graciously to grant; and that it
would please thee to come quickly and finish the work, which thou have begun
and determined for him. And grant that we may all, in all humbleness, faith,
constancy and obedience, wait when thy pleasure shall be to visit any of us,
with thy final fatherly visitation.

O Lord increase his, ours, and the faith of all that belong unto thee; that
we all may look, and long for the time of our dissolution, with patience, in
assurance in the end, to live eternally with thee, through Christ our Lord and
Savior, Amen.
For such as are oppressed with poverty and want: not impertinent for the rich
to read and consider.
Poverty, Poverty and want a great affliction.
and want of things necessary, for the maintenance of this present life, is not
the least affliction that can fall upon man: And that lights many times, as
well upon the known poor, as upon them that think themselves rich; for
riches, and poverty, have wings; for as the poor man, having his wings clipped,
that he cannot mount, or soar to the pitch of other men: So the rich are
often, so deplumed, as they fall into the poor estate of meanest men; and
therefore, as the rich may fall, so the poor may rise: Riches and poverty
variable.
Let neither then the rich presume, nor the poor despair: for the Almighty
God, that governs all things, has two hands; with the one he does cast
down the proud, and with the other he exalts the humble: In the rich is
required thankfulness, and obedience; In the poor, lowliness and patience;
and in both, godly diligence and faithful prayer: otherwise, the rich cannot
prosper, nor the poor be relieved. If the rich man fall into poverty, it is
his blemish; if a poor man become rich, it is his glory: yet, let not him that
rises, disdain him that falls; for both are from the Lord.

To fall, Easier to fall then to rise.
there are many means in a man himself, but to rise, being fallen, is not in
man; and therefore the means both of men's risings and fallings, are duly to be
considered: art thou fallen from riches to poverty? examine thy life and
conversation: art thou risen from poverty to riches? consider well in thine
own heart, whether by right or wrong.

Many may prosper and wax rich by diligence (in a lawful calling) and many
become poor through idleness: many are borne rich, and dye poor; and many
borne poor, wax rich: when the rich become poor, it may be either in Gods
justice, or in his mercy: for, if the rich become proud, and presume upon their
wealth; Riches and poverty may both proceed of Gods mercy.
despising the poor; it is just with God, to take that from him, that he
abuses; yet, also in mercy, to humble him: for there is not a more prevailing
means, to make a man know himself, then poverty; And there is not a more
acceptable thing to God, then a man to abase himself in his sight: nor a thing
more offensive, then a man to exalt himself, by reason of the greatness of his
wealth; which he arrogateth to himself, as if it were his own, when in deed
it is but lent him: And therefore God often times takes it from one, and gives
it to others: And in steed of his wealth, gives him want; that he may know,
that it is neither in the wisdom, nor by the diligence of man, either to get
or to retain his wealth gotten, without the mere mercy and blessing of God.

But, where true faith in God is, joined with godly care and diligence, in a
lawful calling, there wants not prayer; And where faith and faithful
prayers are, there is true prosperity: And to that man, The ground of true
prosperity.
a little means suffices to sustain his estate, and to nourish his life:
for, A small thing that the righteous has, is better then the great riches of
the wicked.

Therefore in thy case of poverty and want, The cause and means are to be
examined how a man comes poor.
thou must consider, and duly examine, the cause, whereby thou art become
poor, and to be in this miserable estate; whether by thine own idleness,
corruption of thy life, in wasting either thy patrimony received from thy
Parents, or thy riotous expending of that thou have lawfully gotten by thine
own industry.

To receive means, for which thou never trauailedst (as many do from careful
Parents and friends) or to get by thine own labors, To get, and ryotously to
spend, is idleness it self.
and to consume it wastfully in evil company keeping, by gaming and riot, is
worse then Idleness it self, which yet in him self is a capital sin; one of
those, for which Sodom, Gomorah, etc. were burned to ashes: for Idleness was
in that City; as it is, wheresoever it reigns, the cause of many other
sins; as of luxury, Idleness the cause of many sins.
drunkenness, whoredom, and all other most monstrous, and most abominable
vices: yet do all these commonly accompany wealth, easily gotten: As when a
man finds he has means coming daily in, lightly without labor, he measures
it not by the uncertainty, of the continuance, as appears, by his wanton and
needless expense, but by a vain hope it will last ever.

But, if thou become poor, and thus cast down, by the loving hand of God, to
call thee from thy sins; as by loss of goods, by sickness, fire,
shipwreck, or the like inevitable crosses; God sends poverty and want to weane
us from sin that fulness procured.
Thou may account them fatherly corrections, and may rather rejoice in,
then to repine at them; for he inflicts this want (of thy former fulness) as
Physic to purge thy corrupt heart, of thy carnal delights, and from abusing
of thy liberty as thou have done, which bred in thee security; and security
sin, and forgetfulness of thy duty to God: as in that rich glutton in the
Gospel, who having plenty of all things delightful to his carnal part,
became so delicious, as he fared daintily every day, richly roabed in fine
linen, and yet so hard hearted, as although he saw poor miserable Lazarus,
hungry and naked, lie at his gate full of sores, crying for some crummes of
the broken meat that fell from his Table, had yet no remorce or commiseration
on the lamentable estate of that poor man, who was more refreshed by the rich
man's dogs, licking away the filth of his sores, then by any comfort received
from the glutton, or his gluttonous feasts.

There was great difference between this rich man, Great difference between
the rich glutto^ and poor Lazarus.
and this miserable beggar: The one was had in greatest reverence, admired and
honored for his wealth; the other held in great contempt, generally despised,
by reason of his baseness and poverty: But neither did the rich man continue
long in his pomp, nor the poor in his penury: Both died, and both carried to
their places appointed by God; the rich man to hell, the beggar into Paradise:
the first to perpetual torments, the other to a most blessed and glorious
Being.

Consider this duly with thy self therefore, thou, that complainest of
poverty, and want: whether would thou enjoy here the pleasures of this life
(for a season) with this man, wealthy and glorious, and in fine to have his
reward; or to endure a little want, poverty, and worldly baseness, for a
little time, and be with Lazarus pertaker of eternal glory? I know, if thou
wisely consider both, thou will not only not grudge nor repine at thy poor
estate, God deals well with us, to take away the means that make us proud.
but wilt rather be thankful unto God, that he so lovingly deals with thee,
in keeping thee from the means to make thee proud, to forget thy self and
him: As I think, thou can not be ignorant, that riches, health, and earthly
happiness, commonly carry men, not having faith and the fear of God, into
many noisome lusts, and ungodly and wanton desires: And that poverty and want,
sickness and other like crosses, are the good and gracious means, that God
uses, to withold his dearest children from running astray; although it
cannot be denied also, but that a faithless poor man may have his heart
infected, and poisoned, with as heinous sins as the rich: for it is not
wealth that always makes a wicked man, though it be a great temptation and
provocation to many and grievous sins: It is not the money but the mind,
wherein the error lies; and it is not poverty, Poverty nor riches make men
good or evil.
of it self, or any other cross that makes an evil man good; but it is a
means which God in his wisdom uses to prevent the danger, that wealth often
works: A knife in a childs hand hurts not, but he is a silly Father, and
she a simple Nurse, that will not tak^ it from the child, for fear of the
hurt it might do the child. So riches of themselves hurt not, but the abuse of
them, may pervert the reputed owner; for no man is the true owner of the wealth
he possesses; he is but a disposer of it, and it is the well using or abusing
of it, that draws upon the Steward, a blessing, or a curse.

If thou that art become poor, and do acknowledge it justly laid upon
thee, it is the entrance into assurance, that God has laid it upon thee in
mercy; Poverty to some, better then riches.
if in mercy then, no doubt but in love: be assured, that thy poverty is
better for thee then riches, for he knows better then thou what is best for
thee; Take it therefore with patience; in faith, and embrace it so much the
more, by how much thou may assure thy self, it is a token of the love and
favor of God toward thee, to humble thee, and to make thee so much the more
like unto thy Redeemer, who became poor, to make thee rich; he abased
himself, to bring thee to honor; he was here in worldly want, to furnish
thee with all spiritual abundance; he has chosen the poor of the world, to
make them rich in God; he keeps his own dearest children low here, that he
may exalt them hereafter: for, it is not possible that any man shall live here
in pomp and pleasure, and all earnall delights, and yet assure himself, of
the glory to come, prepared only for his Elect Saints that suffer here. And
if Christ our Master and Redeemer, suffered here poverty, ignominy, rebuke
and shame, before he in his humane nature ascended into glory; shall any man
persuade himself that he shall attain the glory to come, by a delicate,
loose, carnally delightful, and worldly glorious estate here?

How then are many carnally minded men deceived, Men i^dged happy and unhappy
according to their wealth and want.
that measure the love and favor of God, and his displeasure toward men,
according to their worldly prosperity and adversity? censuring Gods dearest
children seasoned with any kind of affliction, to be the very outcasts of the
world, forsaken of God; and the rich, wealthy and glorious in the world, to be
his choice darlings and favorites; then which, nothing is more contrary*
although their estates, in deed (seen with a carnal eye, and judged by
outward appearance) may be censured as they seem, but not as they are in
deed: for, the outward most glorious, are not commonly gracious within (though
they may be) neither are the outward poor, commonly inwardly and spiritually
rich: But the godly and faithful poor man, were his case as hard, as was that
of poor Lazarus; yet is he the beloved of God, God judges not according to
the outward appearance.
who judges not as man does, partially, by the outward show, but according to
equity: He does not justify the poor, before the rich; if the Rich be rich in
grace, and the poor a wicked man; God, in deed, by promise regards the
poor, and cares for them; namely, for such, as in a lively faith depend upon
his providence; living justly, and in an holy diligence in his lawful calling.

If thou thus behauest thy self in thy poverty, the promise of God, is a
promise made even to thee, that he will never fail thee, nor forsake thee.
Thou may then safely cast thy care upon him, for he will take care of thee.
Thou shall not want food and raiment; and having that, content thee with it,
it is a plentiful portion: for what more has he, that has his Table spread
with diverse dishes, and sundry varieties; but only feeds his body with few?
And he that has diverse and sundry suits and sorts of garments, Food and
clothing a sufficient portion.
one suit suffices to cover him at once. If then thou be fed and clothed,
give the glory to God that gives it.

It may be thou will say thou have a great charge, wife and children to
maintain; a great burden unto thee, who require greater supply, then thou by
thy best industry can provide for them; Thou must allow and allot unto thy
self and them, according to thy means; Thou may not feed or cloth thee or
them, as peradventure thine and their haughty hearts may require; But feed
them moderately, and cloathe them modestly: for in the superfluity of these two
necessaries, Superfluous food and raiment have undone many.
many have not only exceeded, and undone themselves, but have turned thereby,
many times the blessings of God into wantonness; And so in steed of the
continuance of Gods blessings, they have caused him to punish them with
poverty, and want: As who so observes, cannot but see infinite numbers, that
have received great portions and patrimonies from their Parents and friends,
that through the excess of these, together with their lewd, lascivious, and
wicked lives, have drawn upon them, such a heavy weight of poverty and want,
as they have either been deprived of their liberty, for the debt they ran
into to maintain their vanities; or have been enforced to beg their bread,
and (like the prodigal Son) have been constrained, through commanding
hunger, to eat the scraps, that they before scorned, to touch with their
fingers; and that in a just recompense of their former niceness and vanities;
who yet, if this gentle correction may reclaim them, and cause them to reform
their wicked lives, to seek after God, through a lively faith and faithful
prayer; may be received into the favor of God, God is ready to receive a
prodigal.
who is ready to receive a sinner repenting, be he never so poor, never so
base, never so loathsome in the eyes of men; as were Lazarus and the lost Son.

As thou therefore art grieved under the burden of thy miserable and poor
estate, so grieve above it, that thou have offended God, who corrects thee
for thy sins: Cry for pardon, pray for spiritual graces, seek the Kingdom
of God, and the righteousness thereof, have a lively faith, repent and be
patient, use the means, hearing and reading of the word of God, practice
abstinence, from the fulfilling of thy corrupt will; which thou can not
obtain, but by repentance, and that repentance cannot be but by faithful
prayer, which will produce perfect patience, wherein if thou wait the Lords
leisure, for the time, and his pleasure for the means, assure thy self, thou
shall be competently and timely relieved; God never fails the faithful.
for he has promised, never to fail those, that faithfully^ call upon him,
and truly obey him: And he is most faithful to perform what he has
promised. As for his power to do it, thou need not doubt, for his power is
so absolute, that he is able; and his love to his, such, as he can and will so
augment thy least portion, that a little oil in thy Cruse, and a small
quantity of meal in thy vessel, shall not diminish, until more supply come.
And as for the feeding of thy chargeable Family, he can do it with the
smallest show of means: he had but seven loaves and a few fishes, Math. 15.
33. 34.
and yet with that little in show and quantity, he replenished four thousand
men, besides women and little children. And with five loaves and two fishes,
Math. 14. 17*
he fed five thousand, and that, Mar. 6. 38.
that remained when all were satisfied, was more meat then, in show, then was
before they began to eat. And can he not feed thee, God can satisfy his
children with little.
and thine, if thou be faithful; seem thy store never so small? nothing shall
hinder in but sin, infidelity, and impatience: If thou believe faithfully,
pray fervently, and wait patiently, he will do it. Though it may seome unto
thee, that they store does not only not increase, by prayer, but diminish by
spending; yet believe in him that made all things, and yet makes things to
supply his childrens wants. And although he do not with thee and thine, as he
did for the children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 29. 5.
who, travailing forty years in the Wilderness, he so preserved their
garments, and even the shoes on their feet, that they decayed not; yet if
thou distrust not his power and providence; as the one decays, he will supply
it with other.

Thou will peradventure say, that these were the extraordinary works of God,
his miracles of old, and no such things are seen in our days: It is true,
why are they not seen? only because we want lively faith; our hearts are
dull in believing, the eyes of our understandings are darkened, and cast to the
earth, we look not so into the power, nor so believe the promises of the
Almighty, It is a great dishonor to God, to think he cannot do now as he
did of old, for the relief of his.
as he has made them in his mere love toward us. We cannot glorify God,
more then to trust his word, and nothing dishonoreth him more, then to think
that he either cannot, or will not perform what he has promised: But we may
not think, that we shall have any thing only for the asking (for, we cannot
so presume upon an ordinary friend) but before we presume to ask the supply
of corporal things, Before corporal we are to ask spiritual things.
we must be well furnished with spiritual graces, which must first and before
all things, be sought for at the hands of God: Math. 6. 13.
for, he and none but he can give them. It is the righteousness of that
Kingdom which we are commanded, above all things to seek. And having
obtained this, we may assure us, that all inferior and carnal things shall
be administered unto us: And although carnal men think, that GOD works not
miracles now, in providing for, and preserving his children, as in the first
ages; which in deed is a great derogation of the good will, the power, and
providence of God; as if he were less loving, or less able, or of less
understanding, then he was in our Fathers days to help his children: he is
Alpha and Omega. God, as he was so, he is, and will be for ever.
As he was yesterday, he is to day, and will continue the same for ever: and
therefore, if faith fail thee not, if thou refrain from evil and do good;
if thou seek help at the hands of God in whatsoever danger, supply is
whatsoever necessity, and comfort and ease in whatsoever cross or misery,
rather then God will deny that which he knows most necessary for thee, he
will work beyond the ordinary course to help thee: believe in him, serve him,
call upon him, waver not, be constant, faint not, and thou shall see assuredly
the salvation of the Lord.

A Prayer to be used of such as are oppressed with necessity and want of things
necessary.
O Lord my GOD, who have bin evermore, merciful, loving, and a ready helping
Father, to all those that have served thee with a pure, and called upon thee
with a faithful heart; and a patient God, even to greatest sinners, among whom
and above others, I acknowledge my self to have deserved the least mercy at
thy hands, by reason that I have not only too much neglected my duty in serving
thee, but have (in steed thereof) too much yielded my self to many
unprofitable and forbidden ways; and I know and acknowledge, that thou do
most justly correct me for my sins: and I thank thee gracious Father, that
thou have remembered me; for before I felt thy fatherly rod of poverty, and
want, I went astray; but now Lord, I desire to turn me to the keeping of thy
commandments.

As long as I prospered in the world, the vanities of my mind estranged my
heart from thee; and, if I should have still enjoyed what my sinful heart
defired, I should still have gone astray: But now Lord, I am unfeignedly sorry
from my heart, that I have so long followed mine own corrupt will, and in
spending so many days and years in vanities.

Lord I now return unto thee; receive me (though as the prodigal Son) who
have sinned against heaven and against thee, and do acknowledge my self
unworthy to be called thy Son: I am worthily become poor, in misery and
want; and know not to whom to repair for succor, being despised of men, and
scorned of mine acquaintance; by reason of my poverty; which I do confess,
has not befallen me by chance; it is by mine own wretched deseruings, which
thou have observed, and now in love, by this thy fatherly correcting me, put
me in mind to consider what I have been: and I do confess, that I have
been unserviceable unto thee, and unprofitable to my self and others:
Therefore do thou justly in punishing me: and yet thou dealest lovingly in
correcting me; and I embrace* this fatherly chastisement of thine, as an
argument that thou would prevent, a more severe judgment, incident to those
that run on in their disobedience.

Lord, thou have justly deprived me, of the superfluous things of this world;
which, though I cannot but confess they were dear unto me, yet not so dear
as dan^geros; for I now find, that howsoever sweet they seemed unto my carnal
mind; they bred in my heart many fearful sins, which now I feel as pricks
in my soul; and thy correction seems to increase my fear, seeing and
feeling it in my mind (as it is corrupt) heavy, and burdensome: but when I
do consider it, as it is, in thy purpose, I find it to be an ease unto mine
inward part, through thine own gift of faith, in believing it to proceed of
thy mere love; and of patience to bear it, knowing it to be a most wholesome
medicine to cure me of my disease of sin, which in it self is mortal.

Howsoever, I have deserved to be more severely punished, and to be brought to
a more miserable and poor estate then yet I am; yet Lord remember thy mercies,
and the merits of Jesus Christ thy Son; and for his sake lay it not over
heavily upon me: Leave me not altogether destitute of things necessary for
my competent relief here: but, as thou have just cause, fatherly to correct
me; So, yet graciously protect me, and preserve me from too great misery;
though I deserve not thy mercy, yet I have a meritorious Mediator with thee,
for whose sake thou may be pleased to mitigate my hard and miserable estate,
and to give me patience to undergo it, with competent food and raiment, and
contentment therewith.

And defend me Lord, from the injuries that usually thy poor children are
enforced here to endure: In thee I trust O Lord, whose providence I hold my
chiefest portion; for of thee comes my salvation, my safety, and sufficiency.

Thou did create me (Lord) and made me a living creature; who cannot
subsist or continue without such ordinary means, as thou have ordained for
humane sustentation, which thou affordest unto the most brute beasts, that call
not upon thee: how much more unto them that faithfully ask it of thee? I come
unto thee most merciful Father in Jesus Christ; who, as thou have, made all
things, and possessest all things: so thou give and disposest all things; to
every man a portion, according as thou think most fit for every man: And
therefore forasmuch as thou see poverty a fitter portion then riches; and
want then wealth; I accept it with hearty thankfulness, knowing that thou art
able to relieve me, as well with little as with much; And though my portion be
small; thou have promised to nourish me, and to sustain me: Thou refreshest
the thirsty souls, and fillest the hungry with good things, and by promise,
nothing wants to them that ^eare thee.

The meanest of thy creatures which thou have ordained for the use of man, and
the least portion thereof, blessed by thee, cannot but be sufficient, be it
but pulse with Daniel and his fellows, yea the meanest diet, shall so
fructify to the relief of my weak body, as I, in faith feeding upon the
same, shall live thereby; and when thou will, thou can increase my portion,
as thou did the oil and meal of Eliahs Hostice.

Also consider Lord, that poverty and want, not affording for the time,
competency to supply our great necessity, enforces to borrow; and men's hearts
are hard, and Creditours cruel; Let me never fall into their hands, but as
thou did send a prevailing guest unto the widow of Sarepta (Eliah) by whom
(through thy power and providence) her little oil and meal (even wholly
consumed) was so increased, as she had sufficient, not only for the relief of
her and her family, but to pay her debts with the rest. This was thy doing O
Lord! And thou art still the same God, who in my greatest necessity can raise
means, either by the help of man, whom thou sometimes appointest to relieve thy
distressed ones, or by blessing my lawful labors and endeavors: If they all
fail, thou have infinite other means, reserved only in thine own wisdom,
to help in most need: If thou could send that raueuous foul, to feed
Eliah in his hunger, much more can thou afford ordinary means to relieve me,
and to enable me to pay all men their due; a duty required of thee: and I
cannot perform it but by thee; into whose hands I had rather fall, then into
the hands of cruel and merciless men.

I am under thine hand, O Lord, support me with thy grace; strengthen my faith
that I faint not, that being in thy providence relieved, I may (as I truly do
ascribe unto thee, whatsoever comfortable supply I shall enjoy at thy hands)
humbly recommending my self, and mine estate unto thy blessing, in the name of
Jesus Christ: to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all honor, praise and
thanks for evermore, Amen.

Lord increase my faith.
A short Prayer to be said of him, that is in poverty and want.
O Eternal God, most merciful and loving Father in Jesus Christ, thou have
created me of the dust of the earth, and hetherunto sustained my earthly body
by earthly means; which I acknowledge to proceed of thy goodness only, and
of thy mere blessing; without the which nothing can succeed comfortably unto
me; but through thy blessing, the weakest means shall be sufficient to
sustain me; and for all thy mercies, thou requirest only in me a lively
faith in thee, prayer unto thee, and patient waiting on thee: So, though my
portion be h^re poverty, yet as long as thou art pleased to show thy self a
loving father toward me, I shall be relieved, nourrished, protected and
preserved, in my greatest want of the necessaries, required for the
sustentation of this short momentanie, miserable and mortal life: Lord, I
believe thy promises made unto all believers, that in their greatest
necessities, Thou will never fail them, nor forsake them: Lord I believe,
confirm my belief; make me strong in faith, that I may serve thee faithfully
and pray unto thee fervently; that so I may undergo my troubles, and wait thy
gracious pleasure patiently, to be supplied in what I want (timely) knowing*
that thou art a God that show mercy; and yet as a loving father thou
correctest thine own dearest children, to retain them in obedience; thou have
corrected me, I feel thy rod, thy rod of love, not of thy heavy displeasure
and wrath; for, if thou should deal with me, and punish me according to
my merit, I could expect no mercy. I have of sended thee, I have sinned
against thee, and do acknowledge, that poverty and want (though heavy* and
burdensome* unto flesh and blood) cannot be a sufficient punishment for my
evil deseruings; and were it not that thy mercies do far exceed thy
souerity, I had not only more deeply been afflicted, but had perished long
agone.

O Lord, I acknowledge this thy correction just and gentle; yet consider Lord
that I am weak to bear it, and therefore I humbly pray thee to support me
with thy hand, that I fall not altogether, and furnish me with thy grace, that
I fainte not.

I see no humane help O Lord, whereon to depend or hope; there is none to
succor me but thou, whom I have offended: and how dare I come boldy to beg
of thee, whose many and infinite blessings I have so much and often abused? If
therefore I should come in mine own name, thou may justly turn thee from
me; O happy am I that I have one with thee in whose name I may come and be
received: I may pray and be heard, I may ask and receive what I want: hear
him O Lord, for me and in my behalf; he is my Mediator, and whom thou so
dearly love, as thou have promised to deny me nothing for which he asks
of thee for me: and who is not ignorant of this worlds miseries? he was
Patient in suffering as a man, and now though exalted to the Throne of glory,
he despises not those that suffer here as he suffered; therefore Lord, for
his merits sake hear me, mitigate my misery, supply my necessities, raise me
out of the (...) worlds disgrac^, (...) out of the (...) of misery wherein I
stick ^^st.

Lord, confirm my faith in thee, open the eyes of my dull apprehension of thy
power and providence; show me the well of lively relief, as thou did the
spring of releeuing water to miserable Hagar; that I may be refreshed with the
Cup of thy salvation, and may rightly use such means for my relief, as in
thy wisdom thou shall raise up and provide for me: and give me grace that I
abuse not thy gifts, but to use them to thy glory; so shall they be to my
comfort. Give a blessing to all my labors and godly endeauours; and that in
the fear of thy great name, I may live in perfect obedience; that prospering,
I may praise thee, and in my hardest estate, be patient; recommending my self
and it, to thy gracious and fatherly providence, unto the end. Amen.

O Lord increase my faith.
General counsel and comfort, for men imprisoned.
IMprisonment is the deprivation of humane liberty, and befalls upon men
commonly that have before abused their freedom: for, it is the nature of
humane frailty, to run and ra^^ge after pleasures and carnal delights,
having the raines of the bridle of liberty loose, nothing to curb it; It
attempteth many unlawful actions against the laws of God* and men, to fulfill
corrupt desires, and licencious appetites; Therefore does God (as a loving
father) curb the bit of their corrupt wills, Why God depriueth men of their
liberty.
to keep them in obedience; finding no other means auailable, to make them to
know themselves: though he is able to take away the strength and use of all
their sinning parts, and to make them unable to follow or perform their
impious inclinations: but he deals more favorably with men, then they can
deserve, by their restraint.

A father, loving his ungodly and disobedient child; if he cannot otherwise
tame and reform him by counsel and gentle corrections, but that he will still
run into forbidden ways, and dangerous and ungodly courses, he finds at the
last, no other prevailing remedy, but to take him, and fetter him, restraining
him by force from his impious course of life, yet in love: So does our loving
and heavenly father, after trial of such as he loves, by counsel, by
instruction and holy documents out of his word, and many times by gentle
corrections and fatherly chastisements; which not prevailing to their
reformation, he uses this restraining means, he depriueth them of their
liberty, by imprisonment; from whence, they cannot at their pleasures run
out, after their former ungodly delights and accustomed vanities; only to
learn them to live within the more compass of obedience; and to bring their
corrupt minds; wills and affections, into some better order: and when he has
sufficiently tried them, he lets them go free.

And therefore consider, whosoever thou art, that art thus restrained, that
thou may have (if thou be any way inclined to fear and serve God) far more
time and liberty to perform many godly duties, The Prison a place of liberty
to serve God.
more and more, freely in this place of restraint, then when thou had thy
liberty: there thou may ruminate and examine thy self of the abuses of thy
former freedom, wherein thou did many ways offend God and transgress the
Laws of thy Sovereign; which in this place thou can not so freely do: but
rather thou may here meditate of better things, howsoever thy desire may be
corrupt by nature, and have a longing desire to be at liberty, to fulfill thy
former delights, as the Children of Israel longed and looked back to the
Onyons, gowrdes, fleshpots of Egypt, being freed from greater captivity then
thou indurest here.

The least restraint that a natural man has (that loves the delights of the
world, It is a death to a carnal man to be prevented of his pleasures.
and his fleshly pleasures) is as death, to be prevented of them: If he have
but the Go^te, or any other impediment of any part of his body, which disableth
him to follow or perform his former vanities; he longs to be eased, that
he may renew his sins, by accompanying his former associates in the
delights wherein they mutually were wont to spend precious time, in the large
and delightsome field of this world where are as many occasions, tentations,
allurements and prouocations, to miscary the thoughts, as the Eye can see, the
Ear hear, or any of the Senses observe; all tending (in carnally minded men)
to the offending of God: and if a man have not the special gift of sobriety,
continence and te^perance; the liberty and freedom of this deceiving world,
and the corrupt inclinations of the flesh, cannot but seduce him, though he
be in part of some good inclination; yet here he shall find a secret Satan,
and his public prompters to miscary him*

Thou therefore that art thus restrained and limited within the walls, The
mind may be at liberty when the body is imprisoned
beyond which thou can not go; thy mind is yet at liberty, if it be
seasoned with virtue, faith, in and obedience to God; thou may send forth thy
prayers which are not locked in, which cannot but return with greater comfort
then thou did enjoy when thou were at large. But if it be tainted and
infected with unholy thoughts and desires, though they raunge abroad to
Tauernes, Theaters, and other profane places, where thy heart directs them,
they return no good, but evil unto thee: and if thou find thy self still
inclinable to vanities; here thou may learn (according to the condition of
some of thy fellowe-prisoners) to be more vain: but abandon their society,
and seek the company of, and converse with them of thy fellows that fear
God, for it cannot be that a prison which should be as a school of virtue
(though too much fraught with many vicious) should be altogether destitute of
some, fearing God, and of whom thou may either learn good, or to whom thou
may do good.

It is lamentable to see, and grievous to consider, that the Prison being a
place intended for correction of men offending God and the Laws of men, Many
are worse after then before they were imprisoned
should not only not be bettered by their restraint, but are many times found
to be worse conditioned at their coming out, then before they were committed;
which does argue them so impious as they fear not God, nor reverence man: they
have no feeling of their sins which caused their restraint; but, in steed of
sorrow for their sins, they endeavor there, to learn the sins wherewith
they were little acquainted before: these are men past feeling of their evil
deseruings; they conceive not, that God corrects them in this place for their
sins, and that the Maiestrate punishes them for their offenses: but in steed
of acknowledging their faults, they seek to clear themselves, by the malice
of some enemy, some false accuser, some cruel creditor, when indeed their
own sins have been the cause of their restraint. And therefore such as
fear God will take it as a fatherly correction, and attribute it to the love
of God, that by this means seeks their reformation and salvation.

Submit thy self therefore unto his will, and do not think that this befalls
thee by chance, or through the malice of an enemy, or the hardness of the
heart of a Creditor: If an enemy have accused thee, None is restrained of his
liberrie but by Gods Providence though man may be the means.
or a Creditor arrested thee, think they were but Gods Ministers; though
peradventure thou be not guilty of the thing for which thou art accused and
imprisoned, yet remember what thou have formerly done: for, God many times
punishes a man, and that severely, for a sin formerly committed and long
concealed, upon an accusation whereof the Party is not guilty; yet being
guilty of a former heinous crime, that deserves like punishment, the Lord is
not unjust to punish him, how and by what means soever.

God is provoked by sin, to inflict the least correction upon man; and as
there is no man but he is a sinner, As all men are sinners so all men deserve
c^rrection.
so there is no man is free from one cross or affliction or other; to put him
in mind, that God is displeased with his sin, and yet he permits some men
to run on long, even to their last gasp, free from any seen cross or
calamity: but these not the happiest men; for, whom soever God chasteneth not
here, he reserueth for them a more severe punishment in the end; a prison
far exceeding any worldly restraint; for he that is in this world a prisoner,
is at length delivered, living or dead; but from that future, is no time
limited or permitted to be freed through all eterni^ies.

Think not therefore this easy restraint grievous, whereof so good use is to
be made; for by this thou may learn, if a temporal and momentanie
imprisonment be so loathsome and irckesome unto thee, If a corporal prison be
irksome what may we think of the infernal?
where thou have yet some (though small) liberty; what will that be where
thou shall have no freedom, no intermission of torment and horror? besides,
thou have here some companions and friendly fellow prisoners, whose company
thou may frequent to thy comfort; but the companions which they shall there
find, are hideous, fearful, such as have no other quality but to torment
and suffer, and be tormented.

Know therefore that God in his singular providence and love restrains thee
here a prisoner, God restrains men here to give the^ liberty hereafter.
that thou should here learn to avoid that which is prepared for the
rebellious and obstinate wicked ones hereafter: For, if thou reform thee not
being restrained, and become obediente, what may be thought of thee, being at
liberty? But using thy restraint as thou may and ought, thou art in far
better, case then are many Libertines: Here thou may read the word, and
meditate thereon: here thou may pray and exercise holy duties, without such
variety of occasions (as the freedom of the world affords) to distract thee:
Yet I would not that I should be understood, that because corporal restraint,
is a means to have the mind at liberty, when the body is in Prison, that any
man should wilfully occasion, or voluntarily seek his own restraint: The
cause of imprisonment is to be considered.
but rather that being thus restrained, to consider duly, the cause why you are
restrained: for the cause much imports the joy, or grief; the hope or
fear, of a Prisoner.

Pharaohs Baker and Butler, were both in Prison; Genesis 39. 14
the one hanged, the other restored to his Office; yet both deserved
Imprisonment, for offending their Master: But Joseph and John Baptist were
Imprisond, the one through the false accusasion of his unchaste Mistress,
Math. 13. 4.
the other through envy, in telling Herod of his Incest: The first had his
freedom and made Cheef under Pharaoh in Egypt; the other lost his head to
please a Whore.

There are many causes of imprisonement, He that is imprisoned without just
cause, may rejoice.
and many, causeless imprisoned; and both have cause to rejoice: the first
that God in his favor calls him to know himself, by the consideration of
his offense for which he is committed; the other may the more rejoice that he
is punished being an innocent, 1. King. 22. 27
as was Michaiah the Prophet of God, who was cast into prison, for telling
Iehosaphat and Ahab, that they should not prosper in fighting against the King
of Siriah.

The dearest children of God have suffered imprisonment for diverse causes, Most
godly men have been imprisoned.
especially for speaking the truth from God; as Paul, Peter, etc. whose
imprisonments tended to their everlasting freedom: for, to suffer for
righteousness sake is a blessed thing; but to suffer as an evil doer, has no
promise of inward comfort or outward relief; especially, if he continue
impenitent for the evil he has done: yet, all hope is not taken from a
sinner, who, for the offending of the Laws of God or men is imprisoned;
especially, if he truly repent, and with a lively faith return unto God, were
he as guilty as the Thief upon the Cross, who from the prison was brought to
the Cross; at the Cross to Christ, and from the Cross to Paradise with
Christ.

It behooves therefore to consider the cause of thine imprisonment; for, As the
cause is, so ought the counsel to be.
as there are several causes, so are there several councelles and comforts to
be applied.

If thou have offended the Laws of thy Sovereign, Diverse causes of
imprisonement.
which may be done by diverse forbidden actions, deserving death or some other
severe punishment; as treasons, rebellion, murder, theftes, and the like: Some
again are punished for debte, for slandering their neighbors, or doing such
injuries against them, as the Law of man (grounded upon the Law of God) has
power to punish with imprisonement: in all which, What is required of a man
imprisoned.
is required Patience to bear it, prayer in faith to God to be eased, with
true and hearty acknowledgement of thy fault to God, against whom every sin
is committed, and to seek reconciliation with the party offended: so shall
restraint (for what cause soever) become the more easy to be borne: And first
I will touch the most capital and most heinous offenses; such, as if thou
have committed, or any of them, and be restrained for them, there remains
for thee in the severity of Justice, nothing but the expectation of the
censure and Sentence of death: and therefore fit for thee to learn how to
prepare thee, that though thy body perish, thy soul may be saved.

Against Treason, for which a man is worthily imprisoned.
Above all other sins, Treason the most capital sin.
that can be committed against the Law of man, there is none so great, so
grievous, capital and heinous, as is Treason against the person of a
Sovereign, of whom no man ought to move his tongue; no, not in his most private
chamber, but to what may tend to the welwishing of his welfare and
prosperity; much less ought any man to move his hand, or heart, to touch him
to his hurt: for, such is the sacred Majesty of a King, being in earth*
Vicegerent under God, in the Kingdoms wherein the Lord has placed him: that
he ought in all things to be obeyed next unto God, above all other, of all his
subjects: And whosoever goes about, by counsel, conspiracy, or consent, to
betray him, is not only worthy of imprisonment, but of the most cruel
tormenting death that can be devised by man: A Traitor worthy of most cruel
death.
and therefore, if thou should be guilty but of the knowledge of such a
practice, and did conceal it, thou art not to be graced with one minute of
life, nor by the prayer of any good subject for thy delivery; but to have thy
deserving, not as ^ad Baarah and Rechab, who thinki^g to pleasure David, slew
the King their Master Ishbosheth, whom David caused to be slain with the
sword: But the like or worse then Reualiacke had for killing that famous King
of France; whose torments were as horrible as the wit of man could devise.

The Majesty of God is so imprinted in the person of a King, The Majesty of a
King daunteth a Traitor.
as when wicked men have undertaken any desperate enterprise upon them, they
have been many times so daunted, as they have had no power to act their
villainies; or have suddenly so discovered their wicked intention, by
countenance, gesture or speech, as has bewrayd the guilt of their conscience,
and have been prevented of their intended mischief. Among many other most
memorable examples of Gods Providence, the discovery of the many treasons and
conspiracies intended, and ready to have been executed, even upon the person
of our late most famous Queen Elizabeth by Parrie and others, are so
perspicuous, and her deliueries so wonderful, as can never be forgotten. And
his late Majesty's admirable delivery from the conspiracy of the Gowries is
yet fresh in every man's memory, to Gods eternal glory, and the joy of all his
Kingdoms.

When Quintinanus a villain, being solicited to kill the Emperor Commodus by
the conspiracy of Lucilla the Emperors sister, had taken upon him the
murder, waited the time and convenient place to execute the Treason; Traitors
bewray their intentions, by outward gesture.
attending the Emperors coming; when he saw his Majesty, he began to
tremble, his countenance changed, his gesture altered, and his tongue could no
longer conceal his guilty conscience: but before the Emperor came near him,
held out his murdering dagger in his hand, cried out, This the Senate sends
thee: whereupon he was prevented and apprehended.

If therefore thou be apprehended and imprisoned, as guilty of this most
heinous and monster of all sins; examine thine own heart, confess and
bewray thine intention to the satisfaction of men, especially of thy
Sovereign; and acknowledge thy sins to God, repent them; It may be the Lord
may yet upon thy sincere and serious repentance, have compassion on thy soul,
though no good subject will pity thy death, No good subject will pity the
death of a Traitor.
or wish the prolonging of thy life; but the seuearell death. So heinous is
Treason and so odious are Traitors.

For such as are imprisoned, as guilty, or vehemently suspected of murder.
NExt unto Treason, Murder a crying sin.
Murder is the most crying sin; whereof, if thou be guilty, especially if
it were wilful, and imprisoned for the same, remember, that Who so sheddeth
man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: Though the Murder be never so
secretly done, never so closely kept, never so long concealed; so odious it is
to God, that he seldom or never suffers it to go unrevealed: The very
Barbarians held Murder so heinous a sin, Act 28. 4.
as they did think it could not escape the vengeance of God, The blood of the
murdered cries against the murderer
neither indeed can it, for, as the guiltless blood of Abel cried against his
murtherous brother Kayne, so does the blood of every man (guiltlesly slain)
cry against the murderer, and huntes him from place to place whether soever
he fly; where soever he hides himself, the murdered seems still to be in
the eye of the murderer; whether he sleep or wake he is still tormented; and
the Devil that inticeth a murderer, persuading him by many false persuasions,
which he conceiueth in his mind, by this or that means he may escape when he
has committed the Murder; he lays the murdered before the eyes of the
guilty conscience of the murderer; and tells him, lo here is that innocent
person thou have wilfully murdered; God will severely revenge it, he will
give thee into the Magistrates hand to be here tormented in the flesh, and take
away thy life, and then cast thee into eternal torments as thou deseruest.

If, therefore, thou be guilty of any such grievous crime, and be derected,
and imprisoned, thou may thank God, who has discovered thee and restrained
thee in this place, from whence thou can not escape, to the end, The prison
is a fit place for a murderer to repent, if he have any grace.
thou should no longer raunge the world with a tormenting conscience, but
rather casting off all vain hope to be freed, betake thee to repentance for
all thine offenses; and especially, for this thy most odious fact, cry
earnestly and faithfully to God for mercy, that he will still the cry of the
innocent murdered, that sounds so fearfully in the ear of thy guilty
conscience: cry for pardon in Christ, for whose sake there is mercy with God,
if with a true and lively faith thou crave it.

If thou be guilty, and yet but only upon suspicion committed, the fact not
fully reueiled; if thou confess it not to the Magistrate, thy burden will be
for the more heavy, It is not sufficient for a murderer to confess the fact
to God, but to men.
though thou think it sufficient to confess it in secret and silence to God,
who needs not thy confession of the fact: for he saw it done, and knew thine
intention before thou did it; he has seen and observed thee since, how thou
have run hither and thither for safety, and how thou have sought all means
to hide it and escape: but all in vain: there is ^o hiding thee from his sight.

Thy sin is grievous, thou have laid violent and murtherous hands upon, and
taken away the life of the Image of God, though a humane creature: and ^s the
fact is done against God, so thy repentance or hardness of heart, are known
to him alone, not to man, against whom also thou have grievously sinned;
therefore must thou openly acknowledge the fact before men, that thou may
free the innocent that may be otherwise had in suspicion, to be actors of that
which thou thy self have done; and so double thine offense, The guiltless
maybe suspected and suffer, for the fact of another not confessed.
in causing another to suffer for thy sin; and so heap as well his blood (as
the blood of the murdered) upon thine own conscience: Therefore as thou art
discovered, taken, kept from any hope of escape; make of necessity a virtue:
take that punishment with a godly patience, that by all thy secret intentions,
inventions and subtle practices, thou can not avoid: crave forgiveness of
thy sins of God, upon the knees of a most penitent and relenting heart: and
if it be possible, wrest through bitter sighs and sorrow, even tears of
blood from thy bloody conscience, in hearty and faithful prayor to God in his
Son Christ, who shed his blood for thee, and thereby able to wash thee from
thy bloody sin; if thou truly repent and do faithfully and fervently
pray for pardon: and if thou be destitute of the power to pray of thy self,
thou may use the former prayer, made for a man grieved in conscience for the
heinousness of his sins; or this short confession and prayer following; and
that often, until thy conscience become at peace with God: and then howsoever,
both the Law of God and men condemn thee for the fact, and that thou suffer
death for the same, take it with godly patience; for better it is for thee to
suffer here a temporal death for thy sin, then to carry the burden of a
tormenting conscience (not suspected) to thy grave, which (though man do not)
shall accuse thee when it will be too late to cry for mercy.

A Prayer for a man imprisoned, guilty of murder.
O Lord God, whose mercies are above all thy works, and yet I wretched
creature have not deserved the least part of the same, but rather utter
confusion both of body and soul: not only, for my manifold and grievous
sins, committed even from my youth; but above all other of my grievous
sins, I feel the heavy burden of this one sin, this capital and crying
sin, in thy severe Justice impardonable; the wilful taking away of the life
of thine innocent creature, whose blood cries against me, as did that
guiltless blood of Abel cry against his murtherous brother Kayne; who was
rejected by thee, by reason of his impenitency: deal not so with me (dear
father) I pray thee; I am heartely forty for my wicked fact, and do
acknowledge it to be most heinous; yet not exceeding thy mercy: which as far
as the heaven is above the earth, so is thy mercy above thy Justice: and as
far as the East is from the West, so far can thou put this my grievous
sin from me: which, though it be as red as blood, yea blood it self; yet is
the blood of that Lamb Jesus Christ, of more then sufficient efficacy and
virtue to make it white as snow.

O cast me not utterly out of thy favor, though I be a most grievous sinner!
for, my soul is heavy within me, my heart is cast down, I dare not look up
unto heaven where thou sit a seueate Judge; and I tremble to think how
grievously I have offended thee.

I am fallen, O Lord I am fallen into the hands of my most deadly enemy Satan,
that pursues me with deadly hatred; he, he (O God) provoked me to this
ungodly deed, and now he seeks to draw me to despair of thy mercy; into
whose hands O Lord I cast my self, knowing, that there is yet mercy with
thee, and in Jesus Christ perfect Redemption: I am also fallen into the hands
of men, whose Laws I have by this mine ungodly fact wilfully broken, by whose
Laws I am condemned, and that worthily: and there is none to comfort me but
thou alone, against whom especially I have committed this bloody sin: for
which, as I do acknowledge to have deserved the death not only of my wretched
body, but also of my most sinful soul; so I believe that the death of my body
shall be a sufficient satisfaction to the Law of man; and the grief and
sorrow of my truly repenting heart (through the preuayling death of my
Savior Jesus Christ) shall be a satisfaction to thy Justice.

And as I do acknowledge that I have deserved to dye; so I beseech thee Lord
to prepare me thereunto with Patience; faith; firm and constant assurance of
thy mercy; that I fainte not at my approaching death: but may be assured, that
as thou forgauest the Thief upon the Cross; and receiuedst him into Paradise;
so thou will receive my soul, in the merits of Christ my Savior, when
through death it shall leave my sinful body: which grant gracious Lord God,
for his sake that dyed for penitent sinners; among whom I cannot but confess
I am the greatest: and the greater shall thy mercy appear.

Lord confirm my faith in thee to the end, and in my end. Amen.
For such as are imprisoned, for committing any offense against the Laws of
the Kingdom, deserving death.
AS the Laws and Ordinances of Kingdoms are many, Every man knows the
offenses against the Laws that deserve death.
to meet with the sins and transgressions of men, which are infinite; so the
causes of men's restraynts, imprisonments, and punishments, are not to be named
or numbered: yet every man commonly knows the offenses that deserve the same,
and have not yet the grace, or power to avoid the committing of them.

Thou art in prison, known or vehemently suspected of some grievous fact
committed against the Laws, deserving the executing sword of the Magistrate
upon life or member; thy case is hard and dangerous, deserved death, or some
other seueare punishment hangs over thy head, at the pleasure of the Judge.

It behooves thee therefore, to look into thine own heart, and to examine
thine own conscience strictely; whether thou be guilty or not, of the crime
laid unto thy charge, or of any other grievous crime which thou have long
concealed: for, God many times does punish an offender for some wicked fact
(formerly committed and never discovered) by the suspicion of a crime; God
sometimes punishes an offender for some former sin* by the suspicion of a
fault he did not commit.
and punishes it as the act done: and therefore if thou feel thy self
guilty of any grievous offense committed against God by the breach of the Laws
of man, which thou had clean forgotten; if thou be after unjustly accused or
suspected of another, which (if thou were guilty of it) deserved as seueare
punishment as the former, and thou receive it, though (in that) thou be
innocent; yet in Gods Justice, this thy punishment is for thy former offense
just.

He that wittingly or wilfully disobeyeth the Laws of man, The offense of man's
Law is the offense of Gods.
is guilty of the breach of the Law of God, by whom Magistrates that
establishe Laws for civil government of their subjects, are set and
appointed; and have their authority and power (to punish offenders from God:
and therefore should every soul submit it self to the powers ordained by God:
And seeing thou have highly offended these Laws, fit it is that thou should
be apprehended and restrained of thy raunging liberty, whereby thou may not
only offend others, but be a mean to entice others to thy example of sinning.

Receive therefore thine imprisonment and punishment with patience; murmr not
against the Magistaate, that thus in Gods steed, and as his Minister corrects
thee; The sooner an offender is prevented of his sin, the happier is he.
who if he had let thee run on further in thine impieties, the greater had
been thy sin, and the greater would have been thy final punishment:
whereas now, thou may have time to examine thy life past, and to repent thee
of thy sins, and to seek to God in Christ for pardon; and therefore have
thou rather cause to thank God for thine imprisonment, then to grudge that he
corrects thee: so shall thou make profit of thy restraint, in redeeming thy
former ill spent time, and learn to frame thy heart to more obedience to the
Laws of God and man, for the time thou have yet to spend in this life.

If God have ordained the Magistrate in Justice to take away thy life, justly
deserving it, thou (through faith) by true repentance and prayer, may enjoy a
far more glorious life, for thy present ignomi^ious death.

If any other punishment be by the Laws due for thine offense, and that it may
be satisfied with the deprivation of any part of thy body, according to the
quality of thine offense, or to inflict any other corporal punishment upon
thy flesh; think it is in favor, Better to suffer here, then hereafter.
and that God sees it better for thee to suffer here a little smart then
hereafter, perpetual torments: and therefore seeing thou have offended, and
made thy self guilty of crime, so seuearely punishable; submit thy self to
the will of God, and to the authority of the Magistrate, in obedience, faith,
and faithful prayer.

A Prayer to be said of a Prisoner, accused and like to be condemned to death
for some fact against the Laws, or to any other corporal punishment.
O Mighty, omnipotent, and most righteous Lord God, I acknowledge thy
Judgments to be just, and thy Wisdom and Providence unsearchable, wherein
thou have found me out, and discovered my sins, which I have done (as I
thought) in secret: but thine all-seeing eye pierces through the clouds; no
darkness can hide sin and sinners from thy presence: Lord, seeing thou have
found out mine iniquities, and brought my grievous sins to light; I do appeal
from thy Throne of Justice, to thy Seat of mercy: for I do confess, that in
thy just Judgment I am worthy to be perpetually condemned; but in thy mercy
I may find favor: and in the merits of Christ thy beloved Son, I may yet be
saved, though my mortal body here perish.

Thou have power O Lord, to work the hearts of the seuearest Judges of the
earth, with Justice, to join mercy; not to extend the severity in punishing
of me as the Law for mine offense may justly require.

But above all earthly Judges I stand most afraid of thy displeasure, which I
do confess I have justly deserved by mine offenses, many in number; but this
for which I am now restrained, is not the least: yet not so great but thou
can forgive and pardon it. But before I can be assured of thy favor in
pardoning mine ungodly deseruings, for which I lie here, under thine and the
hand of the Magistrate, in bands; I must and I do humbly and heartily seek
to be reconciled unto thee: But alas, what am I dust and ashes? what am I? a
mere worm: what am I? (the vilest of all sinners) that thou should
vouschafe to accept my reconciliation with thee the Almighty God, Creator of
heaven and earth, between whose sincerity and my sins, between whose
goodness and my vileness, and between whose greatness and my weakness, is
so infinite difference, even as between heaven and hell? O! how can I think,
that (although thou can) thou will be reconciled unto me, that have so
grievously offended? How can I expect any favor of thee, whom by the breach of
all thy commandments I have so highly incensed against me? I have sinned, Lord
I have sinned, and many ways transgressed thy Laws; and had it not been of
thy mere mercy, I might have been (as I have often deserved) confounded long
agone.

I do acknowledge O Lord, and thou know that this is not the first grievous
offense that I have committed; and therefore, were I innocent in this, for
which I am apprehended and imprisoned, I cannot but confess that I have
deserved the punishment in Justice due for this.

But Lord, call not all my former sins to thy remembrance; cast not up the
whole account of all mine impious actions, knowing that I am of the seed of
him that first was in thy savor holy, and that first rebelled, and became (and
I in him) disobedient and rebellious: yet as he fell of himself, and I in
him, together with all his posterity, So was the seed of the woman promised to
come, and he is come; and has suffered according to thine own will, to
reconcile, even me (the greatest sinner) and all believers into thy favor
again; the shedding of his blood has made the atonement: and he it is, yea
even he alone, in whom I believe I shall find thee reconciled unto me. Then
Lord do with my body here (which is the active part of all my sins) what
seems good in thine own eyes: for as one hair of the head of thy children,
falls not without thy Providence, how much less can his life be taken from
him without thee?

My life and my death are in thy hands, though the sword be in the Magistrates;
yet it is not his but thine, and he but thy Minister: therefore if thou say
strike he strikes; if thou say spare he spares.

Seeing therefore Lord I am thus in thy disposing onele, and have learned out
of thine own promises, that all things work, and work together, for the good
of them whom thou have chosen: my sins Lord, that has caused mine
apprehension; mine apprehension mine imprisonment; mine imprisonment, the
knowledge of mine own wicked deserving; and my deserving, death; may all work
together for my good: for, except I had been restrained, I had not thought
upon, but had run on still in my sin: had I not been punished, I had not
felt thy displeasure for my sins; so should I never have sought to thee for
succor, and pardon for my sins.

O the incomprehensible depth of thy Wisdom and mercy, in thus visiting me!
for before I was restrained, I forgot my self and thee: my self, what a
wretched creature I was; and thee, what a powerful and just Judge thou art:
yet loving to them that repent, which is also thy guifte: I know and confess
my self now to be an offender, and in danger, and that thou art a just God and
an auenger of sin.

Lord dispose of mine offending body, as it pleases thee: it is dust, turn it
to dust, when and how thou will; and punish it in what manner and measure thou will; yet seasoned with thy compassion: As for my soul, Lord receive it, when
through Justice by the Magistrate or otherwise, it shall be enforced to leave
this my sinful body: which grant for Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

Lord increase my faith, and prepare me ^o obey thee in what soever it
pleases thee here to do with me.
A Prayer to be said of a penitent offender, going to his execution; or to any
corporal punishment.
O Lord God Almighty, though thou be just in punishing, thou art merciful in
forgiving and saving sinners; among whom there is none so great, O Lord, as I
am, who have long lived in the practice of infinite impieties, never thinking
of the danger which now is deservedly fallen upon me: I am worthily condemned
to what thou will inflict upon me; Lord give me patience to take it without
repining or grudging at the just proceeding of the Magistrate, whose Laws I
have offended; nor against them by whom I was found guilty; nor against the
Judge, by whose Sentence I am condemned: for they are all thy Ministers (O
Lord) and have done nothing but what thy good pleasure is they should do: And
therefore I impute unto thee (O Lord) all equity, Justice and righteousness;
to my self nothing but sin, shame and confusion.

O God, though thy Justice requite, that sinners should here be punished, yet
thou reseruest mercy to them that are sorry that they have offended thee; I am
sorry O Lord, I am sorry, that I have committed the least sin against thee;
but this grievous sin, for which I am enforced to suffer, I lament and repent
more then death it self; because I have thereby dishonored thee, wronged
those to whom I rather should have done my best duty: I have caused others to
sin by the example of my sin, and have enticed them that otherwise might
have lived without the danger I have drawn them into: so that I may be said to
be guilty, not only of mine own blood, but of theirs also that have sinned
by my means, or with me, and deserve like punishment.

O Lord remember that all men are sinners; and there are great and crying
sins, and there are sins of infirmity: but Lord, the sins that I have
committed, have cried, and thou have heard them; they cried unto thee, for this
punishment which thou have determined justly to be inflicted upon me; and as
the censure is already past upon me, which I cannot avoid, so do I expect the
time, beseeching thee in the abundance of thy mercies, to give me constancy
to persevere in a lively faith unto the end.

If my lot (Lord) be untimely death; and that I see I must suffer for the guilt
of my trangressions here; let me find favor with thee, as that Thief did who
suffered for his sins, and was received into Paradise; not of desert but of
thy free mercy: O deal not with me Lord, after my merit, for then the death
of my body or what soever corporal punishment, were no satisfaction to thy
Justice; Have mercy therefore upon me, O Lord, and what course soever man
takes with my body, receive thou my soul into thine eternal Paradise. My
heart is prepared O God, my heart is prepared, and into thy hands Lord I
commend my body to be punished, and my soul to be glorified in the merits of
Jesus Christ my Redeemer. Amen.

O Lord increase my faith and confirm it to the end.
For such as are imprisoned for debte.
THe Law of equity, Though the Law of God commands to owe to men nothing but
love, yet there must be lending and owing, but there ought to be no defrauding
by owing.
which is the Law of God, requires that a man should owe nothing to man but
love and good will; which is hard (at all times) for the most of men to
perform: there must be as there ever has bin, lending and borrowing, buying
and selling, Debtor and Creditor: some debtors would, but cannot pay; some
have wherewith and will not pay: the first may be pityed, Eccl. 29. 4.
the other exacted: For the same Law of equity, gives lawful power to a
Creditor (upon conviction) to cast him into prison, and there to detain him
till he pay it.

Many think that what is lent them, is as if they found it, making no
reckoning to repaye it: and so in steed of satisfaction and thanks, they bring
grief unto the Lender. But in the same Chapter ver. 3. men are advised that
have occasion to borrowe, to keep their word, to deal faithfully and kindly
with the Lender, so shall their necessities be always relieved: But, Men of
evil conscience (as is there further said) standing in need of another man's
help, Ver. 5. 6.
will kiss their hand, and humble themselves, until they have gotten what
they desire, and when they should repay it, they prolonge the time, and give a
careless answer; and though they be able, yet scarce give the half again,
or deceive him of his money: and instead of thankefulnes and love, they give him
curses and rebuke, evil words for the good he has done them: And this is the
common course of politic and wilful Banckeruptes and evil disposed persons,
The picture of Bankrupts.
that get what they can into their hands, of others men's goods: and either
voluntarily take shelter in one prison or another, intending a forceable
moderation and qualification of their debts, or else convey away their goods
and estates secretly, and flees the Country, intending to pay nothing at all;
though their estates be able to discharge their debtes, and to leave competent
means (of the rest) to maintain and relieve themselves: by which sinister and
too common a dishonest practice, many have unjustly enriched themselves. But
such fraudulent getting goods, come little short of (if it equalize not) mere
roberie: though for a while they may smile at, and rejoice in their impious
policy.

If thou therefore have, or intend thus subtillie to defraude thy Creditors,
having sufficient to satisfy them, and in the mean time suffer thy
Creditors to want, They that can and will not pay are worthily punished.
who peradventure have as much need as thy self; there is not only no pity
to be had of thine imprisonment, but fit a more severe punishment were
inflicted upon thee, especially if thou be of the number of them that will
rather spend that in prison; or in standing out in Law, to defraude a Creditor
(knowing, that in equity it is due) then with the same money to make him
honest satisfaction, or in part.

But if thy debt have grown by mere necessity of borrowing, and thou at the
time of receiving it, had a true, sincere, and godly purpose to repaye it, by
probable expected means: and in the mean time some cross by the finger of
God has befallen thee, They that willingly would and cannot pay are to be
pityed.
whereby thou art indeed prevented of thy true meaning of the performance of
thy faithful promise: thou art to be excused in thy breach, and pityed in
thine imprisonment, not having conveniently wherewith to pay: and if thy
Creditor (able to forbear) do continue the hardness of his heart toward
thee, still detaining thee; think it a fatherly chastisement upon thee to
inure Patience in thee; wherein if thou submit thy self to Gods will, in
working for thee by faithful prayer, thy Patience shall produce the experience
of the love and favor of God toward thee; so shall thou not need to be so
much ashamed of thine imprisonment, as he may be justly condemned that detaines
thee: thou may rejoice serving the Lord; when he shall be sorry that he
dealt so uncharitably with thee.

It behooves thee yet to examine thy self, and thy life past, whether thou
have lived in the fear of God, and in godly diligence in thy calling, or
whether thou have past thy time in idleness, Fit to examine the cause, that
drives a man to borrow.
in ryoting, gaming and company keeping (according to the course of too many in
this corrupt age) and have been compelled, through thy deserved necessity, to
supply either thine own vanities, or thy poor family to borrow, not knowing
any means, nor having a godly purpose to repay it: if it be so, and thy
Creditors have pursued the Law lawfully against thee, and by them justly, and
in the Judgment of God thou be committed to this place of restraint, thou have
that thou deseruest; for, to borrow other men's goods, to wast them ryotously
upon thine ungodly and wanton delights, is most wicked; it is too much so to
consume thine own substance, but so to consume other men's (when thine own is
spent) prodigally, thou art not fit to have thy liberty; for by thy lewd
course of life, others are induced by thine example into the same excess of
riot: and fitter it is that the prison should keep thee in, and in order, then
to corrupt others abroad, to the breach of the divine Laws of God, who in
Justice does punish thee for thy sin: and yet, if this thy restraint may
work reformation in thee, it savors of the love of God toward thee.

If therefore, A good man may be indebted, and imprisoned for it, and that no
argument of Gods displeasure.
thou can and do repent thee of the ill spent life, and can and do
faithfully seek the favor of God, for pardon of thy, sins in his Christ;
thou may embrace thine imprisonment, and not impute it to the severity of
thy Creditors, though they were the means under God, for thy good; they
nothing less intending then to do (...) good, but to come by their own
thereby: but if thou be one whom God has a purpose to reclaim from evil, to
make thee good, thy restraint is the beginning of thy happiness; for Happy is
the man whom God corrects: They are not strangers from his Covenant of
grace, but sons and daughters whom he does chasten: therefore though thou
have plaide the part of that Prodigal son, in consuming thy patrimony and
thy goods in wantonness; this thy restraint may call thee home again to thy
loving fathers house; and will make thee, not a servant, but embrace thee as a
son, by thy repentance in a true faith.

What have all thy pleasures yielded thee which thou have so eagerly followed
when thou were at liberty, The pleasures whereupon men spend their means, are
nothing but dross.
but husk for swyne, dirt and draffe wherewith Satan feeds them that follow
him? he seasons them with sweetness, to the fleshly mind, yet is that
sweetness but to fleshly minds, and is mere poison to the soul; wherewith
if thou feel thy self at any time to be infected, thou have now time to take
Physic to cure thee: thou art here in the place where thy heavenly Father
has appointed thee; not to destroy thee, but to diet thee and to prepare thee
to receive some bitter Pills, to purge thee from the contagious humors of thy
sins, which the corrupt air of wicked companions of thine, has inspired
into thee: and it may be, if thou had had thy liberty still in the open
fields of this corrupt worlds delights; where thou art restrained for a Penny
(in comparison) it might have been a pound; so the procuring of thy freedom
would have been the more hard to be obtained; if, at all.

But thou art in prison, The last fit refuge for a poor man that cannot pay
his debts.
be thy debte much or little; if thou cannot pay it, and thy Creditors, will
exact the uttermost Farthing, what is thy last and safest refuge? thou may
appeal unto the Magistrate, but he cannot but maintain his Laws: some
mittigation by mediation may be obtained; yet thou must endure the will of thy
Creditor, whose severity may in part (against his will) be moderated, but his
heart is in the hands and disposing of the Almighty; and therefore, make thy
petitions unto God, confess thy evil and profane life, acknowledge thy
sins that have caused thy trouble, repent thee heartily of them; be patient
in them, and thou shall see, that God who made the heart of thy Creditor, can
molifie it; and instead of his uttermost severity, turn it into charity: and
be thou of a meek spirit, and of an humble heart toward thy Creditor, and
settle thine affections upon heaven and heavenly things; pray faithfully and
fervently to God: it may please him to work the means to free thee, but in
his good time: Innocent Joseph, Genesis 39. 14. to 21.
lay two years, in miserable imprisonment (falsely accused) yet highly beloved
of God therefore; think it not long, for God sees the time fit to deliver
thee better then thou thy self: But when thou art sufficiently humbled, and
brought to the true fear of God, and obedient to his will, thou may be
assured he will let thee go free.

A Prayer to be often said, of a man imprisoned for debte.
O Lord my God in Jesus Christ, I do acknowledge that I have grievously
offended thee by my sins, which have so deeply deserved thy displeasure, as
that thou either think me unworthy of the liberty and freedom which other
men enjoy in the world, or, in thy wisdom, that restraint and imprisonment
are more profitable for me, then liberty.

I do confess indeed, that my liberty has wrought in me many occasions to
offend thee; and my restraint, through thy grace, may work some reformation in
me.

When I was free of this my trouble, I did not so walk, as I ought to have
done, but many ways abused that freedom which thou affordest me; by
committing many unseemly and ungodly actions which thou have forbidden, and by
omitting many good and godly duties which thou have commanded: which brought me
to necessity; necessity enforced me to borrow to supply my wants; and
borrowing and not repaying, procured the dislike of my Creditors; and their
severity (in thy Justice) have brought me into this place of unsavory
restraint: from whence I have no means to be freed, but by thy mere mercy
and providence only; wherein I know thou art able to deliver me, if thou
think liberty more profitable for me.

I cannot but confess, O Lord, that I have not only deserved this, but a
far sharper punishment for my sins: yet as thou art a most gracious and
loving Father: so art thou ever ready, to forgive sinners upon their hearty
repentance; and their sinn^^ being forgiven, thy property is, either to remove
altogether, or to mittigate their punishment.

Lord, my debtes are out of measure greater to thee, then my greatest can be
unto man; and my debtes to thee are increased, by the cause whereby I am become
debtor (in this kind) unto man. But if thou Lord may be pleased, to pardon
my debtes, whereby I stand endangered to thee, my debtes due unto men shall be
the more easily satisfied, and I shall be the sooner delivered from this my
captivity: for, he that is freely forgiven of thee, though he be in bands at
the pleasure of men, yet is he free in thee: and he that is thy freeman, he
cannot be restrained according to the will of man, further then thou shall
permit.

Therefore most gracious Lord God, rich in mercy and goodness, while thy will
and pleasure is, to permit me, in this place of restraint to remain; grant
that I may, even here enjoy the liberty of a godly mind* faith in thee,
obedience to thee, and patience in thee; with necessary means from thee, for
my relief and sustinance, for thou see my misery, and what comfort this
comfortless place affords, where I can neither sleep, nor wake but under
lock: But Lord, as Paul and Joseph through thy only love toward them, and
thy providence over them, found grace and favor with their keepers; so work
in the hearts of them, under whose custody I am, that they use no stricte
severity toward me; that I may call upon thee more freely and fervently.

O Lord, I am poor, and my Creditors have no pity; there is no compassion in
man, but with thee is mercy and timely Redemption: thou have thine own time
to correct, and thine own time and means to comfort; a time to cast down and
a time to raise up: though thou seem to forget thy poor prisoners, in
permitting them to suffer long, and to endure much; yet have thou a fatherly
care of them, and in thy good time do evermore deliver them.

I beseech thee, in the love thou bear to Christ thy Son, my Mediator;
that when thou see the measure of mine imprisonment is sufficient to satisfy
the severity of my Creditors, work their hearts to that compassion toward
me, (though I be unable to pay them all) as that they may remit my restraint,
and admit me to my former liberty; that I may the better follow the means* by
mine own lawful industry and thy blessings, whereby I may attain unto such
a portion, as I may be able (as I am willing) to pay them all: and to owe
nothing to any man (before I go hence, and be no more seen) but love.

If it be thy good pleasure Lord, to take me out of this life, before I can
make full satisfaction to my Creditors, impute it not unto me as a sin, but
accept my will to do it, as the true performance of it; that in peace with
thee and (as much as in me lies) with all men, I may surrender my soul into
thy hands, which (though my body be) my soul is not so imprisoned, as to be
restrained from coming unto thee, nor prevented of it ascension to the place
of liberty and glory, where Christ my Savior is ascended; notwithstanding
the cruelty of them, that now covet to retain my flesh, whereof (it may be if
they could) they would wish to make some profit for their satisfaction, which I
must then leave unto their wills to be disposed.

Most humbly comending my self, my soul and my body, into thy divine and
heavenly custody, until the time, In the name of Jesus Christ thy Son: to
whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be for ever (as has been from the
beginning) eternal glory, Amen.

O Lord increase my faith, endue me with perfect Patience, and in thy mercy,
timely delivery.
A Caveat for cruel Creditors, that keep poor men in prison, whom they know
unable to pay that, for which they keep them in prison.
THE practice of Christian charity, has evermore been to do to other men, as
a man desires others to do unto himself; and is grounded upon the words and
strict command of Christ himself: who wills all men, that whatsoever they
would that men should do unto them, Math. 7. 12.
they should do unto others. Luke 6. 31.
And again by way of caveat, he says: Take heed what ye do, Math. 4. 24.
and how ye deal with other men, for what measure ye met to them, the same
shall be measured to you again; this is the truth: Men ought to do as they
would be done unto.
yet, are ye so hard hearted, as for a little money or other matter, to keep a
poor man in prison, deprive him of his liberty, prevent him of the exercise of
his calling, disable him to provide for his own, and the reilefe of his poor
wife and children, and yet account your selves Christians? If ye be Christians
in deed, and not in name only, you cannot but commiserate the necessity of
your brethren, and approve your selves Christians, by loving them, by helping
them, by relieuing their necessities, and that freely, for Christ's sake, whose
they are, as he has commanded.

Be not such lovers of your selves, as only to respect your own private
profit, and to increase it by oppressing your poor brother (for, so he is
howsoever base, and howsoever your selves are glorious.) And in steed of
comforting, ayding and relieuing him, to imprison him, the more to impouerish
him; does not this show you are none of the household of faith? who love one
another, help one another, relieve one another, as fellow members of one body,
whereof Christ is the head?

There is a proverb in deed, Charity begins at home: Charity begins at home:
a proverb often ill applied.
And so it seems; and where it begins, there it ends; where it is bred, there
it lies; at least it never goes abroad to the comfort of the comfortless, to
help the poor, to relieve the Widow and the Orphan.

This, keeping charity in a man's private bosom is the cause, that man is
become a devil to man; Wolfes, devouring one another, The course of cruel men.
by usury, by extortions, by fraud, by deceitful contracts, and uncharitable
bargains: in wrapping poor innocent men (that stand in need of the help of
your abundance) in bands, morgages, and such griping and cruel conditions, as
poor men are not able to perform; and upon breach of payment, or not
performing some unreasonable conditions, you unconscionably exact the
penalties, take the forfaitures, and all advantages, that the severity of the
Law will allow you, thereby undoing husband, wife, children, and many times the
friends of a distressed man; and many times not satisfied with all that the
poor man and his friends are able to make, you keep the poor body of the
party in prison, for the uttermost farthing; and content your selves
oftentimes, to pass by the Grate where you hear the poor cry for bread,
bread! O woeful and most impious uncharitableness, fearfully condemned by the
sentence of God himself.

Nay, who has not heard with his ears (hateful to be heard) some cruel man
say, he would make dice of his debtors bones? Some brag to make dice of their
poor debtors bones.
he were as good to say, he would eat his flesh like a Caniball: And what
less do they, that enforce a poor debtor to perish in prison, there to leave
his bones, and flesh too, for the satisfaction of the Creditor, to make use of
both his bones for dice, and his flesh for Mummy, fit Relics for cruel
creditots, sweet odours for their consciences, and wholesome Physic for their
hearts?

Alas, what will a poor man's carcass profit you? what use can you put it unto
being dead in prison? if you retain him till he pay that he cannot pay, dye
there he must.

But your policy is there, The policy of some creditors.
to keep him in misery, to draw compassion toward him of some of his
friends, to engage themselves for your satisfaction; It savors indeed of
policy not of piety. Is not one man's utter undoing enough, but the overthrow
of two or three more, and their families for company, as often times it
happens by your extreme cruelty?

O miserable Creditors! can you truly pray to God (that is merciful) forgive
my debts, How can a cruel creditor pray, forgive me as I forgive?
as I forgive my debtors: your selves so unmerciful, as not only not to
forgive them, but to persecute them to death or desperation. God has trusted
you for all that ye enjoy, only as his Stewards to dispose as he has
appointed, not as you take liberty; going so far beyond the bounds of your
warrant, as to turn the blessings of God into usury; and to the circumuenting
of Gods poor distressed children that want your help: you have received much,
and much will be required of you; not of your silver and gold, not of your
lands and possessions; God has no need of that, that he can give and take at
his own pleasure: That usury that he requires at your hands, is faith; if
faith be in you, you will love him; if you love him, you will love his image,
your brethren; A godly rich man's best usury.
if you love them, you will express it by the tokens of love; namely, to do
them good, to give to the needy, to feed the hungry, to cloathe the naked, to
visit the prisoners; but if in steed of giving, to take from them, in steed
of feeding to starve them, in steed of clothing, ye strip them; and in steed
of visiting prisoners, ye make prisoners; how appears the love of God in you?
for, if you love not your brethren whom ye daily see, how can you love GOD whom
ye have not seen?

How fulfill you the Law of this love of God, when ye do little or no good to
the poor, and least unto your selves? They are deceived that think goodness to
consist in goods.
you think goodness consists in goods; you are commanded to do good unto
all, and especially to them of the household of faith; And because you think
none faithful, but such as give for giving, lend for lending, and requite one
good turn for another; the truly faithful in deed, are sildome accounted of
the number, of them that are in the household of the faith of them which keep
touch with you; which in deed may be a mark of a moral honest man, but it is
in deed the true note of a truly faithful man, who has ever a godly care and
holy desire, to perform promise in every honest action, to the uttermost of
his power: but this kind of faithful men, are commonly of the poorest rank,
not of the rank of the men, commonly reputed good men; for he is a good man
that is full of goods, though of little goodness; Pro. 10. 15. 16.
But his goods are in deed unto him as a strong City, Pro. 10. 15. and yet
make him more wicked, ver. 16.

Deceive not your selves, you that have the strong supposed Castles of wealth
for your seeming defense, but remember that he that made you rich, can make you
poor; If the rich change robes with the poor, the poor will be the
Gentleman, the rich the beggar.
and he that made the poor, can make them rich: Put the poorest in your
roabes, and put their poor rags upon your selves, and then, who will call
you Master? who then will stoop and bow unto you as now they do, as if they
were your vassals?

Remember, there was a glutton and a Lazarus; A rich Miser, and a miserable
Beggar; which of them had the best portion? the Glutton in show, but the base
Beggar in deed: the story is no fable, and is so authentic, as needs no
witnesses to prove the truth of the ones perdition, and the others salvation:
The rich Glutton and poor Lazarus.
And such gains as the Glutton gat, many rich men diligently seek, and yet
forget what they shall find: It is not reported that the Glutton was a usurer,
an extortioner, a defrauder of men by bargaining; But that he was rich, and
despised the poor, and therefore was he cast into hell: It is not said he
kept poor men in prison, nor that any man perished by his means, but only
Lazarus whom he would not relieve.

Is not this a most fearful example for you that have abundance, both of
food at full, every day raiment and riches, and yet see the poor pine in the
streets, and poor men in prison, lamentably crying for bread and meat, and
yet have no compassion on them?

You therefore that have bin long guilty of cruelty, in oppressing poor men,
it is never too late for you to return to him that is so loving, Luke 19.
and so ready to receive a sinner that repents: It is never too late to
become a Zacheus of a Publican, to be good Christian; he climed up upon a wild
Fig Tree to see Christ, and he willed him to come down; Christ would dine in
his house with him, A worthy example for rich men to follow.
as happy guest; whom Zacheus receiving gladly, was content, for a testimony
of his true repentance, of the ill getting of his goods, to give half of it to
the poor; and if he had taken from any man by forged cauilation, (which
imports all the hard and ungodly means he had used to oppress any man) to
restore it four fold.

O worthy example, and now does the same Christ call upon you, who are at the
height of a more unfruitful Fig tree, which yet seems to you to yield you
much and most sweet fruit; sweet in the taste, but you shall find it bitter in
the belly; it is a wild fruit, and hard of digesture; come down, come down
quickly from the height of your ungodly gains, receive Christ, he will dine
with you, not as with Zacheans usurers, oppressors of the poor, but as you
shall become Zacheans, to give not half, but part of your goods to the needy
members of Christ; Good counsel for the rich.
and what you have sinisterly gotten by cautulous bargains, and by imprisoning
men, and causing them either to perish in their bodies or in their estates, for
the obtaining of that they cannot pay you; remit it either in whole, or in such
a part as may stand with their abilities, to pay and to maintain (though but
in a mean measure) themselves, their poor wives and children by the
remainder; though it do come short of Zacheus his repentance and good deeds,
yet it will be such a beginning, as being accepted of God, he will say unto you
as he said unto him, even that day that you shall thus begin, with a true heart
and lively faith to repent you; this day is salvation come in your houses.

O sweet salutation, that brings salvation; and harsh and hellish are the
gains that bring damnation.

Consider in time, put it not off till the day of your death; no not to the
making of your last Wills: A dead man has no goods.
do good with your goods whiles they are yours, when you are dead they are
none of yours: That which you intend your Executors should do when you are
dead, do it your selves while you are living: for that when you are dead, the
goods that you now possess, shall be at the devotion of others, though you
intend them to never so godly and charitable uses; It is s^^ne by daily
experience, the intentions o^ best men and women are abused: And what can your
intended works, to be done in your names after your deaths, profit you? only
that such a rich man when he died, when he could keep his goods no longer,
gave these and these Legacies to be performed; and their names be registered as
chief benefactors to such and such good uses: Alas, what avails this carnal
ostentation, if your names be not written in the book of life?

First, and before all things then, reconcile your selves unto God, by a free
confession of the wrongs and injuries you have done unto men; though
peradventure you may cloak your cruelty by the Laws of the Kingdom, that
admit forfaitures and all advantages, more in terror, Rich credico^s must not
w^rke all extremities that humane laws permits.
then for the admittance of such extremities, as are daily done under color of
humane lawful tolleration. The divine law of God admits no such liberty, but
commands all men, especially the rich, to do good unto all, especially to such
as are of the household of faith, whom, as it is not in your wisdoms to
distinguish, having amongst us neither Jews, nor known Pagans or Athiests;
do good to all men: then shall you not miss some of that heavenly family, so
will God reward you.

As for such as are wicked debtors, Wilful able debtors may be enforced.
able to pay and stand out, leave them to the power of the justice of the Law;
only help the poor, and do your best to relieve the needy; so shall you
lend unto the Lord, who will become a debtor unto you (if it may be so said) in
the behalf of the poor you shall relieve, and will recompense you here in
this life with competencie; and hereafter with eternal glory.

Encouragement for such as are molested and afflicted with enemies flatterers,
and their slanders.
MAny troubles and afflictions are incident to the children of God; and amongst
the rest, the fear of, and the vexations of enemies is not the least, yet
necessary; for he that has no enemy seems secure; Enemies are necessary.
security breeds a carelessness of godly duties: They that have no changes,
Psalm. 55. 19.
namely they that fall into no troubles, fear not God, says David; therefore
are enemies necessary: for, they will not only vex them whom they hate,
with all manner of evil practices to work their hurt, but will be diligent
obseruers of their lives and conuersations; that they may bring them into shame
and rebuke among the people: And therefore David prayed unto God, To guide him
in his ways, because of his enemies, Least they taking advantage of his
errors, should publish his disgrace.

By the watchfulness of thine enemies, thou may learn to beware how thou
walk; whereas if thou had none, thou might run into many forbidden
actions, and yet think thy self upright.

It is better to have many open enemies, Enemies are better then flattering
friends
then one flattering and dissembling friend: of thy known enemy thou may
beware, but by a false friend thou may be betrayed; and yet hardly is a true
friend known from a flattering enemy: they both speak fair and alike, which
thou may hear, and believe both alike; they may both offer to do thee
equal offices, which thou may with like acceptance embrace; but their
minds, meaning and intentions, are hidden; and the best way to try and
distinguish them, The way to try a true friend from a flatterer.
is, to make them severally acquainted with some slight matter, wherein thou
may seem to have offended; entreating their opinions severally, whether the
offense be not such, as thou may fear some danger: thy friend indeed will
tell thee that it is indeed dangerous, but the flatterer will tell thee, t^sh,
it is nothing: of him beware, that will sooth thee up in thine evil, for he
will discover thy secrets.

The greatest and most secretst mischief that can befall a man, is, when he
knows not his enemy from his friend; and therefore is an open enemy to be
preferred before a false friend: by the words of an enemy, It is a mischief not
to know a friend from a flatterer.
uttered of thee, or to thee, thou may know what he means toward thee;
but by the flattery of a fawning friend, thou can not but be deceived, and
fall into the hands of an enemy, supposed to be thy friend: Romans 16. 18.
Fair speech and flattery deceive the hearts of the simple: And when a
flatterer has his opportunity, he will bring slander upon him he flattered.

But be thou virtuous, The best means to avoid slander is to live virtuously.
and thou shall either discover the flatterer, stop the mouths of
slaunderers, or turn their ears from them that hear them. Remember how
slightly David past over the railing of Shemei; he took it as sent from God,
from whom seek thou counsel, and he will either discover the hidden
intentions of the flatterer, or withstand the most violent practices of thy
open enemy; nay, if thou rely faithfully upon him, and pray for his defense
fervently, he will make thy very enemies thy friends; yea, be they never so
malicious, never so violent, never so close in their counsels, never so
politic in their devices, thou shall avoid them.

But, beware thou give no cause of offense to any man, Math. 18. 7.
as Christ commands; To give no cause of offense.
for woe is pronounced against them by whom offenses come: and take not
offense upon every light occasion, for so shall thou never be free from being
taken as an enemy to others; or procure others to be enemies to thee: and if
thou feel thy self culpable of causing offense, thou shall be worthily
branded with the mark of a contentious person, whose company, neither will the
godly admit, nor the wicked, desire: so shall thou seem unworthy the society
of either.

If therefore thou have erred in thy tougue, by backe-biting others; or gone so
astray in the course of thy life, as for which thou can justly accuse thy
self, If offense be committed, seek reconciliation speedily.
or be justly accused; make speedy reformation, and delay not to be
reconciled to them that are offended thereat: for thereby thou may redeem
the good opinion of the good and peaceable, which thou have lost; and stop
the mouths of the wicked, and their slanders, whom thou have justly
occasioned to speak evil of thee.

And if thou have taken offense at any man's words or deeds (unless it be in
the cause of God, Take no offense at any man's words or deeds, unless they
(...) to the dis^^n^^r of God or the King.
or the King) thou bewraist thy weakness; for, if thou be a true and
faithful member of Christ, thou will bear with reproaches, disgraces, yea
losses by his example, rather then to be moved to revenge; for vengeance is the
Lords, and blessed art thou, if for well doing, or undeservedly thou suffer
these things: if for evil, it is a just recompense for thy sin.

If therefore thou be reviled, revile not again, according to the example of
Christ: if thou be railed on, say with David (rayled on and cursed by Shemei)
it may be the Lord has bidden him: and think not that any man can speak
evil of thee, or do hurt unto thee, but God has a hand in it, either to
punish thee in Justice, God has a hand in whatsoever befalls us.
or to reform thee in mercy: for, thou art but a man, whose nature is, to
pass by and to wincke at thine own; and too strictly to mark another man's
erroneous words and works.

And, because thou art so dull sighted, as either thou will not or can not
see thine own faults, God opens the eyes and the mouths of other men,
Because we see not our own faults God makes other men to observe them.
to observe and preach publicly the faults thou think thou have committed
in secret.

From hence springs quarrels and contentions, and from thence, mutual enmity,
malice and revenge; make use therefore of these backe-biting reports, hear
them with silence, and bewray not a double fault in thy self; God uses
enemies often times to reclaim us from sin.
as first to commit unseemly things, and then to take them as thine enemies,
whom God uses as his means to reclaim thee from thine errors: thou ought
rather to love them, and to do them what good thou can, though they seem to
hate thee: If they curse thee, Lue 6. 27. 28.
bless them, if they slander thee, pray for them. The greatest hurt we can
do our enemies, is to do them good.


Thou can not do thine enemy a greater hurt, nor thy self more good, then
to do him good, for the hurt he intends to thee; Romans 12. 30.
for, So shall thou heap coals of fire on his head: Pro. 25. 21. 12.
And therefore have thou not only no cause to grudge that God sends thee
enemies to watch over thee, to keep thee humble and in obedience, and upon
whom (through thy patience) thou may work much good; in loving them, and
seeking to be reconciled to them: if they then show themselves so furious, and
desperately bent against thee, as they will not be reclaimed, thou art not
barred of thy remedy by the Laws, and the Magistrate bears the sword to
punish them, and to defend thee: and if thou find no prevailing means
thereby, to be freed from their danger, bewray thy case unto God in faithful
prayer, who is a just God to defend thee in thy just cause, and a powerful
God, whom thy mightiest enemies are not able to resist.

Though thine enemies anger and fury be never so great, and threaten thee with
sundry things which they will do against thee, and even gnash their teeth
upon thee, as if they would eat thee up; be not afraid: The way to prevent a
furious enemy.
be only faithful and patient, and thou shall either see thine enemies
become thy friends, their hatred come to an end, or them selves to vanish and
consume away; only live thou godly, pray faithfully, and use all ordinary
means lawfully: then be assured, if thine enemies were more then they are,
more powerful and more furious then they be, they shall stumble and fall.

God in his providence, can find secret and unexpected means to deliver thee
from most deadly enemies, if thou call faithfully upon him; and therefore cast
thy danger upon the Lord, and he will defend thee.

It is not in thine own power or policy, Humane policy or force, without the
fear of God prevail not against an enemy.
that can save thee, unless with it and above it, thou crave, and have the
power and wisdom of God and his blessing, to second any other means thou
can use; for, what is a sword, a spear, or armor of esteemed proof, or the
strength of a horse, to save thee? they are all vain and of no force of
themselves, as appeared by that monster Goliath armed completely with a Helmet,
Brigandine, and Boots of brass; a spear like a Weauers beam, and a sword;
did these things save him? trust in none of these outward means, trust in the
Lord, he is a strong rock, a fortress and defense, in whom, and in or by no
other means, can thou be safe.

It is he that breaks the horns, God weakeneth the power of the enemies of
his children.
namely weakeneth the power of the wicked, and strengthens the godly: he will
guide thee by his counsel, he will protect thee by his power, and provide for
thee in his providence; and in the end, receive thee to glory, out of the
reach of all thine enemies.

Brook thou therefore with godly patience, We must undergo ignominy and
slanders for a while, and after comes glory.
all reproaches, disgraces and slanders; it is but a little while, and a light
burden to bear; and in the end thou shall receive for the ignominy and
slanders thou unjustly indurest here, glory for evermore. And therefore
commit the safety of thy body, and preservation of thy soul unto the Lord in
well doing, in continual faithful prayer; and he will hear thee and deliver
thee.

A Prayer for a man that has undeserved enemies, and is subject to slanderous
tongues, flatterers, and false friends.
O Lord my God in Jesus Christ, loving and merciful, I beseech thee see and
consider the malice and secret practices of such as are become mine enemies,
whereof I neither know the true cause, nor have wittingly deserved their
hatred or malice thus against me.

They privily backe-bite me, and slander me behind my back; they vpbraide me,
and speak evil of me unto my face, unjustly: give me patience O Lord, to
bear it, and wisdom so to carry my self in my conversation and vocation, as
they may have no just cause thus to afflicte me.

I know and do acknowledge, that the sins which I have committed against thy
Majesty, deserve corrections; but Lord, though I have offended thee; to these
mine enemies I have done, nor never intended any hurt: yet thou see and
know what they have done and what they intend against me.

Prevent them of their purposes, frustrate their devices and turn their
policies and practices they intend against me, either to nothing, or against
them selves.

If they wilfully and maliciously persevere; let them fall into the danger they
wish to me.

Thou know their former flatteries and dissimulations, and how they falsely
pretended friendship, only (as it now appears) to supplant me and to
confonud me, if thou permit them.

Lord who can avoid the oily words of a false heart, but shall be seduced by
them, unless thou that know the inward thoughts discover their deceit?

Lord make me to know the secret intentions of all those that flatter me to do
me hurt; and give me wisdom to avoid the fury and force of mine open
enemies; and grant me grace to walk ever in thy truth; knit my heart unto
thee, that I fearing thy name, and depending faithfully upon thee, I may make
mine enemies ashamed of their slanders and malicious practices against me.

Rescue me O Lord, and deliver me in thy righteousness, in line thine ear
unto me, and save me from them that hate me.

Be thou my strong rock, whereunto I may always resort when mine enemies
assail me, In slanderous words or wicked deeds, publickely, or privately.

Deliver me O God, out of all their dangers, out of the hands of all ungodly
and cruel men; for, in thee is my trust, in thee is my strength, and of and by
thee are the means to prevent the mischiefs they pretend and practice against
me.

O stay my feet that they slip not, least they rejoice at my fall, and Set a
watch before the door of my lips, that I offend not with my tongue.

Though they speak evil of me, though they lay wait for me, and though they
take counsel together against me, yet give me not over unto their wills.

Though I hear their slanderous tongues, though I know they detract me, and
speak all manner evil against me: give me patience, not to be moved, to
recompense evil for evil.

Prevent me of their laying wait for me, and frustrate all their combinations
and practices against me. And keep me ever in thine obedience, for I am of my
self weak, and may give offense; or at least, offense may be raken, where no
cause is given.

If they have any just cause against me, wherein I cannot justify mine
innocence, being by nature frail, and may err; yet give me not over unto
their wills, but according to mine unfeigned hearts desire, to be reconciled
unto them: work their hearts to embrace peace with me, and love toward me, as
thou know I unfeignedly desire to show toward them.

If their hearts be so hardened, as no submission nor my sincere affection
toward them, can obtain reconciliation with them, but that they will still
continue to insult, and as it were to triumph over me; I shall ever (as I do)
appeal unto thee for justice, to deal with them as thou will, whose judgment
between them and me, I acknowledge most just.

And therefore Lord, though they by their greatness, wealth and wit, in some
things prevail against me, and insolently make their boasts, that they have
surprised me, and gotten their wills of me; so far as they may say in their
hearts, that thou have forsaken me; give me ever a strong and constant faith
in thee, that I faint not, nor be afraid; for, when they think most to
triumph over me, thou art able to frustrate their hope, and to enforce them to
sue to me for peace, whereunto my heart is truly inclined.

But Lord, thou see that the more I seek for peace, the more they seek to
vex me, and to oppress me with actions at law; diversely troubling me, and
that unjustly, that heartily desire to live in peace.

Their hearts are in thine hands O Lord, and if thou think it fit to keep me
yet under their tyranny, more to humble me, I am in thy hands, do with me
what thou will, for I know that what thou do, or permittest to be done unto
me, is in love, and I know thou see my troubles; and when thou in thy wisdom
shall think mine afflictions sufficient, thou will be pleased to restore me to
comfort and peace.

In the mean time, while mine enemies are in my sight, and I in theirs; guide
me in my ways, protect and keep me under the safe shadow of thy wings, then
shall I not fear what man can do unto me.

Lord evermore increase my faith.
Counsel and comfort for him that is persecuted, for his constant profession
of the Gospel of Christ.
KNow this, thou that art afflicted and persecuted, God shows not his anger
when he suffers us to be persecuted for the profession of his truth.
for the profession of the Gospel of Christ, and for thy faith in him; that
he does not suffer thee to be punished, as if he were angry with thee, as he
sometimes shows himself in some other afflictions, which he inflicteth upon
men for their sins, whereof no man is free; but herein he shows thee an
extraordinary favor; First, in illuminating thee by his holy spirit, whereby
thou know him and his truth, which thou can not comprehend by thy natural
wisdom, were it never so profound and deep, in carnal understanding: And
secondly, in making ^hee a constant witness of that truth which it has pleased
him to reveal unto thee; and in that he gives thee strength and godly
courage, to stand constantly and resolutely in the open and public
acknowledgement of thy faith in him, and patiently to suffer persecution for
his sake; which grace and mercy is given thee of God; first, to know, then to
believe, and consequently to suffer for his name; which patient sufferings are
the fruits of his love toward thee.

Christ himself approves thee blessed, Math. 5. 10.
if thou suffer for righteousness sake: 1. Pet. 4. 14.
If thou be but rayled upon, for the name of Christ, thou art blessed.

If thou had no further testimonies of his love, then these short assurances
and comforts, it were sufficient: But he further adds, If thou thus suffer,
the Kingdom of heaven is thine by promise: If we suffer for Christ, his Kingdom
is ours by promise.
and, if thou be truly faithful, thou can not but feel the truth of this
promise; and therefore doubt not, but hold fast by the promises of Christ; be
constant, be not dismayed at whatsoever threats of thine adversaries, not
thine, but the enemies of Christ Jesus himself, as Paul sometimes was when he
persecuted those that professed the name of Christ.

They were but men he persecuted, Christ is persecuted in his members.
Christian men; and in them he persecuted Christ. Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me? If then thou be persecuted for Christ, remember that Christ is
persecuted in thee.

What an honor then is this unto thee, It is an honor to suffer for Christ,
and he will reward.
to be persecuted for thy Master, who is Lord of heaven and earth? Do thou
think, that if thou suffer for him, he will not freely reward thee for thy
fidelity? Will an ordinary Master of a silly servant, suffer him to be
beaten, wounded, and abused, for him and in his cause, and will he not reward
him? If his Master assign him a service, wherein he trusts his fidelity
and constancy, and he like a coward deny his Master, revolt, and take part
with his Masters enemies: will he not think him a perfidious servant, and
punish him?

How much more will Christ reward thee, if thou stand stoutly, and in a
Christian constancy in the defense of his cause? (though he can without thee
defend and maintain his own) but that he will make thee a witness of the
truth, A dangerous thing to revolt from the truth for fear of corporal
punishment.
which all that shall be saved do steadfastly believe: But, if for fear, of,
or for the enduring of a little temporal punishment, thou should revolt,
forsake him, and deny him before his enemies, having such a royal and rich
reward set before thee, as the Kingdom of heaven and eternal glory, if thou
persevere unto the end: and contrarily, perpetual shame and ignominy, if
thou deny him.

He that for fear of trouble, persecution, or death it self, for Christ, will
deny Christ, he is not worthy of his merits; by which, and by no other
means, thou and all believers are to be saved.

Deny him not therefore before men, He that denies Christ before me^, he will
deny him before his Father.
that must acknowledge thee before his Father in heaven: If thou faint and
forsake him here, it is a denying of him, and he will deny thee to be one of
them he has redeemed, when he shall give up unto God his Father, those that
he has chosen out of the great mass of mankind, by his allsufficient
sufferings, to bring them to glory; which is the free reward, assured to be
given to as many as constantly profess his name, and for his sake patiently
endure here, persecution and troubles.

The sufferings that thou here endurest, Sufferings are here short, our glory
eternal.
are short and momentanie; they endure but a small time, they are quickly past
over; were it that thou should be burned, or to undergo any other torment
for thy faith in Christ: If imprisoned, suffering hunger, cold, nakedness,
and stripes, what were thy suffering, to the eternity of blessedness?

If thou be deprived of thy goods, and of the dearest things thou enioyest in
this world, consider what things they are; If we willingly forsake earthly
things for Christ, we shall receive heavenly.
are they not such things as come and go inconstantly? If thou have lands and
possessions, thou art but Steward of them; If thou have wealth, thou art but
the disposer of it; and if an ordinary death befall thee, as it is decreed it
must: Thou must forgo it all, and give account for all. If thou voluntarily
leave them for Christ's sake, thou shall find a far greater treasure in
heaven.

If thou have some beneficial Office, Loss of honor and office for Christ.
or place of dignity in the world, and for the profession of Christ thou be
thrust from it, and lose thine honor and reputation among men; what losest
thou, seeing thou art sure of a more high and excellent place, and of far
greater honor in heaven?

If thy Parents and thy friends (contrarily minded) disdain thee,
discountenance thee, and cast thee clean out of their favor and society, and
seem to be ashamed of thee; undergo it with godly patience: for Christ (for
whose sake thou endurest these things) will not be ashamed of thee, but will
acknowledge thee to be his adopted brother, and coheire with him of the
Kingdom of his Father.

Think it therefore an honor and no shame unto thee, to be brought forth in
the open view, and upon the public stage of the world, to be a witness of the
truth of Christ, and to suffer for the same: He that willingly suffers for
Christ, has more honor then he that only preaches it, when there is no danger.
Thou shall be esteemed in the sight of good and godly men, above those that
only preach it, and barely profess it, when there is no fear of troubles for
it, and in the time of persecution, will not auowe unto the world by their
suffering, what they have taught, and outwardly professed in the world; for it
is one thing to profess and publish the truth of Christ with the mouth, in
time of peace, and another thing to avouch it boldly, seeing trouble and even
death it self before their faces, for the constant perseverance in the same.

It is commonly reputed an ignominious thing to be imprisoned, and a more
reproachful thing, to be put to death, after the manner of wicked men; But let
not this at all daunt thee, Think it no dishonor to suffer for Christ as a
malafactor
for Christ at his death (whose cause thou maintainest) contented himself to
be hanged as a Thief and a Murderer; for such were the companions of his
death: yet was the Cross whereon he suffered, a more triumphant Chariot of
honor, then the most pompous triumph of the greatest Monarch of the world, for
his greatest victories: And be thou assured, that if thy lot, in the wisdom
and love of God be such toward thee, as to number thee among his faithful
witnesses, constantly suffering death for his sake, thou shall be crowned among
the victorious Martyrs.

Remember the most honorable title, that St. Paul gives unto that constant
servant of Christ, Stephen: stiling him the Martyr of Jesus Christ: And of
Antipas whom St. John calls a faithful Martyr of Christ; Then which, A
Martyr for Christ a most glorious title.
there cannot be a more glorious remembrance of the dead.

Think not therefore that thou art the first that has suffered for Christ;
but, if thou look into the eleventh of the Hebrews, thou shall see such a
cloud of like witnesses, that have professed and suffered as thou do, as
will encourage thee to stand fast unto the end.

And if thou consider the times, not far past, thou may understand of an
infinite number of thine own Country men and women, even the weakest sex, who
have gone the same way before thee, with unvanquishable patience, even to
death; and therefore with like patience run the same race, looking unto Jesus
Christ the Author and finisher of thy faith: who, for the joy that was set
before him, endured the bitter death of the Cross, and despised the shame, and
is set at the right hand of the Throne of God, where thou shall behold him and
his glory, and be pertaker of it, after thou have endured a little speaking
against of sinners, Persecution a most glorious livery of Gods children.
persecution and death it self; which is the most glorious liuerie of Gods
dearest children, whereby they are fashioned to the image of their Redeemer;
and which shall give an end to all thy sorrows, and shame, and bring thee to
endless joy and glory: which, not only the Apostles of Christ, but even late
Martyrs understood, rei^y^ing that they were accounted w^rthy of the honor,
to suffer for their Masters sake.

What can thou then less conceive, but that it is the mere love of God in
Christ toward thee, God in his love suffers his here to be persecuted for
his sake.
to make choice of thee among and above many others, to afford thee this
honor; to be a maintainer of the glory and authority of the truth of Christ,
against the falsehood and false authority assumed by Antichrist?

Therefore, let it not trouble thee, neither be thou the more fearful, to
stand fast in thy profession, because thou see a million of Newters, on every
side of thee, The revolt of others should not cause us to fear.
who for the love of their riches, pleasures, and carnal commodities; the
niceness of their own dainty flesh, their affection to father, mother, wife,
children, and esteemed friends, to be content to run with the time: and in
steed of renouncing the things of this world for Christ, rather to renounce
Christ for the world.

In what a miserable case are these poor people (poor, be they never so rich:
Ill to be indifferent.
) that hold it a thing indifferent, to follow God or Baal, Christ or
Antichrist? forgetting that Christ dyed for them; and that they should
acknowledge him, whose blood, not Antichristian Bulls and Pardons, must cleanse
them from, or to dye in their sins.

The reason of this their luke-warmenesse, is, for that the spirit of God, The
cause why many are lukewarm.
by whom the faithful have power and strength to maintain the truth to death,
dwells not in them, who works mightily in the children of Salvation; so
that persecution for the same, daunteth them not: scourgings, whippings,
scossings, mockings, stonings, burning, or whatsoever death, cannot remove
their constancy in the profession of what they believe.

To conclude therefore with thee, who art now under the cross of persecution,
not knowing what end the Lord will make with thee: submit thy self to his will,
undergo with godly patience, whatsoever the adversaries of the Gospel of
Christ shall lay upon thy body, thy soul they cannot touch; and commend both
thy body and thy soul, into the hands and good pleasure of GOD thy heavenly
Father in Christ, in whom thou art blessed, for whom thou suffer, and for
whose sake, thou shall receive a glorious reward.

In hope of which reward, all the former Martyrs that have been content to
spend their lives for Christ, were willing to lay down their lives, desiring
to be dissolved, and to see the face of him, for whom they suffered.

Fear not therefore (if occasion so require) to yield thy body to the
merciless enemies of Christ: They that kill the body, cannot touch the soul.
they may kill the body, the soul they cannot touch: But, if thou should
forsake him, he will forsake thee, and he it is that can kill thy body and thy
soul too, and cast both into hell.

If a man take away thy life for Christ, they do thee a favor against their
wills; Good to loose a corporal to find ahealy life.
they deprive thee of a mortal, that thou may immediately receive an
immortal and a most glorious life from their tyranny: thou shall be
transported to the loving imbracements of thy Savior Christ, and enjoy the
most amiable sight of him, and the society of the whole company of heavenly
Ang^ls, and of thy fellow Martyrs gone before thee; and be pertaker with him
and them, of that glory, that so far passes all humane apprehention here,
as cannot be conceived or uttered.

O loose not this most blessed recompense, for a little suffering: but stand
fast, and Christ, that before thee and for thee, suffered infinite greater
torments then thou can suffer, or that man can inflict upon thee, shall send
that comforter the holy Ghost, to strengthen thee in thy greatest agonies, God
does comfort his at the time of their martyrdom.
and spiritual distractions; he will stand by thee, and will show thee his
loving, and amiable countenance, as he did at the death of his faithful Martyr
St. Stephen.

Wherefore faint not; fly not, unless thou (without breach of thy faith)
may avoid the danger by the providence of God, by flying from one place or
City unto another, always commending thy spirit unto him that gave it: so
where soever thou be persecuted, he will receive it and glorify it; and both
thy soul and thy body shall be made eternally glorious, when all men shall
be judged according to their faith in Christ.

This exhortation, I do confess may be thought superfluous, In this time of
the freedom of the Gospel, this discourse may be thought superfluous.
in this blessed time of peace, and freedom of the Gospel; for that (Gods
name be glorified) there is neither seen, felt, or heard, of any persecution
among us for the profession of the Gospel of Christ; and let all men pray for
the continuance of it, and for the long life and preservation of him, (a
succeeding religious David) under whom by the mercy of God, we at this day do
so freely enjoy it.

They are the greatest blessings that God, A religious King maintaining the
Gospel, a great blessing.
in earth, can bestow upon us; the free use of his word, and a King so
religiously inclined: as, it already appears, all his study and endeavor
is, to further and to maintarne the true profession and preaching of the
heavenly word, which his most worthy and religious father left inuiolate.

Yet it may offend none, that this exhortation (which may seem out of date)
is inserted among other troubles requiring patience; for, though our general
liberty be such, that every man at his liberty may freely profess the word,
Why this treatise may be at this time borne withal.
and use the means for the increase of his knowledge, faith and zeal; yet may
there be among so great a people, of diverse opinions and practices of
Religion: some privately oppressed, scoffed at, and mocked, and it may be
violently constrained to renounce the truth, which in it self is a
persecution; who meclitating on this exhortation, may peradventure be
comforted, nothing fearing (but by the help and providence of God) any
alteration, or change of that most wholesome and heavenly doctrine which is here
amongst us, freely taught and plentifully preached; but shall be maintained and
defended; which God grant it may be, as long as the Sun and Moon endures.

A Prayer for a man persecuted for his faith and profession of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ.
OEternall, merciful, powerful and euer-louing Lord God, in Jesus Christ; the
only keeper, Protector and maintainer, of thy children that suffer here in the
world for the true profession of the Gospel of Christ: look down I humbly
beseech thee, and behold what man does unto me for thy name sake: for, thou
have assured those that sincerely profess that truth which thou have taught in
thy word, in their sharpest and seuerest persecutions, to be either preserved
and defended from their tyranny, or to be so strengthened by thy grace, that
they shall be able to bear what soever they shall be enforced to suffer.

In hope and assurance of this thy mercy, I rejoice that thou accountest me
worthy to be one, though the simplest of the witnesses of the truth of thy
word, though I acknowledge my self to be weak, and by mine own strength,
unable to bear what is laid upon me for thy sake.

But as thou have promised Lord, so let me feel the effectual working of thy
holy Spirit, in giving me wisdom, to answer the adversary; patience and
power, constantly to undergo, whatsoever thou shall admit to be laid upon me;
for, thou have promised that no more shall be imposed upon me, but by the
strength of the same Spirit, I shall be able to bear it even unto death, for
thy Christ's sake.

If therefore dear father, thou have so determined, that death shall be the
end of my trials here; give me a willing mind to embrace it, and leave me
not unto mine own power; for the flesh is weak, but thy Spirit shall overcome
the weakness of my carnal parts: then shall my spirit and inward faith, with
patience, pass over whatsoever torments of my outward body. Thy presence shall
be so sweet, as shall swallow up the sense of my bodies sufferings; or so
mitigate the same, as I shall endure it, with patience, in hope and assurance
of that future glory, promised in Christ, prepared with thee in heaven.

My flesh is dust, whereof all the limbs and lineaments of my body are made;
and as they are dust, so I know in thine appointed time, they shall again
return to dust, and that by the course of Nature: but if thou have decreed it
untimely to perish by suffering for the profession of thy name; it shall be
but for a season, and then be restored, and my soul (redeemed by his blood,
for whose sake through thy grace I shall be ready to lay down my life) shall
not perish, but pass even from the fire to felicity, from the Cross to a
Crown, from sorrow to joy, from the hands of malicious mortal men, to the
custody of loving and eternal Angels.

O fortify and strengthen me, in the assurance of his merits, for whose sake
I suffer here; which I confess, is nothing worthy of the glory prepared for
them, that constantly suffer for the testimony of a conscience clear of vain
glory in suffering: yet is this suffering glorious, to him whom thou make
truly godly; for I confess Lord, it is not the suffering, but the cause and
mannet of suffering, that make the man that suffers a true Martyr indeed.

The cause, thou know O Lord, is for that I truly and faithfully profess
thy name: grant that I may suffer what thou have determined, in perfect
patience and true humility; and that I faint not, at whatsoever punishment or
affliction shall be presented to my weak heart, to terrify me from suffering;
for, I know that thou art then nearest, when all worldly comfort seems
farthest off.

Let me not therefore, in thy cause be afraid of the faces of men, that set
themselves against thee in me, for it is not me they persecute, but Christ my
Savior in me: for what advantage can they have, in taking from me (a worm)
this my wretched life? which if they spare, it cannot long endure: and what is
my death O Lord, unto thee, if they take it from me, but the weakest witness
of thy truth? the defense whereof, alas, I cannot maintain of my self; and
therefore according to thy promise teach me, even at the instant of my
greatest accusation; that through my ignorance, in a zeal which I cannot
maintain by thy word, I should give advantage to the adversaries.

Lord, give me wisdom, strengthen and confirm my faith, maintain thine
own cause in me and by me; touch my tongue with that celestial coal, from
thine Altar; then shall I be able to give a good account to them that shall
question me, for the hope I have in thee: hold me by thy right hand, that I
starte neither back, nor a side for fear.

Thou art styled the Eternal, the Almighty; who have said, thou will not give
thy glory unto Images, nor thy praise unto any other for thine own sake;
therefore for thine own sake, O Lord, look upon the afflictions, not which I
suffer only; but what, and wheresoever thy poor children persecuted do
suffer for thy sake; even by his means, that makes himself even drunk with
the blood of thy Saints, and that thirsts, even for the blood of Kings
(thine anointed) that honor him not.

Thou see it O Lord, and feel the miseries of thy poor children afflicted
here for thy names sake, by his merciless ministers.

O repress the rage and fury of these merciless men, that falsely conceive of
the saving blood of Christ, and yet are never satisfied, with shedding the
blood of those, whom thou have chosen to be witnesses of the truth of it; as
thou have reueiled it in thy word.

Thou art the God of glory, glorify thy name, and make perfect thy praise, in
strengthening thy weak children to witness thy truth with faithful
boldness, even before and to the faces of thy greatest adversaries: make
perfect thy power in our weakness; thy wisdom in our ignorance; and thy
great glory in our dejected baseness: and give me wisdom and strength, to
undergo with all spiritual patience, these and all other my troubles, and
means if it please thee, to avoid the danger which seems near unto me;
submiting my self willingly to undergo what thou have determined for me.

Lord evermore increase and confirm my faith in Christ my Redeemer.
Comfort and encouragement, for such as are banished, or enforced to live out
of their own native Country, either for fear of persecution for Gods word, or
the fear of enemies, that pursue them without just cause.
IT is a heavy cross for a man to be banished the Country wherein he was
borne; from his parents, friends and alies.

But in such a case, The cause of banishment is to be considered.
the cause is most especially to be considered, for which thou art abandoned,
or do abandon thy self.

If thou be banished by authority, it is for that thou art an unprofitable
member of the Commonwealth wherein thou have been bred and brought up; and
then is thy banishment just and fit: for, as one infected sheep couchant with
the sound, may endanger many, it may be the whole flock; and to prevent it, a
good Shepherd will cull it out from the rest, he will tar it, dress it, and
use his best means to heal it; but if his art and industry cannot prevail,
he either abandons it from the flock, or knockes it in the head.

Even so, a politic State finding an infectious member in the Commonwealth,
by whose wicked, lewd and ungodly example and inticements, other good subjects
may be endangered to be seduced; An infectious member in a Commonwealth fit to
be punished or banished.
after admonition and threats of the Law (which not prevailing) it thinks
(and is) fit in policy, either to banish him (which is the least punishment)
or to extend the severity of the Laws upon him.

If therefore thine exile proceed of thine own ungodly merit, take it with
patience, and think it a favor of the State, to hold it satisfied for thy
transgression, when it might in severity, have taken thy life.

It is also one thing to be banished from, and another thing for a man to fly
his Country.

Banishment presupposes some great offense committed, Banishment presupposes
offense or danger.
suspected, or conceived to be done by a man, against the Laws of the
Kingdom, from whence he is abandonned, or against the Religion therein
professed: And a man to fly his Country, argues either a guilty conscience
for some offense done, for which he dares not stand to the rigor and trial
of Justice: a common refuge for malefactors, and often attempted also, by some
that stand fearful of the fury and violence of some great and irresistable
enemy.

It is not always unlawful for a man to forsake his Country: It is not
always unlawful for a man to fly his Country.
as if he be persecuted for the true profession of the Gospel of Christ, in a
man's own native Country, he may by Christ's own warrant, seek refuge in
another: Mat. 10. 23.
He that is persecuted in one City, let him fly to another.

Paul and Barnabas, Act. 14. ^16.
Christ's worthy Apostles, being oppressed by the malicious Jews in Iconium,
for the profession of the name of Christ, fled to Listra and Derbe, where they
more freely preached the Gospel.

Neither is it unlawful to fly the fury and rage of a malicious enemy: ^.
King 17. 3
Eliah fled by Gods command, from the fury and threats of Ahab that sought
his life; Cap. 19. 3.
and after from Iezebel: when Pharaoh sought to kill Moses, Exo. 2. 15.
Moses fled to the land of Mydian. Genesis 27. 43. 44.
Iaacob was enforced to fly out of his native Country to Haran, for fear of
his brother Esau.

Beware that thou in flying mistake not the cause, Not to fly from the truth
to false Religion.
as to fly from the truth, and from the true worship of Christ, to falsehood
and Idolatry: If for the profession of the truth thou be accused and
restrained, before thou can make lawful escape (though thou be assured to
dye for Christ) use no sinister practice to avoid it as distrusting God, Mat.
26. 56.
as the Disciples did, that fled from, and forsook Christ when he was taken:
neither fly thou as an evil doer, as a Thief or a Murderer, Not to fly as
an evil doer.
or as guilty of any other grievous offense, for which thou dare not to
abide the trial: though for a time thou may escape the sword of the
Magistrate; but the guilte of thine offense will follow thee, into what remote
Country soever thou go; and wheresoever thou carryest the guilt of thy
crying sin, there also follows the Judgment of God; as it followed Kayne
that slew his brother, who ran and ranged from place to place, but still the
Judgment of God, Genesis 4. 11 12.
as a Blood-hound found him out: Thy best refuge, is to fly unto God, by
repentance and prayer for mercy.

Many euilly disposed persons, presuming to escape the Law by flying the
Kingdom, have perpetrated most impious actions: murders, treasons,
rebellious, theeueries and the like, Many commit grievous offenses, in hope to
fly before they be apprehended.
and have escaped; but could never escape the Judgment of God, which has
either enforced them to return, and then to receive their condign punishment;
or have endured greatest miseries, disgraces and shame, where they have thought
to be in most security and ease; for, howsoever runnagate traitors, think
that by committing some capital mischief against their Sovereign, or State
wherein they live, to fulfill the desire of some foraine Potentate, in hope of
promised reward and favor; or under pretense of being acceptably entertained
into some supposed Catholic Society: What gain either of these? the first,
condign suspicion of falsehood and treachery, against him who put him trust, to
perform a mischief at home: for how can helesse think, but that he that has
sworn to be a faithful subject to his Sovereign, and will so capitally
violate his fidelity, but he will be false to him? and so in steed of reward
he receives most deserved disgrace: As touching the second sort, that under
color of Religion, abandon their Country, in hope of high advancement in
foreign parts; are they not scorned of such as are their ancients abroad? and
are they not enforced to adventure their lives, to seduce their own native
countrie-men from their allegiance; and as much as in them may lie, to betraye
their own Country to strangers? yet think them safe by flying away, where
the Judgment of God meets them in every Country.

Whether shall I go from thy presence? Psalm. 139. 9. 10.
says David, whether shall I fly from thy Spirit? Take the sea for thy refuge
as Jonas did, thinking to fly from God, God finds a wicked man out go where
he will.
did he not find him out in the most secret corner of the ship? run from land
to land, from one Nation to another people: God will find thee out among many
millions.

What then does a foreign Country benefit a fugitive, when wheresoever he
becomes, he carries a hell in his bosom, which will torment him in every
place, in company and alone? the worm of his guilty conscience will torment
him; God whom he so highly offended, will appear a fearful Judge unto him:
and where God in his anger pursues a wicked man, A foreign Country frees not
a wickedman from the Judgment of God.
there is no place in the world that can secure him: one mischief or another,
one horrible end or another will follow him at the heels, and at length seize
upon him, without unfeigned repentance and faith in Jesus Christ.

As this is true, that capital malefactors, cannot hide themselves from Gods
judgments in any remote Region. So true it is, that such as are banished, or
do voluntarily flee some inevitable danger of undeserved enemies, The children
of God banished, find Gods favor every where.
as David did from Saul, if he depend upon God, shall find his favor, love,
presence, and protection; even amongst Barbarians, Turks, and Scithians: for,
he is universal in his power, universal in his providence, universal in his
knowledge: He observes and sees his, whether so ever they be banished; and
his mercies follow them, and compass them about. If they seek him, they shall
find him: as David found him in the Deserts of Ziph, among the rocks of
Engedie, and wheresoever he fled.

There is no place where God is not present, in his mercy or justice; and
whosoever seeks him in faith and faithful prayer, finds him every where:
if they pray unto him, he hears them.

If then thou be unjustly banished, or lawfully escaped danger, by sorsaking
thine own Country, and art in any foreign and strange Region: Be mindful
of the mercies of God toward thee; and acknowledge that it is he that has
delivered thee, and who will give thee means, to live among a strange people;
Where GOD is with a man, there is his home.
Then may thou think it thy home: for where a man is well, there is his
Country.

And, admit thou be enfotced to become a servant, or a slave in foreign parts
for thy relief; yet, if thou truly fear, and sincerely serve God, thou art
his free man. Therefore make thou this thy banishment (by thy patience) a token
and mark of thine integrity.

And, if thou remember any grievous sin, A man may repent his sins, and
serve the Lord in any strange Country.
that thou have committed in thy native Country; thou may as well repent it
in thy banishment, and more freely (if it may be so said) then in thine own
Country: for, among strangers there is not such opportunity to sin, as among
familiars: There is no time, nor place, wherein a righteous man can be barred,
or prevented, of serving the Lord, as well in the Wilderness, as in a Chamber,
as well in company, as alone; for, a faithful heart is never idle; it serves
God as well in prison as in the Temple. Serve God therefore in fear; be
faithful in him, and thou shall be comforted as well in the place of thy
banishment, as in thy Fathers, or dearest friends house: And if God see it
expedient for thee, he will call thee home again, to the place from whence
thou art abandoned, to glorify him.

A Prayer for a man banished from his native Country, for some crime
committed; or enforced to forsake it, either for fear of persecution, or of
some mighty adversary that does unjustly oppress him.
O Lord God, powerful, and only omnipotent, all-seeing, and universally wise;
knowing all things, the beginnings, proceedings, and ends, of all men and their
actions: Thy providence and protection, reaches from the heavens to the earth,
the Sea, and to the ends of the world: So that none can run, or be enforced
to fly unto the place, where thou can not find him out; in justice to
punish him for his sins, or in mercy to comfort him for thine own names sake.

Lord, I acknowledge, that I have grievously offended thee, by the manifold
sins that I have done, not only against thine own prescript laws and
commandments; but also against the Laws of my Sovereign: which has incensed
thy heavy displeasure against me; and in thy displeasure, Man is worthily
moved to persecute me, enforcing me to abandon even mine own native Country,
for fear of the punishment I have deserved.

And now Lord, being come into this place of banishment, estranged from, and
abandoned of all my friends, familiars, and acquaintance; conuersing among
unknown people, whose conditions, qualities, and professions, are, as yet hid
from me: I do most humbly pray thee, to be favorable, and a Father unto me,
in yielding me relief, even such as thy faithful servant Jacob, in his flying
from his brother Esau, desired, and bountifully received at thy hands food and
raiment; and move the hearts of this people, among whom I am enforced to live,
that I may find favor in their sight.

Thou have promised, never to fail, nor to forsake any that faithfully trust
in thee: and that though father, and mother, and all friends forsake them, thou will be a father unto them, giving them their daily bread, which implies all
necessary blessings for soul and body: and that all things shall work
together, for the good of those that love thee: As the selling of Joseph; his
Mistress false accusation; his imprisonment; all wrought for his advancement in
a strange Land; yea, among a profane people: So may this my banishment, and
living among a strange people, work (by thy blessing) to my comfort.

Thou art universal in thy wisdom, unsearchable in thy providence, mighty in
all thy works, and to whom all people, Nations and tongues are subject: work I
pray thee, that I may either return to mine own native Country, in peace and
safety, or that I may enjoy here, or wheresoever thou shall be pleased to
dispose of me, means to sustain me.

Thou art every where, Lord, and raignest and rulest over all people; thou
possessest and disposest all things for all men: The whole earth is thine; the
whole mass of gold and silver is thine; the Cattle upon all the mountains,
and in all the valleys upon the earth are thine, and thine to give.

Thou gave Abraham and Lot, portions of lands, and Herds of Cattle in
abundance, in a land wherein they were strangers. Thou blessedst Jacob
constrained to flee, a poor man only with a Scrip and a Staff: and thou
broughtest him again, to the place from whence he was constrained to flee,
with mighty Droues.

Lord, how mercifully did thou work for Joseph, abandoned from father;
mother, and friends? sold as a Slave, falsely accused (guiltless) imprisoned,
yet at last, made the chief (under a strange King) of a mighty people.

When Eliah was enforced to flee from Ahab the King; such was thy fatherly care
of him, that rather then he should want his necessary food, thou appointedst
the very Ravens to bring him food, morning and evening. And co^mandedst a
poor Widow to feed him in Sareptha: And because she was poor, thou through
thy power and love, of thy servant, vouchsafedst to increase her little oil
and meal, (near totally consumed) into so great a quantity, as she had not
only sufficient, abundantly to relieve her self, and her family, in the
extreme dearth and famine: But to pay her debts with the remainder.

When David was enforced to flee, from the fearful fury and malice of Saul,
thou did not leave him destitute of necessaries, even in the very
mountains and desert places.

O my God, how can I, but assure my self of thy like power over me, thy love
toward me, and thy providence for me, having received so many sweet
testimonies of thy helping so many, whom in their banishments thou have
sustained, and relieved in former times?

Thou art the same God, and of the same power and providence: therefore Lord
forsake not me, in this place where I am a stranger, where I have no friend,
no means of any constant assurance to be relieved.

Lord let not my sins hinder the work of thy mercies toward me; but pardon
all my sins, and blot out all mine offenses, through the blood of my Savior
Jesus Christ, whose merits extends to the salvation of all believers through
the whole earth.

O embrace me Lord with the arms of thy mercies, even here, where I am a
stranger: keep me under the shadow of thy wings; teach me wisdom, that
even here I may seek thee, and find thee; and may receive here such relief
and comfort, as I, here give glory to thy holy name, for thine undeserved favor
toward me, Amen.

Lord increase my faith.
Comfort and encouragement for Parents, that are crossed and grieved at the
ungodliness and disobedience of their children: fit for all Parents to read.
AMong the Jews, It was once a note of disgrace for a woman to be barren, and
now many grieve they have children.
it was a reproach, and a kind of shame, for a woman to be barren: and now in
this our age, many men and women that have begotten and borne children, become
grieved and ashamed, that ever they begat, or bare them, by reason of their
disobedience and vicious lives.

Children are the gift of God, and a great blessing and comfort to godly
Parents, if they be good and virtuous, if they fear God, and walk in his
ways; and then can they not but obey their Parents. Pro. 10. 1.
A wise and a godly son makes a glad father: and 17. 25.
but a foolish and wicked son, is a heaviness to his mother.

When children prove wicked, disobedient, Rebellious children greatest grief.
rebellious, and refractarie, it is the greatest grief unto godly and
religious Parents, that any earthly cross or affliction can yield: for as the
comfort is great unto a man to beget sons and daughters, whom God has chosen
to increase the Kingdom of Christ: So contrarily, a greater grief there
cannot be unto him, then to observe his children, inclined to be members of
Satan or Antichrist: Especially when a godly Father has endeavored through a
godly and religious care, to educate a son in the true fear and knowledge of
God, and yet to see him to prove wicked and ungodly.

But, thou that art thus afflicted through the wicked and irreligious course of
a rebellious son, after all the good means thou have used to reduce him to
obedience, and the fear of God: Consider with patience, that although God have
given thee power to be his Father, Though parents beget and bear children,
they cannot make them good.
in begetting him, and to his Mother to bear him: yet neither thou in
begetting, nor she, though she nourished him in her womb, did give him either
form or life: How much less can thon or she form or frame his mind to
virtue and godliness? thou may give good and wholesome counsel unto his
ears; but thou can not infuse grace and goodness into his heart: yet it is
thy duty to do thy best endeavor, to give him good and godly counsel; with
faithful prayer to God, that he will so water the seed, as it may bring
forth good fruit: and more the most godly Parents cannot do.

It is with Parents in their desires, to make their children fruitful in
godliness, as it is with the husbandman that couets a fruitful harvest, who
manures his ground, soyles it, ploughes it, sowes it, harrowes it; and as near
as he can, keeps and preuents the vermin, from devouring the seed sown; yet
it is not his labor, Parents may do their best endeavor, but it is in GOD to
make good children.
skill and diligence, that can make it spring up: he cannot form the blade,
nor infuse the grain into the ear: Nor so prevent the vermin, but that they
will devour some of the seed: neither can the most godly Father by his best
counsel, make good an ungodly Son: He may sow the good seed of the fear
of God, upon the ground of his heart; he may harrow it with sharpest and
seuerest threats, and may endeavor to prevent venomous vices, that offer to
choke the good seed that he has sown: But if his heart be stony, thornie,
or near the high way of the common sins of this world; All his labor, care,
and diligence will prove in vain; he must leave the infusion of grace into his
heart unto God, and to work the practice of godliness in him, The duty of
godly Parents to pray for their children.
to whom a godly Father becomes a daily and faithful petitioner, that he will
drive away Satan, and the swarm of his wicked instruments, from devouring the
good seed, and from sowing the tares of sin, and the weeds of ungodliness in
him.

This corrupt world is so full, and fraught with wicked and ly centious youth,
that as soon as a young man or Maid has liberty, to enter into the company
and society of wantons, and ungodly youth, they become commonly so infected
with their manners, The society of wicked youth, ^he means to make many
corrupt.
as they drink in all kinds of vices, as it were wine, making them many times
so drunken with vanities, by examples and lewd enticements, as the best
counsel of wisest Parents cannot make them, truly sober again. And to keep
youth in, according to the discretion of prudent Parents, is thought by
children, a mere slavery and bondage: so that Parents are many times (as it
were) at their wits ends, how they might best manifest their affections toward
them: for many of them have learned now to object against their Parents that
sharply reprove them for their sins, Rebellious children can make arguments
against good Parents out of Scripture.
that they ought not too much provoke their children to discontents. And
again, if they deny them means to gad abroad, and to spend with their
companions what they list; that Parents are worse then Infidels, if they will
not give maintenance unto their children. Thus the devil teaches them
Scripture, to defend and to maintain their sin.

This is no feigned reproof of youth in this age: I have heard these their
objections with mine ears, grievous to the heart of a godly Father, that sees
and observes, that the more indulgent he is to an evil Son, the more
lycentious liberty he takes: and the more bountifully he shows himself unto
him, the more he presumes, and the more he consumes.

Yet must not godly Parents desist from, or give over the means to win and
reclaim a refractarie Son, Parents may not give over to counsel their
children.
according to the counsel of the Preacher: In the morning sow thy seed, and
in the evening let not thine hand rest; for thou know not whether shall
prosper, this, or that, or whether both shall be a like good.

Parents must be alike instant and industrious at all times; in the morning,
even in the infanc^e of their children, they must begin to sow good seed: and
at noone, namely in their youth to continue it: and in the evening when they
are come to the estate of men, they must not give over. It may be God has
appointed this or that time, or this or that counsel, to take effect.

If nothing will prevail with him, leave him to the Law which God by Moses
has ordained, for a rebellious Son: namely, Deuteronomy. 21. 18
If any man has a son that is stubborn and disobedient, The ancient
punishment of an ungodly son.
which will not hearken to the voice of his Father, and to the voice of his
Mother, and they have chastened him, and he will not obey them; Then shall his
Father and his Mother take him, and bring him to the Elders of the City, and
shall say unto them This our Son is stubborn and disobedient, and will not
obey our admonition: then the men of the City shall stone him with stones unto
death.

If this necessary Law were executed at this day, youth would be more tractable
and obedient to their Parents. Many children for want of public punishment
grow rebellious.
And now, for want of some competent punishment, to be inflicted upon them,
they have no fear (many of them) neither of Parents, of God, or man. And
Parents (for the most part) are so doting over their children, that they will
neither themselves punish them, nor willingly suffer the Magistrate, until
they directly fall under the sword of Justice; and then there is howling, Late
lamentation of some parents.
weeping, sorrow, and heaviness, with wishes, Would God he had never been
borne.

The lenity of Parents, and liberty of Children, breed many inconueniencies in
a good and well governed Commonwealth. Nay, the liberty of youth of all sorts,
being well considered, cannot but be found a mischief where it is (as now in
this Kingdom) permitted; Evil youth a mischief to the commonwealth.
he that has but the meanest understanding, and is conversant among the
multitude, cannot but see it, and observe it.

Who sees not, that youth as soon as they are able to sin, conioyne
themselves with such as are more expert in sinning? And learn of them, all
manner of ungodliness, pride, drunkenness, whoredom, gaming, swearing,
blaspheming; And yet many silly Parents, wink so long at their impieties that
at length they see many times the glory of their children to come to shame. And
some good Parents would reform it in time, and cannot. Foolish mothers most
guilty of making ill children.
And many foolish Mothers are most guilty of their childrens too much liberty,
and sin; who, because they have borne them of their bodies (it may be have
given them suck of their breasts) they are so tender over them, as they must
want nothing that the fond Mother can shift for: As her breasts were open for
them when they were in their swaddling clothes; now their purses must be open,
to put them into every new fashion. The Son he must meet such, and such his
companions at such a gaming, or such a Tavern, or such a show: and it were a
shame for him, and discredit to his Parents, that he should go without money
in his purse, to spend as others do. And poor silly Parents, especially the
sottish Mother, will make means to supply his wantonness, till at length the
young nouice (turned Gentleman) proceeds swaggerer; thence raised to a degree
higher: takes the title Roarer, then turns he off all fear of Father,
Mother, and all authority. The poor Parents sitting sometimes sighing, for the
intolerable expense of their prodigal son; then again they smile, to
think, and to hear their flattering neighbors, to give such high
commendation of their son, a proper, comely, and well clad Gentleman, and like
to come to great preferment.

This is the beginning of an ungodly, All pareuts not to be condemned though
many are.
disobedient and stubborn son; and yet all parents that have a son of
vile, vicious and dissolute qualities, are not guilty of their sons
disobedience; as the father of the prodigal son was, who to fulfill the
wanton desire of his son, gave him a portion, without respect of the
bestowing of it well or ill: how he spent it, appears; viciously and ungodly,
whereof partly the father was guilty. As at this day, fathers and mothers are,
that feed their children with portions, wherewith they purchase often times
shame and confusion unto themselves, and grief and sorrow unto their parents.

Thou complainest of an unthrifty, stubborn and disobedient son; consider
how thou have bred him and brought him up: if thou have done thy duty toward
him, in training him as much as in thee lay, in the knowledge and fear of
God, and he has cast thy counsel behind his back, and kicked against thy
godly instructions, thou art clear, and his wickedness and destruction shall
fall upon himself.

But, if thou have been too indulgent and too favorable, A fearful example
of a father too indulgent, and children stubborn.
in restraining him from his wicked ways, remember what befell unto Elie the
Priest, and to his two wicked sons Hophnie and Phineas, whom God distroyed
in one day; and Elie their father hearing of their untimely death, fell
backward from his feate and brake his neck: a fearful example for a father,
that only used no other means of raistraining his sons, but only the
tender words; 1. Sam. 2. 24
Do no more so my sons, do no more so.

A wicked son of a good father, A wicked son comes commonly to a shameful
and fearful end.
may live long in his wicked course of life, but commonly he untimely perishes
and comes to a fearful end, as too many examples are manifested before our
eyes.

But lest a good man serving and fearing God truly, having a wicked and
vntamable son, to whom he has done all the godly duties of a father, in
bringing his son to goodness, and to a godly course of life, and cannot;
should be too much discouraged and cast down through sorrow and grief, that
he should be the father of such a son: let him but consider, that his son,
though wicked, is the creature of God, What godly parents should do, when they
have done their best duties to make their children good and cannot.
known unto him before he was formed in the womb; his beginning, course of
life, and end determined by God, and the means: and therefore when such a
father has done his uttermost godly endeavor, to make his son good by
counsel, and finds contrary effects of his hope; let him only pray for
him: The best and last duty, that a loving and well-wishing father can show
for the good of his best beloved son. If this work not the reformation of
his wicked child, he may cast off all sorrow and grief for that he cannot
reclaim him* and before the world he may justly disclaim him.

They therefore, A good father not to be taxt for an ungodly son.
that will tax and condeme such a father, for having such an ungodly person to
his son, are uncharitable, as long as the wickedness of his son, proceeds
not of any neglect or known error of the father.

Do we not understand, that most godly parents having two or more sons, of
equal education and equally instructed, that the one proves tractable,
virtuous, religious, fearing God, and another clean contrary?

Had not Izaak by his wife Rebecha, Good fathers may have wicked children.
two sons (borne twins) Esau and Iaakob, the one wicked, the other the
Elect of God? shall we think that Kayne (that Reprobate) was not as well
instructed in the fear of God by Adam his father, Genesis 4. 3.
as Abel was? yet the one a murderer, and the other a godly, religious and
mild man. Shall we think that David instructed not his son Absolon in the
fear of God, 2. Sam. 15.
though he became a rebel against his own father? And what shall we think
of Ismael the son of Abraham, Genesis 16. 12.
the father of the faithful? was it for want of divine instruction, that he
became a fierce and cruel man, whose hand was against every man, and every
man's hand against him?

Will any man be so injurious or so uncharitable, to judge or condemn these
godly parents for the wickedness of their children? does it not hereby
appear, that good men, notwithstanding all their care and diligence to make
them good, Wicked men have not always ungodly children.
may have wicked children? neither does it follow, that wicked men have always
ungodly children: It is God, who as he forms the bodies of good and bad in
the womb, so he frames the minds of such as he intends to make the vessels
of salvation, and gives them the means to become wise in him, religious and
faithful in him; yet yields he the liberty of his word equally alike to
both: but they have not both equal grace to embrace and to practice it alike.

Idolatrous Ahaz had religious Hezekiah: 2. King 16. ^ 3. 23.
good Hezekiah had wicked Manasses; 2. King. 20. 21. and 21. 18. and 22. and 23.
wicked Amon had godly Josiah; Josiah idolatrous Iehoahaz.

Infinite are the examples in all ages, Godly parents may have wicked, and
wicked parents good children.
showing that good men have had wicked children, and wicked fathers good
sons; that no man should presume upon the towardness, or despair of the
ungodly beginning of his children; but to commend both, to the goodness and
providence of God in faithful prayer; using the means, leaving the wicked to
God, in prayer for their reformation, and the godly to him, for continuance and
perseverance unto the end: in whose secret counsel it is determined what shall
be the end of them, that fear not God, nor reverence man.

A Prayer to be used of godly parents, for the reformation of ungodly and
disobedient children, and for patience; not overmuch to afflict themselves for
the stubbornness and disobedience of a wicked son.
O Gracious, merciful, powerful, and evermore loving Lord God, the Creator of
all mankind; to whom thou give, and into whom thou infusest diverse and
several portions of understanding, wit, wisdom and grace; and none by nature
can attain unto the least measure of these blessings but by thee: Fathers thou
have ordained to beget, and Mothers to conceive and bear fruit, to the
increase and multiplication of humane kind; but it is not left unto the power
of parents, to propagate grace in their seed.

Seeing then good Father, that thou have given us power to propagate their
earthly and carnal parts, (yet all formed by thee in the womb) and have
reserved unto thy self, the disposition of their minds and affections: So I
humbly pray and beseech thee, to dispose the inclination of them whom thou
have given me power to beget; and beget in them good and godly desires; reform
the ungodly life and conversation of that disobedient and vagodly son of mine,
whose behavior is much grievous unto me; and I do confess, that mine own
sins have provoked thee to anger against me, and thy displeasure appears,
in that he whom I received, in hope to be a comfort unto me, and the staff
of mine old age, is become, not only disobedient unto me, but as it were,
rebellious against thee and thy counsel.

Thou art a God righteous and absolutely holy, hating iniquity; and it cannot
be hid from thee, how I have neglected the training him up in thy fear: Yet
thou also know O Lord, that I have labored and endeavored by my best
counsel, to win him to the fear and service of thee; if it have been in
vain, thou have wisdom and power to supply in him, what is defective in me
to give him.

I have endeavored to make him to know thee and to walk in thy ways; but he
has contemned mine instructions, and cast my counsel behind his back: he
will not understand, that thou art a God of power to punish him, or a God of
mercy to comfort him, if he return from his sins, to the obedience of thee.

Lord, it is only in thee to reclaim him as thou did the prodigal son,
whom thou vouchsafedst to receive unto mercy, after his long going astray;
whereby it appears, that no man erreth so far, but thou can recall him; O
recall this mine erroneous son, reduce him into the fear of thy great name,
and make him one of the sheepfolde of thy Saints.

He is the work of thine own hands O Lord, though I wretched man begat him in
corruption, his mother conceived him in sin, and bare him in misery; yet are
these no hinderance to the work of thy grace in him: For what is, or has bin
the man, that has not had the like corrupt beginning? thine own begotten
Son excepted.

Enoch that walked uprightly before thee, Abraham the father of the faithful,
Eliah and John Baptist, and all thine Elect vessels came by nature of the same
corrupt seed, as has this (though) my ungodly son.

Thou were pleased to sanctify these forefathers of ours, whom if thou had
left unto themselves, they had been as this my son, ready to lift up their
heels against their parents and thee.

Lord, give thou grace, wisdom, faith and obedience, unto this my son:
these are thine, and only thine to give.

I, indeed have been, as the hand to give him (from thee) food for his body,
whereby, by thy blessing he has been corporally sustained and grown strong
in the flesh, though weak in spiritual graces, which are not in me to instill
into him, no^ bestow upon him.

He is indeed of the poluted seed of offending Adam: yet may thou be
pleased, and I humbly pray thee to accept him into thy favor; instruct him in
thy fear, indue him with heavenly knowledge, and a perfect faith in thee; and
guide him by thy grace, in a godly, religious and sincere conversation; that he
may cease to do evil, and cleave unto that which is good; then shall he
serve thee, and I shall praise thee for his reformation and salvation.

Let neither his sins nor mine O Lord, any more provoke thee to anger, lest
thy severe judgments should fall upon him, and shame and grief upon us his
parents: but his repentance shall be our comfort, and we shall rejoice in his
conversion, and not only we his parents, but all the godly shall rejoice at
his return into the spiritual Society of thy Saints.

Grant it gracious Lord God, for thy Christ's sake, whose righteousness,
accept as his righteousness, and thy sons merits for mine and my sons many
sins. Amen.

Lord increase in him the holy fear of thy great name, faith and obedience
unto thee, and give me grace with patience and prayer, to wait his holy
reformation.
A persuasion to patience, in the crosses that often fall between man and
wife, fit to be considered of married folks for their mutual comfort; with
counsel to such as intend to mary.
THere is no man or woman fit for marriage estate, They that mary ought to know
why marriage was instituted.
that is ignorant, and consider not of the causes for which that holy estate
was instituted of God: But now in this latter age, many rashly enter into it,
neither knowing the causes rightly, nor use it reverently, which is the
occasion of many breaches, between man and wife.

In former times men and women were only married; Where formerly men and women
were only married, now boys and gerles.
but now boys and gerles, that only feel by natures instinct, that marriage
is a pleasant life, and are only led by that law of lust, to run and rush
headlong into that sacred estate, without fear or wit; like a barde horse into
a battle: not foreseeing nor considering the dangers and troubles they run
into; which holy estate ought not to be undertaken, but with highest reverence
unto, and in the fear of God the author of it.

Many only consider, that God created man male and female, the man for the
woman, the woman for the man; and consider not the sacred use, Carnal respects
in marriage commonly lead men and women to mary.
nor the institution of marriage: they look not into the beginning how God
created man, and the woman of the man, to the end they two should by this
conjunction become one, and of one heart and one mind in two bodies: they can
peradventure say, that indeed, the woman was made of the ribbe of the man; but
that, that bone became flesh of his flesh, and by that means they two became
one, they cannot conceive; and yet will adventure, without either examination
or consideration of the danger to take a wife, and the woman a husband; their
least duties to God, not learned of them at all nor considered.

Hasty marriages, Hasty marriages bring hasty repentance.
bring commonly as hasty repentance: not that praise worthy repentance for
sin, but for the sorrow their unadvised marriage has brought them unto;
rashly undertaken without asking counsel of God, whence do spring all the
troubles, iarres, brawles and discontentes between the man and the wife, thus
unadvisedly coupled together.

But man and wife conjoined together in the Lord, The true course how man and
wife should conioyne themselves in holy marriage.
namely where they only aim to live together in his holy fear, and
humbleness of heart in a lively faith, crave his holy favor and fatherly
direction, to guide and govern them; and after due reverence unto the Lord,
they yield mutual and godly love one to another, with due obedience to God;
and after, one to the other, laboring to keep peace, unity, and concord
between themselves, in ayding, helping, cherishing and sustaining each other,
in poverty as in riches, in sickness as in health, and be of like godly
affection one toward another, with daily mutual prayers to God, that he will
give a blessing unto them: they may assure themselves to live in plenty and
peace; and whatsoever crosses, troubles or afflictions befall them, they
encourage one the other in the fear of God, to bear them together with equal
patience; and whatsoever blessing they receive at the hands of God, they
together give thanks for the same.

These married folks think it not sufficient (as many do) to join hand in
hand, Not joining of hands but hearts in the fear of God.
a token of their entire affections one to the other; but heart with heart in
the fear of God, never to be disioyned, until death divide them.

But how can hearts be truly joined together, that are of contrary
dispositions, as many prove to be, that make show of a godly loves beginning?
can bitter and sweet? can love and hatred? can joy and grief dwell together?
and how can hearts contrarily affected comfort one the other in the Lord? can a
truly loving wife rejoice to see her husband grieve? Hearts contrarily
affected can never be joined together in the Lord.
or can a religiously kind husband sing seeing his wife lament? will they not
rather enquire the cause of each others sadness, and seek the means to
remove it? their joy and sorrow should be one, as they are one, they should
bear equally one another burden, and never to be bitter one toward the
other.

It is against the nature of man to hurt wittingly or wilfully his own flesh,
but rather to use all means to perserue it: and therefore as man and wife by
this sacred conjunction, are of twain, made as it were one entire body,
though disiunct in person; how can the one seek to hurt the other, but they
must both feel the smart?

Discord and dislike between man and wife, Discord between man and wife a
great cross.
is a cross of all crosses, a grief of all griefs, and a misery above all
miseries unto either party fearing God: for, as peace and concord between
them, builds and establishes the house, so quarrels and brawles turn it
vpside down.

Peace and love twixt man and wife, makes bitter waters sweet; but hatred and
iarres bring best things out of taste.

The good agreement between man and wife, Eccl. 25. 1.
is one of the three things commended by God and man, and the contrary
condemned of both. If the love and unity of brethren be so sweet and
pleasant a thing, The love of man and wife a most precious ointment.
as that David compares it to the most precious ointment; what may be thought
of the mutual love and godly agreement between a man and his wife, when as
either of them is to forsake father and mother, brother and sister, and all
friends to betake them each to other?

A miserable thing it is, and (above all other former times in this our age) to
be lamented; to see and observe, and many times to feel the discordes and
quarrels, that arise between the husband and the wife, the one snarling at the
other, as dogs about a bone: Tri^^ing things and matters of (...) ^^^ment,
often times (...) against other, Small matters in these days breeds quarrels
between man and wife.
in words unseemly, to vpbrayde, and very vnciuily to check and tax each
other, to the great offense to God, the Author of that holy conjunction, to the
great disturbance of the whole family, and to the evil example of others.

Who is it that has not heard (or been personally acquainted with) the
complaints of diverse married folks of both sexes? Many are the complaints
between man and wife.
The man exclaiming against the woman, the woman against the man; As if they
were not only, not of two, made one flesh by that sacred and mystical union:
but that they were of two contrary kinds; the man a Tiger, the woman a she
Bear.

There is no discord* to that between man and wife; nor harder to be appeased,
where in deed there should be no love, to the love between man and wife, nor
harder to be broken. But no marvel, though it thus fall out now in this last
age; When there was but one couple in the world, one accused the other, much
more now.
for when there were but two; one man, and one woman in the earth, did not one
accuse the other before God? Genesis 3. And shall we think, that he that seduced
them, will be less diligent to make dissension, between man and wife now? He
tells the man: Thy wife is of a stout stomach she has a tart and cursed tongue:
And suggests unto the woman; Thy husband is a froward man. How can thou
brook him? Thus labors he to set enmity between man and wife, as God set
enmity between man and him in the beginning.

And such is humane frailty, as it is easily moved to things evil, as to
strife and debates, without much setting on, but hardly to peace and concord,
by best counsel.

The stronger should bear with the weaker, and the weaker should subject her
self to him she ought to obey: but we see many times, and among many married
couples, that this superiority and inferiority is become preposterous; A
preposterou^ government where the foot guides the head.
the foot would either guide or control the head, and the head must give way
to the heel, or else the head shall have little rest.

Need we seek Palestine, for proud Iesabels; for enticing Dalilahs; for
mocking Michols; Scolding Zipporahs; lustful Rahels? or Egypt for wanton wives
like Potiphars? They are pitifully and plentifully found nere home.

The woman in deed is said to be first in the transgression; and the
Scriptures in many places, The Scripture condemns the woman to be more apt to
give offense then the man.
testify that the woman is most proan^ to give cause of offense; yet not to be
taken so generally, as if there were no women, as worthy commendation as
worthiest men: Neither are we so to justify men in general, as if there were
none, to be in this point condemned as well as the women: for either may give
equal cause of offense to other; And the woman to complain as well of the
man, The man not excused.
as the man of the woman: but the woman the weaker.

Have not many good women foolish and sottish Nabals, brainsick Lamechs, some
lascivious Rubins, others furious and contentious Ism^els, hating and
quarelling with every man, and every man hating and disdaining them? Some poor
women have drunkards, some spendthrift-Gamesters, Wives often cumbred with idle
and unthrifty husbands.
some following Harlots, and the like: this must needs enforce the weak woman
to speak: yet, be her reproof never so fair and gentle, does it not
oftentimes beget in such ungodly husbands, cursing, swearing, railing,
reuiling, and sometimes blows? Some women also are so self conceited of their
own wit or worthiness, as do the husband what he can, he cannot be free
from brawles, Contentious women drives their husbands often out of the house.
that many times drives him out of his own house. Her contentious words, are
like the continual dropping of a rotten house, wherein a man can never lie
dry. It is better to dwell in a little corner of the house in peace, Pro. 27.
15.
then in a Palace with such a contentious woman. Cap. 21. 9.


Now then thou man, that thus complainest of the evil of thy wife, and thou
woman that thus exclaymest upon the distasteful course of thy husband. Take
either of you a strict view, and seriously* examine your own several* ways,
Man and wife ought mutually to examine themselves before they reprove each
other.
and be not partial. Be not so quick sighted, to prye into the faults of thy
wife, and to rest blind in observing thine, own. And thou wife, be not so
clamorous against thy husbands imperfections; and yet to flatter thy self as
if thou need not to reform thine own errors: and then, as the accusers of
the woman taken in Adultery, and brought to Christ, were willed, if they were
guiltless, to cast stones at her; and being all in their own consciences
faulty, in as great sins; they became silent, and secretly departed. So, no
doubt, if thou man be innocent, thou may justly complain against thy wife.
And thou woman, if thou be faultlesse, thou may lawfully ^axe thy husband:
but, if it appear to either of your consciences, that you are both faulty; be
both silent, and pass by one another infirmities, and be at peace.

But here is the mischief: the wife iustifies her self; she has done what
she can to please her husband: but he is still so froward, so testie; and so
choleric, as she were better to be out of her life, Man and wife must be
equally content with their lot.
then to live with him. Thou woman, thou tookest him, to love him, and to dwell
with him, were he better or worse. And thou must now take thy lot (being hard)
as well with patience, as thou could embrace it (if it were most pleasi^g)
with delight. And thou man, that think thou have the frowardest wife of any
man in the world; remember she was of thine own choice; Thou tookest her for
good, if she be become worse then she was, thou have been an unprofitable
guide unto her: thou have bin either too obsequious unto her, in giving her too
much her will, or too bitter unto her, procuring her hatred.

The humors of many men in the beginning, are, to be so fond, as their
daliance cannot be sufficient in private, but they must discover it in
public; a seeming pleasant beginning, Many seem fond in the beginning, that
quickly grow cold.
yet often presageth a sorrowful ending. No violent thing continues long: and
therefore, although love be the most commendable among all other graces, yet if
this kind of love be too seruent, it lasts not long; it is but as a morning
dew; as was the love of Amnon toward Thamar: 2. Sam. 13.
But where true love is in deed, it springs from an higher fountain, which
never dries up. That love between man and wife, 1. Pet. 4. 8.
that begins, continues, and ends in the fear of God, couers the faults that
each may commit against other, and keeps all iarres, quarrels, and
controversies, out of the house.

But, a grief of griefs it is to see, many, and many times men and women to
come together, in such seeming sweet embracements, as if they were above
measure affected one toward the other. And yet stay but a little while, and
you see a cloud of controversies fall between them; and then their love turns
to hatred, their former mutual kindness, to crosses and curses.

And whence arises this sudden distraction, Unequal matches sildome prosper
long.
but originally from Satan, who moves, and makes marriages, as far as in
him lies, between unequals, which may import many inconvenient matches, not
made in the fear and reverence of God? great inequality of years, and much
difference in estates, cause often disparagements.

Houses and riches are the inheritance of Fathers: Pro. 18. 22. 19. 14.
but a prudent and virtuous wife, Men and women ought to pray to God to direct
them, before they conclude marriage.
is the gift of God; And, he that finds such a one, rec^iueth a favor from
the Lord. But how can any man think that God will bestow such a favor upon
him without asking? Abraham's servant that was but put in trust to get a wife
for Isaac his Masters son; went not rashly, and as the proverb is, hand
over head in this weighty business, as to take the first that came to hand,
Genesis 24. 12.
as many do, that conclude the match at the first sight: But he prayed unto
the Lord, to send him good speed in the choice; and waited the Lords
providence; and besought him to show him certain probable tokens, that the
maid Rebecka, was she whom God had appointed for Isaac.

That business which is begun with faithful Prayer to God, seldom or never
succeeds ill. And above all other earthly occasions, The choice of a wife or
husband, is a matter of great moment, lightly regarded.
there is none of higher importance, then the choice of a wife, or a husband,
either of them being an assured cross, or a comfort, as long as both of them
do live: And for want of this heavenly beginning (faithful Prayer to God) it
many times comes to a helli^h ending; which may be a motive to stir up men
and women, intending to entertain this holy estate, to crave direction, and
wisdom from God, both for their choice, and peace in that estate.

And because many already coupled together, seem discontent, and afflicted in
mind, at their mutual crosses, now past reuocation; They must be content to
make a virtue of necessity: namely, to undergo the burden, that the one
unkindly lays upon another, and to pray either that God will ease it, or give
them patience to bear it.

A Prayer fit to be said by man and wife together, or by either of them, at any
time in private.
O Lord our GOD, most merciful and loving Father in Jesus Christ: vouchsafe,
as it has pleased thee of thy great mercy, to conioyne us man and wife
together, according to thy holy institution in the beginning; So let our hearts
be truly conjoined unto thee, in a lively faith and true obedience: And so
frame our affections one toward another, as there appear no cause of breach,
of our sincere mutual duties to the offense of thee. But by thy blessing we
may (as long as we live) endeavor to preserve and maintain peace and unity
between our selves, being a thing pleasing unto thee.

Endue us both Lord with thy grace and heavenly spirit, that as thou have by
thy holy ordinance, of ^wayne, now made us one: so our hearts, affections, and
enclinations, may be ever one, not according to our natural dispositions, but
answerable to thy blessed commandments, that we give no cause of offense each
to other: and that we may ever endeavor to continue perfect, and mutable in
our mutual love, which we by nature cannot do: for we are corrupt, and
sinful of our selves, and always most enclinable to forbidden things.

We have also, O Lord thou know, a subtle and malicious adversary, who
strives to cross in us all good desires, and to pervert our best duties; to
raise discordes, debates, quarrels, and as much as in him is, to break the band
of fidelity, which we made each to other before thee.

He began thou know O Lord, with the first couple Adam and Heuah. It was he
that seduced the woman, and she by his means betrayed the man; and so
subverted their blessed estate of innocence, and made them subject to all
kinds of miseries, and their posterities: whereof we thy poor servants are
feeble, and sinful members.

And as he began in malice and subtilty, to betray our first Parents; So is he
always busy, to sow the seeds of debate and strife between us. But Lord,
prevent, him, and assise us by thy power, that we may have power to resist him,
and all his suggestions and tentations. Then, as thou (Lord) have joined us
together; nothing shall separate our mutual loves, but Death.

And forasmuch (Lord) as this estate (though in it self honorable) may bring
upon us many troubles, crosses, and afflictions incident to marriage estate in
the world: yet by thy fatherly blessing, we shall be able to undergo them with
patience, or to avoid them with thankfulness.

It is not in us, in our wisdoms, strength, or policies, to prevent or avoid
the infinite troubles and vexations, which this estate brings with it:
Therefore we humbly pray thee, O Lord, to endue us with wisdom from above;
that whatsoever thou have determined, shall befall us; be it poverty or plenty,
sickness or health, weal or woe, we may embrace the one with patience, the
other with thanks; And in both, support us in thy love; guide us by thy grace,
protect us by thy power, and provide for us in thy providence.

If poverty or want assail us, supply our necessities; if riches increase,
make us thankful, and alienate our hearts, from too much love of them; If
sickness or any corporal infirmity ceaze us, be thou our Physician to cure
us; If health continue, leave us not in security, but give us watchful hearts,
to wait the time of thy visitation; If the fruits of our bodies increase,
increase to us the means to sustain them, both with corporal and spiritual
necessaries.

And prepare us for the day of our departure out of this mortal life; and in
the mean time so season us in all heavenly and divine knowledge, with true
faith and perfect obedience unto thee, as that day may be unto us, the first
day of our everlasting Sabbath.

Be thou also we humbly beseech thee, O Lord, a continual guide unto us in
our calling: Bless unto us, and under our hands whatsoever we endeavor to
perform, in thy fear, and let thy blessing be upon all that appertains unto
us.

If enemies seek to molest us, to trouble us, or to hurt us, prevent them of
their evil devices; and grant that we give no cause of offense to any, nor
be stirred up to revenge upon every light occasion; but upon all occasions to
leave the revenge to thee; And that we may seek to maintain peace with all
men; to love our neighbors, to comfort the comfortless, and (as far as thou
shall be pleased to enable us) to h^lpe, succor, and relieve the poor and
needy; and to do unto other men, as we desire other men to do unto us: To
guide and govern our family in thy fear; to frequent the places where thy
holy word is preached, seeking the Kingdom of Jesus Christ; and to do all
other holy duties, according to thy will, unto our lives end, Amen.

O Lord increase our faith, and our mutual love one toward another.
How the Husband ought to behave himself toward his discontented Wife.
IT is before showed: and there is none that is, or ought to be (of either sex)
ignorant, that the man and the wife are of two distinct persons, made one
entire mystical body: The man is the woman's head, and the woman a principal
member of that head.
The man the head of the woman, and the woman a principal member of that head,
whom she ought to obey.

In the head, is, or ought to be reason, wisdom, judgment, and all other
gifts, whereby it may rightly guide, and direct the inferior members, and the
whole body.

Therefore thou man that have taken a wife, and made her a member of thine own
body, thou art bound to love her with a perfect love, according to the counsel
of the counsel of the Apostle, who spoke by the spirit of God. Ephe. 5. 33.
T^he love of a man toward the wife, consists in comforting her.
Let every man love his wife as himself. And this love consists in
cherishing her, in giving her competent maintenance in defending her from
danger, as thou thy self desire to cherish, maintain, and defend thine own
person. Thou must dwell with her, thou must do unto her all such duties, as
that holy estate whereunto you have been both called, and as the faith
plighted each to other requires. And thou husband, think not that because she
is the weaker, and made subject unto thee, 1. Pet. 3. 7.
that thou therefore should neglect her, or tiranize over her; but to be so
much the more tender over her, by how much she is weaker. Thou must love her,
as Christ loves the Church (whereof thou art a member) and gave his life for
it.

And think not, A man ought not to leave his wife, because of her in^rmities.
that because thy wife has some infirmities, that therefore it is lawful for
thee, to loathe her, or leave her; for, if Christ should so deal with his
Church, or with thee, a member of it, as to cast it, or thee off, for the
blemishes of it, who could be loved of him?

Let not therefore every fault that she commits in her weakness, cause thee
to be bitter unto her, in words, gesture, or deeds; Bitterness may move the
meekest woman.
for by this means, thou may cause the meekest woman to become like one of
the furies: But dwell with her, as a man of knowledge, in passing by her
infirmity; for, if thou love her, thou will not observe (at least reprove) all
that she does, through weakness, against thy liking.

If her faults be wilful, and in thine opinion gross and intolerable, such
as by nature thou seem not to be able to bear; Show not in thy hastines a
more gross infirmity, in being too furious: How the Husband ought to behave
himself toward his Wife.
but reprove her with meekness; admonish her gently; Let thy corrections be
comfortable counsel; strike her not, for it is the greatest reproach in the
world, for a man to beat his wife: And it is the way in deed (though she
loved thee before) to cause her to hate thee. And what gaynest thou by thy
severity, but a heap of coals upon thine own head?

If thou can reclaim her by counsel, A man's greatest commendation, is, to
win his wife with meekenes.
thou show great wisdom: If thou can bear with her faults, so they be
not capital against God, thou shall be commended of all good men for thy
patience.

If neither reproof, nor counsel, nor conniuencie, will bring her to obey
thee, yet art thou not to leave her: But consider seriously with thy self,
whether the cause, or some great part of it be not in thee, whereby she is
moved to speak, or do that, whereat thou take offense.

Art thou not a Gamester? A husband must thus examine himself.
art thou not Prodigal of thy purse? art thou not idle in thy calling? art
thou not often in Tauernes, Alehouses, in lewd and suspicious companies,
consuming that upon strangers, which should maintain thine estate and family,
when peradventure thy wife and children languish in penury at home? have thou
not, or do thou not purpose to make away some things that thy wife brought
thee (goods or lands) against her will?

If any of these occasions move her, Men most faulty are aptest to abuse their
wives.
thou have reason to bear with her, and more reason to reform thy self: for,
commonly men thus given over to these ungodly courses, are most apt to abuse
their wives: if thou be innocent and free from these, and thy wife through her
uncivil and immodest carriage toward thee do abuse thee, and neither counsel
nor kindness, gentle entreaty, nor seuerest threats will calm her, thou
must sit down by it in silence, and say, It is my cross and I will bear it.

The best course thou can take to remove this inconvenience, is for thee to
give good example, How a husband should behave him self, that has an unkind
wife.
to live virtuously, to serve God, and to pray with her, and for her, to
repent thee of thy sins unfeignedly, and suffer these domestical and household
crosses patiently. Be not wilful nor too wise in thine own conceit, as to
think thou can tame thy wife more by tyranny then tractability; and search,
and peradventure thou shall find thine own faults as great or greater then
hers: If thou could as well see thine own as thou obseruest hers, thou
would acknowledge thine own sins has caused her to become a trouble unto
thee: reform therefore what is amiss in thee, and thou shall find a
comfortable issue of thy good endeauours and prayer.

A Prayer to be said often of a man, who has a wife of refractarie conditions.
O Gracious Lord God, merciful and euer-louing Father in Jesus Christ, who
have the disposing of all hearts, the working and settling of all good
affections in man and wife, the one toward the other! Thou art the Father of
all that love thee; the keeper and helper of all that come unto thee in a
lively faith, who receive comfort of thee in whatsoever trouble or affliction.

I humble my self before thee, and pray thee in the name of Jesus Christ, to
pardon and to forgive me my sins, the ground of all my troubles, the greatest
whereof O Lord, I find to be the unquietness of my wife and her infirmities:
thou gave her me, and I took her for a helper; but thou see she shows
her self rather a cross then a comfort unto me, to the grief of my heart;
and the more, by reason we offend thee by our contentions.

Lord, consider her weakness and her infirmities, and give her wisdom and
grace to reform them.

The corruption of nature O Lord, is strong in us both: in her to commit things
grievous unto me; in me too great and unadvised reproof of her: Lord,
vouchsafe unto us both thy holy Spirit; work in us conformity and obedience
to thy will, and patience to bear one the others weakness.

I cannot Lord, excuse or clear my self of deserving thy just displeasure
toward me, by reason of mine own sins; but must and do confess my self
worthily crossed by her, that should have bin my comfort: for how can I expect
obedience of her that is by nature weak; when I my self that should show
more strength, obey not thee?

O Lord, reform in me whatsoever thou see imperfect; then may thou in
mercy be pleased to reform her.

We came not together Lord, without thy providence! we were conjoined by thee,
and by thee commanded to love and to cherish one the other; wherein as we have
both come short of our duties through our frailties; so we both feel the
bitterness of the breach of our duties each to other which thou have
commanded: O take from me Lord, whatsoever just cause she may object against
me, in defense of her pretended discontentments; and season her heart O Lord,
with meekness, humbleness, patience, peace and love.

Let neither of our natural infirmities O Lord, nor Satan's practice and
malice, move or make any more contentions, quarrels or debates betwixt us: but
as thou have made us by thine holy ordinance one, so let our loves, minds and
affections be one; that we may henceforth live lovingly, peaceably and
religiously, in thy faith, fear and obedience; and truly serving of thee, as
long as we both shall live. Amen.

Lord, encrese my faith, and send us quietness, peace and love for ever more.
How the wife ought to behave her self toward her husband, though he be
faulty and hard to be pleased.
THe complaints of husbands of their discontents, Wives complaints are more
common then husbands.
proceeding from the supposed evil of their wives, are not seen so common, as
are the clamours of wives against their unthrifty and unkind husbands: yet it
may be, if they were equally balanced, there would be no great difference in
the weight; but that, commonly husbands have more privileges over their wives,
being (...) become wise in thee, and righteous before thee; not trusting in a
seeming and outward and verbal holiness; but never to rest satisfied, until
I find the effectual working thereof in my soul through thy holy Spirit; and
an assurance through faith, that my sins and my former neglect, through the
merits and mediation of my Savior Christ, according to thy promises in him, be
freely pardoned and forgiven me.

Thou have taught me O Lord, to pray, that I may do thy will here in earth,
as thy will is done in heaven; and yet such is the corruption of my will, that
it seems to strive to prefer it self before thy will; and by this untamed
and perverse will of mine, I have done all that I have hetherunto done, as it
were to cross thy will, although I have verbally prayde, as thou likewise have
taught me, Not to be led in temptation: I have not only yielded to every
temptation offered to move me to sin, but have sought many (and many times)
occasions and opportunities to sin; in so much as I have turned those blessed
Petitions which thou have taught me to make unto thee, for my reformation and
consolation, into mere wantonness and sin.

O heavy is thy wrath, and severe are thy judgments due unto me for these my
transgressions and wicked deseruings: I could not avoid thy severe sentence of
utter condemnation, were there not mercy with thee, above thy displeasure: and
had I not a Mediator with thee, and such a powerful and prevailing Advocate,
as can work peace with thee for me when thou art angry; what should become of
me? In him therefore O my God (worthily offended with me) I fall down before
thy footstool in his name, for whose sake thou have promised to hear most
grievous sinners, and to pardon greatest offenders; and the greater the sins
are which thou forgiuest, the greater appears thy mercy: my sins are
great, yet far greater are thy mercies: yet Lord, I have not therefore the
more presumed (upon thy mercy) to commit sin, or to omit my duty, in
walking more religiously and uprightly before thee then I have done. Consider
Lord, that corruption has seduced me, and Satan deluded me, and now I find
that I have gone astray, and gladly would I now return unto thee, never to
fall back again (assisted by thy grace,) and therefore Lord, extend the
Scepter of thy loving favor toward me, in token of thy reconciliation with
me; so shall my heart within me (now cast down for fear of thy judgments)
rejoice and be glad in thee; my soul shall cleave unto thee, and therefore
Lord, cast the cancelled Bill of my sins out of thy hands into my heart, as an
acquittance for all my sins, purged through the blood of that immaculate
Lamb Christ Jesus, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all honor and
praise for ever.

Lord evermore increase my faith.
A comfortable conclusion, showing the benefit of afflictions, to the end we
may bear them in what nature or kind soever they befall us, with the more
resolute and godly patience.
IT is before observed, that God exercises all his children with one cross or
affliction or another; not all and every one alike, Crosses that men suffer
here are infinite.
neither in weight, measure or number, which to express in particular, is
impossible, for they are without number: yet the greatest and most principal
are before remembered, as a preparatiue for every child of God to look for
them, and to settle them selves to undergo them with patience, when they come:
for every child of God may be assured, sooner or later to taste of some of
them; and that when one trouble is past, to prepare himself for another; for
commonly when one cross is gone another comes. Why God afflicts his children
here.
God will not leave his children idle, and to live in carnal security here,
lest they should forget him, and so turn his favor into wantonness.

Therefore says David, Psalm. 42. 7.
As one deep calls another deep by the noise of the waters, One trouble
calls for another
so one affliction calls for another. Sin calls for sickness, sickness
for poverty, poverty for enemies, enemies for contempt, vexation and
slander. If thou have neither sickness, poverty, enemies, nor contempt; yet
sin thou have, which calls also for disobedience in thy children,
disquietnes in thy wife, falsehood in thy servants, loss of goods, death of
thy virtuous children, or thy loving wife; these are commonly reputed crosses,
and who is free from them all?

Be assured if thou be the true child of God, one, or some, or all these will
visit thee by turns. Psalm. 40. 12.
Innumerable, troubles says David, have compassed me about on all sides, Gods
children must suffer here.
and that is the condition of Gods dearest Saints, here to suffer affliction on
all sides, and to be exercised with temptations of diverse sorts. The servant
is not above his Lord; Ioh. 15. 20.
if they have persecuted me, says Christ, they will also persecute you: if
Christ had trouble here, so must we.

As Christ through many troubles and persecutions came to glory, so must every
of his Elect drink of the same cup: Through many troubles, they must enter
into the Kingdom of heaven. He that will live religiously and in the fear of
God, must look for trials and troubles in the world, The godly must look for
trials.
and continual temptations of Satan, to draw him to sin, that by his sins
he may offend God, that if it were possible God might forsake him.

The most godly have many sins, If we sin we shall be punished.
and sin is the cause of all troubles, as appears by that which is said
before; and if we sin, shall we think we shall not be punished? though not
as the merely wicked in Gods hot dipleasure; but in love, and the punishments
may seem alike with that of the wicked, but their ends not alike.

Wherefore then should a man (fearing God) be sorrowful for his afflictions?
Iam. 3. 39. 40.
seeing he is thereby occasioned to search and to try his ways, Afflictions
are not the cause of sorrow but sin that procure them.
that finding himself guilty of disobedience to God, he may the more speedily
return unto him, lifting up his heart and his hands to him and say, I have
sinned and rebelled against thee, therefore do thou worthily punish me.

Fools, says David, by reason of their trangressions, and because of their
iniquities are afflicted: and is not every man that fears not God, Every man
that fears not God is a transgressing fool.
in the rank of David's fools? nay, who is so righteous, that has not
committed folly by sinning? and who then can be free from affliction? If God
should not correct us her^ for our sins, he could not but reserve us for
destruction hereafter; for such is the vileness of sin, and so odious to
God, as he never lets it go unpunished in Gods dearest Saints here for a
little space, and the obstinate hereafter for ever: therefore better to suffer
chastisement here for a moment, then to be here free, and hereafter perish for
ever: better to be corrected in the world, then to be condemned with the world.

And we must consider, that as we seem and find our selves endued with a
greater measure of guiftes and graces then some other men: so we must think,
that God will try these graces in us, God will try the graces and gifts he
gives us by afflictions.
and the power and virtue of them by afflictions and troubles here; that
through our patient suffering, we may be known to be what we would be reputed
to be; for, the wicked commonly come not in to such calamities as the children
of God do, unless by their wilful running into miseries and dangers by their
impious actions: but the godly are not so much agents to procure, as patients
to suffer their afflictions: they are tried as silver from the dross by the
fire of tribulation, to make them perfect.

Yet such is Gods great mercy and favor toward his own, God proportions our
afflictions according to our faith.
as although he punish them, he proportions their afflictions according to
their strength, and their strength according to the weight of their correction;
giving them grace to possess their souls in patience in greatest crosses, and
causes them to rejoice in them, through the hope of the eternal weight of
glory promised.

Seeing then, They are in an ill case that suffer no troubles.
that all Gods children are to suffer in one kind or another: and they that
live at their liberty and in the pleasure; of sin without trouble, in what a
lamentable case are they, that do not only not fall into like affliction, but
boast of their freedom from all kind of crosses?

Are there not some that say, I was never troubled by Satan, I never felt any
of his temptati^^? Another, I have never (...) sick in all my life? A third, I
know no enemy that I have? A fourth, I want nothing, my corn and Cattle
prosper, and I have enough to maintain me during my life? Another boastes of
his thriftie children; Another of his beautiful buxum and loving wife.

Do not many silly men thus foolishly ^latter themselves, Men that are not
afflicted ^latter themselves that God loves them.
and think that God deals thus favorably with them above others, as an
argument of his love toward them, far above those that are many ways
afflicted? but let them consider it well, and they shall find the contrary;
for, if God indeed loved them, he would assuredly correct them: for he
chastises every son that he receives; for every man is a sinner, and for
sin he corrects.

Therefore have such men as are free from troubles, They that have no troubles
may suspect themselves
greater cause by far to suspect themselves to be out of Gods favor, then to
boast of his love; and to think rather, that they are under the power and
slavery of Satan; and that the world and the pleasures of the ^lesh have
bewitched them: for where Satan is silent, he suffers men to sleep securely:
he is loath to trouble them, out of their secure slumber; And he is content
that the world should smile upon them, and to give them all sensual content,
never desiring to cross them. And this makes many poor souls, falsely to
imagine, that they are here even in Paradise, when the devil has them
Captives.

But, when it pleases the Lord of his great mercy, to alter their carnally
pleasing condition; and to give them some bitter potion, As long as Satan
finds men to run on in security, he troubles them not.
or some precious eye-sal^e, to make them see the danger they stand in, by
awaking them by his correcting rod; And they begin to be sensible of their
miserable estate, and to incline to repentance: Then shall they find Satan
(before silent as a Lamb) roaring as a Lion, bereft of his prey, laboring by
all infernal and ^lattering means, to retain them still. And where before he
seemed not to appear in his likeness, in using any apparent tentations,
finding them already sufficiently chayned unto him: seeing now his Captives,
like to break loose, and to escape; They shall find he will vomte out a flood
of hellish tentations after them, to bring them back again; and will leave no
means unattempted, neither inward tentations, nor outward allurements, nor the
enclinations of a man's own will, to overthrow them: And where before he was
contented, they should be free from troubles and afflictions; he will now
work all the means he can, to load them with all kinds of miseries; not to
make them better, but, as much as in him lies, to drive them to despair in
God: And (as Jobs wife, by his instigation said to her husband) to curse God
and dye.

So that their case is dangerous that live securely free from Satan's malice, A
dangerous case to live securely.
from feeling of their sins, and from worldly troubles; and happy are they
that suffer here under the gentle hand of God, and according to his will.

Satan's tentations, The afflictions of the godly are not strange
and greatest afflictions, are no new and strange things, but unto them only
that have long been lulled in the lap of all kinds of pleasures: When crosses
in deed light upon them, they think them strange; but unto the dearest
children of God, they are, and have been ever familiar; and Gods Elect Saints
have been ever companions in afflictions.

Therefore St. Peter, to the comfort of all afflicted, to the end of the world,
says, Dearly beloved, 1. Pet. 4. 12. 13.
think it not strange, concerning the fiery trial, which is amongst you to
try you: as though some strange thing were come unto you: but rejoice, in as
much as ye are pertakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall
appear, ye may be glad and rejoice. Therefore let every man comfort himself
in his proper affliction; And consider well the course that Almighty God takes
with afflicted men, be they punished in his anger in justice, or chastined in
his mercy: The natural man makes no difference, between just judgments, and
fatherly corrections.
the natural man makes no distinction between just punishments, and fatherly
corrections; he thinks the chastisements of Gods children, to be of the like
nature, as are his just judgments upon the wicked. And therefore makes no
difference, but concludes all under one and the same sentence of wicked men,
because they are alike punished: and in deed it is hard for a man to judge his
own; much more hard, to determine of another man's deseruings before God; who
often times keeps the godly still in trouble, and eases the wicked: which
makes the carnal man to think the wicked to be in Gods favor, and the
child of God in deed, not to be beloved of him.

But mark well the purpose of God, Great difference in the wisdom of God, in
easing the godly and the wicked
in thus relieuing, comforting, and easing a wicked man of his troubles! think
not it is in his love, but in that he observes in him a mind inclined to some
stubborn opposition against his commands, which he would put in execution,
but that his crosses and afflictions hinder him: As Pharaoh, being afflicted,
entreated Moses to pray for him; and being eased thereof, he forgot his
affliction. So the children of Israel, when they rebelled against God, and GOD
afflicting them for their disobedience, as soon as by submission and prayer
they were eased, they fell to their old and wonted stubbornness: And this does
God foresee; namely, that neither affliction, and misery on the one side; nor
prosperity and outward felicity on the other, can bring a wicked man to be
good, a rebellious to be obedient.

As touching Gods correcting, The end why God eases the troubles of the godly.
and again comforting his own children, it is to another end; for when by his
chastisements he has sufficiently tried and humbled them, and brought them to
the knowledge, and acknowledgement of that, for which their calamities and
crosses are fallen upon them; namely, for their sin and disobedience: Then
he begins as the skillful Surgeon, to lay mollifying and healing plasters
of love upon their wounds; he works inward assurance of the free pardon of
their sins, in their consciences, by the apprehension of his mercies in
Christ.

The godly may be visited with sickness, The godly and the wicked, may be
alike afflicted.
so may the wicked, and either of them recover their health; They may likewise
fall into poverty and want, they may be alike imprisoned, they may fall into
equal outward crosses, and be alike eased of them. But to the comfort of the
one, and that Gods glory may the more appear in his recovery and release,
through his faithful prayers; and to the further condemnation of the other;
reserving for him a greater punishment, howsoever he may think, that God has
restored him in his love.

And therefore, Men afflicted, ought to hold fast by God.
be sure whosoever thou art that suffer affliction here, to hold fast by God
through a strong faith: and know that thy crosses are sent thee, to exercise
thee with patience and obedience, and to make thee better. And therefore if God
be pleased to ease thee of any of thy troubles, it is in his great mercy, to
make thee to know, and to acknowledge, that thy crosses and corrections, and
the cure of them, come only from God; who requires of thee only
thankfulness, and new obedience: for, if thou upon recovery of thy sickness,
upon supply of thy wants, upon thy freedom of imprisonment, or upon release of
wha^soeuer troubles, thou should return to thy former sins; thou must
look for new, and more severe and (speedy) punishments.

Be well advised therefore, repine not at thine afflictions, but in patience
possess thy soul: wait the good pleasure of God for thy delivery; We must
wait Gods delivery.
and forget not in all thy troubles, to lift up thine eyes to him that strikes
thee; entreat him in an humble heart by faithful prayer, in the name of his
Son: faint not, and he will ease thee, or release thee.

A necessary Prayer, for strength, to bear whatsoever afflictions, with
patience; and for faith, to resist the tentations of Satan, that will suggest,
they proceed of Gods mere displeasure.
O Lord my GOD, who in thy wisdom, did first form me in, and broughtest
me out of my mothers womb: In thy goodness have relieved me; and in thy
providence, as a Father, preserved me unto this day: And before I was borne,
did determine all things, that I should suffer in this my mortal life;

Leave me not now, I beseech thee, nor forsake me, for now are the troubles and
trials befalne me, which thou had determined from the beginning; only
through my sins, whereby I have grievously offended thee.

I thank thee Lord, that thou have so fatherly a care of me, as not to suffer
me to run on in my sins, without this gentle correction.

I confess, O Lord, before I was afflicted, I forgot to serve thee; nay, I
forgot mine own sins, I followed mine own wanton and unruly desires, and
corrupt will, as I was misled by that deceiving guide, that miscaries all those
that forsake thee, and follow him: And therefore I acknowledge thy judgments
just, and my troubles deservedly laid upon me; yet not in so heavy a manner,
as thou justly might inflict them:

For, as the troubles and afflictions are infinite, which thou can find out,
to inflict upon thy sinning children: So might thou have laid the most
heavy of them upon me, because my sins are great and infinite; And I cannot
but acknowledge, that had it not been, that thy mercies surmount my sins, I
had perished under my troubles long agone.

If thou had observed every of my sins, and for every of them have
inflicted upon several punishments; I could never have been able to bear the
least part of them, I should have fainted and sunk under them.

But, such has been thy fatherly love toward me, that thou have not punished
me, according to the ten thousandth part of my deseruings.

Though sometimes I have felt thy rod, and have been sensible of thy
corrections, yet never ouerpressed with them.

I have had sickness, but thou healedst me: I have had enemies, but thou have
defended me; I have been in diverse mortal dangers, but thou have preserved me;
I have been in want, but thou have relieved me; I have had many domestical
crosses, but thou have given me patience to bear them: And although I be not
yet free from some of them; yet will I not fear or faint, now (by thy grace)
having had so many testimonies of thy fatherly loving kindness toward me, in
working so many gracious deliueries for me.

My sins then provoked thee to correct me: I am a sinner still, and therefore
I cannot but look, for my continual sins, continual chastisements. But
Lord, let not thy corrections be such punishments as thou inflictest upon such
as have neither feeling of their sins, nor are sensible of thy punishments; I
confess my sins, I feel thy correcting hand gently laid upon me;

And I find, gracious Father, that though thou be displeased for my sins, yet
art thou not so severe in thy chastisements, as I justly deserve. Thou
proportionest my corrections, according to thine own gift of faith and
patience, which thou fatherly do furnish me withal; so that I am in some
measure able to bear them: or thou give me faith and patience, according to
the weight of thy corrections; otherwise it were not in my power, to bear the
least of thy chastisements; but with much impatience, murmuring, and grudging,
whereunto thou know my weak nature is inclined.

And thou Lord, well know what a malicious and subtle adversary I have,
Satan, that endeavors to draw me, to rebel and to kick against thy fatherly
corrections; suggesting unto me, that they proceed of thy final hatred
toward me: and coueteth to feed my carnal enclination, with the vain
pleasures and delights of the world, and the lusts of my corrupt heart; and to
reject the yoke of thy gentle chastisements.

But Lord, thou have taught me to know; and I have found him (as in deed he
is) a liar, an enemy, a tempter.

O give me wisdom to observe, and strength to withstand all his tentations
and a^lurements, that I may onl^ ^elie upon thy providence, mercy, and
goodness; wherein I know that all the troubles and afflictions which I now
endure, and that thou shall hereafter impose upon me; are the true and
infallible tokens of thy love toward me: And therefore shall neither my hope
nor my patience in suffering, be weakened, notwithstanding his malice.

Though I should walk through the valley of death; yea, if Death were instant
before me; I will not fear: for, thou art with me in all my dangers, to
succor me. Thy rod and thy staff they comfort me: Affliction and sorrow may
endure for a little time, and then comes joy.

Thy dearest children, O Lord, endure troubles; but as they come of thee, so
are they eased again by thee.

Thou have sent me great troubles, O Lord, and many adversities have befalne
me, but not without thy providence; and thou have hether-vnto sustained me in
them all.

I will therefore go forward in thy strength, who have hether-vnto vpholden me
by thy power. And therefore my trust and sure confidence is, that I shall never
perish, in whatsoever troubles. Though sorrow and heaviness, under mine
afflictions, may seem to oppress me, and to press me down; yet taking
perfect hold through a lively faith, of thy neuer-fayling promises: I am
assured in thy good time, to be finally relieved and comforted. In the mean
time O Lord, give me perfect patience, and let my faith never fail me; But
as thou have willed me, I cast my burden (even the burden of my sins, for
which thou correctest me, and the troubles which thou inflictest upon me for my
sins) upon thee my Christ, who have suffered both for my sins, and for the
punishment of them. And have promised to nourish me, to sustain, maintain,
and uphold me in all my trials.

Lord, I have had experience of thy goodness, mercy, and favor toward me,
ever since I was borne; by thee I have been stayed* from the womb; Thou
tookest me out of my mothers bowels; I have ever since tasted of thy goodness,
thy power has held me up; thy providence has evermore found out means to
relieve me in my greatest necessity, to defend me in my greatest dangers, to
ease me in my greatest grief.

O my God, grant that I now may not distrust thine accustomed mercies, but may
still assure my self, that when greatest danger shall befall me, that rather
then thou will leave me helpless, thou will give thine Angels charge over me,
that I shall not be utterly out of hope of help; and that thou will send from
heaven and save me.

Thou have promised to cover the faithful, even with the wings of thy
protection. I believe Lord, therefore I pray, that thou will sustain me, and
deliver me out of some of my troubles.

I embrace thy chastisements, O Lord, with a thankful heart, knowing that,
that man is blessed, whom thou correctest: Be not therefore far from me, O my
God, though I be compassed about with many troubles. Though fear possess my
soul, confirm my faith, and I shall not faint.

Thou have promised not to be far from them that call upon thee faithfully:
let not therefore faith fail me, O Lord, and then lay what thou will upon me;
for I know thee to be my Lord that have made me, my strength that have
hether-vnto sustained me, my Redeemer that have saved me, and he that will for
ever preserve me. Amen.

Lord increase my faith.
FINIS.

