LONDONS DOVE: OR A Memorial of the life and death of Master Robert Dove,
Citizen and Marchant-Taylor of LONDON, and of his several Almesdeeds and large
bounty to the poor, in his life time. He departed this life, on Saturday the
2. day of this instant Month of Mar, 1612.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, for Joseph Hunt, and are to be sold at his
house in Bedlam, near Moore-field Gate. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR JOHN SWINNERTON KNIGHT, ONE of the Aldermen of
the honorable City of London.
Having drawn certain particular remembrances, of the bounty and charitable
Almes-deedes of Master Robert Dove, lately deceased (done all for the most
part in his life time.) And they being digested into a volume (although little
for quantity, yet not unworthy to be committed to memory) I thought they
could not be better bestowed then upon such as held commerce with that company,
or were Heads of that body, whereof he continued a long time a worthy member.

Amongst which, I have selected you from a number of others, and am bold to
present this little labor unto you, as a brother of that Society, and one
that can well judge both of the Relation, and the truth thereof.

The chief and farthest point that my intention seeks to arrive at in this,
is but to leave to Posterity a deserved Testimony, and commemoration of his
s^^erall liberalities, to the intent that the hand of M^rcy which Heaven (in
him) has stretched forth over distressed people, being duly considered: Others
(to whom God has plentifully given his blessings) may be stirred up to trace
him in the like steps of true Cha^i^ie, and be encouraged to look into their
own Sou^es betimes, and to imitate him in the works of piety.

It is my Love that makes tender of this unto you, which I pray receive with
such good acceptance: As with my best affection, it comes and is bestowed upon
you: Thus humbly referring my self to your censure, I rest

Devoted unto your worship, Anthe: Nyxon.

LONDONS DOVE, OR THE MIRROVR OF MARCHANT-TAYLORS.
CAlling to mind the final end of man's Creation, (which is) to glorify GOD,
and to edify one an other in the ways of true Piety; I thought it a duty,
as well in respect of the one, as in regard of the other; to publish this care
and wonderful example of the virtuous life, and Christian death of M. Robert
Dove; Citizen and Marchant-Taylor of London: who whilst he lived, was a Mirror
of Charity, and now being dead, is a true pattern of perfect Christianity;
But how I may be bold to lay colors of commendation, (though never so fresh,
true, and lively) on the picture of his Bounty; drawn forth by the cunning
hand of his worthy deeds, (or at least, the deeds of his hand, upon the
several Tables of needy persons; I am in doubt, since by these colors of
mine, his glorious Picture may be much obscured, that of it self is so fair
and beautiful, as the hearts of all admiring it; Their Pens in private, and
Tongues in public, are busied to write in short, and speak at large, of the
worthiness of the same.

Notwithstanding, It being such* that extracteth from the Tongues of every one,
this Confession: Huic similem non vidi; I have not seen any like to this man:
And more also: Nulla fere^t similem Secla futura tibi.
The Age to come (it is like to be)
Will never bring the like to thee.


And such being the condition of every good work of bounty (as Almes-deedes,
or such like) that it leaves a perpetual Impression behind, that Posterity
may see in succeeding times, the venerable footsteps of such, as have trod
the paths of precedencie in true Love, and Charity: Let us now behold, what
lively Prints this happy man made (even in his life time) by the sundry stamps
of his manifold bounties; That the times present, and future Ages, may both
imitate and admire the same. This Phrase of Scripture may be duly attributed
unto him, (...). 3.
Many have done virtuously and bountifully, but thou surmountest them all:
What Tree may more justly make compare with the T^ee of this man's blessed life,
(...).
then that which like an Heavenly plant, growing up in an earthly soil,
bears twelve manner of Fruits, even t^elue-times monthly in the year. The
very Leaves being for Medicine, as the Fruit is for meat; For he in good works
was so fruitful^, that he spread-foorth his branches, with their fruits, (...)
after several manners, unto thirteen sorts of persons: (...)- men.
Feeding them twelve times also monthly in the year: that is, All the year
long, with meat and medicine; As wc such Fruit and L^aues, as his Tree
affoorded. Preserving the sound in health, ridding the diseased of infirmities,
and so continuing both in life. By which they cease not with cheerefulnes, to
lift up this voice to Heaven: Oh how happy Creatures are we, that ever he
was borne? And thrice blessed he, that ever he so lived, to help (in
number,) more distressed members of the Mystical body of CHRIST, then were
the members of his own natural body.

To speak of his godly life, it was such, as gained the rare commendation of
all that knew him, as well for his wisdom, As for his honesty, gentleness, and
affability: And above all, for his fervent zeal which he bare unto Gods word:
For his whole heart was bent to seek the Lord, His legs were always willing
and ready (so long as they had ability to perform their duty, to carry his
aged body to frequent Sermons, and hear divine service: His whole delight was
to be conversant in the Scriptures, and to meditate upon them day and night.
Insomuch (as while his sight served) he was seldom or never found without a
bible or some other good book in his hands: And when that failed him, he would
spend his Time in conferring, talking, and reasoning of the word of God, and of
Religion, and especially of places and points that did most concern his latter
end, and mortality: Asking what is the Sense of this place? what of that? How
may this place be expounded, How that? What observe you of this point, and what
of that? So that he seemed to be as it were ravished with the same Spirit that
David was, when he said, The Zeal of thine house has eaten me up.

Oh happy Dove, whose soul is a sacrifice to God, and in whose flames so many
poor men's prayers are flowne up to heaven.

Blessed may thou be, as by beholding thy self to be so graced of thy God,
as by seeing thy sins, to cleave unto the pauement through humility: and by
bestowing thine Alms, to reach unto the firmament through thy liberality, and
bounty, hearing the words of that message once brought to Cornelius his ear,
sounding a fresh in thine heart. Acts. 10.
Thine Alms have ^scen^ed before the face of God. Ascending up, to be
rewarded, and yet abiding below to be renowned. Ascending up, That God may show
his faithfulness in performing no less ^he^ he has promised in rewarding more
ten thousand sold then is deserved: And yet abiding below to be renowned.
That thy works staying here amongst men, God may thereby be glorified, who is
in heaven amidst his Angels. Good works here outwardly performed, declare and
show forth Gods great graces, wherewith his Saints on earth are from heaven
inwardly beautified. Every good work of theirs sweetly spiced with faith,
abiding with the distressed members of afflicted Jesus, Phil. 4.18.
being as a comfortable ball of Balm unto them: but ascending up unto God,
comes to be in his Nostrills: the very odor that smells sweet. It were to be
wished, that his good mind might be a motive to men of greater Revenues and
ability to imitate the like deeds of charity, and that the saying of Ierom
(verified in his days) touching the piety of people, may not be alluded to
our Time. Parsinebecillior vincit robustiorem. The weaker part does ouertop the
stronger. Meaning in relieuing the poor, and yielding succor to the
distressed.

Of 13. aged men, to whom he gives yearly 20. nobles a piece, and at the end
of every three year, to each man a gown.
WHat the Monuments are of his bounty and liberality, the tongues and prayers
of poor and aged men do iest^fie, (whereby there are some of them almost
become infants again,) and do declare, and the meat in their mouths, and
clothes to their backs do actually testify unto the eye, that which their
words do openly give testimony of unto the ear. They that before had taken
up this Lamentation, We are aged, succourles, and fallen into distress and
misery, may now cease their dolorous complaynings, and for the comfort they
receive by their bountiful Benefactor, they may turn it into this sweeter
song of joy, Lo: It is not with us as it has been: We that were afflicted,
are now comforted, our heavenly father has cast a loving look upon us, and
has sent us, a second father better then our first father unto us. Oh what
greatness is this? vera magnitudo, Even very greatness indeed: Tueri infirmos:
Thus to defend the weakest; Thus to maintain the poorest; This is the very
ablen^s, and the most true power a man can have given of God, Eos defendere qui
nihil possunt: To defend them from the rigor of distress and extreamitie, who
are least able to resist necessity. Oh goodness truly good, and surely great
in him, Benefacere sine merito remunerationis* and ab^que spe omni (...)
ributionis. To do good, (yea and so much good, without all desert of theirs
that might call for reward at his hands, or without hope of his, to receive
recompense at theirs. But his hearts love to God (which being true love, is the
very desire, and delight in doing his commandments) constrained and urged him
(oh blessed constraint and happy violence) to do all the good he has done.
This virtuous man knowing these poor aged and impotent men, to be least able
to help themselves, dealt with them, as Jacob did with Ephraim, of whom we
read thus: That when Joseph had set his two sons, Manassah, Genesis 48.
and Ep^raim, the elder on his right hand, and the younger on his left, for his
father to lay his righthand on the head of the elder, and give him the
principal blessing, Jacob, beyond the expectation of Joseph, crossed his
Arms, laying his right hand on the younger, and his left hand on the elder,
being led thereunto by a foresight of things to come, that was cleerer and
better, then was his insight into any thing present.

So this most godly father, being presented by the world, both with rich and
poor, The rich at the right hand, (even his able friends and kindred) and the
poor at the left (even aged persons, and impotent widows) he beyond the
expectation (because beside the custom of the world) crossed his arms (as it
were) of ability laying his right hand of bounteous liberality on the poor,
and giving them his principal blessing. But his left hand of gratuitie, on his
well able kindred, and friends: the foresight of his Soul (illuminated by
divine inspiration) being cleerer to behold future things, then were the eyes
of his humane reason to behold things present. Beholding even for the very
present, this honorable title, Pater pauperum, miserorum adiutor, The father of
the poor, and the helper of men miserable: Engraven on Gods fatherly helping
hands, as well as Dominus Dominantium, and Rex R^gum, The Lord of Lords, and
King of Kings, Reu. 19.16.
engraven on his powerful thigh. And beholding also for the which is to come,
The day of the Lord, called Magnus ille dies, That great day. And the Lord
himself at that day pronouncing the sentence of his Judgment on all,
according to their works of mercy, or obduracie, toward his poor distressed
members, giving or denying them the joys of heaven, as they have given or
denied the comforts of this earth, unto the indigent and needy. Taking all
good or evil, as done unto himself.

Thus he having showed his bounty and charitable Liberality unto his
impotent, and aged creatures, Worms and no men; Psalm. 22.6.
even the children of men that are but Worms. Job. 25.6.
They to clear themselves of unthankfulness toward their good God, for him
do acknowledge his wonderful rich gift and worthy Talent, which he gave in
his life time, into the hands of his Company, to endure for ever; Namely, to
each of them, (being 13. in number,) the yearly pension of six pounds,
thirteen shillings and four pence, and to every one of them a several Gown,
at every three years end. Bringing not only means to maintain their bodies
by the staff of his Bread, Chap. 31. 20
but their Loins also (as Job speaks,) to be warmed with the Fleeces of his
Sheep.

Of his Charity to threescore poor Widows, in the Parish of Saint Buttolphes
without Algate, and to six men, who have every three years several Cloakes,
and four Nobles a ^eere for ever.
AMongst many others whom he has relieved, let it not be forgotten what he
has done to p^^re distressed wi^owes: who having received an Annual portion
from this their godly Benefactor, do continue their thankfulness in that
remembrance. Their need suc^oured, cries every hour in their hearts, to put
them in mind of their duty, and their relief urges them not to be
unthankful for so great a ben^fite. They from whom God had taken the help of
their Husbands, being left in care and sorrow for their loss, and in
distress for want of maintenance, were often enforced with tears to lament
their miserable estate, forsaken of Friends, and through poverty despised of
kindred. They had no ability to help themselves and old age denied the^
strength of body, to labor for their living.

In this extremity they were comfortles, saving in the hope they had of
Heaven, and Celestial joys, often wishing it would please God by ending their
lives, to give end to their miseries But as the Lord never forsakes such as
trust in him. So in his good time, he provided means for their succor,
styrring up the heart of this his dear Servant, to regard them with
compassionate affection; and to stretch out his merciful hands, to succor
their bodies beaten with sorrow. God blessed them by his earthly gifts, whom
he had blessed by his heavenly Graces; By his hands has the Lord wiped away
their tears, and breathed new life into their hearts laden with griefs.

The love of Jonathan never more appeared to his dear friend David then his
love has been manifested to CHRIST'S poor members; wherefore it may be said
of him, that the candle of his Faith was not hid under a Bushel, but has
burned most bright, to the good example of others. He like a true Steward,
has performed his duty; He has nourished Children; He has lodged the
Harbourlesse; He has given comfort to the succourlesse; He has ministered to
them that were in adversity; and continually given to every good work. It
rests now that these released persons do yield continual praise to GOD,
for so gracious a Benefactor; and daily pray that the number may be increased,
that the poor may be respected of those that are honored in the Gates, and the
cry of the needy may cease in the streets. And to the end that this
charitable deed may not be thought unworthily bestowed upon them who are now
relieved, that before were distressed, It is expedient they should so behave
themselves in their actions, as God thereby may be glorified, and others by
their example, brought from vice to virtue. Their minds that before were
clogged with care, wanting ye which was necessary; by which they were made unapt,
either in outward action, or inward thought, to serve their God; is now freed
from that heavy burden, by the works of this reverend citizen. So as they have
now no let, but as the P^almist says, To set their delight in the Law of the
Lord, and to exercise themselves therein all the days of their life.

Besides his yearly Pension allowed to these threescore Widows, which is, vi.
s. viii. d. per annum, forever: besides other allowances; He has also left
order toward the continual maintenance (which was begun in his life time) of*
poor widows in Mercha^tailors Almeshouses on Tower hill. And to six poor
men every third year, cloaks a piece, and to each of them xxvi. s. viii. d. a
year, to be continued for ever. And as any of these Almes-men shall die, and
their places g^ow void, then these Cloake-men by Election to stand, and
possess the former p^ace, and benevolence in reuertion.

In regard whereof, they may (with the Prophet) cry out and say, Oh what
shall we give unto GOD for all his ben^fites, and the Blessings he has
bestowed on the Sons of men?

If we would know how to please him, and be ready to follow his will and
Commandment, though we be not able to perform what we would, yet doing what
we can, our imperfectness shall be mad perfect through CHRIST, and esteemed as
righteous in the merits of his Passion; Neither does the Lord ^^quire more
then a thankful heart, as the Scripture test^fieth. He that offers praise
shall glorify me, and to him that disposes his ways aright, will I show the
Salvation of GOD.

Of his Charity to Bedlam and Bride-well, The Hospital of S. Bartholmews, and
Saint Thomas Hospital in Southwarke.
NOw turn your eyes upon wounded, and vlcerous Laz^rs, that lie under the
hands of Chyrurgicall Physicians; (made miserable, by their own grievous, and
Eye-wounding sores, and made happy again, through present hope, and after
hap, to be perfectly Cured, by the prouide^t means of this godly Benefactor)
and you shall see their wounds and Ulcers to stand wide open before you; Oh
look in at them, and you shall beho^de Misery her self, to have taken
possession of their earthly bodies, (being Houses of Clay, as Job calls
them,) for to dwell therein. And when you are gone, come again within a while,
and behold their wounds closed and sores skinned, and seeing nothing but bare
scarres and Prints in their places; pronounce, that Mercy has been there,
and displacing Misery, (nothing to be seen, but her foote-steps) has set
joy, health, and comfort, as joint Tenants in possession, assigning them to pay
for their Rent, Laud and praises unto the HIGHEST; It being his goodness that
sent his servants Charity to do all the good is done unto them. And seeing it
is God, which has stricken them, (as Job felles them) bringing on them vulnera
per alium, wounds by something from without, or making to rise up in them
vulnera perse Sores from something within; It is for them to know, and
acknowledge, that Ipse medetur qui vulnerauit, etc. He which wounds them by
one means, heals them by an other: And he which has stricken them by his
instruments of equity, salueth them by his hands of Mercy. Striking them,
that their hearts may see into their sin, and acknowledge his justice,
heartily crying, Iustus es Domine and iustum iudicium iuum. Righteous art thou
(Oh Lord) and just is thy Judgment. And healing them again that they may
behold his merciful goodness, sweetly singing, Gratia dei est, misericordia
Domini est: This is the favor of God, This is the mercy of the Lord: (that is)
even that they perish not.

Upon sweet experience of which great Mercy, Duty lays upon them (that are
thus relieved, if shamefully they shake it not off) this humble confession of
Jacob, I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies. And this great mercy
which they find coming unto them from God, they may conceive, that through
this godly Benefactor, as through a Conduit pipe. It is derived unto them from
their good God: the fountain of mercy: yea rather brought unto them in him as
in a vessel of mercy: That so God showing them mercy by him, and they
returning him honor, and praise from him: He may as well from them to Godward
be vas honoris, A vessel of honor: as he from God to them, vas misericordiae.
A vessel of mercy. Who as he was always, a charitable relieuer of diseased or
maimed persons: So did he but at Easter last, not three weeks before his
happy departure out of this miserable world, sent to each of the places
a^oresaid Thirty and odd pounds a piece, to be employed to the ease and
comfort of such as were there detained.

That Prisoners have been relieved and released out of the prisons of Newgate:
The Counters and Ludgate by the riches of his gift.
HEre may you behold the further care of this virtuous man, in his continued
deeds of charity in his life time, and a little before his death, extended to
the comfort of distressed prisoners: who if ever men had cause to magnify the
Majesty of God for his gifts bestowed by the hands of his servants: Then may
not they be bashful to speak, or bury in silence the bountiful favor of so
good a Benefactor, who through his charity has not only relieved them being
in prison, but has also loosed the locks of the prison doors, and made the
bolts fly open by his bounty.

They whose debtors made them captives, and cast them into loathsome prison,
where the bordes were their beds, where the prospect was but I congrate, and
the sweetest air infectious smell, at length by his means found ease of their
extremities.

Oh that hard hearted people would be but moved (as this good man was) to enter
into a charitable consideration of the extremity of Prisons, and the
distressed estate of Prisoners.

They hear nothing there but mones, nor have sight of any other thing but
misery: Their smiles choakt with sighs, and their mixth overcome with
morning: careful complaints are their communication, Oppression and extreme
dealing, is the tale they tell of, and every one knows better how to declare
his grief, then which way to redress it. Fraud, deceit, and faithles
friends, bring most men in, and hardness of heart, cruelty and lack of mercy
keep them there, where many months together they feed on the bread of
affliction, and drink the water of sorrow.

Let no man speak of extremity, that has not known Captivity, nor brag of
friendship and friends, till he have been bolted in prison: This is the fire
that purges the gold from the dross, and the touchstone to try a faithful
friend from a fawning flatterer: There dwelles the melancholy Muses of sad
petitions, who like Briarius with an hundred eyes write swiftly, but the
messengers that carry them, may be fitly compared to leaden heeld Saturnus,
that finishes his course but once in thirty years: Thus the poor man's
thoughts which run as swift as Pegasus, expecting an answer, do in vain
make a thousand long looks out of the iron grate to see the back return of
this slow worm: At which time it often comes to pass, that his hopes are
utterly frustrate.

Then sends he for his brethren, and they look big* for his kindred and they
will not know him; for his friends, and they will not come at him; but with coy
looks, and scornful terms they all forsake him, and no man pitties his
afflictions.

Flintie hearted Creditors have threatened to make dice of poor men's b^n^s,
but they would be paid, and the while their poor wives, and succourles
children, have been ready to starve at home. But in the midst of all this
misery, when hope of help has been past and nothing looked for, but
continual calamity; Then has the Lord by his servant sent help, as he did
to Danie^ in the Lions den, and to Peter being in prison. This elect servant
did not only like Abacuck, feed the hungry Captive, but like the blessed
Angel of God he has also taken by the hand, and brought forth the poor, and
miserable Prisoner, paid his debt, and set him free. Hereby they have enjoyed
the sweet blessing of liberty, and been cleared of that cruelty, which they
were lately before afflicted with.

God increase the number of such charitable men, and soften the flintie hearts
of cruel oppressors: Before whose eyes this worthy man has set an
everlasting president: As Well to be continued in these places for ever: As by
his godly gift at Easter last, being but three weeks before his decease, who
gave to each of the prisons before named 50. pound a piece to be disposed of,
either to the poor prisoners relief, or enlargement.

Of his Charity to poor young beginners of the Company of Marchanttaylours.
AS he was generally well disposed toward all, So was he especially unto the
company: Into which he was worthily incorporate: And in his many good deeds
toward them (as in a Crystal glass) you may behold his godly care to poor
young people of that Society: who not forgetting such as have been newly made
free, and have been beginning to trade in their professions, to help them
forward in the world (making them go ye were scarce able to creep) and to
further them in so laudable an action, has also stretched forth his bountiful
hand toward their relief.

Those who in their beginnings, have not been able to ensconce themselves
against poverty, (resting in the fear of GOD, on his providence for their
preferment) his heart has the Lord stirred up to help, and to regard their
want, and relieve their necessities: He like a kind Father, has provided
portions for them, and has not let them pass into the world without some
gifts from his bountiful hand: that they might thereby, (either the better
profit themselves, or otherwise provide for their necessary imployements:
Following the example of CHRIST, at the marriage of Canaan: where seeing their
need, he showed his first miracle, by turning water into Wine; That gift is
small that does no good, and the good will very slender that deserves no
thanks.

As the young Damsells and Maidens of Jerusalem sung the praises of King David
for his deeds: So may the Young Men of this company, sing in the
commendations of this good man's Charity; For by his means have their
Preferments been furthered, and their weak estates and conditions often
raised.

And as it was said to the Governor of the Feast, Thou have kept the best
Wine till now; So may these young beginners say: The best gift came not till
now;

For which benefit, they are to yield unto GOD due thanks, and continual
glory.

Of his bounty to the Prisoners of Newgate, and his provision for the Tolling
of the Bell, at S. Sepulchers, for condemned persons, which gift is to
continue for ever.
SEeing the Prayers and tears of the needy do pearce the Heavens, and that
Joseph's afflictions are regarded of GOD, why should I not set down these poor
men's miseries, and magnify Gods mercies, which do comfort them in the same.

The wretched and Forlorn men, forsaken of the world, and despised of the
multitude; who with hungry bellies have been cast into Prison, without either
money or Friends to help them, have not been left destitute in their
extremities, but provided for, beyond deserts or expectation.

Among many Faithful servants of CHRIST, pitying the Poor, they have not
been least bound to this their godly Benefactor for their relief, who has
bountifully fed CHRIST, (in his Members.) His cheerefulnes in giving, has
from time to time, made well known, that he was beloved of GOD, who loves a
cheerful giver.

The Harvest of his happiness shall be most plentiful, because he has not
sown his seed sparingly, but has been made rich unto all Liberality: which
has caused in many poor people a continual thanksgiving unto the ALMIGHTY.

Oh happy man, Oh Heavenly Dove; so may we call him and so shall he find,
taking part in the first Resurrection: For, Blessed are they that consider the
poor and needy: the Lord shall deliver them in the day of Trouble.

He fed these men in Prison, and gave them c^mfort in their deepest
distress; But the Lord shall deliver him out of the Jaws of Hell, and his
soul shall be filled with gladness.

Ahasuerus Feasted the Princes of Persia, and had much praise of men for the
same; But Marie and Martha Feasting CHRIST, were blessed of GOD for ever. Many
make Banquets, but the poor have no part in them.

So did Holofernes for Iudiths sake, but perished in his excess. The rich
Glutton fared daintilie every day, while the poor man died at his gate, for
want of food. Covetousness would suffer him to give nothing, like churlish
Naball, and Unmercifulness, threw him headlong to Hell.

Pity, and tender Compassion, do declare the Children of men to be the
Sons of God, who does admonish them thereunto; saying: Be you merciful, as
your heavenly Father is merciful. Herein is God pleased, and his Majesty
honored, by doing and showing the true marks of his dear Children.

This stirred up Master Dove in the godly remembrance hereof, not only in his
life time to relieve these distressed persons, by his many continued deeds of
Charity, but to leave a worthy commemoration of his Religious intention^, to
remain for ever after his death, by the gift of Fifty pounds, to be
employed in the perpetual behoof of such as shall be condemned to die. That
is, in having the great Bell at Saint Sepulchers Church without Newgate, to be
Tolled (on every Execution day,) till the condemned Prisoners have suffered
death; and also a small Hand Bell, to be Rung at Midnight, under Newe-Gate,
the Night after their Condemnation; And the next morning, at the Church-wall;
To put them in mind of their mortality; with a Prayer to be said touching
their salvation.

Oh admirable Devotion, and worthy to be recorded in the Monuments of
Antiquity; who whether he lived or died, gave maintenance by his bounty, that
this should continue for ever: for the comfort of them, and all succeeding them.

Oh what a virtuous man was this? whose care was not only to preserve their
bodies from fainting, by ministering ordinary supply of sustenance, but to give
them spiritual food; and to awake their sleepie senses from security, to
save their souls from perishing.

Of the maintenance given by him unto certain Scholars, in Saint John Baptist
College in Oxford.
BEsides the many memorable deeds of Devotion which he did to poor aged men,
to comfortles widows, to destitute and needy yong-men, to distressed
Prisoners, and to diverse others, (yet unknown,) in far larger measure then
my Instructions have hitherto led me unto; He was also a charitable and
careful Patron to poor Scholars, where the ability of their own Friends
was not able to reach to yield them exhibition. And (besides what he had
formerly done unto them) he gave an hundredth pounds at Easter last, and a
Latin Bible, written in parchment, to certain Scholars, in S. John Baptists
College in Oxforde, for their maintenance and use, and for their further
preferment in learning (the high way to honor:) Oh happy Scholars, borne in
such a time, where bounty and virtue calls you to promotion. Spend not
therefore precious time idely, nor withdraw your selves from the happiness of
your future hopes. Now is a golden treasury opened unto you, which far
surmounteth Craesus wealth, make your self rich in learning, and honor shall
be your reward. This your good Benefactor has laden you with better treasure
then gold, silver, or precious stones, which are subject to many casualties,
gotten with grief, kept with care, and lost with a thousand sorrows. These
riches are seldom possessed in peace, but are the cause many times of cruel
murders, thefts, and an hundred deadly dangers of body, and often prove the
destruction of the Soul: But learning shall whilst you live ever last, and
remain with you: No thief shall be able (leaving your life) to rob you of
this treasure. Had king Priamus sent his Son Polidorus with no other treasure
to his supposed friends: The young Prince had never felt the force of inhumaine
murder and cruelty, nor his Parents had cause to lament so grievous a
mischance, with so many sorrowful and bitter tears. Therefore be greedy to
gain learning, and knowledge, be earnest, and careful to purchase wisdom,
the which shall crown you with honor in the days of your perfection, and
raise you to the high Seat of dignity. Embrace this benefit with gladness, and
praise God for him that gave furtherance unto it.

Of the bounty and charity of Master Doves to the Schoolmaister and
Scholars of Christ's Hospital in London.
Over many Orphans and poor children, did he become a careful father
standing in stead of their own natural Parents, in affording means to have
them trained up in the exercise of good letters, to bring them to preferment,
and to keep them from the snares of Idleness (the path to perdition) has in
tender regard of their good, and the Commonwealths benefit, given furthera^ce
to ye Schoolemaister of Christ's Hospital, to nourish them in the knowledge of
the latin tongue, and such as are not capable thereof, to be instructed in
writing, and casting account, and to be placed and preferred to several trades
and mysteries, whereby they may grow in time to be happy members of this
honorable city. Oh ye children, carry thankful minds, first to God for his
goodness in preferring you hereunto, and next unto such Benefactors, as have so
charitably provided to instruct you. Through his bounty shall you be trained
up, either in the latin tongue, that you may proceed unto further knowledge,
or in writing, that you may be able to set down that wc your pen, which your
memory is by no means able to preserve. And whether you be in prison
restrained from liberty, or separated by the Sea, from the sight of your
country, by your pen you may help your selves in the one, and satisfy your
selves in the other. What honors you may attain unto by learning, or what good
you may come to by handwriting, you are not able to conceive, before you have
made experience of it. By the one you may be both beatified, and beautified
with all yt inward graces of the mind, by the other, you might speak, if you
had lost your tongues by tyranny, as many did in the bloody days of
Dioclesian: Or did your legs fail you, or were you made cripples by the
wars, (as Scipio was) yet your writing might get your livings, and procure
both raiment for the back, and food for the belly: were your minds troubled
and vexed, and that your memories were as weak, as Mesala^s brain was feeble,
yet the property of your pen might serve to help you in yt imperfection.
Wherefore it is no small benefit bestowed upon you (oh ye child^en) that may
be enriched with so excellent a quality, only by using diligence without any
charge to your Parents.

For this cause suffer not occasion to ouerslip you, but take hold of her fore
cop, least neglecting meet opportunity, you afterward snatch in vain at her
bald hinder part, and so with grief, and repentance, bewail the loss of that
which can never after be recovered, according to that of the Poet, Volat
irreuocabile Tempus.

That Time is bald, and being but once past, cannot be called again, for all
thou have.

Of his charity to the city of Bristow, and a relation of some other his
several bounties.
BEsides many other places that can yield a plentiful testimony for him in
his behalf, and make a condign Relation of his good works, we may not here
forget the religious care, and provident order which he took in his life time
for the relief and succor of the poor people of Bristowe: Who hearing that
the same city was fallen into some decay, and poverty, out of a feeling
remorse, and charitable inclination he had to yield help to their deiections,
freely bestowed upon the same city, the sum of one hundredth pounds.

As his bounty was great toward this City, so were his hands every where
reached out to the necessities of all sorts. Yea such was his charity, that
if he had seen poor men addicted to labor, he would set them on work, and
cause them to be employed to their better furtherance, and encouragement. If he
heard that any of his poor neighbors, were decrepit, or destitute of means
to follow their professions, he would supply their needs in one condition or
other, and not fail by his money to make way for their good intentions.
Wherein he dealt no worse with them, then a Reverend father dealt with a poor
kinsman of his; who being solicited to advance him: And he thereuppon
inquiring, what course of life he followed, and receiving answer, that he was
an Husbandman: Why then (quoth he) if his plough be broken, I will repair it,
or rather then fail, bestow a new one upon him, whereby he may go on in his
course of life: But so to advance him, as to make him idle, or to forsake his
trade, or condition, in which he was brought up, that I mean not to do.

He was mild and gentle to all, and his purse ever open to such as were
petitioners unto him for his relief, so as he might justly be compared to
Titus, Qui neminem vnquam a se tristem dimisit. Such as were suitors unto him
for succor, did not at any time depart from him without contentment, he
dismissed no man sorrowful for lack of success, nor sent any man from his
presence full of grief or sadness, for want of his helping hand, to give ease
and enlargement to their heaviness.

As he was devoutly careful to relieve both aged, and impotent old men, so was
he always religiously mindful (as is aforesaid of the well tuturing and good
education of poor, and indigent scholars, following the example of a godly
Patron, who esteemed Hospitale adsubleuandam pauper tatem, and Scholam, ad
instruendam inuentutem, esse optima opera, quae aliquis potuit efficere. That
an Hospital, to sustain the poor, and a School, to train up youth, were
the worthiest works that a man could leave behind him.

Insomuch, as (led by these motives) he left to the benefit of Posterity, an
everlasting memory of his Saint-like mind in these behalfes, Allowing
sixteen pounds a year for ever, to Christs-Hospitall in London: to be
employed toward the use and maintenance of a Schoolemaister, to train up and
instruct ten young Scholars, in the knowledge and learning of Music and
Pricksong.

Eighteen pounds a year, to be continued for ever; for the Examination and
Approbation of certain Scholars yearly, out of the Free-schoole of the
Company of Merchant tailors in London.

Twenty pounds a year for ever, To the Prisons of Ludgate, Newgate, and the
two Counters. And certain Fees and Allowances, to the Officers of
Marchant-tailors-Hall, to remain to perpetuity: to see these things duly
observed, according to the purpose of his charitable and religious intention.

All which he performed with such Alacrity, that it may be said of him,
Merces eius copiosae est in Coelis; His reward is very great in the Kingdom of
Heaven.

In the sight of God, he enjoys the fulness of all Felicity, which neither
eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor man's heart achieved; For Resurrectio
immortalitatis pullulat foecundius, cum in pauperum auxilio seritur: The
Resurrection of immortality springs more fertillie, when it is sown in help
of the distressed and needy. And he living and dying (no doubt) a chosen and
beloved servant of God, and one, who (as it may be truly said of him,) had
devoutly consecrated both his whole life to God, and his careful endeavors to
the relief of the poor.

After he had performed his Oblations of Prayer and Thanksgiving to God, as
Abraham, (of whom he was a true Son) yielded up the Spirit, and died in a
good Age, an old man, and of great years; Committing his body (which was but
lately the mansion of a most excellent Soul,) unto his grave, where it rests,
in assured expectation of a glorious resurrection.

The manner of his Departure out of this World, and his desire to be with God.
IN all his sickness (which was not long by reason of the weakness and
disabilitie of his body, being fourscore and fifteen years old,) he never
showed sign of coffeehouse, or impatience, neither was there one word heard
come forth of his mouth, sounding either of despair or infideliitie, of
mistrust, or distrust, or of any doubting or wavering in the Faith of Christ,
but always remained faithful, and resolute in his God; and so desirous was he
to be with the Lord, that these golden Sentences were never out of his mouth. I
desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ; And oh miserable wretch that I
am, who shall deliver me from this body, subject to sin? Come quickly, Lord
Jesus, Come quickly.

Like as the Heart desires the Water-springs, So does my Soul thirst after
thee (Oh God.)

I had rather be a Doore-keeper in the House of my GOD, then to dwell in the
Tents of the wicked. With many other Heavenly speeches, which least I should
seem tedious, I will omit

He would always pray absolutely, that God would take him out of this
miserable World. And when his Kindred or Friends would seem to pray for his
health (if it were the will of God) He would answer;

I beseech you pray not that I should live: For I think it long to be with my
God; CHRIST is to me Life, and Death is to me advantage; Yea, the day of death
is the birth day of everlasting life; and I cannot enter into Life, but by
Death; Therefore Death is the door, or Entrance into Everlasting life to me.

I know and am certainly persuaded by the Spirit of God, that the Sentence is
given already (by the great Judge) in the High Court of Parliament of Heaven,
that I shall now depart out of this life; and therefore pray not for me, that
I may live here, but pray to God to give me strength and Patience to persevere
to the end; and to close mine eyes in a Justifying Faith, in the Blood of my
CHRIST.

With that, he said, I thank my GOD, through JESUS CHRIST; He is come, He
is come, my good Iaylour is come, to let my soul out of prison;

Oh sweet Death thou art welcome, welcome sweet death, Never was there any
Guest so welcome to me as thou art; Welcome the messenger of everlasting life:
Welcome the door and entrance into everlasting glory; Welcome I say, and
thrice welcome: My good Iaylour, do thine office quickly, and set my soul at
liberty; Strike sweet Death, strike my heart. I fear not thy stroke: Now it
is done; Father into thy blessed hands I commend my Spirit: Into thy blessed
hands I commend my Soul and my body.

At which words his breath stayed, and so neither moving hand nor foot, he
slept sweetly in the Lord. The second day, of May. Anno. 1612.

Thus have you heard the virtuous life, and Christian death of M. Dove; whose
many deeds of Charity, are more acceptable to God, and more memorable to men,
in that they were done in his life time: God stir up the hearts of Rich and
Able men to follow his steps, and give them grace to imitate his good
example; That they may come to those unspeakable Joys, wherein he now
rests, through Christ our Lord.

FINIS.

