CERTAIN SERMONS Upon diverse Texts of Scripture.

Preached by GERVASE NID Doctor of Divinity.

LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS for WALTER BURRE

1616

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN God GEORGE, by the providence of God, Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan, and one
of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
My good Lord
IT is not vain ostentation which has moved me to publish these Scrmons;
they that know me, know, that I was never any of those whom S. Basil calls
(...), which I have heard your Grace well interpret, Selfe-putting-forth
fellows. But being to leave your Graces service, I thought meet to depose
these as a small testimony of my thankfulness. Secondly, intending to commend
another Treatise to your Graces Patronage, I resolved to premise these: it
being some difficulty to find room for things of smaller value in this
voluminous age, which is so piled up with books: for who sees not, that now
the fate of Witters is the same with Preachers, whereof Saint Jerome complains
in his time: Com. in Eccles. 9.11.
Nam videas in Ecclesia imperitissimos quosque florere, and quia nutrierunt
frontis audaciam, and volubilitatem linguae consequuti sunt, prudentes se and
cruditos arbitrantur, maxim si fauorem vulgi habuerint: You may see how in the
Church the most ignorant are most esteemed, and because they have profited in
boldness of front, and volubility of tongue, they think themselves wise and
learned men; especially if the vulgar favor them. But I know your Grace ever
hated long Salutations, therefore I have to take my leave: resting,

Your Graces humble servant to be commanded. GERVASE NID.

THE FIRST SERMON. Of Murder.
1 IOH. 3.12. Not as Cain who was of the devil and slew his brother, and
wherefore slew he him? because his own works were evil and his brothers
good.


IT is the will of God that deadly sins should not die, that they which take
away the life of men, should not be able to take away life from the memory of
their wicked deeds: Wherefore in Divine History the detestable facts of sinners
are infamous and eminent spectacles threatening and admonishing a far off: To
this end the pillar of Salt was erected, and Saint Peter says, of the
combustion of Sodom, and her neighbor Cities, (...) they lie out as an
apparent, and prominent spectacle: that bituminous lake does still demonstrate
the ebullition of unnatural lust. So Cain who murdered his brother in the
beginning of the world, still hangs upon a gibbet until the worlds end.

All manner of death is mute, Psalm. 115.17.
and the grave is called Domus silentum: only those that are murdered talk
after they are dead, Reu. 6.10.
How long Lord: and in the 11 to the Hebrews, Abel the just being dead, yet
speaks: (...). Where speaks he? marry in Scripture, says Beza: wheresoever
there is relation of this murder, they be the words of the blood of Abel. So
the words which I have read suppose them to be sighs of Abel rendered from his
grave: Gemitus lachrymabililis im^, auditur tumulo, as the blood of Polydor in
Virgil, bids fly or depart: so the blood of Abel bids beware, eschew:
(...), Be not like to Cain who slew his brother, etc. which words have three
parts: First, a dehortation from being like unto Cain, in the first words, Not
as Cain. Secondly, a description of the person to whom we must not be like:
1. from his nature, or quality, he is of the devil: 2. from his fact, he slew
his brother. The third part contains the cause that moved Cain to this
horrible fact, consisting of a question and an answer, the question, wherefore
slew he him, the answer because, etc. here be two motives; one outward, the
sight of his brothers virtues, the other inward, the beholding of his own
vices: the comparison of which two, struck such a fire of hatred within him
(strange monster) as would not be extinguished but by his brothers blood.

First then of the dehortation, or prohibition, Not as Cain. The sacred
Scripture which ever suffered more calumniation from her own, was slandered by
heretics for the narration of evil deeds; whereas, says Saint Augustine,
wicked facts are always expressly condemned, either where they are related, or
in some other place of Scripture: Indeed there are ambiguous facts of the
Fathers, as Abraham's cuasion to Abimelech, and Jacobs simulation to his father,
which as we must not condemn, so we must not imitate, not knowing whether
they were sins, or no sins in them: but for the manifest crimes occurring
in the History of the Book of God, what madness to esteem them otherwise
then as evil actions, in good men to be pittyed that they cannot always be
good, and to be detested in evil men because they would never but do evil.
Manacheus.
Yet such spirits of error have not wanted; some condemning the Scriptures
because they record wicked deeds. Others commending wickedness because it is
recorded in Scriptures, Tertul. praser.
as the followers of Marcion and Carpecrates. And for the other kind which were
doubtful actions whether they were good or evil: if they were evil, Facta
credamus, non facienda: Believe that they were done, believe not that they
ought to be done. And if they were good in those men, it was by extraordinary
dispensation which is not granted unto us: and therefore such examples, do
neither excuse the old Priscilians from lying, nor the faithless generation of
Equinocators, which swear with their tongues but keep their minds unsworn.

Now for these words, Not as Cain: Who would believe that any judgment were so
corrupt, as either to praise Cains fact, or to honor his person? but that we
read in Tertullian, Epiphanius, S. Austine, and others, of a brood of
heretics called Caiani, who did honor Cain, affirming that he was a worthy
man, conceived by some powerful nature, which therefore showed it self mighty
within him, that his brother was conceived of a weaker and inferior
conception: The same Heretics honored Core, Dathan, and Abiram, as men of
courage and resolution: yea, they adored Judas the traitor, being persuaded
that some Divine operation, and Prophetical instinct, did direct him, that by
delivering of his Master to the Jews, all men might be delivered from the
devil. Thus Adams eating of that forbidden fruit, has put the judgments of
his posterity out of taste. Hence women long for meats that are noisome,
taking it from the first woman, and all men being concelued in that corruption
have their judgments and appetites so absurd, as David complains, according
to the Greek Tranflation: (...): in sins my mother longing has conceived
me: This Insipience appears strangely in some, that they affect and like
such things as be openly repugnant unto right reason, and distastefull unto
nature corrected: So the Persians admired Nero, that hatred of God and men (and
as Suctonius reports) whom all others thought unworthy of common burial:
they sent yearly some with flowers and odours to adorn his sepulcher: Thus,
as Saint Jerome says, there are men which admire none but the basest wits and
obscurest Authors: Neque est fere tam ineptus scriptor quin sui similem
inueniet lectorem: What stupidity to prefer Cartright and Brightman, and such
trash, before all the Worthies, both new and old. What is this, but in our
iourny toward heaven to forsake the glorious Lamps which have guided all our
Ancestors, and to follow every Ignis fat^^s: every new light: These are (...)
senseless appetites, 1. Tim. 6.9.
as Saint Paul calls them (...), that is of me^ whose judgments are corrupted,
and out of taste: Wherefore almighty God is not so much displeased with Israel
for her spiritual fornications, although he was displeased, as that she
doated upon such beastly and clownish lovers (...) Asses and stallions:
Ezechiel 23.30 Septuag.
Like Pasiphae, which doted on a Bull. The like infection is in all-those
understandings which relish nothing that is plain and profitable, ancient and
honest, but profane novelties: Every worthy man has his imperfections: There
is no fish without bones; yet some embrace nothing but these, Colligentes
spinas librorum: Gathering thorns out of books, whence proceed all these
bitter pamphlets and inuctiues: All these are appetites of absurd Cainites,
whom Saint John did in these words prevent: And jointly all of that humor:
perverse lovers, and perverse imitators: which thing also in his third Epistle,
and verse 11, he generally forbids.

Beloved be not imitators of that which is evil: the Holy Ghost foresaw that
such besotted iniquities would arise, that the examples of wickedness would
be so abused, therefore he thought it not needless to set this mark upon
them, Not as Cain, envious and murtherous, and Heb. 12.16. not as Esau,
fornicators and profane. It is the crooked disposition of man to promote his
sinful actions by such examples as should restrain him. So whereas amongst
the Grecians some used to drink out of a dead man's scull, to moderate their
pleasures by consideration of their mortality, others applied it to the
provocation of intemperance, saying, (...) let us eat and drink, for to
morrow we shall dye.

Further, if they do not thus pervert examples, yet how little are they moved
by them: wherefore does the world still offend upon the same, and no sin can
be consumed by punishment, although the monuments of precedent ages do
exclaim against us, and there is no offender which has not seen others
perish by the same sin. O seek not your death in the error of your life:
look upon your predecessors: Thou intendest murder, behold Caine, how he is
stricken with the palsy of an affrighted conscience, a quaking runnagate,
restless when he rests, tormented with repentlesse horror, and unprofitable
grief. And is not every homicide signed in the forehead?

Now follows the description of this wicked person, first of his nature, and
badnesse of disposition, he was of the Devil. Every worker of imquity is the
Devils bastard, and the Devil is a father, not by substantial procreation,
but by original cause and similitude of disposition. For as there is semen
Dei, the incorruptible seed, whereby the begotten of God are the sons of God:
so there is semen Diabolt, and that is concupiscence, which conceiueth and
brings forth unto the Devil: hence sloweth that similitude of nature which
discovers the true father of the children: first in countenance, none are
like unto him, but they that paint says Tertullian: but in speech, in gesture,
in action innumerable: in speech, all slaunderers and detracters, (...), he
Devils, and she Devils, Tit us 2.3. In gesture, he that winketh with his eye,
treades with his foot, signifies with his fingers for to raise dissension, he
is a son of Beliall, Pro. 6.13.
as Solomon describes: and as for action, when iniquity is grown to ripe age,
and maturitie of defection, the children of Satan doc so resemble their
father, that they be often supposed fiends incarnate: so S. Paul calls
Elimas the Magician son of the Devil, Acts 13.10.
because he was replenished with all deceit.

Now Caine is not only begotten, but first begotten of this evil one, the
first branch of sin, the first propagated evil. Mark how soon ill weeds
shoot up: the mother is corrupted of the serpent, and the first she bears is
a serpent, who no sooner grown able, but declares his father: the father the
first murderer of souls, the son the first murderer of bodies: the father
procures the first curse upon the earth, the son procures the second: the
father first brought in death, the son untimely death. And sure, if you
obscrue the progeny of Satan, (let no discreet man be offended) you shall
find that it much tanne upon the elder brothers. First, besides that Satan may
be called an elder brother, being the chief of the ways of God, Job. 34.
Cain was the first eldest brother in the old world, then cutsed Cham the
eleldest of the new world, and wild Ismael the eldest to the father of the
faithful, and profane Esau, which sold his birthright, the father of all
unthrifty heirs, which sell their honor for their pleasure. Lastly, Ruben,
which desiled his fathers bed. But we read in the Gospel, that the elder lived
soberly at home: the running Prodigal was a younger brother. This I observe,
first to note the despite of Satan, because the first borne is Gods, therefore
he endeavors his utmost for that: secondly, how the Almighty suffers him to
carry it oftentimes, perhaps to signify that these first fruits of nature are
not in such high request with God: there is a new creature, a second Adam which
he esteems, which therefore he causes to spring often out of younger and
inscrior Nature, because the excellencies of nature were so ungrateful unto
him. Again, to abate the admiration of prime Nature, wherewith the most
spiritual sons of God have been taken. O that Ismael might live in thy
sight, says Abraham. And Isaac would gladly have blessed Esau, but God would
not. So Joseph would gladly put the right hand of his father upon Manasseth:
and in Jacob I hear the voice of Nature Iamenting, Ruben my eldest son, my
might and the beginning of my strength, the excellency of dignity, and the
excellency of power: thou wast light as water, thou can not be excellent, and
thy dignity is gone. To conclude, seeing in this corrupt mass of humanity,
the first generation that was formed was evil, it argues that no man is good
which is not first regenerated out of evil. Nemo bonus qui non ex mal^ bonus,
says S. Augustine against the spirit of Pelagius. Who knows not the vanity
of the Manichies, and the dotage of Illirieus, who out of this and other places
made sin substantial, and the Devil a creator of sinful men: which follies
to name is to confute them.

Neither am I persuaded, that evil spirits have any part in the generation of
the most ungracious natures, although the worthiest Christian wits did hold,
that they had knowledge of the fair daughters of men, and thence to have
proceeded the race of Giants, as monstrous for their vices and conditions, as
vast and enormious in their bodies, that this infectious and detestable seed
being dispersed through the whole earth, does now and then spring up and
produce such abominable monsters as Heliogabalus and Mahomet, and other
carnal fiendes. The prodigious lewdness of some violent, and in corrigible
natures has caused this opinion more probable then true: howsocuer, it is sure
the Devil has a lineage upon earth, and Cain is the most ancient of that
kindred.

In this pair of brothers were the two houses first divided, and as they begun
with fighting, so they have continued until now. Hence multiplied the two
Cities, Cinitas Dei, and Terrena ciuitas. whose beginnings, proceedings, and
wonderful variety of fortunes, how learnedly has S. Austin followed in those
sweet books which begin Gloriosissimam ^iuitatem Dei. Where he teaches how
every man belongs to one of those Cities, being descended either of the
malignity of Cain, or of the blood of Abel which Cain spilt. There are but two
factions: if thou be of Abels blood, declare what house thou come of, by
thy innocence, and patience of the Saints: If thou art of Caines kindred, then
deny not thy name, be content to be numbered amongst thine own. And thus much
of the nature of Cain. Of the stock and descent: he is ex maligno of the
Devil, of the malignant faction: to conclude, a vessel of dishonor, made of
the corrupt mass: for if he had not been of the evil, he should not have
been evil: hac enim, Aug. epist. 106
massa, si ita esset media: vt quemadmodum nihil bont ita nec mali aliquid
mereretur non frustra videretur iniquitas vt ex ea fierent vasa in contumeliam.
This masseis it were of indifferent quality neither good nor evil, there might
be cause to think it injustice in God to make out of it any vessels of
dishonor.

Now such as the tree is, such is the fruit. Who was of the Dinell, there is
the tree: who slew his brother, there is the fruit: bitter and deadly fruit,
especially in the manner, (...), the word signifies to cut in pieces like a
sacrifice, because he had sacrificed so well. Cain would sacrifice him. So
Pilat mixed the Galileans blood with their sacrifice. And at the time of
Immolation of the Passover, the Jews sacrificed the innocent lamb of God:
thus the innocent when they are murdered, they are offered to God in contempt
of God, and his worship, that they may seem to perish by him in whom they
trusted. Another circumstance is of the time how soon Cain shed blood, and the
Devil slaieth in the morning: in the morning of youth, and in the morning of
the world. By him death entered, and how he longs to see it work? and that
in the first blossom of virtue. It is his cunning to stop the first step to
goodness, therefore have care of the beginning of thy ways of thy youth and
good endeavors, for there the Devil is most instant; he knows well, that in
every beginning is contained more then a beginning. As soon as the Temple
began to be re-edified, he opposed mainly, he stirred every stone, that no
stone might be stirred. And immediately when the Savior of our souls began
the office of Christ, the Devil tempted him in the desert: so in the nativity
of the creation, he slew the first innocence of Nature, and in the entrance of
generation, the first innocence of grace. So he persecuted the tender infancy
of our Lord, and he made the Primitive Church to swim with blood. He knew that
if the world were stained when it was a new vessel, that color would continue
unto the end. So Rome an Epitome of the world, in token that it should be died
with the blood of Martyrs, the foundations of her walls were dipped in brothers
blood. Cain and Romulus, both elder brothers, both furious and potent: Cain in
his name, which signifies possession, showed that he had elenen parts against
one: so Achab killed Naboth, and took possession, and ever the greater part
overcomes the better: Abel could not kill Cain if he would; but where might
and malice, wealth and wrath are joined, there break forth iniuties and
oppressions. (...) wealth brings forth wrong. Wherefore God set a mark upon
Cain, that men might beware of him. As the Romans used to bind some hay to the
horns of a mad Bull, to signify (says Plutarke) that too much sodder made
him mad; whereupon they applied this proverb: Foenum habet in cornu: beware of
him that is injurious and rich. Now as Cain was a pattern of all oppressors,
having power, and doing wrong: so Abel signifying vanity, in the beginning, was
a type not only of death, but of the vanity of life; for every man living is
altogether vanity: How many have their sunne-setting in the morning, and they
which have the longest day, live but a day, so soon do we appear, and
vanish. Vanity in apparel, walking in a vain shadow, talking vainly,
disquietting our selves in vain, vain hopes, and vain desires. In the days
of my vanity (says Solomon) I saw this and that vanity, and whatsoever I
beheld was vanity of vanities. Another thing was allegorized in this History,
namely, how our Savior Christ, the second Adam, was murdered by the Elders of
the Jews, and his Blood shed, though speaking better things then that of Abel.
without the gates, as Abels in the fields: for which horrible sin of
Godslaughter, the Jews shall be errant vagabonds unto the worlds end, signed
by God, that although all men hate and eschew them, yet none shall kill them.
Destroy them not O God (says the Psalmist) least my people forget it, but
scatter and despearse them: So they are aliens in the whole earth, a common
proverb, a common prey, not borne but by leave, nor breathing but by good
will. And surely it is seldom seen, but shame and beggary is the end of those
which destroy the innocent, either by the mouth of the sword, or by the sword
of the mouth: and they which kill men's souls by heresy and selusme, and they
which slay by hatred, and they which raven and oppress. As the great fish
eats the less, and the greater cates the great, and the greatest the greater;
so greedy Cainites devour and are deooured, but at last the biggest (says S.
Basil) comes into the net, and the devil rips the prey out of his bowels, thou
appears the insatiablenesse of these swallow-goods that have more riches then
they can digest, when the whole estate of such and such a man, shall be found
in their bags indigested. The last degree of Cain his exceeding wickedness,
that he killed his brother, his natural brother, and his only brother; and
which aggrauates his villainy, in whom were all the kinds and degrees of
brotherhood undivided. For then there were not brothers, some by the father,
some by the mother, brothers by friendship not by blood, brothers by affinity
not by consanguinity, brothers, that is, the same Countrymen not strangers,
brothers of the same Religion and not diverse, but all these strings of love and
affection they were united in one. Neither did he it for want of lands and
territories: for was he not heir of the whole earth? but Ambition and
Covetousness are impatient of consort and fellowship, be they never so much
dilated. Further, by this murder Caine is guilty of the blood of Christ, and
all the blessed Progeny, which should have been derived from him. Nay yet
further, he has slain all posterities that followed, all generations may call
him cursed: For if God had destroyed him, and given Eve no more children, as
justly he might have done, the propogation of mankind had been cut off, and
this fair world shut up, as soon as it was made, like goodly new houses which
have no inhabitants.

But the love of brothers will not suffer me to pass it thus, which the more
sacred it is, with the greater sin was it violated by this unnatural. Why
did he not consider that having a brother his strength was doubled? For what
are brothers but two in one, two in labor but one in enjoying, two against all
others, one betwixt themselves? What advantage is it to be in two places at
once, to watch when he sleeps, to have his health when he is sick, and all
this not by a deputy, but by himself? for this union is in some sense
natural, not only of affection. Two hands, two feet, two eyes, two cares, in
one body, do resemble brothers, which are two bodies in one. Wherefore
fraternall love being a pattern of all love, when we would have any to love
entirely we style them by the name of brethren. As brethren envy not one
another: for the love of husband and wife though it be great, yet it is not
natural but grafted, the love of parents and children greater, but not
reciprocal, for love descends not ascends, but the love of brothers is
natural and collateral, neither ouer-awed with reverence, nor by satiety
intermitted.

How full of sweetness is it, to remember, (says Valerius) that we lived in
the same lodging before that we were borne, and past the time of our infancy in
the same cradle, smiled upon the same parents, preserved by the same prayers
and vows, drawing equal honor from the same Ancestors? having had the same
parents, the same womb, the same blood, the same beginning, the same
education, the same nobility, the same estate, the same discipline, why should
they not will and nill the same, be of the same mind and affections? But this
is the mischief of sin and of the devil, that the sweetest love turns
into the sharpest hatred, brothers being incensed are unquenchable; as much
water will not quench their love, so not the Ocean their hatred. Because every
injury is more grievous proceeding from a friend, (...); what will Brutus stab
Caesar? that strikes him to the heart. And our Savior to his Apostles, John 6.
will you also forsake me? you? But this woeful discord of brethren is not
usually kindled but by extraordinary wrong. What was it that enslamed Cain,
wherefore slew he him?

This interrogation is to stir us to attention, and makes way for an evident
reason following: Romans 9.22.
for no man will demand of himself unless his answer be plain and ready.
Then the reason is because his own works were evil, and his brothers good.
Because his own works were evil, therefore will he make them worse? and
because his brothers works were good, did that only offend him that his
brother did not offend? if he liked his own evil works better, why was he
not content with them? and if he loved his brothers good works, why did he not
make his own like them? So wickedness is loathsome to the wicked, yet he will
retain it, and thought he choose to be evil, yet he would not be so
accounted. But what were his evil works? No man is extremely sinful all at
once, vice grows upon men by degrees, therefore before this oblation it is
probable that he was disobedient to his parents, proud, voluptuous, preferring
the world, despising the simplicity of innocence, and the infirmity of virtue,
and coming thus affected how could his offering please God? how could the
fruits of the earth be acceptable, when the fruits of good works were
wanting? an honest man will not take a gift from a knave, much less will God
admit of such giftlesse gifts. Thought he by those gifts to bribe the
Almighty, and procure conneiuance to his sins? so it was: and so it is the
daily practice of secular manners, to serve God only to make use of him: for
as religious men (says Saint Austine) do use the world that they may enjoy
GOD; so the ungodly do use GOD that they may more freely enjoy the world, which
indeed is to make themselves a friend of the righteous GOD, that they may more
plenteously enjoy the unrighteous Mammon. Abel was not thus conditioned, but
offered unto God himself also by mortification, and sacrificed in the faith of
that alone Sacrifice, to come with living sacrifice God accepted, neglecting
the inanimate oblation of Cain, Viua accipien^ terrenarecusans, says
Prudentius: the sight of these virtues made Cain to deiect his countenance, and
envy followed, and murder the brood of envy. So the brethren of Joseph being
moved with envy, sold him into Egypt, and there can be nothing excellent, but
the eye of envy espyes it. An evil eye (says our Savior) therefore evil
because another is good, a sore eye which cannot endure to look upon a
quality that is bright and amiable in his brother. This insatiable vice being
that which first moved the Devil against our nature entire, and first moved
Cain against Abel, it is one also of the first vices which appears in our
nature. Vidi puerum amaro vultu in tuentem collactaneum suum. I have seen an
infant (says S. Augustine) look bitterly upon his fellow-suckling, Confess.
and it is one of the last sins. Hence is bewitching commonly in old women,
which antiquity did believe to be effected by the poison of an envious eye, as
appears by the name (...) and fascinus that is, killing with the eye: this
made them so fearful of any singular or admirable nature, least it should be
blasted with envy, and perish, especially if it were a maturitie before his
season, praecox fructus, a hasty fruit, wit or valor above his years. (...).
says Menander, therefore when any one praised it, they were wont to say,
prefiscini, God bless it; least perhaps self-love might breed within it, or
rather, because envy did pretend flattery; I omit superstition: but sure it is,
whether the world be not worthy of things worthy, or because God permits the
devil still to exercise his inueterate envy, or whether the substance of these
beauties is not durable, howsoever it is, things wonderfully amiable, have no
long continuance. Whilst virtue is in health, malice hates it, and love
neglects it; and if it perish not quickly of it self, envy murders it: envy
will consume it self until it be consumed. Which conjunction of envy and
murder, the Greeks expressed in the similitude of their names: there is but
one letter between envy and death; (...)
and that is a deadly and dismal letter. So the Apostle ioynes them together:
Romans 2.19
Full of envy and murder. And Gal. 5.2. The works of the flesh are enuies and
murders. Wherefore if thou will prevent the one, suppress the other. Thou
beholdest in another that good which is not in thy self: either it is thine
own fault, or in recompense thou have that which he wants. Or why do
thou malign him when God gave it him? or may not God dispose of his own? or
is there not another world to give every man satisfaction? Further, alas what
is there in this world worthy of envy? is not every good thing haunted with his
spirit? are not the virtues of the best poor enough, but we must pair them
by detraction? if thou will needs envy, envy within thy self, to see the worse
part get the better, to see the prosperity and insolency of the flesh above
the spirit. Woe to them (says Saint Jude) which walk in the way of Cain: for
they contemn the simplicity of Grace, for they admire things transitory, and
there is no love in them. From which sins the blessed spirit of love preserve
us, which combineth the Father and the Son, unto whom one GOD be all honor,
praise, and confession for evermore. Amen.

The end of the first Sermon.
THE SECOND SERMON. Of Humane Misery.
JOB. 3.20. Wherefore is the light given to him that is in misery, and life to
them which are bitter in spirit?


THINGS Tragical which in themselves are fearful and unpleasant,
notwithstanding they are represented or remembered with delight. But besides
that the suffsrings of the Saints recorded in Scripture, do afford unto a
Christian further instruction, namely with the Greek Church to pray to have
his purgatory in this life, and to say with S. Austen; Domine hic seca, hic
ure, vt in aeternum parcas. Lord here lance me, and here lash me, that thou
may spare me for ever. A famous pattern of these passions was happy Job,
and amongst other his tragical exclamations is this miserable and doleful
complaint powered out of the abundance of his grief. In which text consider
two things, First the grief and passion of Jobs mind expressed by an
interrogation, quare, wherefore. Secondly, the cause and matter of his grief
in the words following, which is the misery of mankind, and that he diuides
into two kinds, the troublesome things which we do, out of these words, light
and labor: and the miserable things that we suffer in the words following, and
life to them that are bitter in spirit. For he thinks that light does
aggrauate our labors, and life augment our sufferings.

This interrogation wherefore is not a word of indignation or murmr against
God, but of sorrow and complaint. For sighs and groans, and miserable
outcries, they are the irruptions of a heart burdened with grief, which if it
should not find passage that way, would be combust, or cleave asunder. And
they are caused oftentimes from extreme heat and affection of love, when the
mind being stricken with some unexpected accidents, utters terms which
seem to be of hatred and disgrace, which notwithstanding do indeed proceed
only from the affection of love troubled and distracted. Such affectionate
speeches the Psalms, the Canticles, and the book of Job, they be full of;
where the Saints of God are expressed, varying themselves into all shapes of
affections. Into fear, into hope, into chiding, into weeping, into sudden
silence, into show of despair, into forsaking, and suddenly into earnest
entreating. Hence we learn two things: The first, that the violence of
affection and grief, it may be pleasing unto God sometimes, and compatible
with the government of reason and of grace. There is in us naturally in some
more, in some less, a softness and flexiblenesse of nature, which takes
impression of grief: it is created of God, and the operations of it are not in
vain: When God is angry he will have us grieve: when he chides, or when he
scourges, he will have us weep and power out our souls into deprecations and
complaints. Yea then our love appears to him, when we melt like wax before
the heat of his anger, when we seek him, and sorrow that we cannot find him,
and when we feel the discontinuance of his favor. This bleeding of the heart
of man, it is delightsome both to God and to us, therefore says Saint Austine:
Possumne audire abs te Domine, Cur fletus dulcis sit miseris? an hoe tibi dulce
est quod speramus ex audire te? Neither is the extremity of any passion to be
blamed, but the perturbation, or disobedience to reason? Therefore we read in
Scripture of the boly men of God when they were afflicted with any occasion of
grief, that their sorrow is expressed in terms of greatest lamentation. They
rend their hearts and their garments, they afflict their souls with fasting,
they put on sackecloth and ashes, because as Saint Jerome says, Ieiunus venture
and hahitus lugubris Ambitiosius dominum deprecantur. Lastly, their words are
doleful above all the Tragical exclamations that Art can find. How exceeding
great was the lamentation of Jeremy, for the good King Josias? that it came to
be a Proverb, as the mourning of Hadadrimon in the valley of Megiddon.
Wherefore there being a mean and measure in mourning, two extremities are to
be avoided: the first is dullness and sencelessenes of heart, a pretended
calmness, but indeed a stoicall and unnatural carelessenesse, proceeding
from the love of case and want of compassion and affection, either in our own
troubles, or the troubles of others. These men will neither weep, nor
exclaim, nor give any signs of violent passions, as if this were fortitude
and patience, which is rather stupidity and want of charity. What father will
like his son if upon his displeasure he show himself nothing daunted, nor
moved in his countenance, nor stricken at the heart, to look pale, or to
humble his voice, or to weep, or to deiect his eyes? Will a father call this
patience, or stubbornness, in his son? Such are they, who when their heavenly
Father afflicts them make have presently to stop their passions, that neither
tears, nor groans, nor complaints, may find any passage, through too much
self-love, or indolence, hasting to heal their hearts before they are
wounded, and to comfort their consciences before they be afflicted. Heerevpon
they condemn all deep sorrow and lamentation as soft and effeminate, or want
of faith and patience, all funeral rites and ceremonies as Heathenish and
Unchristian, all solemn afflicting of the soul, himnes, supplications,
fasting, and alms deeds; which notwithstanding has been practiced of holiest
men and women in all ages. In the eighth of the Acts, the second verse, deuote
men bear out the body of the blessed Martyr Saint Stephen, (...) and made
great lamentation. The word signifies extremity of grief with beating and
knocking of the breast. With what extraordinary sorrow did Saint Austine mourn
for the death of his mother? Et libuit flere in conspectu tuo de Illa and pro
illa, de me and pro me and dimisi, lachrimas vt effluerint quantum vellent.
Lastly, which is the greatest commendations of this goodness and softness of
nature, we read that our Savior Christ was deeply moved, and did weep at the
departure of his friend, whereupon the Jews observed how greatly he loved
him. God has created in our hearts, Dulce nomen: (...), this sweet name of
natural affection. Which is as a spark of that eternal love wherewith the
indiuided Trinity is enslamed. Which is so spiritual and active, that being
moved it does presently heat and dissolve the heart into passion.

The second extreme to be avoided is, immoderation of grief, which proceeds
from impatience and unbelief. For when men believe not that God is the God of
the dead, as well as of the living, and of the sick as of the whole; that all
things work unto the good of the godly: then love sailing them, and their
hope, they sorrow like them which have no hope. And how can they have any hope,
when they want the Comforter, who is so called, says Saint Austiue, that they
which suffer loss of things temporal might be comforted with hope of things
eternal. Therefore when any cross befalls them, through immoderate love of
these transitory things, they are infinitely dejected, full of bitter thoughts,
of cursing and howling, Desperate mourners, not capable of consolation;
accusers of God, reuolters from Religion. One example for all, take the King of
Israel in that miserable siege and famine of Samaria, how he railes; first,
against the Prophet of God; secondly, against God himself, for that is the
method, and these are his blasphemous words: Behold what evil comes from
the Lord! why should I wait longer upon the Lord? Ecce tantum malia Domino,
quid amplius expectabo a Domino? A true example of impatience and insidelity.
Likewise the Gentiles when the hand of God was upon them, they used to break
out into exclamations and accusations against God; as in that: Atque Deos,
atque astra vocat crudelia matter. As Quiutilian: quis mihi alius vsus vocis
qua^ vt incusem Deos? And, Iure per mala mea per infelicem conscientiam, Hence
rise their funeral pompes, and superstitious exequies for the dead:
Sacrificing of men and women, in honor of the defunct; ertificiall howling and
cutting of their flesh, ambitious Sepulchers, and excessive feasts of many
days continuance: In which kind every Nation had some peculiar vanity and
superstition above the rest. Lastly, in all their troubles and calamities they
captiuate their understandings to their affections, wayling without restraint,
raging against God and his creatures. But Jobs lamenting was not of this kind;
neither are his words otherways to be interpreted, then as signs of
extraordinary grief easing his oppressed heart, although not without some
perturbation. Hitherto of the grief and passion of Jobs mind, expressed by
this interrogation, Quare, wherefore? Which is a word of sorrow not of
indignation.

Now to the matter and cause of his grief: namely, that such benefits of God
as light and life, should be so blotted with miseries and vexation of spirit.
Although according to the usual interpretation, these words have one and the
same sense; light and life, and labor and bitterness of soul; yet their
proper acception, and signification, will afford us this difference of
discourse. All the misery of man is either labor, or bitterness of soul: By
labor understand all that we do with difficulty and impediment, whether they
be actions, and operations, of the mind or body. By bitterness of soul is
meant all that we suffer in our souls, either immediately or from the body, or
any outward affliction. These two diverse kinds of misery do planely and
distinctly appear in that sentence of woe which God pronounces against Adam,
In dolor comedes, here is the misery of suffering: In sudore comedes, there
is the misery of working. In like manner the good things which we enjoy, they
be either such as guide and ease our actions, which Job comprehends under the
name of light: or those which sustain and benefit our passions, which are
contained in the word Life. For the first, Light is of three sorts; sensible,
intellectual, and spiritual. Sensible light is either artificial, or
natural: Concerning natural light, as of it self nothing is more sweet and
cheerful, so to the spirit which is in weariness and toil, nothing is more
tedious. In the 10 of Eccle. the 7 verse: Lighe is sweet. And in the Creation,
light is the first creature that is made, and first hallowed. Hence is it
adorned with so many Epithits in Greek (...) Therefore as poor laborers by
singing do sweeten their pains; for which cause S. Basil calls their singing
(...) the sauce of their toil: So the light of the Sun does lighten their
labor, and makes them more cheerful in their work. Yet how much pleasanter
is light to them that are at liberty and rest? which have leisure to
contemplate the beauty of the heavens, or to discourse of the benefits of
light. But if they be bound to some grievous tax, and incessant labor, as
the Israelites, then light is but an eyesore. Whilst they see their own
vexation, and how much work they have to do: whilst they see others sporting
and themselves toyling. Lastly, whilst they see their misery to be exposed to
the sight of all. They see youth dancing, and age wooing; women walking to
theaters to see and to be seen. Lastly, they see the day distribrute beauty
and cheerofulnesse to all creatures but unto themselves: unto birds, unto
buildings, to the clouds, to the air, to the earth, to the waters. And
therefore unto them which in time of old tyranny, were condemned ad
lapicidiuas, yet this was some comfort, that they neither so much saw their own
misery, nor the happiness of others. The Sun in the creation was ordained
for signs and seasons, to rule the day, and to shine upon the earth: but after
sin had brought in labor, the sun became a taske-maister to call men forth
unto their work, as it is in the 104 Psalm. The sun rises, and man goes
forth unto his labor until the evening. Likewisese Ecclesiastes the King,
speaking of toil and labor, he usually styles it, Labor under the sun. What
profito has a man of all his labor wherein he labors under the sin? So
that as the eye of the master urges the servants work: so the eye of heaven
exacts labor, and vpbraids rest unto miserable and mortal men. And yet when
the sun is down, still light continues labor by artificial lamps and
candles, holding them to their task. Whereupon from the name of light this
labor is called Lucubration. Therefore Job lamenting the affliction of
mankind, does fitly use this speech, Wherefore is light given to them that
labor? the sweet sight whereof they cannot enjoy. Which have no leisure to
feed their eyes with pleafant colors, or with sights and theaters? Wherefore
do they see light? light the measure of pains, the renewer of weariness, the
enemy of rest, the opener of the eyes which want sleep. Wherefore is light
given to augment labor, and pursue the poor servants in the night? The
painful housewise rises in the night, and holds her maids to their task.
Prou. 31. Noctem addens operi, famulasque ad lumina longo exercet penso, castum
vt seruare cubile coniugis and possit paruos educere natos. So every Carpenter
and Workemaister that labors day and night, and watches to finish a work,
operi perficiendo inuigilat. The Smith also by the Anuill, early and late, are
not his eyes put out with too much light? whiles the vapor of the fire wastes
his flesh, and the noise of the hammer is ever beating in his earer, and ad
poliendum opus aduigilat, and he watches to polish his work. To conclude
then, seeing as light was first ordained for delight and pleasure, and to
direct and illustrate our actions; So now since we were condemned to labor
and travel, it is become tedious and cruel; let us with Job bewail our
finnes, which have so altered our condition, and sigh to be delivered from the
house of bondage into that liberty where the wearied be at rest, where the
servant is free from his master, and the voice of the oppressor is not heard.

Now besides this sensible light, there is also the light of knowledge and
understanding, which in stead of joy and delight, how it adds affliction unto
those that labor, does more easily appear. For as it is Eccles. 1. vlt. in
multa sapientia multa indignatio, and qui addit sapientiam, addit laborem. The
eye of the understanding is so owlish, that the light of knowledge does offend
it. So that most men do either decline wisdom and experience, or else
complaint of the labor wherewith it is accompanied. It is true which Solomon
says, Ecles. 2. That wisdom excelles folly as much as light excelles
darkness: and that the eyes of a a wise man are in his head, but the fool
walks in darkness. Yet when the light that is within us is darkness, says
our Savior, how greatis that darkness? For which cause we may complain
with Job, Wherefore is knowledge given to them that labor? Whereby they know
this one thing, that they know nothing whereby they know God, but better what
he is not then what he is. Whereby they know themselves to be most misescrable
and wretched. Wherefore is knowledge given to those that labor? whereby their
labor is more increased by knowledge, then their knowledge by labor. Whereby
they know what it is to labor. For as children and fools are most
indefatigable in pains, because they do not prize nor esteem labor: so wise
men, the more wisdom they have, the more sensible they are of pains, and the
cogitation and weighing of their labor, makes it appear more grievous and
more weighty unto them. Pueris continuus lusus, and totius dici discursus non
nocet, quia pondus illis abest, nec se ipsi grauant. Children (says
Quintilian) are not weary, because they have not weight of understanding: but
in men consideration and judgment makes their minds more ponderous, and so
labor becomes more difficult and burdensome unto them. Lastly, this model of
knowledge which this world affords us, is so small, that as the Orator says
of the poor pittance of a paisoner, (...), it neither can strenthen the body,
nor will suffer it to die. So this knowledge neither can make a man happy, nor
will suffer some men to seek for that knowledge which would make them happy.
But this is true of intellectual light, it is not so of spiritual. Yet surely
even this light also has his spots of darkness. For the beams of spiritual
graces which are extraordinarily infused by the holy Ghost, being (...),
illuminations, or (...), sanctifications they are mixed with the imperfections
and frailties of these corrupt souls and bodies of ours. We here see in part,
and we know in part; and the beauty of our purity consists more in the love
of God, then in the loveliness of man.

Now follows the last part of Jobs complaint. And life to them that are bitter
of soul. Where he laments two things: The misery of life, and the life of
misery. Bitterness of soul, there is the misery of life. And life to them
that are bitter in soul, that is the life of misery.

When the child is borne into the world, he weeps, prophesying (says S.
Austen) of his misery to come. His cradle is his grave: he suckes error with
his milk: and when his understanding first appears, the weeds of bad
affections spring up with it. Before he knows what vice is, he becomes
vicious. Further, how many cruelties do they suffer? whilst some are snatched
from their mothers breasts, and either exposed with Moses, or dashed against the
stones as the children of Babylon. Whilst some are the death of those that
bear them, and loose their mothers before they can smile upon them. Whilst
some do but once by breath take in the air, and then breathe out their souls
into the air. Whom God only shows unto the world, and takes them away as
soon as he has given them. And if they live till youth, what says the wise
man of youth? (...). Youth is vanity it self. ruled by fancy and affection,
adoring pleasure, and treasuring up matter of repentance for age, full of hopes
and crednlity, ouer-growne with vice: by waste and prodigality making war
against himself, as disobedient to reason, as to his parents. Lastly, what is
youth, but the boiling of outrageous, blood, which when it is decocted, and
something more moderate by age, although it be less boasting, yet is it more
pernicious and hurtful. For most men when they grow to experience and years,
they strive to put off simplicity, and to put on craft. And then they have
well profited, when they can deceive, and not be deceived. Their knowledge is
now to unlearn that they learned before. Their bodies how much the stronger,
so much the longerenduring of sickness, of consumption, of death.
Vainglorious, cruel, dissembling, rising by the ruins of others. Lastly,
what is man-age, but the Giantnesse of sin, and the power of misery? But
when these ages of childe-hood, youth, and manhood are worn into old age,
then you have the recapitulation of humane misery: the infirmity of
childe-age, the incorrigibilitie of Boy-age, the subtlety of Man-age: and all
these greater here then in the former Ages. Here the prodigality of youth is
dried up into avarice: pride, and lust be sins here out of fashion, but not
out of use, indecent and unbeseeming vices. Here wisdom doateth, and of power
to sin is left a will to sin, the greater torment. Lastly, what is old age,
but the storehouse of repentance and oblivion, the rags of life, the ashes
of a lustful body, and weariness of a wandering mind? Atque hi sunt manes
quos patimur: these are the miseries which we suffer in all ages, sin, and
sorrow, and folly, vexation and bitterness of spirit. Hence spring complaints
and discontent, either for want, or disease, or the frustration of our hopes,
or some other evil. No prosperity without change, and in the midst of
laughter the heart is heavy. What way and course of life can a man cut out,
wherein there is not trouble and vexation of spirit? Theology never so full of
questions, the law as full of difficulties as men of quarrels. Physic as
manifold in cures as the appetite in absurd desires. In Courts few prosper, and
those that prosper perish. The Country makes beasts, and the City Devils.
Single life is solitary, and marriage ill company.

This is the misery of life. Now follows the life of Misery. Who knows not
that life, and all the comforts of life, they be but increase of afffliction
to those that are plunged in grief? What pleasure is there in melody to a man
that mournes? And to him that is in an ague, how unseasonable is the discourse
of love and iollitie. Eternity of torment is the hell of hell: so continuance,
or life in misery, there is the misery of misery. Space of time diminishes
sorrow that is past, but increases that which is present, because it weakens
patience, and prolongs the hope of deliverance. Therefore the Patriarch
complains that his days were few and evil. Not evil and few. For to have a
short time allotted him, and yet evil days intermixed, is more evil. But
being afflicted with evil years, to have them shortened, is less evil.
(...). O days few and evil, brief and tedious. How it lies upon us beloved,
to lengthen them by good deeds. And so much the more because the shortest of
the year is certain, but the shortest of our life is uncertain. Let us
frustate the tenure of iniquity, and in every age do the virtue of the age,
not the sin of the age; that so not living after custom, but after truth,
nor making profusion of the blood of CHRIST, that it may not fail us at our
greatest need, we may preserve the seal of our redemption inuiolate, and be
bold every one of us to pray: O my GOD, let not the end of my devotion be
sudden, but after much mortification of heart, and long consumption of
languishing desires to see thee, make a ripe dissolution of my flesh and
spirit, close up my wearied thoughts, and receive me to thy mercy. Amen.

Live sweet IESV, and reign with the Father, and Holy Ghost, one God, etc.

The end of the second Sermon,
THE THIRD SERMON. Of the love of Christ.
1. PET. 1.8. Whom you love though ye have not seen.


THAT which blessed Saint Peter commends in the dispersed Jews of Asia,
Pontus, Cappadocia, that they loved Jesus whom they had not seen. The same is
the praise of all devout Catholics, who have lived these many years, that
being scattered from sea to sea, under every star, and throughout all lands,
yet they love their one Head unseen; as they love their many fellow members
unseen. Which is a singular commendation in the Daughter of Christ dispersed,
His espoused Church, so dearly to affect Him whom She never saw: Whereas the
daughters of men make sight a necessary antecedent of affection, and will
esteem highly of no object until the eye have set a price of it.

This word, (...) (though) contained in the aduerbe (...), or else understood,
not expressed in the original: implies another love of Christ; namely, as he
was visible in the state of Mortality, making that to be the greater, but this
the harder. As if he should say: You love Christ whom you have not seen; How
much more vehement would your love have been if you had seen him? These then
be the two parts of my Text: First, the love of Christ being seen: Secondly,
the love of Christ being not seen. If any man love not our Lord Jesus Christ,
let him be Anathema Maranatha. Of all the senses there is none so proper a
mediator of love, as is the sight: It is the beginning of love, according to
the Proverb, exaspectu nascitur amor: and it is the perfection thereof, whilst
we desire to see that whereof we have much read, or heard. Therefore we love
our eves above all parts of our body, giving them the names of the most lovely
creatures in the world: as the Sun and Moon: O oculi gemiua sydeva: And that
which we love dearest we compare it to the eye: as, Ocule, ocelle ni; and
Psalm. 7.8. Keep me as the apple of an eye. Now the causes why sight so much
procures love. First, it is the most spiritual sense, and may be called
(...), a corporal mind, whereby we understand things sensible. By reason of
which affinity, videre is put for intelligere: For this cause the mind best
likes that object which is commended to her by the eye. Secondly, it is the
quickest sense, and therefore does soonest fire the affections: According to
that, Segnius irritant animos immissa per aures, quam quae sunt oculis subiecta
sidelibus. Thirdly, it is the surest evidence, and most certain demonstration:
Whence, by metaphor, the word demonstration is drawn: And therefore the
fruition of eternal happiness is called Vision. Lastly, it is the most
unwearied, and insatiable sense; the eye being never satisfied with seeing.
Which makes for the continuance of love. For love hates nothing more then
mutability, and fastidious inconstancy. For these causes, I say, sight is the
most peculiar Factor for Love.

Now that we may the better understand this love of Christ which they had that
saw him in the flesh: let us consider a little of the diverse kinds of love.

There is a sensual love, or rather lust, which the base Jews, nor other
Infidels, ever suspected in Christ Jesus, although he loved the two sacred
sisters of Bothania; and though Saint John leaned in his bosom, and many
women used to accompany him: therefore the malicious Jews, amongst all their
false accusations, durst not offer to stain his credit with the least
suspicion of any folly. There is another love rising from concupisence of the
eye, which is not lust, but curiosity: When men desire to see rare, or strange
things, without any further benefit but to satisfy the eye. Such love, no
doubt, had many of the Jews, who desired to see Jesus for his fame and
wonders, but with a natural and humane love. Other loves there be whereof some
be lawful, some unlawful; some sensual, some intellectual; but all
natural and humane. But the love which we enquire after, is spiritual and
sacred; yet much communicating with sense and affection. For the understanding
whereof, I must premise these.

I have observed a double love of God. There is a kind of love which is holy,
but merely spiritual; when the soul being a spirit loves the Father of
Spirits, in spirit: abstracting all mediation of body, and bodily accident,
using no help of imagination, or any sense: But considering him to be an
eternal Goodness, Incorporeall, Incomprehenble, the Author of all being, and
of all good. Whereupon the will does immediately embrace this object of
Goodness, rests her self in the love, and delight thereof. This love will
have no communion with sense, or any imagination drawn from sense, or any
affection, accounting them to be perturbations, and stains of this sincere
delight. This religious love is more contemplative, and therefore in the
Angels, and in men of knowledge and understanding, nourished by vision, and by
discourse. To this the Platonicks speak proportionably, who were esteemed the
most Theological Philosophers. They making the perfection of man's felicity to
consist in this intellectual love: and, as I may say, abstracted ideall
delight: spend much ink in blacking and dispraising bodily and sensible
things: calling them shadows of things spiritual, images, and not substances,
obscurers of the understanding: And the body to be the sepulcher of the soul,
and the affections to be as the rebellious rogues, and unquiet multitude in a
Commonwealth.

There is another kind of sacred love which is placed in the affections, being
not merely spiritual, but making use of all sensible objects, for the
enslaming thereof. Thus we love God whilst we consider the excellent beauty
of all his creatures, giving him the eminencies of them all; and turning our
affections from every creature to burn toward him which is the Author of all
these. And this is most properly called devotion, nourished by sense, and
sensible accidents: without which no Religion of any Age, or Nation, ever
flourished. Wherefore the most wise God knowing man by nature, to have so much
co^merce with body and bodily things, ordained so many Ceremonies, and
Sacraments, in his worship: And, at the time appointed, sent his Son in the
visible form of a man, that He being Spirit and flesh, both these, our loves,
both spiritual and caruall might be spent on him. That our affections might
have something to feed on, as well as our understandings. And this is the love
whereof the Apostle here speaks which was in the Saints that see Christ in
the flesh: Which is seated in the affections, and is called devotion. And
surely, if we look into the examples of piety, and devotion, in all times,
you shall find that the most holy and pious men, were men of the most hottest
affections: as the Prophets, as King David, as Saint Augustine, who after their
loves were diuerted from doting upon vanity, and worldly shadows. They
outstripped all men in the ardencie of devotion, as their Writings and
Meditaons witness: breathing nothing but spirit. Psalm. 18.1. Ex intimis
visceribus diligam te demine: And S. Austens Works to a judicious Reader, will
plainly show, that though he be the most profound Father, yet he speaks
more out of his heart, then his head, full of actionate devotion, even then
when the subject of his Discourse is subtilty and understanding. Hence it is,
that women be called the devout Sex, by reason of the feruencie of their
love: According to that, Thy love to me was wonderful passing the love of
women. Whereof excepting the mother of God, amongst thousand others, the most
eminent examples be Mary Magdalene, and Mary the Egyptian: Which two holy
women, the one having seen Christ, the other the place where he was
crucified, they changed their lewd lusts, for hallowed, and incorruptible love:
they washed their wanton eyes with tears: And for the latter, her whole flesh
which had been fired with lust, she sacrificed it an whole burnt-offering
unto God, exhaling it with fasting and penance until her dying day. Lastly,
devout old age, which after much damage and loss of grace, would gladly
preserve the relic of devotion: they keep it in the warmth of their
affections, as appears by their tenderness to Religion, often weeping,
fasting, and Almsdeeds. This being so natural a ground, that devotion
especially confisteth in affection, and that affections are chiefly moved by
sensible objects, and bodily exercise: Therefore all Religions necessarily have
Ceremonies, and inuitations of this kind: Some profitable, some necessary, some
superstitious. For the eye, as goodly Temples, ornaments of pictures, vestures,
and such like. Music for the ear. See Calvin. Instit. q. 4. c. 10
Set times of fasting, prayers, offering, and other outward actions: The ruin
whereof overthrows devotion. See the Marginall note in the Geneua Bible.
Hither you may refer Allegories and Metaphors, which be the greatest part
of cloquence in Sermons, and be nothing else but speaking pictuers, according
to that Gal. 3.1. Before whose eyes Christ Jesus was described crucified with
in you. Seeing then that these things cannot be gaine-said; How ill do they
deserve of Christianity, who delight in nothing so much as ruins of Churches,
Church Orders, and Church Ceremonies. They place no more holiness in a Temple
then a Schoole-house; Counsel them to fast, they answer they fast from sin;
Tell them of sitting bare at Divine Service, they answer, all things are
uncovered before God. They give no honor to the Sacraments; bid them kneel at
the entering into a Church, and when they receive the holy Eucharist, they
answer, they bow the knees of the heart. They offer no other sacrifice but the
calves of their lips. Instead of Alms, they give poor men good counsel, as
if men could cate precepts, and drink good counsel. They are affected with
the sight of no sacred Monument. Nay, if our Savior himself were alive they
would not go far to see him, or not have worshipped him for fear of
superstition. Hence comes it thar they have so common a conceit of the blessed
Virgin that bare him in her womb; that they give so little privilege to the
Apostles that eat and drunk with him: Finally, to any holy place where he
walked, or any Saint to whom he appeared. They would hold it no happiness to
have touched the hemme of his garment. Then Nathaniel was unwise who desired to
see Jesus, and little Zacheus who climed the Tree to look down upon him that
was higher then the sky: Then the Wise men of the East were not worthy of that
name, who came so far to see him. Saint Jerome might have made a better wish
then above all things to have seen Christ in the flesh. But our Savior
himself condemns these men, when he says; the Queen of Saba shall rise up
in judgment against this Generation, for she came far to hear the wisdom
of Solomon, and behold a greater then Solomon is here. And Luke 10.25. Blessed
are the eyes that have seen what you see: for I say unto you many Prophets
have desired to see that which you see, and could not see it: Which is meant of
seeing Christ Jesus in his mortal estate. Foelix qui potuit fontem boni visero
lucidum: To apply that speech unto this sense. If the eye of a man were
suddenly made able to behold the Heavens, the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, in
their just splendure, and bigness: Or to see the whole earth with all the
creatures in it, at once: Vuo and distincto intuitu: How would his mind be
rapt with admiration? But the sight of God manifested in the flesh, was a far
more admirable object, the ecstasy of men and Angels, and as I may say the
proper end why the eye was created. Of which fight, if the senseless creatures
had been made capable, How, think you, would the Sun have desired to shine
continually in that climate where He breathed: And the other parts of the
earth have contended that they also might have received the impression of His
sacred feet, envying the felicity of Canaan.

Then let all true Christians honor the happy memories of those blessed
Saints, who were ordained to see that Just One, and to be eyewitnesses of
that Mystery, into which the immateriall Angels do delight to pry. And as for
us, we that had not that prerogative to see him in the flesh, yet for increase
of our devotion, let us ever bear Him in our fancies, and use all means that
we may seem to see him, that with a readier passage we may feel him, and
bear him in our hearts. This is the recompense of absence, and only solace
unto true love, by imagination to fill up the distance of time and place, and
transform things past into things present. Quem vidistis pastores? whom saw
ye shepherds? tell us, tell us. We saw the Omnipotent infant, and Angels
worship him. But where? and when? and how? tell me some circumstance that I
may seem to see him. Vidimus Deum parvulum pannis inuolutum, matrem vbera
admouentem. We saw God a little one, swadled and lying in a cribbe, and his
mother giving him suck. O happy sight! O unspeakable mystery. O gratissimi
vagitus per quos eternos ploratus euasimus! O foelices pannim, quibus
peccatorum sordes abstersimus! O praesepe splendidum vbi iacuit panis
angelorum. Lacta Maria creatorem tuum, lacta virgo gloriesa. O foelicia oscula
lactentis labijs impressa. It is S. Austens meditation. Sapientia si oculis
cerneretur quantos amores excitaret sui? Wisdom (says Plato) if it could be
seen with bodily eyes, how would it stir up men to love it? But the wisdom
of God became visible and manifested in the flesh, and how should it stir up
men to love it? This did so inflame the beloved Disciple, him which drank
wisdom our of the bosom of our Lord, that his Epistle which is wholly
precepts of love, he begins with, mention of seeing Christ, and repeates the
same word again and again. That which we have seen with our eyes, which we
have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of life. For the life
appeared, and we have seen it, and it appeared: that I say which we have
seen and heard, declare we unto you. And the whole number of the twelve, when
after his last farewell he ascended, how stood they gazing on him, as being
loath to loose the last minute of his visible presence. And no marvel: for the
very sight, no doubt, conueighed unto the faithful, a benign influence
prefigured in the old Testament, where to look steadfastly upon the brazen
Serpent, was sovereign against the poysonfull sting of fiery Serpents. What
devout Christian now living, would not give the whole world if he had it, for
to see him? To see him either in his childe-hood, or in in his youth, in his
humility, or in his majesty. When it pleased him sometimes to make his
glorious deity shine through his manhood, as Saint Jerome thinks he did when
he called S. Peter and S. Andrew, who therefore presently laid away and
followed him. Hear the meditation of the blessed Father S. Austen upon this
point. Hei mihi quia videre non potui Dominum angelorum, heu quod tam
inaestimabili pietati presens obstupescere non merui. And further. Cur o anima,
etc. Wherefore o my soul, wast thou not present that thou might have been
pierced through with sharpest grief, when thy Saviors side was pierced with a
spear? where thou could not have endured to have seen the hands and feet of
thy maker rent with nails: that thou might have swounded to have seen the
blood of thy redeemer spilt, that thou might have condoled with the blessed
virgin. O gracious good Lady, what streams of tears may I think flowed out
of thy most chaste eyes when thou beheldedst thy innocent, thy only son bound,
scourged, murdered, flesh of thy flesh, and bone of thy bone so cruelly cut and
mangled. And further, vtina^ cum felice Iosepho dominum meu^ de cruce
deposuissem, cur non fui deosculatus loca vulnerum? etc. Thus holy men were
wont to incense their love, and their devotion, to cleanse their imaginations
from the idols of carnal beauty, which having entered at the eyes haunt the
disquiet fancies of poor youth, and cannot be spelled, nor expelled, but with
the image of God incarnate.

For this cause our venerable ancestors from all clymates of the Christian
world, have resorted to the holy City, that although they could not see their
Savior, yet they might see and worship where his feet had trod or walked,
where he wept, and swet, and bled, and died. There was the price of our
redemption numbered, that earth and that heavens shall witness, that there the
sum was tendered, and that innocent heartbloud powered out, which none can
power into his breast again. This made good Paula, and her daughter
Eustochium, Roman Ladies of the honorable family of the Grachi, remove with
all their substance to Bethleem, and there they lived, and there they died with
S. Ierom. This made S. Helen honor of our English nation, the happy mother of
great Constantioe, so devoutly to visit every place where our Lord conuersed,
and every where to erect so many famous memories, so many goodly Churches. This
caused S. Ierom to spend the greatest part of his life there. There he
commented, there he indicted, there he translated. And for this cause many
learned Divines, amongst whom S. Ierom and Eusebius, with diverse of late
memory, have carefully described all the sacred places, and religious
monuments of the Holy land, that those which have not seen them really, might
see them imaginarily, and nourish their Divine cogitations without supestition,
without any great cost, or trouble: I that they might see Canaan a far off,
as Moses did from mount Phasga.

Now look what has been said concerning devotion nourished by sight, the same
is true likewise of the other learned sense, namely, hearing, as the hearing of
music, or eloquent discourse, which being used without curious scrupulositie,
and affectation, how greatly they increase the love of God, and of his true
worship, it appears to any liberal and ingenious disposition, unless any man
think the use of music proper to stir up vanity, to nourish pleasure, to
maintain lightness and obscenitie. And not

1 To raise up men's minds to meditation of heavenly joys, whereof music may
seem a kind of type.

2 To confider the harmony and consent of the world, how all Ages, all
Nations, all Languages praise Him.

3 Out of the mouths of Babes sucklings he prepares praise.

4 To expiate the ears which have been polluted by wanton madrigals, and
lascivious ditties.

5 To kindle the affections with love of God.

6 Lastly, to praise him with learned hymns, who is the giver of all
excellencies. Unless any man think that eloquence was given naturally to
adorn folly, and flatteries, to overthrow right, to color falsehood, and
deceive simplicity, and to be misvsed, when it is appliyed to strengthen truth,
to sweeten diligence, and commend piety. Quis ita desipiat vt hoc sapiat?
says Saint Augustine 4. de Dectrina. Chr. And if any man object that Saint
Austin could not resolve himself concerning the lawful use of artificial
Music in Churches, it is false: For though he speaks of his own
experience, that the delight of his sense did sometimes prevail above reason;
yet he confesses the excellent use of Music for devotion. And for being too
scrupulous he checkes himself, calling it nimia seueritas; and concludes that
he approues the custom of the Church: Vt per oblectamenta aurium infirmior
animus in affectum pietatis assurgat: That by delight of the ear, the weak
mind of man might rise up into pious affections: whereof he makes himself an
example, with delightsome remembrance how he was moved to tears at the
hearing of artificial Church Music: Cum reminiscor lachrymas quas fudi ad
cantus ecclesiae tuae, magnam instituti huius vtilitatem agnosco: Besides, what
Saint Austine says there of artificial music, may be as well an argument
against plain song, and common tunes in Churches, which affect some men as
much, and of many are sung with as great affectation. Again, if for this
difficulty, they would wholly reject the lawful use of music, let them read
the two chapters next going before, and they shall find that he makes the same
difficulty in the use of all the senses, which if they will refuse therefore,
then must they neither see, nor smell, nor eat, nor drink. But this holy man
there expresses his carfulness to avoid sin; as also did Saint Athanasius,
whom he there cites. But how far their spirit was from preiudicing others,
or from scrupling men's consciences in the use of the approved Institutions of
the Church, their other speeches and actions are sufficient witnesses.
Wherefore to shorten this discourse, let us all endeavor to have a zealous and
devout love of Christ; both that which rises out of knowledge and
understanding, and that which rises out of sense and affection. And to this
purpose use all those means which the practice of most holy Fathers. and the
law of Nature her self does warrant: which is not sensual love, but
affectionate, and holy, raised out of sense. As they which saw Christ loved him
the more, not for the lineaments of his body; but being enflamed with
consideration that they should see their Creator become Flesh, who is in his
own Nature invisible. That they should see the same passions as in themselves,
in him which was Impassible: and all their own infinrmities without deformity
of sin: That man might not now choose but love God, unless he would not love
himself: This, I say, bred admiration and love in them, a spiritual love, yet
raised out of sense, and is chief part of that which we properly call
devotion.

And thus much of the first part of my Text; namely, the love of Christ, being
seen: Where I have showed how much sight augmenteth love: And how all other
sensible means and external practices are incitements and inuitations to
increase devotion. Devotion, which is the only happiness of this life, and to
be preferred before wisdom, subtilty, or discourse, being indeed the end and
perfection of all. The delicious taste of heavenly joys, which God gives unto
his Saints here, that they may long after the fruition of the whole: Whereof
Saint Austine speaks in the 40 chap. of the 10. book of his Confessions: Et
aliquando intromittis me Domine in affectum multum inusitatum introrsum ad
nescio quam dulcedinem, quaesi perficiatur in me nescio quid erit, quod vita
ista non erit.

Now to the second part, which is the love of Christ not seen: Quem cum non
videritis diligitis: whom ye love, though ye have not seen. This, not only
S. Peter here, but S. Paul also, with many other Worthies have admired; to see
how soon the world, without compulsion, consented to follow, and to love Him
whom they never saw: How so many thousands and millions were moved with such a
strange instinct, to leave their goods, their wives, their children, parents,
their dearest Country: and lastly, to loose their lives so willingly for love
of him whom they never saw. This amazed the unbelieving world, to see her
number daily minished, and most furious persecutors become the hottest lovers.
What secret influence so reigned in men's hearts? what cruel love made them so
impatient that they ran showting to their death? Wherefore forsook they all
their present joys, which they not only saw, but carried in their eyes, to
love him whom they saw not? Crying, Hunc amemus, huno amemus. Nothing could
bribe them, or abalienate their minds. Youth was not moved with beauty, nor
old age with money, nor children with fear of death, nor Statesmen with
preferment: No contumelies, no disgraces prevailed, they suffered all things,
they endured all things, and all this for the love of him whom they never saw.
The new married preferred the grave before the bed. Honorable and beautiful
maids choose rather to be called virgins of Christ, then queens to great
Princes. The frail sex was crowned with Martyrdom, and compassionate mothers
ouercomming nature, beheld with cheerful countenance their sweet infants
killed for the love of Christ, as we read of that happy child which died with
the constant martyr Romanus. How willingly his mother gave him to the hands of
the tormentor; kissing him but once, which was as little as a mother could do.

Nee immorata est fletibus tantum osculum
Impressit vnum, vale, ait, dulcissime,
Et eum beatus regna Christi intraueris
Memento matris.
Now if a man inquire into the inward moving cause for which the world was so
strangely carried away with affection unto Christ, he shall find it to be
faith. Which faith though the Scripture opposes to vision, yet calls it a
kind of sight. So faithful Abraham desired to see Christ's day, and saw it,
and rejoiced. By faith Moses endured patiently as if he had seen the
invisible. And by the eye of faith all the Saints since the Apostles, believing
them that saw him, have loved him as firmly as if themselves had seen him.
They seeing the head, believed of the body: we seeing the body, believe
concerning the head. Namque habet fides oculos suos, quibus quodammodo videt
verum esse quod nondum videt. For faith has it eyes, whereby in some manner it
sees that to be true, which as yet it sees not, says S. Auste^. Faith is
opposed to the corporal view of things visible, and to the demonstratiue
knowledge of things intelligible. Which knowledge is also called intuitiue
knowledge. Now the bodily sight of Christ in his humility, was only proper to
them that lived in his time. Though by imagination we can likewise represent
unto our selves the same. But the sight of his spiritual and glorified body
shall be the reward of all. And as for the intelligible visiun of invisible
glory of the Godhead of Christ, and of the eternal Trinity; they that see it
here in twy-light, shall then behold it as at noone day, and love it there with
incomparable feruencie of spirit, if they continue here in that model of
warmth which this life affoordeth. The hope whereof how greatly does it
sustain the patience of his absence, and confirm the constancy of loving
Christ unseen, when we have so good assurance to see his spiritual body, and
that happiness which never eye has seen? Where if he show his five wounds,
and the verity of all which he did and suffered in this life, what can be
wanting to the destruction of that which is in part, and converting faith into
vision?

Mean while wonderful is that grace which makes us now to love him. For
although the conversion of the world, the strange preservation of the
Catholic Church, the authority of the same Church, the blood of so many
Martyrs, the fulfilling of Prophecies, the superexcellent learning of
Catholic Writers, and Catholic Governors, with many other unanswerable
arguments, have in a manner demonstrate the whole truth of Christian Religion:
Insomuch that he which will not now believe without seeing wonders, is
himself a wonder, says S. Austen. Yet in many ages when God has permitted
general inundations of Goths and Vandals, of Turks and Saracens over the
Christian world, which the old serpent having spued out of his mouth, desired
to make (...) the woman to be carried away of the flood; or when fearful
tempests of heresy do obscure the Church, that for a time neither Sun nor
moon appear, till controversies be determined, till ancient records be se
arched, and unquiet nouelists suppressed, the safest way was always to cast
himself into the bosom of the Church, that faith might support where
knowledge fails, and the love of Christ continue, where he was not seen.

Faith is the subsistence of matters hoped for, and the evidence of things not
seen, by the firm embracing whereof in the midst of all miserable
temptations, and inuestigable errors, the faithful lovers of Christ Jesus
have loved him whom they never saw neither with the eye of sense, nor the eye
of reason. Great friendship has there been betwixt men which never saw one
another faces, yet true report of wisdom and virtue has bred strange
conjunction and familiarity of minds, as if their souls had met together in
the night when their bodies rested: or because that minds being incorporeall,
need not visible presence to unite them, nor are their loves separated by
distance of place. Which if it be true in natural love, and humane affection,
how much more certain is it in spiritual and Divine? where not only
similitude of nature combines, but also unity of spirit. If thou love none
but whom thou see (says S. Austen) then should thou not love thy self.
Neque enim teipsum nisi in speculo vides.

Many men there be, whose wisdom will not suffer them to be credulous, their
hands have eyes, and their hearts have eyes: they believe that which they see,
and they will love that which they see: unknown vnbeleeued, unseen vnloued.
But unto the most of faithful Christians, Almighty God has left more things
to be believed then known, that there might be place for reward. For hope
that is seen, is no hope. Every one could not live at that time when Christ
was living, nor see the wonders which he wrought, or which his Prophets did
before him, or his Apostles after him. Yet many will say hereafter, if we had
lived in those times, or if when had talked with one risen from the dead, we had
surely repented. Indeed the Tyrians and Sidonians, if they had seen the
miracles at Corazin and Bethsaida, they would have turned their purple into
sackcloth: but they had sufficient helps, and so have thou: neither know
thou whether thou might be so obdurate, through thine own first wilful
negligence, that the sight of Christ would have caused no more love in thee,
then it did in Herod, who defired of long to see him, and not believing Moses
and the Prophets, neither would thou believe if one should rise from the
dead. S. Austen says he was often tempted to desire a sign from God
concerning him self; but by Gods grace he always resisted that temptation. So
our Savior taxes the Gentleman of Cana in Galilee, whose son was sick at
Capernaum, Unless you see signs and wonders you will in no ways believe. The
Atheist if he might see the Devil, he would hate him. And the Idolater, if he
may have a palpable visible God, he will worship him. Make us Gods to go
before us, cry the Israelites, as if things that were inuifible, were not. They
that desire to see the holy City, upon distrust or curiosity, which is
concupiscence of the eye, or dwelling far off, greatly endanger their present
estate, their fame, their lives, and neglect their necessary functions. I see
not how they can warrant that action. Against which S. Gregory Nissen speaks
in an Epistle of his. Local motiou (says he) makes thee not nearer unto God,
which is in all places. And it is better to go a pilgrimage from thy body to
God, then from thy country to Jury: for whilst we are at home with the body,
we are steangers unto God. Jerusalem is not now the necessary place of
worship, the word is near thee, and every faithful soul is Jerusalem. For as
goodly vineyard which cost the Husbandman much care, and his servants long
labor, being the sweetest plot of ground which he could choose, and having the
indulgence of the heavens, and all the elements to cherish it, whilst it was
tender, and flourished, and at the time of vintage all men resorted thither, to
see the beauty and temperate situation, and to reap the fruit which grew not
else where: but after the fruit was gathered, the hedges being broken, and the
swine having defaced it, and other beasts haunting it, though the Winter
beauty thereof be lovely, yet the necessity of coming thither it abolished,
and the conuenience of seeing is much limited: So Jerusalem that pleasant
City of God, where the word of life grew, so watered by Prophets, so watched by
Angels, during the beauty and glory of her summer age, thither the Tribes came
up, and from all Countries there they worshipped: but when the fullness of time
was come, wherein the grapes of this holy vine were pressed, and the blood
thereof conueighed by Apostles and Evangelists throughout the world, to cheer
the hearts even of the coldest nations, Jerusalem became (...), as the Prophet
speaks, no longer necessary, and though ever holy and reverend, yet often
dangerous to be visited, being polluted by wild infidels, and now possessed of
unchristened Turks. The orchard of Balsamon is removed from the Hills of
Engaddi into Egypt, and so salvation, which was only of the Jews, is now
translated to the Gentiles, Et Assyrium vulgo nascitur amomum. To conclude
then, although the most worthy and devout Christians have increased their
devotion and piety by sight of the holy monuments at Jerusalem, yet many who
never saw them, have been more godly then some others that have seen them,
and believe as firmly, and love Christ Jesus their redeemer as deerly as if
they had seen him, or seen the place where he was seen. (...). For (says
Gregory Nissen) if thy inward man be full of bad thoughts, although thou
stand upon Golgotha, or mount Oliuet, or under the monument of his
resurrection, thou art as far from Christ, as they which never acknowledged
him. The same is true of all sensible means, and outward actions, which if
they be not joined with sincerity of the spirit, they are unprofitable to us,
and disstastfull to the father of spirits. Many are content to perform these
external actions, which they do perfunctory, merely for fashion, without any
tincture of spirit: Especially where there is a multitude of ceremonies, as in
the Roman Church, and in the superstition of the Eastern Churches, is most
apparent. We are all by nature ready to choose that which is of eafier
performance: and in actions, and matters of Religion which of all others are
most tedious, because they touch the conscience, the crafty Mind would gladly
rest herself, and think to discharge all by light works of the body, and of
the senses. Is this the fast which I have chosen, says God, for a man to bow
his neck, being weak with abstinence, to put on sackecloth and ashes: Is this
the fast which I have choson? Nay, is not this the fast which I have chosen, to
loose the bands of wickedness, and to let the oppressed go free? and to deal
thy bread unto the hungry: Where God hates the outward obedience, if it be
without fasting from sin. And in comparison, better spiritual worship
without external, then external without that which is spiritual. So he
says, Rend your hearts and not your garments. And I will have mercy and not
sacrifice, Where the aduerbe is a Comparatiue rather then a Negative: And
therefore the Septu. well translate it: (...). sub (...). God forbids neither,
nay he commands both; but preferres the one before the other. So many, says
Saint Austine, they will eat no flesh in Lent, but they will bite and devour
their brethren: They will drink no wine, but they will drink iniquity like
water. What profits it to be pale with fasting, and at the same time to be
lean with hatred, and euuy? What profits it if we abstain from flesh, which
is sometime lawful, and do those things which are never lawful? therefore I
say with Scripture, and with holy Fathers, that as the presence and sight of
Christ would little have increased love in his Disciples, unless they had also
seen him with the eyes of the inward man: No more do any sensible, and
external means further devotion, if they be separated from the inward and
spiritual motions of the heart My son give me thy heart. Why drawest thou
near me with thy lips when thy heart is far from me? To proceed then,
though every one have not that glorious pretogatiue given them to be Martirs;
to die for love of him that died for their salvation: Yet ouery one may
mortify his earthly members, and die to sin, which is a kind of Martyrdom. In
like manner, though every one could not see Christ, and so love him; yet they
may love him whom they have not seen by faith, which is a kind of sight. Nay,
if they which saw him, and loved, were such as would not love him unless they
had seen him; greater is their reward that love him whom they have not seen.
For what said our Lord to Saint Thomas: Thomas because thou see, thou
beleeuest; happy are they which believe and see not. What remains now but to
provoke you to the love of him whom you do not see: who first loved you,
unseen? Nay, when you were worse then nothing: Whom you hope to see, and see
him as he is. Let me say unto the afflicted that live in obscurity, and
misery, wait till the cloud be broken, and the Sun shine out. Let me say
unto the simple and ignorant, but loving and faithful: be constant, and you
shall see as you are seen. Let me say unto the wise and learned: help ye
the weak sighted, and make him loving that is blind. Lastly, to all men, though
you love him which is unseen, yet let your love be seen. Love in deed, and
not in word: By this we know that we love him, if we keep his
Commandments. If your loves burn vehemently upon things temporal and visible;
how are you said to love him whom ye have not seen. Silver, and gold, and gay
apparel, ample possessions, and goodly buildings, fair flesh and blood
compounded of corruptible elements, whatsoever deceiptfull time has colored,
or the world has set a gloss on: if ye be ever gazing and admiring these
things, how are ye said to love him whom you have not seen? When women go to
see, and to be seen: when men, the little good they do, they do it to be seen
of men: When most had rather seem then be good: how are they said to love him
whom they have not seen? He that longs to see every strange thing he hears
of, and to have every costly thing which he sees, how can this love of Christ
bo in him? He which hates his brother whom he daily sees, how can he love his
Savior whom he never saw? When the concupiscence of the eye is waxen dim,
and the fair forbidden fruit is faded: Alas, how will ye wish that ye had
seen less, and less loved that ye saw, and more loved him whom ye never
saw. Behold him in his members, behold him in his poor distressed membes;
behold him harbourlesse and naked, behold him hungry and thirsty: Cloth him,
lodge him, feed him, if you love him: that when you shall see him coming in
the Clouds, with glory, ye may hear, Come ye blessed, for when I was hungry
you fed me, when I was naked you clothed me. Which happiness He grant us,
that lives and reigns with the Father, and Holy Ghost, to whom be all
praise and glory evermore. Amen.

The end of the third Sermon.
THE FOVRTH SERMON. Of the frailty of Man.
1. PET. 1.24. All flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man as the flower
of grass.


THIS is the echo of a cry in the fortieth chapter of Esaias, the sixth verse,
rebounding from the solidity of Peter: The voice said cry: Because all flesh,
the whole world, must hear. And because the whole world is so ingurgitate in
the dullness of flesh, that without a cry they, cannot hear: It seems then
that God will have this cry to be (...), a resonance, in our ears, which no
melody of pleasure should take away. The Heathen man caused one to cry daily
unto him, (...), Remember thou art a man. And there are two maine cries in the
Scripture: The one puts us in mind of our immortality, which S. Ierom says
he heard always sounding in his ears, Arise you dead and come to judgment.
The second of our mortality, and is of necessity precedent to the former,
proclaimed by this Harbinger: Omnis caro foenum: All flesh is grass, and all
the glory of man: Wherefore, he that has ears to hear let him hear: 1. the
common meannesse of his nature, al flesh is grass. All, there is the
community, Flesh, that is the name of his nature: thirdly, Grass, there is the
meandness of his nature. In the second part, the meandness of the excellency
of his nature: The glory of man, that is the execllency; The flower of grass,
there is the frailty of his excellence. Lastly, without exception all: all the
glory of man is as the flower of the grass.

All flesh is grass: For God having made all men (...) of one blood, although
they have variety of distinction, yet they all meet in this ground that they
are grass. I am no better then my fathers, says Elias. And the Apostles make
themselves level in the same veil of misery, with the common people of
Iconium, that they were (...), subjects of the same sufferings. For this cause
the Holy Ghost calls the poor man's body the flesh of the rich. Despise not
thou thine own flesh. Now the second point is the name of our nature, which is
here called flesh. The body is our worse half, and flesh the worse of the
worse: for it is tender, and subject to change and loss. Further, the flesh
lusts against the spirit. Therefore S. Gregori calls it with contempt (...)
this envious little flesh. By this name the Scripture calling the body, or the
whole man, and using the part for the whole, yet would not have the part to be
the whole: for then we should be like the Cretians, who were nothing but belly
and beast: or as the Israelites, who seeking to fat their flesh, the Psalmist
says, that God sent leanesse into their souls. Howsoever then you interpret
the word flesh, either of the body, or of the nature and estate of man, which
confisteth much of things bodily, or of carnalitie, which is perishing of the
soul in favor of the body. Of all these the Prophet cries aloud, Omnis caro
foenum, all flesh is grass.

To enter then upon this argument, which is the grassie substance of our
nature, did not the first man spring out of the earth? and though he grew
amongst the delicious fruits of paradise, and had no poison in his root, yet
he continued not in honor, but being transplanted into that common where we
grow, spread his degenerous offspring over the whole earth, whose seed
multiplying innumerable, was nourished with no other food until the flood
came, and corrupted the virtue thereof. Since which time, although our diet be
changed, and flesh be nourished with flesh, yet the chief of that flesh is but
grass concocted and converted into flesh: and the flesh of men and beasts are
both resolved into one dust, which dust by perpetual revolution in the same
circuit, sends forth again that aliment which sustames both them and us.
Before that just and universal deluge had discolored the earth, it seems
probable that as the days of man were of a greater length; so the vegerable
verdure of the earth was of more continuance in all habitable elymates thereof.
But after that calamity immediately in the distinction which tho Almighty
established, a greater portion was allotted to the harder times, the sweet
seasons of the year were contracted, and decaying Autumn, and the aspetitie
of barren Winter prolonged. Agreeably whereunto the spaces of our life were
measured. The young springall soon passes through his green hopes, and ripe
manhood being straightned in the midst, encroching age extends the rest in
trouble and tempest until death. There is Cruda viridisque senoctus, whom the
Greeks call (...), who through the indulgence of a mild Winter, besides the
venorable antiquity of their gray hairs, which is the uncture of wifedome,
and sage experience, have also fresh vigor in their blood, and actinity in
their wits and understandings. But for the most part the strength of these
years is labor and sorrow: for it is soon cut down, and with one blast of
Gods anger they fly away. So the famous Champion sighed to see his ^ere and
dead arms: And Helen wept when she saw her withered beauty in the glass.
So that the Philosophy of nature does restrain our pride, comprising the
progress and persection of our life within the period of one year. Quale
gonus foliorum, tale est and hominum. There is a time of growing, and a time of
fading: but no part of our time passes out of this compass. Which affords
matter of consideration. For as plants depend upon the planots, and are more
beholding to the Suimne their father, then the Earth their mother: so that
which we live, although it be supplied by an inward cause, like to that power
where with the earth was first endued by the creating Word; yet the favor or
displeasure of heaven conferreth more to this effect, then either the native
faculty within us, or all our own industry and endeavors. That which we plow,
and sow, and grind, and bake, it is not our work, but Gods. So sings the
Psalmist: He brings forth bread out of the earth. Not corn, but bread. What
should I speak of the Mildew of Serenes, of fevers and consumptions, which
like canicular feruours, burn up our bodies by the roots? What of blasting of
cankers, and the green sickness? all which does show the similitude of our
flesh with grass. The remembrance of which original God has signed upon our
heads, whose change of color, and leafe-fall declares plainly that his body
is Congestum cespite culmen, a poor cottage, whose toppeds covered with a
sodde of earth. Earth, earth, earth, (says the Prophet) earth thou wast, and
earth thou art, and earth thou shall be, whose bones are stones whose veins
are rivers, only in this it differs; the earth is fixed, and immovable, man
is (...), earth walking upon earth. Can any cogitation make us more humble, or
more humane? Humus aut humi repens es. Grass, or grasse-hopper, says Dinine
Esaias. He sits upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are
as grassehoppers. Poor grasshoppers, that sing care away, merry and pleasant in
their summer-dayes, and not providing for the adversity of Winter, and of want.
O remember thy Creator before the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have
no pleasure in them. When all the daughters of music shall be brought low,
when the Grashhopper shall be a burden, and dissipabitur capparis, and
appetite shall fail, when man goes to his long home, and the mourners go
about the streets, and the voice says Cry. what shall I cry? All flesh is
grass, and every man is vanity. Vanity of vanities (says the preacher) all
is vanity. Omnis caro, all; but especially the many, vere foenum est populus,
surely the people, which grow so triuiall, and so innumerable upon the the face
of the earth. (...), says Clemens, the domesticals of worldly delight. (...).
Earth living, and earth loving, and affecting any thing but truth. vere foenum
est populus, surely the people are grass: the multiplying multitude, foecunda
paupertas, says Lucan, prolifical and fertile poor. Who when they be as poor
in spirit as in substance, are the most proper subject of Gods mercy. (...),
says the merciful Lord Jesus, my bowels are tender to this poor multitude:
but when their sins spread as themselves, luxuriant, and infinite, the
displeasure of Almighty, God mowes them down by whole millions at once, they
are trodden under the feet of Soldiers, pestilence and famine do depopulate
great Cities, and for an emblem of sinful flesh, grass grows in the
streets. Poor Christian brethren, says S. Chrysostom, you that replenish
the earth, why do ye cumber the ground? and make the land groan, and lade God
with your iniquities, and press him under you, as a Cart that is pressed with
straw. Your sins turn you into straw, and know ye not that God is a
consuming fire? For if you lust, lie, swear, purloyne, and will not trust him
for raiment, which clothes the grass of the field: you make your selves like
to that grass which is to day, and to morrow is cast into the oven. When the
root of bitterness springs into infidelity, and thorny cares choke the word,
and when that saying of the Pharisees is verified, (...) the people are
accursed being ouer-growne and ouer-grast with thistles, and malice, with
cursings, with drunkenness, and other venomous and vicious weeds, what are
they but fruits of the first malediction, whose end is to be burnt? Thus
Sodom, which was green as the garden of God, whem their sins were rank, and
grown over their heads, they were destroyed with fire from heaven. And the
populous Israelites, which grew as plentiful as the grass of Goshen, their
carcasses were strowed in the dry wilderness, and of all that prevailing
multitude, but two were planted in the land of Promise. Calamity comes of
Calamus, the conflagration of a whole country like a stubble field. And in
Christian lands, what woeful desolation has devoured the miserable vulgar? As
an Ox licketh up the grass round about him, Numb. 22. Or as the Proverb
speaks, that where the foot of the grand signior his horse treads, nothing
will grow that is green. Popule, popule mi, my people, my people, says
Almighty God, quid potui facere, quodnon feet? What could I do for you which
I have not done? I have watered you with the deaw of Heaven, giving you showers
and fruitful seasons, nourishing your sucklings with the sweetest juice,
filling your hearts with joy and gladness, covering your imperfections with
mercy, and remembering that you were but flesh. But because you longed for
anger, behold your land is left unto you desolate.

Beloved in our Lord, (...), are these things so? has God wasted our brethren,
and made way for his wrath through the throngest of them, and shall we muster
our sins, and think our selves as far removed from God, as we are divided
from the whole world? when we shall have been, shall praeterciroumcised
Saracens, or other outlandish locusts graze on our posterity, and deglut our
labors? Barbarus has segetes? shall barbarous miscreants swallow these fields?
shall the abominable Alcora^ supplant our Bibles, or unknown language bellow
in our Churches, or the bodies be prostrate to infernal Mahomet, whose knees
would not bow to the blessed name of Jesus? (...). I hear the soft murmr of
your hearts, God forbid. Then let us seek Him, before He slay us: and be not
like the Israelites, who when He slew them, they sought Him, and sought Him
early, when it was too late. But hitherto the Apostle has compared the common
frailty of our nature with the ordinary pasture of the field. (...), that is,
gramen, aut stramen, grass withered, or green. But is there nothing excellent
and glorious in humane estate above this? Yes, and that is the second point.
What is the glory of man? As the flower of grass (says the Apostle; or as the
Prophet styles it, All his goodlinesse is as the flower of the field.

The top of eminence is a crown, and that is as Circular, and of as short
continuance as the crown of the year, (...) Psalm. 65. the two great Caesar's
have their names in two months, which are the strength and glory of the year,
as they the Majesty and maturitie of the Roman Empire. Neither was ever known
more then one (...), or summer vigor in the period of any kingdom. What
constance then in a voluble Diadem, which being carried about (...) in the
course of nature, has been translated from the Cedar to the brier; from the
Master to the servant, which proud Popes have spurned from the heads of
Princes, and was disparaged in that Thorny Wrearh that pierced the sacred
temples of our Lord. Roses and Lillies are the ensigns of this happy Kingdom:
long may they flourish. For this is the peculiar honor of our state, Not
Solomon in all his royalty was clothed like one of those: And though the Lilly
withered is of no use, yet Roses retain their sweetness after death. If
supreme Potentates, and mighty Monarchs of the earth, had considered how
transitory is that felicity whereon they boasted: then would they have
endeavored, as they were flowers of ornament, so to have bin fruits of benefit
to the Country where they grew; but when their chief end was to shine in
admiration, and to draw the eyes of the world upon the color of their present
glory, He consumed their short days in vanity, and no more was spoken of them
but that they had flourished. As Job calls them, (...), yesterdaies men, who
like to Solstitinlis herba, suddenly sprung up, and suddenly decayed. When
Nabuchadonosor outbraued God, he was deposed from his throne, he fed on grass,
and the dew of heaven wet him like grass, to make him know by sensible
experience what insimilitude he would not understand. Lord what is man that
thou regardest him, says David? the poor son of Adam, or the rich Son of
Man. Man that is borne of woman has no long time to live, he comes forth
like a flower, and is cut down: Take him in his beauty, what is beauty? but a
brag of nature, an illusion of desire, exhaling into vanity: a self adoring
idol, the first bait of sin, which breathing upon the concupiscentiall eye of
the woman, has ever since with her, and by her, continued the concubine of a
doting soul. This felicity of body (says Tertullian) what is it, but vrbana
vestis, a trim suit upon the soul which inuites the Thief and Murderer, and
is often extreme dangerous to them that wear it: Witness the examples of Sara
and Joseph, whose wanton Mistress would have stripped him also of his chastity.
But in the luster of those colors, if the white of simplicity, and the red of
modesty be away, it may take the vulgar, but the wise esteem it no other then
a garish garment on the back of fools. Come on therefore, let us enjoy the
good things that are present, and let no flower of the spring pass by us. Let
us crown our selves with Rose-buds before they be withered: let us take our
part of iollitie, and leave the signs of voluptuousness in all places. Thus
talk these wantons, when they inuit their fellows to repentance: which being
seasonable follies are more excusable, but when age reuokes these fugitive
pleasures, renewing youth with artificial devices, as if they were ashamed of
that season which brings them nearer unto God, and delivers them from the
unquiet perturbations of the flesh, What argues it but that they are resolved
to make the utmost farthing of the good of this life, and will forgo no
delight here for hope of recompense in the life to come. A painted flower in
Summer who respects when they are produced by nature? and in Winter which has
other fruitions, it is unseasonable and against Nature. Now well does the
Apostle here call this, and whatsoever is amiable, the flower of grass, or
the flower of the field. For after that Adam was translated out of Paradise,
all his glory was but wild and common: as best appears in the barbarous vast
Regions of the earth, where verus cultus the true worship is wanting, where
every flower of beauty is the prey of violent, and unruled lust. And yet these
small parcels of civil States which are so fenced with Laws and Religion,
where beauty is manured by education, nourished by special care, and cherished
by best counsel, according to that, Quem mulcent aurae, firmat sol, educat
imber: Yet how seldom is it preserved and kept safe, that the invasion of
foreign lust do not break in and deflowre it? But let these flowers fade, the
glory of wealth will not leave us. Saint James answers, As the flower of the
grass, the rich pass away. For the Sun is no sooner risen with a burning
heat, but it withers the grass, and the flower thereof falls, and the
grace of the fashion of it perishes: So also shall the rich man fade away in
his ways. Name me any other excellence, and ye shall find it but a choice
flower of short continuance. Wit, and eloquence are but blossoms, which
falling off, the fruit of wisdom succeeds and understanding. To conclude,
whatsoever is desirable in the world, whatsoever fawnes upon the fancy of men,
whatsoever makes our wills idolatrous: all is but a flower of grass, a thing of
small use, but no fruition. Yea the Divine Majesty has so abbreuiated all
earthly glory, that those excellencies which spring from an immortal root,
and are by nature not liable to vanity and consumption, yet they will not
thrive upon earth: and though they be illustrious for a time they are suddenly
snatched from us. Piety, and goodness, and Divine knowledge, which perfume the
sinful world, and send up a sweet savor of pacification into heaven, how
thinnely do they grow, and how quickly are they exhaled? Saluete flores
martyrum, quos lucis ipso in limine, Christi insecutor sustulit, ceu turbo
nascentes rosas, flores martyrum: Innocent martyrs, whose names Christ has
written red in letters: of blood in earth, and of gold in heaven. The Flower of
Iesse, (...): whether you will call him a Star, or a Flower, the skill of
neither languague can determine: and the Holy Ghost (I think) left it
ambiguous, to signify that He is the Offspring of both, both heaven and
earth. As flowers are stars on earth, and stars are heavenly flowers. This
celestial Flower was no sooner sprung, and declared by a Star, but the rude
hand was ready to nip him off: and He had not long adorned the earth with His
glorious presence, but in the latitude of his goodliest years, He breathed
out his sweet Soul, And who can express the abrupt cruelty of His bitter
ending? he bowed down his Head: It is a circumstance which none but (...), the
Disciple of his bosom observes: -- Inque humeros ceruixcollapsa recumbit,
Purpureus veluti cum flos succisus aratro
Languescit moriens, lassoue papauera collo
Demisere eaput. --


By this gesture he might signify that his triumphant Soul was now
descending to the lowest parts of the earth: Whence, according to the deep
root of his humiliation, he rose again, and ascended above the highest
heavens, and we with him: For heeres our comfort, that being complanted in the
similitude of his death, we shall be made partakers of his resurrection. All
flesh is grass, there is mortality and depression, all flesh shall see the
salvation of God, there is the spring and resurrection. This is the true
condition of our nature: Although death reap a whole field, and leave no
flower, nothing that is green, yet the root remaining, all flesh shall be
restored, all glory shall be new colored: Yea and with advantage: Lucrodamno,
says Tertullian, with lucre-losse, with honest usury. It here grows in
weakness, it shall there rise in strength; it is cut down in dishonor, it
springs in honor: here natural, there spiritual. It is a Plant whose flower
shall be exasperate with no thorny care, not greenness be euerwithered. What
hurt, what hurt then can death do us? we shall not laugh here: Nor shall we
weep. We shall not be admired, neither shall we be contemned: But we shall
do no more good, but the good we have done shall follow us: But we shall not
live to lament sin, but the sins we have lamented shall be forgiven us.
Lastly, as the day springs after night, and the Sun reuiues, and flowers
return, and the earth is refreshed: Sic nos resurgere deuota mente credimus,
So we believe to live again: Which that we may do with him, he grant which
lives and reigns, etc.

The end of the fourth Sermon.

