THE WARS OF SWETHLAND. WITH THE GROUND AND Original of the said VVarres,
begun and continued betwixt SIGISMOND King of Poland, and Duke CHARLES his
Uncle, lately Crowned King of Swethland. As also the State and condition of
that Kingdom, as it stands to this day.

LONDON. Printed for Nathaniel Butter, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard by Saint
Austins Gate. 1609.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND Most Noble minded lover of Learning PHILIP, Earl
of Mongomerie.
SVch (Right Honorable) as have purposed to please Hector, have still
presented him, with Horse and Armor, because his chiefest delight was in
Martial Discipline, and such oblations best fitted his humor. For by this,
and the like presidents is noted, how all have sought in their presents to
keep a Decorum: Having therefore composed this little Treatise that concerns
the dessignes of two Kingdoms: I have thought good (aduenturing the Pardon of
your Lordships discretion) to pass the same under your Honorable N^me, as
well for that your Expe^ience is already known to be sufficiently instructed
in the affairs of our own Country: Being descended of most Honorable
Parents, educated in the most liberal Sciences, and managed in one of the most
Royal and famous Courts of Europe. As also for that the custom of Honorable
dispositions, has always (next after that) labored the knowledge and insight
of foreign Estates and conditions. That they may not only deserve well of
their own Country, by this their industry, but also spread their own fame,
as far as their Country is known.

Your own worth is the principal motive that emboldens me to shroude it under
your Patronage, as one that is a fautor and favorer of virtuous Actions, and
whose Honorable loves grown from the general applause of the Commonwealth
for your high desert, may keep it from the malice of bitter tongues.

Commanded thus with this consideration, I presume to present my Book unto
your Lordship: And humbly entreat, your Honor will be pleased to vouch of my
Labors and favor a Scholars pen with your gracious acceptance, who
answers in affection, what he wants in eloquence. So shall I rest devoted
unto you, and bestow my future Studies to effect matter of better deserving,
Ever remaining

Your Honors most humble affectionate. ANTH. NIXON.

The true Copy of a Letter Certificatorie, written in commendation of Captain
King of Ratcliffe, M. William Bardwell and Alexander Child of Redriffe,
Masters of three Ships of London, for their memorable service against the
Swethens, being thereto compelled in Summer last, 1608.
Johannes Carolus Chodkiewich Earl of Seckloro Bychor, and of Misra, Captain
of Samogitia and Porpatie, General Commissioner of Lyffeland, and chief
General of the Army of the great Dukedom of Lytawe. To all and singular, to
whom it may appertain, or that shall read these Presents, I do let to weet,
that whereas William Bardwell, William King, and Alexander Child English
Gentlemen, came with three Ships at Riga, when the Earl of Mansfielde
General of the Army of Duke Charles Suderman, periniuriously breaking the
Truce, made war in Lyffeland, I held them there, and employed them in the
service of War for the most excellent King of Poland, my most gracious Lord,
and they undertook to defend the Dunn, wherein they did behave themselves very
faithfully, manfully and valiantly, so that the said Earl of Mansfield was
often by them driven back again to his great loss and shame, and likewise
he was often assaulted by them, so that he lost not only his strength of men
and his courage, but also lost some Ships with many men and goods, which the
said Englishmen with a memorable courage, and to the notable glory of the
English Nation, did set on fire and burn. And therefore I have thought good to
grant unto them this Testimonial, to the end that they may have great thanks
for their deserts, purchased by their good renown and name* and that others
may see, that as fame and immortality belongs chiefly to noble minds, so also
it is gotten by virtuous and valiant deeds:

Written in the Camp at the new Mill in Lyffeland the seventeenth of
November, Anno Domini 1608. And is subscribed by Johannes Carolus Chodkiewicke,
manu propria, and sealed with a Seal in Red wax, Printed thereupon, Ita
testatur Carolus Demetrius, Notarius Publicus.

THE ORIGINAL GROUND OF The present Wars of Swethen.
Chap. I. The dangerous plots laid against Gustovus in the life time of his
Father: His flight to Lubeck in Germany in the habit of a slave, His strange
entertainment there, etc.
THis is like a brief Cronicle, that comprehends in it much matter in few
lines, and various business in little circumstance. It presents to your
reading the dessignes, and affairs of a spacious kingdom, and reaches to the
beginning of many years past. Understand therefore that the Country of
Swethen, before if was advanced to the dignity of a kingdom, by the allowance
of the^ Empire, and general consent of their own State, was a long time
governed by the authority of four Dukes, bearing the Titles of the four
Provinces, into which the Country is divided, The first is the Dukedom of
Doland, having in it a Regal Castle, called Vpsale, where the kings of
Swethland be Crowned and buried. The second is the Dukedom of Newland, where
the Castle of Newkeeping stands. The third is the Dukedom of Finland, where
the Dukes seat is called, Oua Castle. The fourth is Warmland, where stands the
Castle of Wasten upon the Mediterrenian Sea; being the strength, and Bulwark
of the kingdom. The Country being (as I say) a long time ruled by these four
Dukes, in the kind of an Aristocratie, that is, The government of the Nobility,
as was the government of the first and former Roman Peers and Consuls: was
in the end of the Reign of Henry 7. King of England, made a Monarchy or
kingly government.

The first Monarke or King hereof, was called Gismond. whose Son, named
Gustovus succeeded his Father in the Kingdom. This Gustovus (being in the life
time of his Father, Duke of Doland) was a Prince very absolute, both in the
perfections of his body, and his mind, excellently composed in the one, and
honorably disposed in the other. Of an indifferent stature, neither too high,
nor too low. His complexion sanguine, his hair bright, his countenance
cheerful, and pleasant to look upon, full of grace, and Majesty. In war
stout, and industrious, in Counsel wise and full of respect, in the Court he
carried such a Port and State, as attracted all eyes to gaze upon him. In
private places full of affability and delightsome recreation: To conclude, it
seemed that Nature and virtue had both joined together to frame in him the most
absolute pattern of a Prince in his time. But as no excellency whatsoever is
without malignant opposites, so this Prince found that old saying to be true,
Virtutis comes inuidia, plerunque bonos insectatur. For the Dukes of the other
Three Provinces, being joined with him in Commission (for you must understand,
that the four Dukes did still retain their titles, and authority under the
King, as the Senate of Rome did theirs under the Soueraintie of Caesar, though
it were subordinate:) The other three (I say) envying that greatness, love,
and opinion, which his virtues, as well as the Nobiliti^e of his blood had got
him, sought by many devises to betray him, whom no honorable mind, but would
have defended, and to this end, they bent all their courses: A plot (no doubt)
full of honor and regard unto the State, the project whereof was either the
murder, or disinheritance of so lawful a Prince; Falsehood and Envy the
accusers, Suggession and Subornation the informers. Thus was the plot laid, The
Queen (being mother in law of Gustovus, and having a Son by the King, and
borne since the kingdom was erected) as far as she durst (for she yet feared
the greatness of Gustovus) did many times buze matters of jealousy and
suspicion into the Kings ears, of his sons carriage of himself in the
kingdom, which at first he did not either believe, or dissemble. The three
Dukes knowing the Queens mind toward the Prince, added fuel to her fire,
alleging that she should never find a sure estab^ishment for her self and
her son in the kingdom, if Gustovus were not made away. The heart, that
before began to burn with this desire, was now more incensed, having those
three Noblemen, the principal Counselors of State in the kingdom, to
further her intendments. The Queen being thoroughly instructed by the Lords,
takes the advantage of time, in her complaint to the king, Tells him that his
son aspired, and would shortly aspire against him, that he affected
popularitie, received like Absalom his subjects Petitions, not in love, but
Ambition: That he kept a Court, and Port greater then the King, and that all
his actions did more savor of Sovereignty, then subjection. The Lords, they
second the Queen in her unjust information, allege matters probable to
confirm it, The King believes, and in the error thereof, hates Truth,
imbraceth Treason. Thus all being inuerted, Nature rebels in the Father, but
Loyalty remains in the Son* The plot was hereupon laid for his
apprehension, Gustovus being then at Court, who noting a strange alteration in
his Fathers countenance toward him, began to suspect the drift of the Queen,
upon the distrust of the Noblemen about her: Himself being almost abandoned,
deuiseth with himself how to avoid the danger. A Gentleman of the Kings,
comes secretly to Gustovus, and tells him that the plot was laid that night, for
his Attainder. The Prince being amazed at the sudden immiuence of such a
peril, posteth presently from the Court with a few of his Retinew, and the
next day recouers his Dukedom of Doland, where he meant to stay, till he heard
further of the Kings proceedings. His departure was soon made known, at which
the Queen, and the Lords (though they mist of their purpose) were not much
sorry, foreknowing that his sudden flight from the Court in that manner,
would strongly confirm their accusation. The King by them again is incensed,
and messengers sent into Doland, by whom the Prince was Summoned by a certain
day to make his appearance in Vpsale Castle: which the Prince refuses to do:
affirming by his submissiue Letters to the King, that though he knew his cause
to be just, and his heart loyal, no probable suspicion of any misdemenour
from him, either in act, or intent, that yet nevertheless he durst not hazard
his life in the heat of the kings displeasure, for that he knew his adversaries
were so great in power, and in so gracious account, that it would be an easy
matter to have his Majesty's grace, and Nature her self perverted to his
untimely and unjust destruction: And that the only cause why he retired
himself into his own Country, was to stay the time, until these mists of
his Majesty's jealousy and suspicion were blown away, that the Sun of his
alleagiance might shine clear, far from the clouds of all distrust, or
disloyalty. This answer being returned, but not accepted, the King by the
Queens continual instigations was more, and more prouokt, insomuch that a
great power was suddenly raised to fetch him by violence out of his Dukedom.
Which the Prince perceiving, and being neither able, nor willing to resist his
Fathers forces, gives way to necessity, and in the habit of a slave,
purposes secretly to go into Germany. And having past some dangers in his
flight by the Kings pursuers, at last he crossed the seas, and holding on his
course for Lubeck in Germany, not many days safely arrived there, All this
while he kept his disguise, for though he knew that the Lubeckers were
heretofore beholding to him, yet he doubted what minds they would put on in
this change of fortune, Remembering Pompeyes usage in his flight by Ptolomie
King of Egypt, and the like of Hanniball by Prusius king of Bithinia.

Chap. II. Gustovus is discovered in Lubecke: The Lubeckers take his part, The
King his Father dies, He recouers by their means the Kingdom of Swethland.
THe news (being arrived in Germany) of Gu^tovus his flight out of Swethland,
before his coming thither, was diversely entertained in Lubeck: Some pitied
the state and condition of the young Prince, that so Noble a Gentleman, so full
of hope, and expectation, even in the prime of his youth, should in this vile
manner suffer violence: Others spoke against him, supposing that his own
natural Father, and others of his blood, would not in this manner have
proceeded against him, if he had not shown himself dangerous unto the State,
as the minds of the people are in this case diversely distracted. The Prince
after his coming to Lubeck stayed certain days in a common Inn, not daring
to discover himself, and to avoid the suspicion of a stranger in such common
places, found means to prefer himself unto a rich Merchant of the Town (if
such a place in the meandness of his fortune at that time may be called
preferment.) Being there entertained, he contented himself to do any bodily
labor in the house, striving to suite his mind unto his misery, yet could he
not so well counterfeit this part of his sinister fortune, but that the
Merchant did soon suppose him to be a better man, then he seemed to be, and
perhaps the man he was. So hard a thing it is for Nature to learn to forget
her custom. Staying some few months in the Merchants house, he heard of a
Gasant sent from the king to the State of Lubeck, being supposed he would bend
his course thither. The tenor of the Gasants message, was to deliver to the
Lubeckers that the kings desire was, that either they should not entertain him
at al, or else send him back to Swethland, for that he was known and
proclaimed to be an enemy. But they being at that time ignorant of the
Princes abiding, answered for the time to those things, that might stand with
the Kings pleasure. The Gasant being dispatched, Gustovus lived in a continual
fear of being discovered, as well for that many great men in the Town had
before seen him in Swethland, and might then remember him: As also for that
his Master would many times pry into his countenance, and behavior, and utter
strange words, and show strange passions, even in his presence, sometimes
repeating the name of Gustovus.

The Prince holding thus a Wolf by the ears, in doubt whether to stay or go,
(in both which he found danger) was wondrously perplexed: Sometimes he thought
to discover himself, opposing his mind against the worst of fortune, that if
the Town did betray him, his blood should be shed in Innocence, and he be rid
of that torment: wherein his mind was diversely distracted betwixt Hope, and
Fear, and Fear the predominant: but at last resolving with himself to stay,
he still framed his mind unto his business. One day cleaving of wood, in the
strayning of his body, a button that held the flappe of his Ierken, brake, and
there withal a little Chain of gold, whereon did hang a Jewel of
inestimable price, fell from his neck: Which a maid servant in the house
(being by) perceiving, was desirous to see it: but he suddenly snatching it
up, told her that it was a thing of no worth, but given him by a friend of his,
in the remembrance of her. The maid dissembled her opinion for the present,
but soon after told it to her master. The Merchant upon this accident,
confirms his former suspicion, and having now matter more relative then
before, informed the State of Lubeck with this circumstance. The Burgomasters
of the Town, sitting then in Counsel, sent for the stranger by a guard, to
come before them, How the Message was entertained by the Prince, let them judge
that have undergone the like adventure. There was no denial, nor possibility
of escape, Obey he must, And it is a hard thing when Princes must obey. Being
brought before the Magistrates, it was demanded of whence he was? he answered,
of Swethen. They asked him of what degree? He told them, as mean in birth as in
fortune: what moved you (quoth they) to forsake your Country? The Prince
replied, my unkind usage there. A principal Senator of the Town looking all
this while steadfastly upon his countenance, perceived that it was Gustovus, and
whispering the rest in the ear, assured them, that it was the Prince. The
matter was before concluded what they meant to do, Whereupon this great
Citizen began to speak in this manner. Your birth (quoth he) is far better
then your fortune, Therein you dissembled, but your fortune bears the blame,
your first and last answer is true, for we know that you are of Swethland, and
your name is Prince Gustovus, and the unkind usage of your Country has driven
you from thence: what we mean to do, you shall understand shortly. In the
mean time repose your self securely and hopefully in the rulers house. The
Prince acknowledged himself, and thankt them for these signs of their good
will. And if you shall find (quoth he) my protection, or defense to prove
dangerous unto your State, Let my life rid you from that fear: I shall be well
content, so I may free you from danger, to be your Sacrifice; Whereupon they
all embraced him, with the tears standing in their eyes, every one honoring
him* and putting him in great hope and comfort, They caused him presently to be
invested with royal ornaments and in all honorable and loving manner,
conuayed him that night to the ^ulers house. The Prince stayed as prisoner, but
honorably attended about two years in Lubeck. During which time, the king his
Father sent diverse Gasants with fair words, and large promises to have him
delivered, but it would never be granted; Howbeit they promised that they would
keep him safe from attempting any innovation. The Prince during his stay there
would often visit his old master, whom he would alwa^es call his kind master,
affirming that if his discovery had not been made known, he could as
contentedly have lived a poor servant in his house* as he did then a princely
prisoner in the Town: The Merchant would many times tell him, he had much
ado, to keep himself, from the sin of pride, for that it was his fortune,
to be master of such a servant.

Within two years after, the king his Father died, and the State of the
Country proclaimed the Queens Son, King of Swethland. Gustovus had quickly
intelligence thereof, as such news flies ever with the Swallows wings,
receives Letters from many Noble men, and other of his friends in the Country,
wherein he was advised to use all means possible for his return, with assured
confidence of their assistance The Prince shows the Letters to ye Lubeckers,
solicits them in his own behalf for aid, gives them princely pomises of their
requital. The Prince returns to Swethen full of hope and encouragement, His
friends meet him in great multitudes with all signs of love and obedience:
His enemies are dispersed without battle: some fled, some taken prisoners, the
Queen with her son conuaied to Vpsale Castle, The three Dukes beheated, and
all the rest pardoned. When all things were established, and the sums of
money paid back to the Lubeckers, Gustovus was shortly after with all
solemnity Crowned king of Swethland, and not long after was honorably married
out of Germany, His Queen being nobly borne in that Country, By whom he had
four sons: Prince Erick the eldest, Duke of Doland, John Duke of Finland,
Magnus Duke of Warmland, and Charles the youngest Duke of Estergutland, that
now lives and inioyes the Crown of Swethland.

This Gustovus Reigned peaceably and happily, Laden with many years, but with
many more Trophies of honors, The care and love he bare unto his subjects was
well seen in their reciprocal respect to him. His sons brought up in all
princely knowledge, acknowledged faithfully their natural duties during his
life, Though after his death they fell at unnatural debate, one with another.

In the last of his years he showed the best of his affections, different from
the observance taken in other Princes, who after a long continued
Soueraignetie, do much decline from the gentle behauiours of their beginnings.
But at last (as every thing is unstable, and each estate, that has being in
this world, holds his uncertainty) This noble king deceased, at that time,
wherein his life was most desired of his subjects: whose love had been the like
unto his sons, had it not been crossed by the nature of the tumultuous times
that followed: The dead corpse being now the sad remnant of a king, was with
all solemnity conuaied and enterred in Vpsale Castle: His friends following it
with all tokens of sorrow, calling him the proppe and protector of Religion,
the defender and preserver of his Country, the honor and glory of the Swethen
Nation. His fame went before him, dilating his Noble acts, and princely
virtues, that (not buried in the grave with him) returned back, posting
through the world, and still sounding forth the praises of Gustovus, whose
name shall never die, so long as the memory of the Swethen State indures.

CHAP. III. Ericke is crowned King of Swethland, after the death and Funeral
of his Father: A marriage is plotted with Elizabeth Queen of England, That
failing another is tendered to the daughter of the King of Poland, His brother
Duke John conspires against him.
AFter the death of Gustovus, Erick his eldest son is with all general
applause, and the Countries ceremony, crowned king of Swethland about the
year of our Lord 1559. and in the same year an ouerture of marriage was made
with Elizabeth Queen of England in the beginning of her reign. Duke John his
brother sent Ambassador (princely appointed) in this negotiation, who safely
arriving in England with his whole Fleet, was honorably entertained. Howbeit
the matter of his Embassage, was rather flattered, then granted, rather
fairly countenanced, then embraced, For some noble men at that time, great in
their places, either in their own respects, or the honor of the Queen, stood
against it, But the Queen her self did fairly entreat the Prince, royally
feasted him, gave him many princely gifts, Told him in conclusion, that she
took the Tenor of his Embassage in very gracious manner: Sent kind
commendations to the king his Brother, with this hopeful message, that if it
pleased him to take the pains to come into England, she would take such order
for his entertainment, that he should have no just cause to return
discontent. For (says she) I have made this vow, never to con^ract my self to
any, whom I have not first seen. The Duke thus furnished with this answer*
takes his leave, imbarkes himself, boyseth sail, arriues in Swethland, and
delivers to the longing languishing King this hopeful doubtful answer* of
the Queen. The young King imbraceth this news, and his brother for them,
flatters his fancy, kisseth the Queens picture, beguiles imagination, buildes
Castles in the air, rigges his Fleet at Sea, exhausteth his Treasure, makes
himself poor to enrich his hope, which proved indeed, far above his
Fortune. The Winter following was spent in this preparation for England: During
which time Frederik then king of Denmark, a Wise and politic Prince stoodmuch
against this Alyance with England, foreseeing the danger that might redound to
him in his neighbors marriage, with so potent a Princess: sends
Ambassadors to King Erick, showing both the inconvenience that would happen by
marriage in a Country so far remote, as also the dangers that were like to
ensue, in ioyn^ng with a Queen, more strong then himself. But the king gave a
deaf ear to this Embassage, Continuing his preparations still for England:
Some say, that in that Winter ryding between Vpsale, and Wasten Castle, a
Maid of excellent beauty, but obscure parentage, whose name was Gondole
coming amongst others to behold the king, who by chance, casting his cies upon
her, was so suddenly ensnared in her beauty, that that poison which he drew
then into his heart by his eyes, did so corrupt the whole body of his affairs,
that at last he lost both his life* and kingdom: but others say it was the
winter after. But to return to our voyage for England, The kings fleet being
royalty rigd, and all things ready for so great a business, the king took
shipping about the beginning of May* leaving Duke John his brother Uicegerent
in his place, and sailing along the Coasts of Norway, Report says that
Frederick king of Denmark had procured certain Witches in that Country to
drown, or dispearse the Fleet of king Erick, and by their spelles, and
deuillish incantations to Confound this intended Uoyage, whether this be true
or no, I know not, but this is certain, that the king being upon the coast of
Norway, such a strange foggy, thicknes did so cloth the air that the kings
Fleet had soon lost sight of one another: And then followed such horrible
thunders, and unheard of Tempests, that it seemed heaven and earth had met
together in the disturbance of this intendment. The king being at his wits end
long before he came to his ways end was so perplexed in his thoughts, that
he knew not what to do, either to go forward or to return: The sight of y^
Eye was so taken away by the the thicknes of Air, the beneu^t of the Ear was
consounded by the noise of the thunder, the waters rose so high as if they
meant to kiss the Clouds: Noe light but what the flashes of lightning made
which amassed them all, the rain fell so thick that they could scarce keep
the Hatches, the master calls to the Boatson, and is not heard, the
Sternes-man cries to the Master, and is not regarded. Three days together,
continued these three nights of darkness, wherein was seen neither sun Moon,
nor star: the kings Fleet was diversely dispearst, some into the coast of
Denmark others back again into Swetland, the king himself upon the Coast of
Norway looks every hour for his burial in the Sea. At last entering into
cogitation with himself, he thought that God had suffered his pride to be thus
punished, for that he undertook a Marriage with such a Queen, whose fame and
glory was so great, as well from her State, and government, as for the riches
and strength of her Crown, and kingdom: that entering into cosideration of
it, he held himself much unworthy of such a fortune. Upon this, the king
rashly vows that if it would please God to deliver him from that danger, he
would give over his over high attempt, return into his Country and learn
hereafter to suite his desires to his estate. At last these storms have end,
the king returns according to his vow, shortly after arriues in Swethland, And
thus failed this Negotiation for England.

The king soon after his landing begins (say some) renewes (say others) his
love to his fair Gondole: that afterward proved as fatal to him, as
Cleopatraes love to Anthony: His eyes were seldom off either her person or her
picture: His mind museth on nothing but the pleasures of her body, his tongue
speaks of nothing but her delights, and praises; all public affairs are
abandoned, the palaces are like a wilderness desolate, the Court is kept
where Gondole has her byding; reason, and regard of government, are now
banished, pleasure and sensuallitie made his Counselors of Estate. The Noble
men would oftentimes advise him, but all in vain, his brother Duke John did
still smooth the Kings humors, not as being enamoured o^ his delights, but as
from hence drawing a subject that happyly hereafter might serve his turn, in
case the Nobility (as they began a little) should afterward wholly withdraw
their affections from him. Thus whilst the king follows his pleasures Duke
John pursues his purposes, would oftentimes complain to certain of the
Rexen-Roade, which we call The Blood Royal, of his brothers effeminate and
vnlikingly government, but especially to Duke Charles his youngest brother,
yet no further engaging himself to danger then he knew means how to wind out
again. Not long after, another Marriage was tendered of the Polands Daughter,
which the king Coulorably entertained to satisfy his Nobility, whilst his
heart doted upon his Paramour. Duke John his brother was employed in this
business, and it fell out as he desired: For if the cards were dealt aright,
he might happily himself mary the Polands daughter. And thus with a false
heart taking a fair leave of the king his brother being furnished with all
accowtrements fit for such a business shortly after arrived in the Court of
Poland, where after the solemnity of such entertainements he delivered his
Message with such a Maiesticke grace both in his speech, countenance and
carriage of himself (as sure he was a most accomplished Gentleman) that it wan
him great commendations in the kings Court especially with the young princess,
in whose tender heart there was such an inward breach made, as was soon
outwardly perceived, for her eyes that conuayed these pretty assaults unto her
heart, did soon betray her hidden affections: which the Duke perceiving lays
hold upon the occasion, Winnes by rewards many tongues to speaken in his
behalf, joys with the greatest of the Kings Counsel, and in especial with
one Fe^nsbecke Duke of Leif-lande. He told them that the condition of his
Countries disordered estate, occasioned by the discordant disposition of his
brother, moved him rather to look with a public, then a private eye: If he
ought nature and duty to his Brother, he ought no less unto his Country, and
it was his countries cause (to the which he was most bound) that made him
inueigh against his brother? Let no man (quoth he) rashly ce^sure me, but
comparing the State of the kingdom to the condition of the King, let him then
judge whether all is not like to ruin, if prevention be not made, which in the
Kings person (quoth he) will never be, for that he seems to be buried in his
his own delights, and the breath which he himself should draw, lies not in
his own, but in another body. The most and best part of the Nobility being by
these and the like suggestions won unto his party, a way was quickly made for
the Duke to Woo for himself, which was not long a doing for the heart, that
was already so strongly assaulted, was soon framed to yield. To be short the
young Duke Weddes and beds the princess with great honor, and delight, so
easily is the policy of a state drawn to obey the necessity of the time: the
news hereof is soon brought to Swethland, wherein the wise looked into the
danger of the King, how be it the King himself foresaw no peril: But as a Man
wholly devoted to his delights, does against the advice of all his friends,
quickly after Marry the said Gondole, whereby he did suddenly run into such
a scandalous hatred of his own Subjects, that they ever after held him
unworthy of his Crown and kingdom: Within a year after his Marriage he had a
Son, not long after whose birth Duke John having assured promises from his
youngest brother Duke Charles, procures an Army to be levied by the King of
Poland, his Father in law, and arriving in the Dukedom of Estergutland, was
lovingly entertained of his brother Duke Charles, who joining their forces
together, having also the aid of other Noble Men in the Country, gave battle
to his brother King Ericke, who being overcome, and flying to Stock-holand, was
there by his two brothers taken, and made away, no man ever knew how. A noble
man in the Country, brother to Herrerick Gusterson, and dear unto the King
was at that time honorably slain in the defense of his Prince. The Queen had
before sent her young Son out of the Land, foreseeing the danger that was
like to happen. Who now lives as an Exile in the great Duke of Moscouias Court,
and the Queen her self confined to Stickborrow Castle, where she yet lives a
sad and solitary life. Thus ended the unfortunate Reign of King Erick, who
might long have lived and governed in the Land, had he but subdued his own
affections.

CHAP. IIII. King John is crowned king of Swethland: has a Son borne called
Sigismond: The King of Poland dies: young Sigismond is sent for to be King of
Poland: He stays there certain years till the death of his Father, and is
then sent for by his Uncle Duke Charles to receive the Crown and kingdom of
Swethland.
DUke John having thus by his brothers murder attained unto the Crown,
disposes with his best Counsel the affairs of the kingdom, disperseth his
Army, satisfies his Subjects in the cause of these indirect proceedings,
against his brother, and having set all things in order, sends for this Queen
out of Poland, who with an honorable train being conducted into Swethland, was
there Royally entertained, and shortly after with Duke John her husband, in all
princely manner, Crowned King and Queen of Swethland at Vpsale Castle: Many
Statutes he repealed which the King his brother had made, being found
prejudicial unto the Country, and others he enacted, that were held more
profitable: To all Suitors he showed himself very gentle and gracious: And
because the treasure of the kingdom was much exhauste in his expedition into
Poland, he was driven to borrow many great Sums of money both there, and of
his Friends at home: He kept a Princely port, and was very liberal in his
rewards, delighting much in all Martial exerrises. His liberality was equal
to that which was so highly commended in a worthy Captain of Thebes, who when
he had obtained a victory against the Lacedaemonians, took only of all the
spoil but one sword, distributing the rest amongst his Soldiers, saying,
Fellows in Arms this I Challeng because I wrong it out of the hand of mine
Enemy. Whatsoever else is yours, as the reward of your trauells, for, the
Theban Senators war for honor, not for treasure. The Mercenary Man that
bears Arms for hier, and for his ordinary Pay, fears not to venture his
life in the face of his Enemy, having but his wages, has but his due: So that
if hope of spoil, and the bounty of his Captain did not encourage him in his
attempts, he would both doubt the danger of his person and scorn for so little
gain to ran upon such imminent perils. His liberality toward his associats
in Arms, and his experient wisdom and valor in Martial enterprises made
him both honored feared, and held in worthy estimation. Thus by this and his
other virtues Duke John in short time Crept into the hearts of his Subjects.
The first year of his reign the Queen brought him a goodly Boy which was
Christened by the name of Sigismond, the Emperor being his Godfather, which
Sisgismond, is now King of Poland. About the Tenth year of his reign, King
John made an honorable journey into Russia, upon the breach of a League made
betwixt them. From whence he returned victorious. The rest of his reign was
quiet and peaceable: And set a side the stain of his brothers death, he was
doubtless a most excellent Prince and worthy of the Crown and kingdom, and
although there were many times iarres betwixt him, and his brother Duke
Charles, yet always the matter was so handled, that they were soon reconcilde
again. By which were cut off all occasions of Civil war. In the twelfth
year of his reign his father in law the King of Poland dies, for whose death
the Queen his daughter mourned heavily. The young Prince Sigismond her Son
was elected King of Poland, and with an honorable conuoy being guarded thither
was with all solemnity in all Princely manner Crown King of Poland: Shortly
after Marries honorably into the house of Austria; and in the twelth year of
his reign in Poland, King John his Father dies: whose death being much
bewailed of his subjects, he was with appertaining solemnity buried in the
Chapel of the Kings in the Castle of Vpsale. Duke Charles of Estergutland
after the death of his brother sends into Poland for his Nephew Sigismond to
come to receive the Crown of Swethland, Sigismond takes heavily the death of
his Father, and deuines before hand of the troubles that followed in that
kingdom: Great preparation is made for his journey into Swethland, and
doubting of his uncles mind and proiectes, carries a great power of Poles
with him to prevent all dangers. The king arriues safely in Sweathland, is
with all honor and sign of love received by his uncle Duke Charles, and the
rest of the Nobility of Swethland, He is honorably conveyed to Vpsale Castle,
where he was lovingly received of the Queen his Mother, whom he comfort
being a sorrowful widow for the death of King John her husband. Shortly after
he was crowned K. of Swethland without any disturbance. A Rex-day was held in
the castle of Vpsale, where all things being established, Duke Charles is made
vicegerent of the kingdom: having with him joined in Commission four Noblemen,
of the Rexen-road whose names were Hergusten Bonner, Hersten Bonner, his
brother, Herrerick Spare, and Hartor Belk: These four Noble men, being great
in the kingdom but not very great with the Uicegerent, were of purpose joined
by the King in commission with the Duke to curb or Control all over haughty
and headstrong attempts, that the Duke might happily Commit by the greatness
of his place and power in the absence of the King, who was then ready to
return to Poland. The Duke perceaues the drift, but dissembles it. before the
Kings departure, order was set down by the King with the Duke and the
Commissioners for the payment of certain sommes of money, which King John his
Father did owe unto many Soldiers, that were yet unpaid since the time of
expedition into Russia, and unto many Merchants of England, Scotland and other
Nations for the prosecuting of that war. After all things were thus settled
and ordered, the King returns to Poland, leaving behind him that fire that
afterward consumed the peace of the whole Kingdom: for the Noblemen, the
Commissioners being commanded by the King, (that was ever jealous of his Uncle
Charles) to observe and inform his Majesty of the manner of his government,
did so oppose themselves against him in all his proceedinges, and especially in
the payment of this money, that the Duke plainly perceived, that this new
government was but laid as a trap to ensnare his life, A Rex-day was holden at
Vpsale, no order Concluded, nor money paid, and much ado there was to keep
them from factions, the Commissioners would have these sums paid out of the
Subjects purses, the Duke out of the Common Treasury: which the commissioners
refuse, alleging the Kings want of money, The Duke writes faithfully, The
Lords falsely to the King. To whom they intimate fear of innovation, and that
the Duke by all likelyhoods aimed at the Crown, that he had paid part of the
money due to the Soldiers out of the Revenues of the Dukedom, to draw their
affections to him, that he sought to further the State, and wealth of the
Commons more then stood with the loyal nature of a Subject, that he kept the
Port and State of a King rather then a Deputy, and that it was not like he
would long yield his honors unto Uassalage, whose fortunes in such a mind and
State as his might attain to Sovereignty, if prevention were not speedily
made. The Duke intercepts these letters, and sends them enclosed in his own
unto the King, to whom he writes very humbly, and with all protestations of
duty, and alleagance: the king receaues the letters, but believes the Lords and
dist^usteth the Duke, sends secretly to the Commissioners that they should
suddenly surprise him, depose him from his government, and to that end he
sent his authority: and finally to keep him prisoner, his wise and children,
during life in a castle built of purpose for that stratageme within the
dukedom of Litto: Oh that the nature of fortune should be so fickle and
uncertain, never singular either in her frowns or favors, but that commonly
in the height of any hope it produces some cross accident of unhappy
misfortune.

The Duke notwithstanding having intelligence of this plot, began to look
about him, hasted into his own dukedom and raised a great power of men, Some
say that if he had but staide one hour longer in Vpsale, the plot had been
effected, and the Duke utterly undone. The Lords were in a maze upon the Dukes
departure, knowing that their devise was discovered, they now perceived their
own weakness to resist the Duke, being in power, place and opinion, and
far above them, And though they had the Kings authority, yet was he far
from them, and they near unto their danger, they knew not well what course to
take, sometimes they purposed to fly to the King, and then they feared the
ways were forelayd. To stay in the Castle of Vpsale were no safety, it being a
place of pleasure, not of defense: whereupon they determined to depart from
thence: Three of them unto the Castle of VVasten in the Dukedom of Finland,
and Hartourbelk to Calmer Castle. Having these* Castles delivered unto them,
they purposed to stay there to understand the Dukes proceedings, and in the
mean time dispatched letters unto the King of the particulars of these
troubles: The Duke (as I said before) having raised a great power of men,
marches speedily toward the castle of Vpsale, but understanding of the Lords
departure toward Wasten, bends his course thither. It is a world to see what
numbers of men came unto the Duke from all parts proffeting their service to
him: All which he gently welcomed. Some he entertained, and the rest sent home
again with special charge to look unto the Kings peace, signifying further
that the cause why he was now up in Arms, was but to right himself of such
wrongs done by those Lords, who neither loved the King nor him. The Lords that
were in the Castle of Wasten understanding of the Dukes approach with such a
power of men, suddenly forsook the castle, and not being able to defend it,
fled in all have to Poland, whom the Duke would not pursue, but taking the
castle put in a strong Garrison, and presently hast^d to the castle of Calmer,
which Hartourbelk had a little before taken in the Kings name, who standing at
defense and defiance with him, the Duke besieges both the City and castle,
the citizens more willing to entertain him, then resist him. The Duke plants
his ordinance against the Gates of the City, and thereupon the Citizens
resisting the command of Hartour Belk, open the city Gates and recaue him in:
The Duke besieges the castle, and in short time by the help of the Town
Winnes it, takes and keeps Hartour Belk prisoner, and discharges all the rest.

From hence the Duke sent letters to the King, informing truly the cause of
these troubles, That the unjust attempts of the Commissioners against him, did
move him to raise these powers in defense of his state and liberty, not in the
disturbance of his Majesty's peace, nor to make any innovation in the Land, and
beseeching him that no false or fained suggestions of his adversaries, might
stand as a bar betwixt his Majesty's grace toward him and his own
fidelity: Affirming further that it lay in his power to stopp their passage
into Poland and that he would at the Kings pleasure disperse his forces,
surrender up the castles, that he had taken, be content to resign his charge
of government, to who^soeuer it pleased the King, Provided that he might be
assured of the quiet enioyment and peaceable possession of such Lands and
honors, as he was born unto by Nature: and this (quoth he) I learn of
necessity, which teaches every creature to defend it self.

The King receives the Dukes letters, but gives no credit to his protestations.
During the time of the Dukes stay in the City of Calmer, and understanding of
many disorders, and misdemeanors that were committed in a Nunnery, standing in
the Town, One day Came to visit the Nuns, accompanied with certain gentlemen
of his house, and understanding some of their minds to be discontent with
their orders, and some of their bodies well known to the Friars, dissolues the
Nunnery, and transposeth the Nuns, according to their own disposing, Some
into other nunneries, many to their Friends, the most to Marriages. The King by
this time had answered the Dukes letters very coulorably, that he was sorry
for the tarres that happened between him, and the Lords, That as soon as his
business would give him leave, he would visit the Lords, and him. In the
mean time he requested that he would deliver Hartourbelk, or entreat him
kindly. The Duke though he believed not what the King had written, yet he
receaues the letters gladly, and honorably feasted the messenger. In this time
another dangerous plot was laid, to entrappe Duke Charles, and to enforce him
Prisoner, in the Castle of Litto aforesaid, whereupon there were forces very
secretly, and suddenly raised in Finland, The king having a purpose to win
to that power, other forces that he meant himself to bring out of Poland, and
appointed a day of meeting in Stock-holland.

CHAP. V. The Duke has intelligence of the plots that the King and his
adversaries had devised against him. He encounters part of the Kings army, and
discomforts them, with other accidents.
THe Duke having intelligence of this dangerous plot, devised against him by
the king, assured himself to find no favor at his hand and that no
submissio^ would serve ye turn: For him to disperse h^s powers, and to stand
rather upon the protestation of his allegiance then his guard, were to put his
neck upon the block, and to endure the stroke: for raging str^ames are not
stayed with gentle hands. Wherefore calling his friends about him, he told
them that it was now no time to dally. That the king by his adversaries was so
prouokt against him, that nothing but his death or deprivation would satisfy
the kings displeasure. These unwilling arms (quoth he) that I now bear, are
for the defense of you, and my Country, unto which I owe my life, and
wha^soeuer else is dear unto me. I see (quoth he) the drifte of the king,
and my adversaries, is to overthrow our customs, and to govern you according
to the Polish Policy, which is unfit for any free state. To pursue this, and
to lay heavy yoakes upon your necks, my life is sought after, which I shall be
always ready to spend or end to do you or my Country service.

His friends embraced him, willed him to go forward, promised their aid, to
the uttermost of their powers, and the Duke lets slip no time, but presently
seizes upon the Navy of Swhethland having it before under his command,
maruelling much that the King had not before that sent to seize upon it
himself, but thereby belike he thought he should have ministered matter for
the Duke to suspect his device, The Finland Fleet being upon the Coast some
few days before the day appointed, the Duke having furnished the Navy with men
and munition, took the Opportunity of Time, and with all expedition made have
to meet them before their joining with the Kings power, with whom had they
met, they had put the Duke to a great hazard, The Finland Fleet consisted of
three score and ten sail most of them vessels of great burden, and in them 14
thousand fighting men, the Dukes forces by Sea were scarce so many. The Duke
deuides his Navy into two parts, the Fiulinders into three. The Duke bearing as
great a breadth in the front of his Navy, as his adversaries did, doubting
least he should be engirt. The charge being given by the Duke was semblably
answered by the contrary party, and now the voice of the Ordinance, (that was
many years a stranger in those parts) carried such hideous noise in the Land,
as much amazed the quiet minds of the inhabitants, when they heard that the
harvest of their Peace was now like to be reap't by the ungentle hand of war:
Then began they to forethink the troubles that were like to follow these
fearful beginnings, but happily not to remember the causes thereof: it is
either a natural or Customary stupidity in man to be senseless in the
understanding of their own offenses, Pride, Blasphemy, Avarice, Extortion,
Luxury, and other the like enormities are in particular men the general causes
of the disturbance, nay sometimes of the depopulation of a whole kingdom, when
the minds of Princes corrupted with Ambition are stirred up, though in their
own respects, even by the power and sufferance of the almighty to plague (by
war his consuming Minister) the unrepented sins of the people. But to
return to Sea, where the fight continued little more then two hours, during
which time the air was so troubled with smoke, that the ships at Sea could
not see one another, and the beholders at land might judge by the eye, that
they were turned into a cloud. But at last the Admiral of the Finlanders
being struck between wind and water, did sink in the midst of them all:
Their fleet began to take about to hoise up their Sails and fly, the Duke
followed them as far as he durst, but being doubtful of the Kings approach,
made his return the sooner, Landed his powers, and hasted with his army to
Stockholland.

Upon his coming to Stock-holland he understood of the Kings landing at
Ca^mer Castle, his whole Navy consisting of a hundredth Sail, or there abouts,
whereof there were eight and twenty English ships, which the King had hired
of the Merchants being then resident in that coast bearing in the whole Fleet
eight and twenty thousand fighting men: Duke Charles being advertised of the
news, doubted what he were best to do, Sometimes he was in mind to give
place unto his adversaries, considering the miseries that were like to attend
this uncivil war, And though he knew himself well lyned with friends, in
the kingdom, and that it might be in his power to resist the king, yet when
he reduced into his mind the Calamities that might happen unto the Land by the
maintenance of this war, He did often persuade himself with Otho, rather to
give place to Vitellius, then to resist a Tyrant to the overthrow of his
Counter, but being otherwise advised by his friends, that counseled him
either to take upon him the sovereignty, or at least to maintain himself in
his place, as well for their lives as his own, having all gone so far that
they could not retire without irreuocable danger, His courage ouercomming his
fear, and the respect of the generality above his own particular, he resolved
to prosecute the war but yet in such manner, that all the world might
understand he did it rather to defend himself then offend the king howsoever
his acts might be mistaken. Whereupon the duke remooues from Stock-holand into
the heart of ye country to a hold called the castle of Lynnkeeping. By the way
the King had taken the castle of Calmer, and detained the Captain of the
castle (placed there by the Duke) close prisoner. And though the Town was
surely guarded by the King, and always by him forelayd, to intercept all
news, yet a certain Townesman undertook to carry the Duke intelligence
thereof, with the consent of the principal in the Town, such was the love they
bare unto him. The Messenger because he could not pass the ports was let down
at a privy, joining to the Town Wall, and having past the kings Scowt-watch,
that lay in diverse places houering about the Town, took so circumspectly the
advantage of the time, yt in two days he recovered the Dukes Army being upon
march, to the castle of Linnekeeping, The tenor of his message was, that on no
conditions he should trust the King, for that as well by the usage of his
officers in the castle of Calmer, as other principal intelligence given to
some (that loved the Duke too well to keep it close) that the king purposed
his utter destruction, and that there was no agreement to be made but only
coulorable (upon any reconcilement) to foregoe a further mischief. The Duke
though sad to hear these news, yet embraced, and rewarded the messenger. And
understanding there of the kings remove from Calmer to the castle of
Sterborrow to his sister Preking Anne, he bends all his forces thither, and
within three days after came w^thin sight of the castle: he pitched his Tent
within a mile of the Town, before he attempted any thing in any hostile
manner, sent some of his principal friends unto the king, and humbly desired
him to know the cause of th^se unjust wars undertaken: If the fault lay
justly in the Duke or any of his adherents, they were content either to submit
their lives to the law, or to the kings mercy, If any fault were supposed, or
but suggested, they desired an indifferent Judge: And if the fault were found
(where in deed it lay) they desired the same upon their adversaries. Finally
he besought his Majesty that he would measure the nature of ill tongues, not
by their sound but by their quality, for there were some about him, that nether
loved him nor them, nor ye land. The king received these messages, gave fair
but dissembled words, that if he would disperse his Army he would discharge
his, Confirm unto him his place of government, and other offices he enjoyed in
the kingdom, Provided that Hartourbelk whom he detained as a prisoner, might
be delivered, and he with the rest of the Lords reconciled. The Duke answered
to the first, that if it would please his Majesty to disperse his Army, he
would do the like, and for the other upon due consideration he should find him
conformable. Twelve days were thus spent in messages interchangeably between
them The Duke meaning faithfully, the King otherwise, Both their Armies they
still retaynd during which time, the trapp was laid to intrappe the Duke. That
upon an interuiewe betwixt them in the sight of both their Armies Fe^^becke
Duke of Leif-lande should rush in, and upon the sudden surprise the Duke, take
him prisoner, and carry him to the Castle aforesaid. But missing of his purpose
being thoroughly countercharged by the Duke, his mind was much perplexed in
the uncertain event of his expectations, His cogitations fought within
themselves, when sometimes he would lay the fault upon such, as he employed
in those businesses, Sometimes he would place one, sometimes displace another.
In his own judgment thinking such a man fit to be a Commander and sometimes
another: He would like one to day, and to morrow utterly distaste him. To
submit he thought dishonorable, and worse then death, for by open disgraces,
the fame of men grows odious. In this conflict of mind, the King retyres with
the Duke Ferns-becke to Steckborow, knowing that the fortune of war had not
so done her worst, but that she might begin a new Tragedy, and the rather for
that his strength was weakened in the former assaults, having lost two thousand
of his men in the same: The Duke returning to the Leager, and resting there
that night.

The next day the son had no sooner stepped from the bed of Aurora, but the
Dukes Fleet remoues from Finland to Stock-borow, being distante an hundredth
leagues. The Kings fleet lies in a ha^^n between two rocks. Duke Charles his
Fleet ryding in the Main, and the King perceiving how he was charged by Sea
and Land began to be diversely distraughted, sometimes he resolves to undergo
a mean estate, alleging that medium est tutissimum, and Auli ca vita,
splendida miseria. Cares are the Contiunall Companions of a Crown, when rest
remains in a low condition and fortune. Low shrubs feel least tempest, In
valleys is heard least thunder. In Country rooms is great rest, and in little
wealth the least disquiet. Dignity treads upon glass, and honor is like a
fading herb, that when it bloometh most gorgeous then it blasteth. Sometimes
he thought to disguise himself and with his clothes to change his thoughts,
that being poorly attyrde, he might be mearely minded, and measure his
actions by the present fortune, not by his former estate. Yet in the summons of
these diverse thoughts and cogitations he had some respective regard of his
honor, though all false, yet his heart should not faint, for the courage of a
man is showed in his resolution. In the midst of his extremes he held it
his safest course, to fly by night with all his power, sister, and friends,
with a full purpose to attempt the winning of Wasten Castle, being three or
four days journey from Steckborow. But the Duke that had waded through many
dangers, and in many adventures both prosperous and lucky, had gotten such
reputation, that he was highly preferred in the estimation of that Country put
the King into such a Continual fear of his pursuit knowing his strength
unable to match his Enemy.

The Duke understanding the King to be unstayed in his resolution, and to stand
thus wavering between war and peace (which danted the hearts of his people
to be seen in field, leads his Army, plants his ordenance against the Castle
of Steckborow and takes the kings fleet with seven tun of Gold, and all his
regal Ornaments. The King had conuaied himself to the Castle of Linnekeeping,
and was there royally entertained, howbeit in the midst of Solemnities, the
sad news of that unhappy accident was brought thither unto him: At the hearing
and relation whereof, though he was much aghast, yet with that kingly courage
that his unfortunate success had left him, he burst out into this or the like
passion. If my moderation (quoth he) in prosperity had been answerable to the
greatness of my birth, and state, or the success of my last attempts to the
resolution of my mind, I might have come to Linnekeeping, in my accustomed
honor, and Royalty, and not as a man thus wasted and spoiled, and to be rather
gazed upon, then honorably entertained. But what cloud soever has darkened my
present state, yet have the heavens, and nature given me that* in birth and
mind, which none can vanquish or deprive me of. I see that my enemies make
their triumphs, the subject of my miseries, and in my calamity as in a myrour
may be beheld their own glory: yet let them know this, that I am, and was a
prince, furnished with strengh of men, and abiliments of war, and what
marvel is it, if it be my chance to loose, seeing experience teaches, that
the events of war are variable, and the success of policy guided by
uncertain fates: The desire of souerainty admits no limitation, and if Duke
Charles must command all, then all must obey. For mine own part whilst I am
able, I will make resistance, and will be unwilling to submit my neck to a
servile yoke: For so far the law of nature allows every man to defend
himself, and to withstand force by force. This passion of the King filled the
peoples hearts and eyes with wonder, and delight, and with their best comfort
and encouragement they promised their joint performances of duty. Insomuch as
the King did therewith attempt the taking of Wasten Castle. But he whom
fortune had before striued to make unfortunate did in this also fail, and has
nothing left him to glory in that attempt, but his loss of men, and of much
expectation. These cross accidents sat near the Kings heart, who with much
cares and trauells had wearled his spirits, and greatly spent the strength both
of himself* and his people. For whatsoever he determined, was not carried
with any such secret or politic course, but that by some means or other the
Duke had some notice thereof, and still apprehended his drifts. For this was no
sooner plotted, but the Duke sends letters secretly to the Captain, that he
should not deliver the Castle with his priuity.

The King lying in Linnekeeping sends five hundredth men secretly to surprise
the Castle, yet was the same able to defend it self as indeed it did, and the
Captain therein performed the Dukes will, and retainde his credit, without
impeaches of his valor. Questionme^t were made whether they might enter into
the Castle in the kings name, but a peremtory answer was returned, that
without mandatory letters from the Duke, there was nothing there to be expected
but resistance: upon this the kings mind was disquieted, and a world of inward
Conflictes encountered his cogitations, as he stood doubtfully distract, what he
were best to do: at last as fire cannot he hid in straw, nor the nature of man
so concealed, but that at last it will break out, and have his course: So
fares it with the king, who perceiving his pleasure to be like Sicke-mens wills
that are parall (which having no hand nor seal, are the laws of a City
written in dust, and are broken with the blast of every wind) commanded that
forthwith the Duke and all his adherents, should be proclaimed to stand in the
state and nature of Traitors.

CHAP. VI. The Kings Army, and the Dukes join: Many on the Kings side slain,
and taken prisoners.
IT Was not long before this news of the Kings proceedings, in this manner
against the Duke was made known unto him: at which the Duke began to put on
a furious countenance, able to amaze any that made attempts against him, and
looking like Hercules when he aduan^te himself against Achelaus, he follows
the King to Linnekeeping with all his power: (...) in a mi^^y morning the
morrow before Micha^^mas day, ryses early, calls his Soldiers together,
deuides his Army (consisting of fifteen thousand men) into three several
bodies. One James Hill an English m^^ (...) the leading of the first: Captain
Scot being his Lie^^^^^nt, ^ndreas Lemeston Leads the second the Duke himself
with the thirty takes a wood within a mile of the King lodging: Here might you
see these three, shine like three meteors in the firmament, all in steel,
their Courts were camps and none Court^^^s, but Soldiers. Such effect did
the fire of discention work in the hearts of these Enemies. Fortune turned the
wheel of the Swethen and Polish state with unsteady hand, and had now almost
brought it to the point she meant they should sit: she took her favors from
them? Or rather, to speak of a power that controules fortune, and whose very
finger throws down kingdoms to utter confusion, or holds them up in their
greatness, whether the general sins of the people deserved this, or whether
the people were punished for the particular faults of the Princes, or for what
other causes soever, the rodd of vengeance was laid upon these Nations, It is
in man to think upon, and fear, but not to examine. Yet sure it is, that as
fire catching hold at first but of some mean cottage in some end or corner of
a City, has oftentimes (ere the fury of it could be put out) swallowed up in
his flames the goodliest and most beautiful buildings, that stood even
farthest out of reach: So did the Clouds of discention burst open their veins,
and let fall the poison of them on these several kingdoms.

In the expedition of these wars, one Lucas Righter undertakes to perform
the Dukes pleasure in the proclamation of his intended proceedings unto the
Kings Army, (which consisted of four and twenty thousand men). The tenor of
the Dukes proclamation made known his greeuances which although it be not
answered to expectation, Yet Lucas Righter making his return, is royally
rewarded by the Duke, and appoin^ed that day to attend the Dukes person. The
next day following the mist breaks up, and Armies discover one another, A
river being betwixt the King and the Duke, right thousand of the Kings
Soldiers were appointed to make good the bridge. Captain Scot full of Courage
and valor, gives the Charge, but receaues the overthrow: the like success
had Captain Hill Andreas Lemerson seconds them, and bides the Shock.

The Duke perceiving this, issues out of the wood alone hartens his Soldiers,
fills his ordinance (wanting shot) with pibbie stones, and makes choice to
encampe himself and his host, even on the top of a Hill naturally defenced
from passage and if any were, those he stoppped up with heaps of stones in
manner of a Kampier: near the foot whereof ran a River, with an uncertain
ford* where a troop of his ^^st Soldiers were set in order to receive the
Enemy, and the more to animate the minds of his men, the leaders went about
exhorting, and encourageing the Soldiers, taking all occasion of fear from
them, and putting them in hope with all inducements of war. And the Duke
himself coursing hither and thither, protested that that day should be the
full end of their misfortunes, and the beginning of their happiness, or else
his own perpetual servitude and bondage. The Soldiers upon this shewde as
great forwardness, and as Echoes redoubled his words, vowing never to yield,
either for wounds or for life, which they were all ready to sacrifice in the
cause of their Country: which resolution appearde in the squadron of Captain
Hill, who leading his Army, met the Enemy with such a shower of shot, that
many were slain, and many wounded: Andreas Lemerson gives the second charge,
and that with so fierce an encounter, that he seizes upon the enemies
ordinance, and turns the same upon them. In this conflict the Kings Army is
discomfited, eight thousand of them being slain, drowned, and taken Prisoners.
Upon this sad success, the King being in the Castle of Linnekeeping calls a
Parley. The Duke upon knowledge of the Kings pleasure, is willing to entertain
it, Messengers are sent enterchangeably, and upon hearing and debating the
greeuances one of another, the conditions are agreed upon, the Duke to have
pardon for what was past, and whereas he had one of his adversaries already in
his custody, it was likewise agreede, that he should have the other These
delivered into his hands, being the four Commissioners that disturbed the
peace of Swethen, which was performed accordingly, so as the Duke detaines them
prisoners with their wines and children: After this friendly coherence, the
Duke rides to the King with sixeteene of his men, leaving charge
notwithstanding with Lemerson, that if he returned not, nor sent word to the
contrary within half an hour, he should come to him with his whole Army. The
King and the Duke do so well concord and agree, as they dine together, and are
feasted very royally: all matters are pacified on either side, so as a Rex-day
is appointed, and it is determined that the King shall have his own, the Duke
his, and the disturbers of the peace their due. The King returns to
Steckborow to his Fleet, the Duke to Carborowgh where the Duchess lay. The
Peace being thus concluded, the Duke dismisseth his Soldiers, and receives
Letters from the King, that he purposed to pass into his Country with a
thousand men, and desires provision for them: The Duke receives his message
very kindly, and returns this answer to the King, that if it pleased him, he
should find provision for two thousand. As this provision was preparing,
Fernsbecke Duke of Liefland persuades the King to return with his power to
Poland, and not to stand to the Articles of agreement, but to renew the war,
alleging that he could never be absolute King of Swethen, so long as D.
Charles lived: And this was the only ground of the Civil war that followed.

CHAP. VII. The King returns to Poland, Duke Charles renues the war against
the King his Nephew, winnes the City and Castle of Calmer, and setleth the
state of the Dukedom of Finland.
THe King having thus falsified his own promise, and deceived the Dukes
expectation, returned with all expedition into Poland, landing at Danske with
his Army, leaving the Castle of Calmer and certain other holds adjoining,
strongly manned and victualed for a year: Duke Charles being much discontented
with this unkingly breach of his Nephews promise, knew now that it was no time
to capitulate, and that no solicitation, nor any submissiue means would serve
to appease the Kings anger, and to reintegrate himself into his love and good
opinion, called his chief friends about him, to have their advise what was
best to be done in this weighty business: They all agreede that if it were
possible they should recover the Castle of Calmer that winter, and certain
other holds lately manned and victualed by the King: whereupon the Duke with
his Army marches to Greenekeeping, a little City in Swethland, where having
certain days rested and refreshed his Army, he hasted to besiege the Castle
of Calmer. The City being indefensible, yielded unto him at his first approach:
The Duke having made his entrance into the City, delivered sayre speeches to
the Citizens, the just cause that was given him to renew the war, and that no
ambitious desire or turbulent spirit of his own, drew him so violently to
these actions of hostility, but that he was full Master of his own affections,
and the necessity of the time in the Kings incensed hate against him, did move
him to these Arms, that being (quoth he) at the first but private betwixt him
and the three Dukes his adversaries, that always maligned his estate, might
very well without the general disturbance of both kingdumes, have been ended
long ago, and nexther he held guilty, nor the land defiled with the shedding
so much Polish and Swethish blood, But since the king had so unkindly taken part
with strangers against a kinsman, and had so unnaturally laid their treacherous
plots against his loyalty, nature and justice were the fair protectors of his
quarrels, that should defend the equity of his cause against the mouth of envy,
or any such calumnious tongues whatsoever.

The Citizens that always affect peace rather then war, looking into the
condition of the disturbed States, were much perpleed in mind, and severally
distracted in their opinions, being uncertain how to stand affected: They knew
that the right and title was in the King, but the power and authority in the
Duke: The king had the command of the Castle, the Duke the possession of the
City. Their fear exceeded their distrust, for both the Dukes Army that lay in
the City committed many outrages, notwithstanding the Dukes strict
Proclamation, and again the ordinance of the Castle augmented their fear, and
if Hergusten Boner that commanded the Castle had had his will, the Ordenance
had been bent against the Town. The Duke satisfying as well as he could the
fear of the Citizens, beleaguers the Castle of Calmer, there being a great
mutiny within the Castle betwixt the Poles and the Swethians, which served
excellently well for the Duke, for Hergusten Boner that commanded the Castle
under the King, agreede with the Poles to have battered the City, which the
Swethean Soldiers resisted, insomuch that from words they fell to blows, in
which conflict the Swethens having the better, took Hergusten Boner Prisoner,
together with all the Poles, being to the number of three hundredth, and knowing
this Act to be unanswerable to the King, submitted themselves, yielded the
Castle, and gave up their Prisoners to Duke Charles. The Duke gently
entertaines al but Hergusten Boner (his old enemy) whom he sent Prisoner to
Greephollam, where he remains to this day. All the Poles he sent new
apparrelled with white staves in their hands, fairly entreated, to the King.
The Duke having thus fortunately recovered the City, and Castle of Calmer, did
strongly Manne them both, and comforting the Ditizens in the best manner he
could, with the rest of his Army marched into the Dukedom of Finland, it being
a part of Swethland, bordering upon Russia, and there beleaguerd the Castle of
Oua, and in few days wanne it, still fairly entreating the Kings Soldiers,
which in all places wanne him great commendations, and having in short time
quieted the Dukedom returned back with his Army to Stockehollam, where he
rested the remainder of that winter.

Chap. VIII Duke Charles inuades the Dukedom of Liefland, surpriseth most of
the Towns and Castles of that country, and is in a manner absolute possessor
of the whole Dukedom.
DUke Charles knowing his principal adversary with the King to be Fernes
beck, Duke of Liefland, (which country notwithstanding it joins with
Swethland in law and language, had neuerthe less a kind of absolute power and
authority within it self) thought it best to begin the war in that
country, that the eye of his adversaries looking into his actions there, the
Kings forces might not be bent against his own country, the peace whereof
he much desired, and to this end in the beginning of the Summer following
having reinforced his Army, Marched into the dukedom of Liefland, The chief
City whereof called Rauell yielded unto him, into the which he triumphantly
entered. The Citizens themselves, whether for fear of his power, or love of
his person, showed such tokens of submissiue duty, that there little let a
Contestation of their allegiance. Having there rested certain days he rayseth
his Army and marches toward the Castle of Whettensten, which in short time
was yielded unto him. From thence he came to the City of Perno, which he
likewise took in, placing there a strong garrison. He marched from thence to
another strong City called Durpe, and in five days forced the Town: five
hundredth Polish Soldiers within the Town submitted unto him with tender of
their service, whom he gently entreated, and entertained. They ever after
serving him in all his wars very faithully. The Lieflanders themselves, noting
the gentle behavior of Duke Charles wished in their hearts all good success
unto him, though they durst not show it outwardly, forfeare of their Lords
displeasure, who in his rule bare ever such a rough hand over them, that he
seemed a Tirant or an unjust Usurper, rather then an honorable governor, or a
natural prince.

Duke Fernesbeck having some intelligence of the sudden invasion of his
country, raises with all the have he could, all the powers he could make,
being constituted by the King, General of his wars, and within a few days
landed in Liefland, whereof Duke Charles having understanding, and fearing to
be prevented, sent very secretly and speedily fifteen hundredth soldiers
under the command of coronell Hill to surprise the city of Venden, but (I know
not how) the plot being discovered, and Ambuscadoes laid in the way by
Fernesbeck, they were suddenly charged, and being weary and faint through a
long march, were soon overthrown, and slame, only the Coronell with
seauenteene of his fellowers, the poor remain of so many hundreds, making way
with the sword, through the fury of the Enemy, did wounderously escape,
bringing this sadnewes back to their Lord. The Duke, though it somewhat
troubled him, yet showed no sign either of fear or sorrow, but hartned on his
soldiers to the revenge of their fellows deaths. There was nothing that
aduantaged him more then his Celeritie in all his attempts, for whenever any
advantage was proffered, he would never pretermitte the least occasion. Duke
Charles upon the news of this overthrow, understanding of new succors shortly
to come out of Poland in the aid of Fernesbeck suddenly raises his (Army, his
Enemies supposing that the late overthrow had much quaild his courage, and
nothing less suspecting then what he intended) marches with all speed to the
City of Venden, into which Duke Fernesbeck but two days before had made his
triumphant entrance. The march was so speedily and secretly made, that they of
the Town understood not of his remove from Durpe, till they saw him with his
Army before the walls of Venden. Ferns-beck staying within the Town, every
hour looking for his new supplies, when he saw himself (thus unlooked for)
confronted by the Duke, and his Army, stood so amazed that a long time he was
in doubt what it were best to do. At last made a show of resistance of the
Enemy, and defense of the Town; till the approach of the night following, In
which time he devised such a plot, that utterly lost his honor, and the Love of
all his friends within his Dukedom. For in the beginning of the night having
thoroughly instructed his Commanders, and followers, what he meant to do, No
Townesman supposing what he purposed, made an absolute spoil of the Town,
ransacking every man's house, and carrying away their plate, money and jewels,
flies closely away and leaves the Town abandoned. Duke Charles had sudden
intelligence hereof, and with all have pursues him, and in the way he takes
certain of Fernesbeckes Espials, whom having threatened, was by them
conducted to the place where Duke Fernbecke that night encamped, and having
given the charge to Coronell Hill, that was desirous to revenge himself of his
late overthrow, suddenly set upon them being at rest, slew the most part of
them, recouers the goods taken a little before so violently and dishonourably
out of the City, Fernsbecke himself with a few of his followers hardly
escaping.

Duke Charles having thus recovered his late loss, returns with his Army to
the City of Venden, where, with all acclamation of joy he was honorably
entertained: Being thus seated in Venden, within two days after his abode in
the Town he sends Eight hundredth men under the conduct of one Peerslompe, a
gallant Swethish Captain, to surprise the Castle of Newhall bordering upon
Russia, which was by him fortunately achieved, who returning to the Duke gave
him presently the command of five thousand men, Coronell Hill being Steward of
the feeld. The proiecte was to besiege Cokenhouse, being then and at this day
the strongest Castle in christendom. The duke thought if he could gain this
castle, he were then thoroughly possessed of all the dukedom, he himself
purposed shortly after to second him. This gallant young gentleman with all
speed, and with a full spirit marches to this honorable exploit, and encampeth
his Army close to the walls of the Town, which being very strong, and
faithful to their Lord, endured a long siege with great effusion of blood on
both sides, but at the coming of the Duke, the Town was taken, and upon a
breach in the entrance of the Town, this young captain was unfortunately (but
honorably) slain with the shot of a Musket in his priuities, sent from the
castle: Duke Charles was very sorry for his death, making a vow that he would
never raise his Army, till he had either forced the castle, or followed the
fortune of this gallant captain. Three months the Duke lay before the castle
with continual battery, and in the end takes it, and keeps it at this day.
Upon the taking of the castle he was sufficiently revenged for the death of
Peereslompe. Thus all the castles, houlds, and fortresses, in Liefland, were in
this Summer brought under the command of Duke Charles, only the castle of Ree,
which was second to none but Cokenhouse, was yet left unassaulted. Duke Charles
having thus in a manner the entier possession of Liefland, and being now
wearied with this long toil, hearing no news of Duke Fernesbeckes return, in
the latter end of the Summer, having ordered his affairs in that country
returned to his duchess into Swethland, lying then in Stock holland, before
his going he left the cities and castles in the dukedom, being thoroghly
maned, under the government of his friends. The rest of his Army rested under
the command of Coronell Hill, who having directions from the Duke at his
departure, to attempt the taking of the Town of Ree, together with the castle,
set forward with hope and courage, while the Duke was upon his journey into
Swethland, and encamped before the Town of Ree, burnt the suburbs, assaulted
the Town, battered the walls, etc. But finding it stronger manned, then
either it was supposed, or stood at that time with his power to force, returned
according to his directions to the Duke.

CHAP. IX. Duke Charles winters in Swethland: takes order for the renewing of
the war: The Summer following is fought withal in Liefland by Duke
Fernsbeck, and discomfited: His strange escape, and recovery of Swethland.
DUke Charles made his abode with his Duchess the Winter following in
Swethland, having still privy intelligence from Poland of the Kings plotts, and
proceedings. That Winter nothing was attempted, but in the prime of the Spring
following Fernesbeck returned to Liefland with five thousand men. A greater
power being appointed shortly to second him. Upon his landing he marched to
the Town and Castle of Ree, where he reposed himself to understand what Duke
Charles intended to do: Many blamed the Duke for that he let slip the taking
in of the Castle, which if it had been, Fernsbeck had had no place to have
retired to in all his kingdom. But it is an casier matter for a man to Censure
then to act: words are soon spoken, so are not deeds performed, for Coronel
Hill Attempted with the remainder of ye army, to do what was possible to be
done, but the winter being at hand, which in that coast is very extreme, his
men wearied and weakened with a long summers toil, every man's natural desire
in ye Country to rest themselves in their stones, the winter season took away
al possibility of winning the Castle Duke Charles understanding of his Enemies
arrival at Ree, let slip no time, but suddenly raised his powers to the number
of fifteen thousand men, took shipping at Stock-holland and landed with his
whole Army safely within two days, within 15. miles of Ree. His purpose was to
have suddenly beleaguerd the Castle before the rest of his enemies forces were
Landed out of Poland, which he understood were ready to be shipped: and to that
end (having refreshed his Army) he marched speedily and out of order, in the
latter end of the day toward the Castle of Ree, supposing by the benefit of
the night following, the better to have ensconc't and fortified himself. But
as no man, though never so circumspect, can warrant to himself the assurance
or continuance of success, and especially in the actions of war, where
fortune bears a sway so this noble Duke found the nature of her favors, which
she had powered upon him, to be so unstable, that in a Minute she snatched from
him, what a long time before she had prodigally bestowed. For Fernsbeck having
intelligence of the Dukes landing, suddenly issued out of the Castle with three
thousand of his followers, and having a place of great advantage about three
miles from the Castle, the way that Duke Charles must of necessity pass, took
the benefit of the place and the night, lying there in Ambush for the Dukes
coming, and giving directions not to stir till the vant guard of the Dukes
Army had past them, and then sodenlie to charge the battle, and the Rereward
to give the Alarm to the Castle, At which time a Polish Captain with three
thousand Poles was appointed to charge the vantguard of the Dukes: which on all
sides was accordingly accomplished. The Duke being in the Battle, finding
himself so suddenly and dangerously inuiron'd, gave (according to the Time)
the best directions, resist he must of necessity, Retire he could not*
wherefore ryding cheerfully up and down his Army, gave encouragement to his
Soldiers, making still the danger less then it was, But Fernesbeck stirrd up
with a desire of revenge, and recovery of his dukedom, and having advantage of
the place, so violently assailed, that at the first Charge he made a great
breach into the body of the Dukes battle, she like was performed at the
instant upon the rereward by one Stockland, a gallant young Polish Captain.

Thus all parts of the Army being assaulted, that before was weary, weak, and
fainte, through a long March, they were suddenly put into such a fear, as begat
much amazement in them, so as men desperate of all hope to resist, they flong
away their weapoas and fled, hoping to save themselves that way, wherein was
least hope of safeguard. The Duke did what lay in his power to stay his flying
Soldiers. But in this perplexed face of flight, where nothing but the
Caracters of fear and despair could be seen, no words could suffice, nor any
commanders tongue be regarded, but in this confused manner they ran upon their
deaths, whilst the enemy stood ready to receive them. And in this horror of
blood and massacre, the Dukes horse was slain under him, he himself hurt, and
perceiving no hope either by fight or flight, he fell down (as dead) among
the dead Carcasses, reteyning a hope that way happily to save himself. Of
fifteen thousand men, fourteen thousand and odd were put to the sword, the
rest fled to their ships. Every man supposing the Duke to be slain. The sad
news of this fatal overthrow and of the Dukes supposed death, was soon
brought into Swethland, which upon the hearing thereof, showed such a general
face of sorrow, as if the whole land had put on one entire mourning garment, to
attend his sad and untimely funerals They now saw their Prince suddenly snatched
from them in the spring time of their hopes, and in the prime of all his glory,
they found themselves naked, and open to the Polish Tyranny. They feared their
Religion and government would now be forced and adulterated by the tyrannous
command, and superstitious customs of Poland, wherewithal they knew their
King was wholly corrupted. No heart so Noble, no head so circumspect, no hand
so victorious, to order the state, manage the affairs, and fight the battles
of their Country, Now he was dead all hope was buried, and all their happiness,
and freedom should be laid in the grave with him, and last but not least of
their sorrow, they wanted his body to give it honorable funeral.

But as this false news made them true mourners, so this passion of sorrow for
his supposed death, was afterward turned into the contrary passion of joy, for
the Dukes strange and unknown delivery: to whom we will now return, having
left him before among the dead carkases of his Soldiers. There was a young
Gentleman of Swethland, attendant to the Duke (whose name I could not learn)
that saw the Duke when he fell, thinking him with the rest to have been
slain, and desirous to do the last service to his Prince, kept close (having
a place fit for his purpose) hoping to recover the body of the Duke, and
finding in the dark of the night, a certain Gentleman of Poland, newly slain,
shifteth armor and apparel with him, and having the Polish tongue,
undertook as one of Fernsbecks soldiers to rifle the dead bodies, and having
found the place where the Duke lay, all imbrued with the blood of his
Soldiers, and coming near to raise the body, the Duke began to strive: The
Gentleman amassed, asked in fair terms if he were alive: to whom the Duke
replied, Art thou my friend? the Gentleman told him his name and purpose, and
since he was alive, he should horse him self upon the Gentleman's horse, and
fly unto his ships, using the benefit of the night for his escape, while he
himself would make what shift he could to follow after. The Duke being thus
raised from this grave of blood worse then Golgotha, embracced him, thankt him,
and spoke these words, God prosper thee, whom if it please, that thou shall
live to out live the fortunes of this night, there was never man so dear, as
thou shall be to thy Lord: whereupon the Duke mounted, and with all speed
hasted to his ships, where the joy of his coming was so much the greater, by
how much the fear before of his death was the stronger.

The Gentleman whom he left behind, being vnluckely discovered, was
unfortunately slain, which though the last, was not the least honor he
achieved, to die in the safeguard of his Prince. The Duke stayed long for his
return, but at length suspecting that which had happened, hoyst sail and
safely arrived in Swethland. It is a world to hear the concourse of people
that from all parts came to see him: Upon the news of his landing, they strewed
flowers in the way, as thinking the Earth unworthy to bear him: they showed
all signs and tokens of joy, as now holding themselves free from those fears,
which the report of his death had before possessed them with. Now as men newly
revived, they began to entertain new hopes, and to flatter themselves with a
perpetual stability of their estates: The Sun, which they supposed had made
an eternal Set from their Horizon, did now shine again in the midst of
their H^mispheare, and this glad day, after their sad night, they made a
general vow sor ever to consecrate. Thus as in a triumphant manner the Duke
held on his course, to Stockeholland, where the triumphs for his delivery he
found doubled, with the Duchess his wife, his kindred and his nearest friends,
that in joy of his return feasted many days together.

Duke Fernsbecke proud of the late victory, let slip no time* but having the
seconds of his power, safely landed out of Poland, recovered many of his towns
and Castles which he before had lost, and which he holds at this day: Duke*
Charles did little that Summer, but that he sent certain forces to strengthen
those principal towns and (...) in Liefland, which he yet holds. And in
this Summer, not from any ambitions desire of his own, but the policy of the
time, in the state of the Kingdom, so requi^^^^, at the special instigation
of his friends, for the coun^^^^s good, but principally upon respect of the
churches peace, (...) took upon him the Crown and Scepter of Swethland, in
the year of our Lord God, 1604. which he does still no^ly and peaceably
govern, as the state of the Time does suffer. The wars being for the most part
transferred into the Dukedom of Leifland. And thus as I (...) informed,
stands the condition of the affairs of that kingdom at this time.

FINIS

