ABRAHAM'S FAITH: THAT IS, The old Religion.

WHEREIN IS TAVGHT, THAT THE RELIGION NOW publicly taught and defended by
order in the Church of England, is the only true Catholic, ancient, and
unchangeable faith of Gods elect.

AND THE PRETENSED religion of the Sea of Rome is a false, bastard, new,
vpstart, heretical and variable superstitious devise of man.

Published by JOSIAS NICHOLLS, an humble servant and minister of the gospel in
the Church.

Stand in the ways, and behold, and ask of the old ways, which is the good
way; and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls. HIER. 6.16.
LONDON Imprinted by Thomas Wight. 1602.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER in God my Lords grace, Archb. of Canterbury, and
to the right Honorable, my L: chief Justice of England: both of her Majesty's
most Honorable privy Counsel, Josias Nicholls wishes all grace and peace in
our Lord Jesus Christ.
PVrposing (right Reverend and Honorable) to publish this little book, it came
into my mind to commend the same to your honorable protection. For it seemed
to me, that although all good men of al estates are bound in conscience and
love, to contend earnestly for the faith, which (as S. Jude says) was once
given to the Saints: yet are there some more proper reasons, in regard of your
two callings, which challenge in my judgment, a more peculiar eye and watch
unto these causes. For being both of the same most Honorable table, of her
Majesty's most grave wise and Christian Counsel, where all are set in the same
charge and joined in the same care, namely in all provident and godly
oversight, to manage the great affairs, pertaining to Gods worship and glory,
and the blessed safety of the Queens most excellent Majesty (whom God
vouchsafe long to preserve among us:) yet the one being a minister and Bishop
of the gospel, and set over many others, for the good and faithful teaching
and practicing of the christian faith in this land: And the other a professed
and chief Judge, for the executing of all laws and statutes, ordained for the
maintenance of true religion, justice, peace and godliness: this being a
necessary declaration of our Christian faith and religion, established by the
public magistracy, and laws of this realm, and a faithful displaying of
the iniquity of popery, being a mortal enemy and a very great opposite
unto the same: It could not so properly respect any other, whose ofifce and
profession did so nearly and naturally offer it self to patronize and protect
so just a matter of this kind. Therefore I humbly crave your Honors favor,
to accept of this my travail, and your fatherly countenance upon mine honest
labors. Which, although I frankly acknowledge, might have been more
eloquently and exquisitly handled, by some man of greater gifts: yet I hope,
that in some measure it shalll satisfy the expectation of such honest and
Christian readers, who both can and will judge according to equity und truth.
For my purpose being, (considering the season) to show the antiquity and
certain truth of our faith and religion, now professed in England, and the
newness, uncertainty and falshoode of the popish superstition: to this end
that it might be a stay to many which waver and seem now ready to fall
away: I endeavored rather to join plainness and perspicuitie with brevity,
then by large amplification to show great learning, and by direct arguments to
make manifest an undoubted truth to the conscience of all men, for the gayning
of some unto Christ, rather then by saying what I could to trouble the reader
with abundance of matter, or hunt for that which is vain and fruitless. And
this verily I thought most necessary, and the rather because diverse men in
differing manner have heretofore handled this argument, both that I might give
occasion to men to enquire after and to read such godly writings: and also
because the present season seems to call for the same, when popery begins
to ouerspreade, and after a sort to set up his brissels against the gospel,
and men of that superstition are very much lifted up: that it might appear,
what a foolish, wicked, new broacht and monstrous heresy and apostasy they so
much contend for and so egerly labor for: being greedy of that which will
slay their souls, and proud of that whereof they ought to be ashamed.
Therefore I have made choice of such method and reasons, as I hope through Gods
blessing, shall effect that I purposed, and make that manifest which I desire.
Whereof knowing that your Honors can judge with wisdom, and that your
Christian care tends to this end, that the people by all good means should
be staide, in their faithful obedience to God and our most gracious prince: I
was bold to present this book unto you, most humbly beseeching you to
accept of my bounden duty to my Prince, country, and to the Church of GOD:
earnestly praying GOD to be with you always with his gracious favor and
good spirit, to guide you and prosper you in all good and godly endeavors, to
his honor and glory, to the good of prince and country, to the increase of
the Church, and to your own souls comfort in Jesus Christ, Amen.

Your honors most humble to command, JOSIAS NICHOLLS.

TO THE HOLY AND Christian congregation of England, being a most lively member
of Christ's Catholic and visible Church: Josias Nicholls, Minister and
servant of Jesus Christ, as a son to his most dear mother, wishes all grace
and spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ, and all peace and
prosperity in godliness and truth for ever.
NO Nation ever under heaven, English men grealy bound to praise and serve God,
for his rich blessings in and by the Gospel, under the happy reign of her
majesty.
more bound to praise and serve God, then we English men; now above forty
years, under the happy reign of our dear Sovereign and Lady Queen
Elizabeth, (whom God long preserve) tasting and enjoying the sweet goodness and
favor of God most kindly showing it self, and shining into our hearts, by his
most blessed and joyful Gospel. No nation ever under heaven has had more
cause of joy, and comfortable encouragement unto godliness and honesty, then
we Englishmen, all these years: when God most miraculously by a maiden Queen,
(the weaker vessel) has made his name known, and his Saints glorious by
deliverance: when mighty potentates could not stand in battle, he has
raised health by a woman, and made the weak to confound the strong. No nation
ever under heaven, has had more sure and perfect experience of the truth of
God and his word, and of the certain knowledge of the holy faith and pure
religion, then we Englishmen (whose eyes the God of this world has not
blinded) most abundantly have had, that we might glory in our God, and
magnify the rich grace of Jesus Christ, and the effectual power of his holy
and blessed spirit. For we have seen the breath of Gods mouth, mighty to
consume Antechrist, and the light of his word to make all things manifest: that
it might be said of us, as by prerogative it was once spoken of Israel: Psalm.
147.19.
He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel,
he has not so dealt with every nation, etc.

The entrance of her Majesty's reign a most blessed day unto England.
There was a day of darkness, a day of great blacknes and sorrow, when the
people of this land were made slaves, under the thraldom of spiritual Aegipt
and Babylon: when they knew not aright the true and living God, nor the power
and grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were led after vain things, in whom
there was no help; and men by a just plague of God, were given over unto their
own lusts and fancies, yea even unto most abominable idolatry. But the day
of her Majesty's most royal coronation was a day of light and glory, a day of
clear and perfect joy: in that day did the sun of righteousness arise and
shined from on hie, he cast forth his bright and pleasant beams, and
enlightened all the land. Then fell away the gross miss of palpable
foolishness and ignorance, and the veil of man's presumption was taken from
our hearts. Then humane devises, and the grievous yoke of the apostaticall
bondage in tradition and voluntary service of men, was taken from our necks.
Then were our hearts opened and the light of the knowledge of the glory of
God, and his bright shining countenance in the face of Jesus Christ did shine
into our souls. It was a day that the very Angels of heaven did rejoice and
sing, because of the sweet and blessed tidings of great joy unto all the people
of this land. For the grace of God, which brings salvation unto all men, did
then appear: and the beautiful feet of the messengers of peace, which brought
tidings of good things, and said unto every elect soul, Thy God reigns; had
then a merry and comfortable passage and safe travel over all the land: the
ambassadors of God brought unto us the wholesome word of reconciliation. Then
did the Lord plant his vineyard, and build his holy temple among us, and he
became our strong sanctuary, and visited us with his rich mercy and
salvation: his blessings spiritual and corporal most plentiful, flowed down
from heaven upon our land. So that our enemies being Judges, it must needs be
said: God has done great things for us, and has given us all things
abundantly to enjoy. In which time many nations round about us, in grievous
darkness and bloody misery, even mourning daily before our eyes, might well
have counted themselves happy, if they had part of our peace. We have lent and
not borrowed, we have given and not taken: we have been a refuge for the
poor, and a place of succor for the persecuted: our men and money have been
a relief to the oppressed and deliverance to many in great danger and
distress. Our prince has bin an hyding place from the wind, and as a refuge
for the tempest, as rivers of waters in a dry place, and as the shadow of a
rock in a weary land. My pen is insufficient, and I am unworthy and unable
to rehearse the manifold and constant goodness and favors of God upon us
these many years: O let us love the Lord and serve him, let us praise and
glorify him, who has been so beneficial and bountiful unto us. He has
delivered our souls from death, our eyes from tears, and our feet from
falling, he has brought us out of the horrible pit and mierie clay, and set
our feet upon the rock and ordered our goings, and has put in our mouths a
new song of praise unto our God: many that have seen this have reverenced the
Lord, and put their trust in our God. All Englismen are bound to love the
Queens most excelent Majesty.
And who can but love the blessed and worthy instrument of our peace and joy?
whose heart is not inflamed with her desire? If we were ten thousand times
more then we are, and every man had a thousand lives, who would not willingly
lay them down at her feet in the cause of truth, to show his thankful mind
unto her Majesty: who has constantly passed through many hazardes of her life
for love of Gods truth and care of his Church? whose heart is not greatly moved
to glorify God, who has given us, so faithful and constant a nurse and loving
mother, and so wonderfully defended and preserved her, and by and under her
most happy government has made us so many years together, without fear the
free possessors of most unspeakable joy, in the participation of incomparable
heavenly treasure and most flourishing earthly prosperity.

We are to consider whether we have rendered to the Lord according to his
kindness toward us.
But O my dear mother, my good and reverend fathers and brethren, have we
rendered to the Lord according to his kindness? have we with reverence
received, with thankfulness acknowledged, and with care and conscience used
these mercies of our good and loving God and merciful father in Jesus Christ?
O that I could boldly and faithfully so say; and that our silver were not
become dross, and our wine mixed with water. And that the vine which God has
planted with good and pleasant plants, did not in stead of grapes bring forth
wild grapes: and men did not neglect yea forsake the word of the Lord, and
follow the foolish imaginations of their own hearts. O that it might not be
justly said, that the Lord has a controversy with this land, because there
is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land. By swearing and
lying, and killing, and stealing, and whooring, they break out, and blood
touches blood. And that men did not encourage one another, in their wicked and
vicious living, saying: come and let us bring wine, and we will fill our
selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more
abundant, let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall die. O that men would
consider and that their hearts would smite them, in remembering and forethinking
what a fatherly watch word, our tender and loving God has given us, by many
and sundry most mild and kindly tempered corrections and chastisementes, at
many times: but especially within these eighteen years last past, when he
began at his sanctuary, and lightly touched his holy remembrancers, when he
caused a great and cloudie mist to cover the very heavens, so that many bright
stars were not seen to shine for a certain season. Then did the winds
burst out shaking our houses over our heads, as unworthy to dwell under so
good and plentiful grace: our bodies and lives were assailed with grievous
pestilence, dearth, scarsitie, and the threatening sword did advance themselves
against us. Thousands have gone forth and returned but by hundreds. And now
seeing all these things have not made us to turn to him that smites, neither
do men seek the Lord: behold every man sees how his anger is kindled more
and more, and how near his sword is come unto us, that the Lords wrath is not
turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. But yet if it please thee O
God and merciful father, be thou entreated by thy poor servants, (who seeing
the plague, call night and day upon thee) that thou take not so great vengeance
of our sins, as to make the sweet streaming fountains, which water all thy
holy temple and the garden of thy delight among us, to be salt and unsavory:
or to let that burning star of wormwood, which is fallen from heaven to
touch our rivers of waters: or that thou should make the heart of this people
fat, and their ears heavy and shut their eyes, least they see with their
eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts and convert
and thou heal them. Why should we be as men of another generation, which know
not and remember not thy great works, which thou have done, by our princely
Iehoshuah, and the great victory over the Cananites of the land, by thine
anointed handmaid our renowned Deborah: that our eyes should look back to
the flesh pots of Egypt, or that we should return to join in friendship,
with that wicked Babylon, whom thou have commanded us to reward with double, as
they have rewarded us: and learning their manners, and being partakers of their
sins, we should be partakers of their punishments, and thou should give us
over to the enemy, and they which hate us should be Lords over us: and then al
these good things and the light of thy countenance should be quite turned from
us, and our glory forsake us. We have indeed sinned most dear father, and our
offenses are many: yet is there mercy with thee that thou may be feared:
Teach us therefore thy way O Lord, that we may walk in thy truth: and knit our
hearts unto thee, that we may fear thy holy name, even for thy holy Son sake
our dear Savior Jesus Christ Amen.

When men wax rich they begin to be careless: and by abundance of peace,
Deuteronomy. 32.15.
men forget themselves and fall away: as it is written: When he waxed fat, he
spurned with the heel. For this cause has God set us ministers as watchmen to
see the plague when it comes, and to admonish the people, that they die not
in their sins and to say unto them: Take heed, you forget not the Lord your
God which has done all these good things for you, but fear ye the Lord your
God, The cause matter and purpose of this book.
and serve him, thou shall cleave unto him and swear by his name. And this is
verily the reason of the publishing of this treatise: wherein I show that the
religion and faith publicly professed in this Realm, and maintained by the
righteous scepter and sword of our dread soueraign and gracious Queen
Elizabeth, is of the only truth, most ancient, catholic, and unchangeable;
out of which none ever have been saved, from the beginning of the world,
neither can or shall be. And that the faith and religion, under the pretense
and name of Christ, Peter and Paul, and of the glorious show and title of the
Church, which is now professed at Rome, and followed by the vassals of the
pope, is but a new, vpstart, heretical and superstitious devise of man,
contrariant to the faith of Gods elect, and of the ancient covenant which God
gave and taught Abraham both for Jews and Gentiles, and which Moses and the
prophets declared and expounded, and Christ fulfilled and established, and his
holy Apostles published to all the world, and taught all nations by Christ's
commandment. For I thought my duty first unto God, and then to my gracious
prince, to show some token of my thankful mind, and secondly to acknowledge
my bounden duty to Christ's Church here among us, my dear mother, in whose
womb I freely confess my self to be bgotten and borne one of Gods children,
and though of thousands the most unworthy yet one of the servants of Christ
and of his congregation in the ministry of his Gospel. And especially that I
might call to remembrance and set before the eyes of my loving country men, my
loving and faithful brethren and sisters in Christ, the assuredness of truth
and the good treasure of God among us: namely that we are lighted upon that
heavenly pearl (blessed be God) for which a man would sell all that he has:
that this might be some means to blow away the ashes from the cooling zeal
of some: stir up and awake some that are now ready to sleep, and bring
back again some, (if it please God) which are ready to go out of the way:
and that I might admonish others that they receive not the grace of God in
vain. For when a man shall think with himself (and well way it in his heart)
that we have the true faith which is unchangeable, by which all Gods elect are
saved: will it not move him to bestir himself, that he neglect not so great
salvation, and that he try every spirit, before he believe, and that he be
not carried away with the vain show of ostentation in men of school learning:
but whomsoever he hear with the men of Berea to search the Scriptures whether
those things be so? yea though it were Paul or an Angel from heaven should
preach another doctrine then that we have received, we should hold him
accursed. I pray God for Christ's sake to be merciful unto me, that as he
put into mine heart to take this work in hand, and has graciously assisted me
and strengthened me to finish it, and now to publish it. So it would please him
to vouchsafe his blessing to accompany the same, that it may be accordingly
profitable to many, and have an effectual fruit to his glory and the good of
his church, in the encouragement and strengthening of weak Christians. I
humbly beg this at his fatherly hands in and by the mediation of his son Jesus
Christ even for his holy and blessed name, to whom with his holy spirit be all
praise power and dominion for ever. Amen.

From Eastwell in Kent the 26. of March. 1602.
The Contents of this Book.
The first part of the ancient and unchangeable estate of our religion now
professed in England.
CAp. 1. Wherein is showed, first, That we come to know the true religion, by
the true knowledge of God. page 1.2. 2. That there is one God, and he is the
only lawgiver. page 3. 3. There is but one catholic religion, whereof God is
author and maintainer. page 3. 4. For this cause Christ and his Apostles teach
the same religion, which is in the old testament, and the gentiles are adopted
to be children unto Abraham. page 5. 5. Here is taken away the objection which
might arise by the difference which seems to be in the three times, before
the law, under the law, and under the gospel. page 7. 6. Here is opened that
faith and love are substantial and perpetual: but by Gods disposition
ceremonies and manner of government are changeable. page 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 7.
Although ceremonies and manner of government are not of the unchangeable
substance of religion, yet are they to be reverently used and not violated
during the time of Gods assignment and prescription. page 14. 15. 16. CAP. 2.
1. How God has governed his Church in one religion, before and after the fall.
page 17. 18. 2. And since the promise given to Adam of Christ in three sorts,
the fathers before the law, the Jews under the law, and the Gentiles under the
gospel. page 19. 20. 21. 3. In all these three times was there a difference in
the outward face of government, but not in substance of religion. page 22. 4.
And this by Gods judgments and manifestation of his spirit, has been always
maintained and preserved. page 23. 24. 25. 5. And it will be a witness of our
religion now professed in England, against all Atheists, papists, and other
wicked men. page 26. CAP. 3. Here is more largely showed the unity of faith in
all ages, and that the religion openly professed at this present in England, is
the same ancient and only catholic faith of Abraham, Moses and the Prophets,
and which Christ and his Apostles preached and taught. Where first is declared
that Abraham received it of God, both for the Jews and also for all other
nations. page 27. 28. 29. 30. 2. The particulars are compared in 15. several
Articles of the most weighty points of doctrine. page 31. etc. unto page 132.
CAP. 4. Wherein is declared, 1. That antiquity, universality, and visible
succession, is no perfect mark of the church much less of the popish
sinagogue, which is but of yesterday. page 133. etc. 2. The measure and order
of the visible succession of the Church from Christ's time forward is showed by
the scriptures. pa. 137. etc. 3. The papists do prove themselves to be no
Church, when they ground themselves, on this false principle: The Church cannot
err. page 40. 141. 4. How the true religion has showed it self by many
witnesses, from the Apostles times, even unto our days, page 143. etc.
The second part of the newness of popery.
CAP. 1. HOw the Romish superstition disagreeth with the true ancient catholic
religion and faith of Gods elect. Where is declared. 1. How many ways in this
sort disagreement is to be found, page 149. 2. And that in all the former
fifteen Articles, they disagree very greatly page 152. 153. etc. CAP. 2. Of
the disagreement that popish superstition now taught in Rome has with the
religion S. Paul taught the Romans, and with the doctrine S. Peter taught the
Jews. page 181. 182. etc. CAP. 3. Of the agreement of popish doctrine, with
all kind of heresy, where it is compared, how the popish heresy, resembles
the ancient heresies of the primative ages of Christ's Church. page 193. 194.
etc. CAP. 4. Of the original of popery, wherein is declared. 1. That by the
precedent Chapters it may appear to be of a late birth. page 205. 206. 2. That
neither the difference of calculation in stories, nor forging of writings, nor
mangling of good authors, do hinder the knowledge of their birth. page 207.
208. 3. Their own tongues and traditions prove popery new. page 209. 210.
etc. 4 Many particulars are rehearsed out of popish authors and the former
counsels. page 214. 215. etc. 5. Five fundamental points more largely
examined by antiquity. page 235. 236. etc. 6. The latter ouergrowing and
lopping and daily new sprowting of popery. page 275. 276. etc. 7. That popery
is not yet a perfect body of his full shape, proportion and members. page 283.
CAP. 5. Here is showed, that all men ought to fly popery. 1. Because of the
exceeding danger it brings to themselves to their seed and country page 289.
2. It is of all heresies and apostasies the most pernicious. page 293. 3. It is
not tolerable or to be winked at in any Christian common wealths. page 312.
4. We of England have great cause to praise God that we have nothing to do
with, page 315.
CHAP. 1. Wherein is showed: first that we come to know the true religion by
the true knowledge of God, 2. That there is one God, and that he is the only
lawgiver. 3. Therefore there is but one Catholic and unchangeable religion,
whereof God is author and maintainer. 4. For this cause Christ and his Apostles
teach the same religion, which is in the old Testament, and the gentiles are
adopted to be Children unto Abraham. 5. Here is taken away the objection which
might arise by the difference, which seems to be in the three times, before
the law, under the law, and after the law: that is, under the Gospel, that
although there was a difference in ceremonies and manner of government, yet the
religion al one in faith and love. 6. Here is opened how faith and love are
substancial and perpetual, and ceremonies and manner of government changeable.
7. And that although ceremonies and manner of government are not of the
unchangeable substance of religion, yet are they to be reverently used and not
violated during the time of Gods assignment and prescription, as necessary
duties in the worship, service, and obedience, which we owe unto God.
TO know the true, ancient, catholic annd unchangeable religion (that is, the
undeceivable way of salvation and perfect rule of upright living) we must get
the knowledge of the true and living God. For in the Ephesians. 4.17. Tit. 3.3. 2.
Pet. 1.3.
ignorance of God, is the estate of the wicked and the cause of damnation: and
whosoever knows God aright, he has by the divine gift of Christ, all things
pertaining to life and godliness. Therefore our blessed Savior, speaking to his
father the almighty and glorious God, constantly affirms. Ioh. 17. ver. 3
This is eternal life, to know thee to be the only very God, and whom thou
have sent Jesus Christ. So the Prophets foretell, that the happy estate of the
word should be then; when Esai 11.9.
The earth is full of the knowledge of the Lord, and Hier 31.31.32.
the people know God from the least to the greatest. Such was the glad tidings
of the Gospel which makes bewtiful the feet of him which declares and
hublisheth peace, saying unto Syon (that is to the church) Thy Esai 52.6.
God reigns, and the same unto all nations is proclaimed by the name of the
great 1. Tim. 3.16.
mystery of godliness: God manifested in the flesh. And the effect of the
gospel preached agrees thereunto, for those nations Gal. 4.8. 1. These. 1.9.
who being led by the impotent and beggarly rudiments of the world knew not
God, and did service unto them which by nature were no Gods, by the hearing of
the gospel preached, did know God, and turned from dumb idols to serve the
living and true God. Hereof the almighty gives sentence by his holy servant
Hieromie saying: Hier. 9.23.
Let not the wiseman glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man glory in his
strength, neither the rich man glory in his riches: but let him that glories,
glory in this, that he understands and knows me etc. And according to this
frame, is the last judgment literally described, namly that 2. These. 1.7.
the Lord Jesus should show himself from heaven, with his mighty angels in
flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto them that do not know God etc.

2. And herein we shall find that he which knows God is instructed in two
things. First that God is one and that there is no other God beside him, even
as Moses says Deuteronomy. 6.4.
Here O Israel, the Lord our God is Lord only, and how is he one? namely Esai
44.6.
the first and the last, the beginning and the ending, which is, which was and
is to come, Maluch. 3.6.
he never changes nor has so much as a Jacob. 1.17.
shadow of turning. Therefore says the Psalmist: Psalm. 90.2.
Before the mountains were made and before thou had formed the earth and
the world, even from everlasting to everlasting, thou art God. Secondly that
God is the Jacob. 4.12.
only lawgiver and teacher of righteousness and salvation, as says Psalm.
94.10. Micas. 6.8. Psalm. 98.2.
the Prophets: He teaches man knowledge, showing him what is good, and what
the Lord requires of him, he declares his salvation and his righteousness he
reueileth in the sight of the nations.

3. Now in the true and perfect understanding of these true things, we shall
clearly see, that there is but one true and catholic religion, from the
beginning of the world to thend thereof, fitly proportioned to the nature of
the only God, the author, fou^dor, and maintainer thereof. For as Christ
teaches because Ioh. 4.24.
God is a spirit, he must be worshipped in spirit and truth: So the nature of
God being one and unchangeable, and his supreme authority, to be the only
lawgiuer, there can no religion please him, but only one which varieth not,
whereof himself is the author. For this cause in one part of our religion
which is our justification and salvation, S. Paul reasons thus. Romans 3.29.
God is he the God of the Jews only, and not of the gentiles also? for it is
one God, who shall justify circumcision of faith, and uncircumcision through
faith. Thereby showing that as God is one, namely, as well over the Gentiles, as
over the Jews: so he will justify, circumcision, (which are the Jews) and
uncircumcision (which are the gentiles, that is, al other nations) by one way of
religion, that is to say, thorough faith and belief in his son Jesus Christ.
For which cause this religion is called the Tit. 1.1.
faith of Gods elect: because all the elect are but of one religion, and
therefore saint Jude Iud. ver. 3.
wishes us to contend for the faith which was once given to the saints:
affirming that in writing thereof, he writes of the common salvation. And it
is called in the former place of saint Paul. The knowledge of the truth
according to Godliness, under the hope of eternal life, showing what is the
matter of this religion, and lastly to show the author, he says which God that
cannot lie, has promised before the world began, and has made manifest in his
times etc. To which sense are these words in the Epistle to the Hebrews: Heb.
13.8.
Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day and the same is for ever: where speaking
before of the word of God and faith, and after admonishing them not to be
carried about with diverse and strange doctrins: he means by Jesus Christ,
(putting the cause for the effect) the doctrine and religion whereof he is the
founder, that as he in regard of his Godhead, is without change, beginning and
ending, so he is eternally the foundation of the church: and that doctrine and
religion, which he teaches, is the truth everlasting, infallible and not to be
altered, as it seems to be expounded in the epistle to the Ephesians. Ephe.
4.4.
There is one body, and one spirit, even as you are called in one hope of your
vocation: there is one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and father of
all, which is above all, and through all, and in you all. And for this cause
saint Epist. 2. ver. 9.
John is bold to say: whosoever transgresses and abides not in the doctrine
of Christ, has not God. He that continues in the doctrine of Christ, he has
both the father and the son.

4 For the more plain evidence of this matter we may observe in the new
Testament two things. First that Christ and his apostles, professed and taught
no new religion, but the same which the scriptures of the old testament did
before instruct: and secondly that in it the gentiles were made and adopted
children unto Abraham. The former Christ shows where he says, Matt. 5.17.
Think not that I am come to destroy the law or the prophets, I am not come to
destroy them but to fulfill them, and again. Ioh. 5.39.
Search the scriptures for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they are
they which testify of me. And saint Peter affirms, that Act. 10.43.
To him give all the prophets witness, that through his name all that believe in
him, shall receive remission of sins, and saint Paul says that he spoke, Cap.
26.22.
no other things then those which the Prophets and Moses did say should come,
and Romans 16.26.
that the Gospel and revelation of the misery of Jesus Christ, is opened and
published among all nations by the scripture of the prophets at the
commandment of the everlasting God for the obedience of faith. Therefore
Christ and his Apostles taught no new thing differing from the old Testament,
the writings of Moses and the prophets. Now for the second Christ says: Matt.
8.12.
Many shall come from the east and from the west, and shall sit down with
Abraham, Isaacke and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven. Hear he spoke of the
calling of the gentiles, insinuating that they must be saved by the same faith
and religion, by which Abraham was, and for this cause, entering into the house
of Zacheus a gentile and finding faith in the promise made to Abraham he says.
Luke 19.9.
This day salvation is come into this house, for as much as he is also become
the son of Abraham; and it is shadowed in that phrase of Christ, where he
says that Lazarus was in Abraham's bosom. Cap 16.
But it is made more plain by the Apostle saying. Gal. 3.29.
If ye be Christ's then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs by promise: So then
the gospel adopteth us into Abraham to be his children, and the same religion,
faith, and way of salvation, which the new Testament teaches, is the sum of
the law and prophets and of the fathers before the law, and namely of Abraham,
who is the Romans 4.16.
father of us all.

5. But it may be objected, that the religion of Gods church did differ and
alter; namely that before the law, from that which was after and that of the
law, from that which is now under the gospel: For the first age had not the law
of Moses; the second were altogether subject to that law: and we after the law,
are ruled by the gospel and are free from that law. For the ease of which
scruple, we are to consider, that as in material things, there are somthings of
the substa^s and essence, which cannot be altered, except the thing it self
perish, and somthings are adioined, and as it were hanging upon the thing, as
moveable properties, accidents or ornaments, as in a man the body and soul
united are so far off the substance, that if these, or either of these fail
he is not a man: there be also joined to a man his outward countenance,
apparel, stature and age, and these make a man in outward show, to differ much
from himself, yet is he one and the same man still: So is it in the case of
religion there are some things of the same nature, that if they be absent, there
can be no religion at all; such is faith and love: some things are servants
and dependances upon these as ceremonies and manner of government; and these
differ according to the time, and change not the nature of religion. For as a
child is a true natural man, though he have not the same stature or
countenance of face, as when he is old and grown up; and howsoever he
change his apparel, years, stature, or countenance, yet is he the same very
man, he was before. So in religion; ceremonies and manner of government, have
altered in their times, and yet make no alteration or change of religion, but
do further garnishe and beutifie it, more or less according to their seasons;
which similitude I use because the holy ghost has the like comparison Gal.
4.1. showing the state of religion under the law, to be as a child, that
although he be heir yet is under tutors etc. So God appointed the fulness of
time under the gospel, when he would beutifie religion which such ornaments,
that it should be like the freedom of an heir, when he enjoys the possession
of his inheritance, the like we find in an other place where he compares
this life unto the life to come, by these words, 1. Cor. 13.11
When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as
a child; but when I became a man, I put away childish things. And he
expounds this case where he says: Gal. 3.17.
The law which was 430. years after cannot disanull the covenant, that was
confirmed before of God in respect of Christ, that it should make the promise
of none effect. Whereby he shows that the law came not as a new religion,
faith, or doctrine of salvation; that the religion before the law should be
abolished, and the law as a new, come in the room thereof; But that it had some
other use, as an accidentarie ornament or servant to that former religion which
God had taught Abraham should belong unto all nations, as after he shows that
the law was added because 16. ver. 19.23.24.
of transgressions, and we were shut up under the law, and the law was our
schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, that we might be made righteous through
faith, whereby it appears that the giving of the law altered not the religion,
faith and doctrine of salvation, but was as an helping servant to further the
same; as a prison or schoolmaster to drive us to the true and pure religion of
Abraham, that by faith in the promise concerning Christ, we are justified and
saved as Abraham was.

6 But that you may the better understand what is now in hand, I will open unto
you what I mean by faith and love, and what by ceremonies and manner of
government. By faith, I understand the doctrine of the covenant of mercy and
grace, which is so called, because it is apprehended by faith, as in these
words. Gal. 3.2.
Received ye the spirit by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith.
In which doctrine we believe the trinity and unity of God, the person and
office of Christ, the creation and fall of man, his corruption, redemption,
justification, resurrection of the dead, eternal life and such like. For all
these depend one upon an other, as in the first eleven chapters to the
Romans, to the discreet and attentive reader may appear. By love I
understand all the duties in the moral law both to God and man, as they are
the fruits of faith: and as it is expounded by our Savior Christ saying:
Math. 22.37.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thine heart, with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind: this is the first and greatest commandment, and the second
is like unto this: thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. By ceremonies
and manner of government I understand all outward rites and ordinances, with the
manifestation of the spirit, which serve for the furtherance, beautifying and
more fit expressing and exercise of these two aforesaid. And ceremonies I find
to be of two sorts: some which are for the time, maine parts of Gods worship:
and such are all Sacraments, as the sacrifices and circumcision before the law,
the passover and al sacrifices commanded by the law, by signs and figures of
Christ to come, and such are Baptism and the Lords supper now under the
gospel: The other ceremonies concern the time and place of the Church meeting,
and the manner and order in the decent usage of all the parts of Gods
worship, which before the law is said Genesis 21.33.
to be in groves, and as for other circumstances there is little mention, as
matters of no great moment: under the law they Luc. 4.16. Act. 15.21.
had sinagogues, and appointed ministers for the same, and the reading of the
law with preaching every Saboath day: in the gospel touching all such things
we have this rule 1. Cor. 14.4.
: Let all things be done honestly and in order. The ordinances with the
manifestation of the spirit, be contained in the persons, their offices,
degrees, and dignities, their excellency and power in their gifts, and the
order of adiministration. As before the law the Genesis 12.7. and cap. 17.23.
father of the family, Exodus 24.5. Numb. 3.40.
or the first borne, was the person, by whom the word and holy things of God
were administered. Their degrees, dignities, etc. are not much spoken of, save
only they are called Genesis 20.7. cap. 49 1.
prophets, and did tell of things to come, and ordered the church in the
families, as they were 2. Pet. 1.21. Genesis 15. and 17. and 21. etc.
guided by the spirit of God in prophecy, or received commandment by vision
or dream from God. Under the law there is the This is taught in Exodus,
Numbers, and Leuiticus, and expounded in Deuteronomy and all the prophets.
priesthood in the house of Aaron, and the Levites under the^, attend upon the
holy administration, by diverse orders and ordinances, keeping the people under
the pure religion of faith and love. Under the gospel there be also diverse 1.
Cor. 12.4.5.6. etc. Mat. 28.19. Ephesians. 4.11. Romans 15.18.19.
administrations, gifts and works set in the church to rule and feed the
flock of Christ, to make them obedient to the faith in word and deed. And the
Math. 13.17. cap. 11.11. and 2. Cor. 3.
manifestation of the spirit is more excellent and abundant in the latter times
then in the former. Now in these three times you may see, touching these
ceremonies and manner of government, great difference, and that the word of God
does not esteem of these outward things as of the substance of religion
unchangeable, as he does of the inward and spiritual, namely faith and love.
And first, as touching the time before the law, Christ teaches that the Jews
could not be Abraham's children: Ioh. 8.39.
because they did not the works of Abraham: which works are not in ceremonies
and manner of government, for they were two curious in those things, and
therefore Christ says in another place: Math. 9.13.
Go and learn what this means, I will have mercy and not sacrifice. Thereby
declaring the moral duties of love, to be substantial in a religious
profession, and not ceremonies as sacrifice, washing, tithinge etc. And S. Paul
on the other side says thus: Romans 4.10.11.12.
Abraham's faith was imputed to him for righteousness, before he was
circumcised, and that after he received the sign of circumcision, as the seal
of the righteousness of the faith which he had when he was uncircumcised, that
he should be the father of all them that believe. Where he shows that
Abraham's religion whereby he was just before God, was his faith, and that was
before he was circumcised and without circumcision: then his circumcision was
only a sign and a seal to strengthen his faith, in sealing up of his
righteousness, but not of the matter or substance of his righteousness.
Secondly, that this was so divided, that the gentilles which were not
circumcised might be justified through the same faith without the observing of
the law, and the Jews though circumcised, were not justified except they
walked in the steps of Abraham's faith: So that herein consists Abraham's
religion, even in his faith and walking in the steps thereof, the ceremonies
were only ornaments and outward helps to the same. After which manner the
prophets also do interpret the law. For when the people preferred the
ceremonies and manner of government before the moral duties and faith. Esaias
says unto them: Esai. 1.10.
Hear the word of the Lord, O princes of Sodom, harken unto the law of our
God, O people of Gomorrah: What have I to do with the multitude of your
sacrifices, says the Lord etc. Where he calls the^ from the foolish and
curious observation of ceremonies and manner of government verse. 16.
Repentance and the fruits thereof according to love, and of faith in the
consent and obedience to Gods word and mercy. verse. 19.
And in another place he says that cap. 66.1.2.
God esteems neither temple nor sacrifice, but the humble and contrite heart,
who trembles at his word. Hereof Hieremie: Hier. 7.3.4.
Amend your ways and your works, and I will let you dwell in this place, trust
not in lying words saying the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord etc.
For this cause the Psalmist shows that the end Psalm. 78.5.7.
why God gave Israel his law, that they should teach it there posterity, was
this: That they might set their hope on God, and not forget the works of God
but keep his commandments. And the cause of all the plagues was not in regard
of ceremonies or manner of government (for he says Psalm. 50.8.
I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices) but for their falling away from
faith as it is written: Psalm. 106.13.14.24.
They forgot his works and waited not for his counsel, but lusted with
concupiscence etc. and believed not his word: And therefore it is said in the
Epistle to the Hebrews. Heb. 3.2.
The word that they heard profited not them, because it was not mixed with
faith in those that heard it. So likewise in the whole tenor of the gospel,
what is the principal aim of the holy Ghost, to make men religious? are not
these two namely faith and love? is not the sum of the gospel in these two:
Marc. 1.15.
Repent and believe the gospel. Did not Paul say, that when he taught the
Ephesians all the counsel of God, that he taught them Act. 20.20.21.
: Repentance toward God, and faith in Jesus Christ: and what is this else, but
that we should leave the wickedness of our hearts and lives, and walk in
all duties of love to God and man, and hold fast his holy covenant by a true
and lively faith: Therefore he says else where, that Gal. 5.6.
in Jesus Christ, neither circumcision avails any thing, neither
uncircumcision, but faith which works by love. Where by circumcision he
means the ceremonies, and manner of government of the law as he expounds
it, verse 3. and so contrarily uncircumcision signifies the order and manner of
the gentiles. Therefore these outward things are not the maine substance but
only faith and love. Hereof it is that the spirit of God commends the Ephesians.
1.15. Coloss. 1.4. 1. These. 1.3.
churches for their faith and love, hope and patience: and Saint Paul speaking
of himself shows how he became a religious Christian, saying: 1. Tim. 2.13.
Before I was a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and an oppressor, but I was
received to mercy etc. but the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant with
faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus. Whereby you see that a wicked life
and unbelief, make a profane and irreligious person, but faith and love a
true and religious Christian. And hereof follows the difference, between an
hipocrite and a true Christian: the one is altogether superstitious in outward
things, Mat. 23.5.
laboring by such observations to appear righteous and religious unto men,
but within is full of hypocrisy and iniquity: the other has 1. Tim. 1.5.
love out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience and of faith unfeigned. And
this is the cause that the Corinthians 1. Cor. 10.1.2 3.4.5.6.7. etc.
are threatened with the fearful examples of the Israelites in their abode in
the wilderness, that having the word of God and his holy sacraments, they
walked not faithfully with God, and therefore were punished; So the Corinthians
ought not to put their trust in their sacraments and live contrary to faith
and love, for the^ they are like to be punished as the Israelits were. So the^
you see what is substa^tial and perpetual, and what is changeable according to
times.

7 Howbeit here is to be understood, that those ceremonies and outward things
in the manner of government are necessary and in their times religiously to be
observed, though not so highly esteemed as the parts of the unchangeable
substance of religion: but being the co^mandeme^ts of God by which he would for
the time be outwardly worshipped, or else teach and seal his covenant to his
people, that they might be steadie and increase in faith and love, and that all
things in the use, profession and exercise of their faith might be done comely,
seemly, orderly and co^mendably according to his word: whosoever offended in
any of these were subject to punishment, not only that he which Heb. 10.28.
Deuteronomy. 19.17.
despised Moses law should die without mercy under two or three witnesses: but
Heb. 2.2.
also every tra^sgression and disobedience received a just recompense of
reward. Leuit. 10.1.
As Nadab and Abihu the sons of Aaron, for offering strange fire, (that is such
as God had not appointed) were devoured with fire which came from the Lord. 2.
Sam. 6.
Vzzah was smitten with sudden death for holding the Arc, unto which he had no
office and calling: 2. Cron. 26.19.
And Vzziah king of Judah was stricken with a leprosy, for usurping the priests
office. Therefore in their times, and during so long time as God appointed these
ceremonies and manner of government to be used in his church they were to be
observed with all care and conscience, because of the commandme^t of God: only
taking heed, that no affiance should be put in the^ above their proper use, but
only make them helps and ornaments to the more substantial pillars of faith
and love. And when the time was come that they should be abolished, then was
the church free from such ordinances, for they were as the holy Ghost Heb. 9.9.
says, figures for the time present until the time of reformation, Cap. 10.11.
they were shadows of good things to come, and not the very image (or
substance) of the things themselves. Namely in as much as Christ by the oath of
God became a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck, to make perfect
that which the Leuiticall priesthood could never accomplish: the priesthood of
Aaron and all the law of Moses were changed, and the servant gave place to him
that was Lord of the house, as is at large disputed in the Cap. 3.7.8.9.10.
epistle to the Hebrews. Hereof it came to pass, that all the sacrifices
before the law, and circumcision which were of the fathers, and all the
ministry of Moses gave place at the coming of this great high priest, the
son of God the Lord and head of the Church, Jesus Christ. And he Dan. 9.27.
confirmed the covenant, and caused the sacrifice and oblation to cease, he
Ephesians. 2.14.15.
brake the stop of the partitio^ wall, abrogating through his flesh the law of
co^mandeme^ts standing in ordinances, that as well gentiles as Jews might have
access unto God by his spirit, Gal. 5.1.2.3.
he has set us at liberty from the yoke of bondage which was by the low: so
that now Ioh. 4.21.
we are not tied to Jerusalem, to worship the father: but that we 1. Tim. 2.8.
may pray every where lifting up pure hands. And Act. 15.9.
God puts no difference between men, for these ceremonies and manner of
government when their hearts are purified by faith: yet is it not his divine
wisdom and goodness, that we should be altogether without ceremonies and
government: For in stead of the priests and Levites, he has 1. Cor. 12.18.
Ephesians. 4.11.
set in his church, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, pastors, and teachers, to
teach us and guide us in the pure religion of faith and knowledge of the son of
God, and for our further help, we have in stead of all sacrifices before and
under the law, the sweet preaching of Christ only sacrifice (by which they were
ended and accomplished) to assure our consciences, that he is Heb. 7.25. ca.
9.28. and 10.18.
able perfectly to save them that come to God by him, and that by one sacrifice
once made, he did so fully take away sin, that there is now no more offering
for sin. And 1. Cor. 5.7. and cap. 11.23.
in stead of the passover which was a figure of Christ to come, we have the
holy supper of the Lord to show forth his death til he come again. And Colos.
2.11. Tit. 3.5. and Math. 28.19.
for circumcision, which signified the putting of the sinful flesh by the
blood of Christ which was to come: now Christ is come, we have baptism for
the washing of the new birth, and renewing of the holy Ghost, to enter us into
his holy church. And generally, we are taught by the gospel 1. Cor. 14.26.33.
to do all things in the church unto edification and without confusion. And
all those evangelical ordinances Ibi. ver. 37. and 1. Tim 6.13.14
are the commandments of God to be kept unblameable and unchangeable until
the coming of Christ.

CHAP. 2. How God has governed his church in one religion in all ages, which
is declared before and after the fall of Adam. 2. And by the dispensation of
times, since the promise of Christ first given to Adam, which is in three
sorts, the fathers before the law, the Jews under the law and the Gentiles
under the gospel. 3. In all these three times was there a difference in the
outward face of government but not in substance of religion. 4. Which by Gods
judgments and manifestation of his spirit has been always maintained and
preserved. 5. And this will be a witness of our religion now professed in
England, against all Atheistes, Papists, and other wicked men in the day of
Christ Jesus.
NOw this foundation being laid: because my purpose is to show, that God
always set forth and allowed but one faith and religion, I will in the next
place briefly show how God has administered his church from the beginning of
the world, namely in what order he has governed his people, Psalm. 37.12. and
48.3. Hier 10.25.
Whom he chose to himself to know him, and call upon his name. First we are
to remember that the world has bin in two estates, and a third we look for.
For before the fall of Adam, when man's heart was upright, being made after the
image of God in knowledge, holiness, and righteousness; his religion was pure and
his faith in God, and his love toward God, and al creatures were righteous:
and his estate happy, enjoying the presence and glory of God. But this estate
endured not long: for the devil envying man's happiness, allured the woman Euah
to eat of the forbidden fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, and
by her Adam was partaker of the same transgression: Ep. 2.1.2.12. Tit. 3.3.
Genesis 6.5.
so man fell clean from al religion and became the vassal of Satan, dead in
sin, lost that holy image so far, that both mind, will, and affections were
only evil: and by his very nature he was the child of wrath, and without God
in the world, that is to say, he was of no religion: and in this estate he was
most miserable, cursed, and damnable. Here our most gracious and merciful God,
pitying our most woeful condition, Genesis 3.
calls man to an account, chastises him, condemns the serpent and teaches
him again the true religion by giving him the promise, that The seed of the
woman should break the serpents head: that is, that by Christ he would over
throw the power of the devil. Upon which promise he builds his church of
such of the sons of Adam, as he Ephesians. 1.4.5.
in his eternal counsel had chosen to be adopted to himself in Christ Jesus:
Ephesians. 1.4.5.
To. 9.18.22.
leaving all others unto themselves, to remain in their sins, for their just
condemnation. And these his elect he restores to that former happy estate
wherein they were created; which thing he does (during this world) by Math.
28.19. Ephesians. 4.11.
instructing them in the true and pure religion, which is the faith of Christ
and the fruits thereof in true repentance and amendment of life, by the love
of God and of his neighbor, which two things have their measure and are
imperfect in this life, but they shall be perfect in the life to come. Faith is
imperfect because our 1. Cor. 13.9.
knowledge is imperfect, yet because it is fixed in Christ the son of God, it
is a Ephesians. 6.16.
shield to quench the fiery darts of the devil, so that by it we Romans 5.1.
are righteous in gods sight, and have peace with God through Jesus Christ: but
when in the life to come we shall have a Psalm. 17.15. 1. Io. 3.2.
perfect sight of God, and see him as he is, then that which is vnferfect shall
be done away: our love in this life is much more weak because it answers not
Jacob. 3.2.
to the perfection of the law moral or Gods holy image, and therefore unless by
the shield of faith in Christ we were defended we should never recover our
former estate of happiness: but by faith there is given unto us the Romans 8.23.
Ephesians. 1.13.
first fruits of the spirit, and an earnest of our salvation even in this our
pilgrimage, but afterward the same also shall be made perfect, when 1. Cor. 15.54
our corruption shall put on incorruption and our mortality shall be swalowed up
of life: and enjoying the glorious liberty of the sons of God, we 2. Tim. 4.8.
shall be crowned with the crown of righteousness, which is laid up in store
for all them which love the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. And here is to be noted, that between this time of man's innocence and the
time of the glory of Gods elect, is the Ephesians. 1.10.
dispe^sation of times wherein God gathers his elect, and nurtureth his church
in one certain kind of religion, holy right, pure and catholic, so far as by
his gracious gift in this life his people are made capable: thereby sanctifying
them and seperating them from this present evil world, and Colos. 1.13.
translating the^ out of the power of darkness into the kingdom of his deer
son. And this we find to be in iij. sorts in regard of the manner of government,
in the dispensation of iij. diversities of times, and yet but in one rule of
faith and religion. The times were these. 1. From the promise of God made to
Adam, until the giving of the law in mount Sinay or Horeb, during the space of
2513. years. 2. From the giving of the law until the preaching of Io. Bap. and
sending of the Apostles to preach to all the world about some 1445. years. 3.
From that That is 30. years after Christ birth.
time to our days some 1569. years, and this is to continue till the end of the
world, when Christ shall come again to judge the quick and dead. In the first
the manner of government in regard of the persons, over whom it was extended:
they were the fathers of the first world and all the whole world of al nations
and languages, and in regard of the things then in use, Read Genesis 3.4.6.8.9.12.
Romans 3.1.9.4.5
they had not the law of God nor any part of his word written, but were taught
and commanded by visions and dreams from heaven, and many were endewed with the
spirit of prophecy. In the second the manner of government touching the
persons was this: they were one nation called lastly Jews, first Israelits and
sometime Hebrews, and in regard of the things, they had Moses law written and
so preserved in books for the perpetual use of the church; and this law was in
three sorts, the moral written in two tables, showing in ten words all duties
to God and man: the ceremonial law consisting in ordinances of rites,
sacrifices and the leuiticall priesthood, by which order it pleased God in
those days to be outwardly worshipped: and the judicial law which were civil
laws and statutes, for the punishment of evil doers and ordering of the
common wealth of that people, as was most fit for the time, for the true and
holy religion. And under these three they were governed until the coming of
Christ. And because they often times fell away unto idolatry, God raised up
prophets, to bring them to repentance, who instructed them according to the
law, and showed them always the true faith and religion, with the right order
and manner of government. Now Ephesians. 2.11.12.
while that the church was in this one nation of the Jews, the gentiles (which
are all the nations and languages of the world beside) were left out from
being the people of God, and of his visible church, which thing began at the
circumcision of Abraham, in that God ordaining it, did call it the covenant,
that is a sign of the covenant, namly that Abraham and his seed should be the
people or church of God, and they that were not circumcised should be none of
his church, which being some 400. years before the giving of the law, in that
space the sin of the gentiles came to their perfection; and so the Jews were
then and thenceforth distinctly known to be of a differing religion and faith
concerning God, from all people under heaven whatsoever. Romans 1.1.2.3.4.
The third sort in regard of the persons are the gentiles that is all nations
and languages after the coming of Christ, and in regard of the things, they
had the gospel, which Jesus Christ the son of GOD being made man of the
virgin Marie, did preach, ordain, and commit to writing, to be preserved for
the everlasting benefit of the church which being preached by the Apostles of
Christ, as well to the Jews as to the Gentiles, at his commandment and by his
commission: the Jews for their unbelief fell away, and being left to the
hardness of their heart, were rejected, and ceased to be the visible church of
God, and remain scattered over the face of the whole earth until this day;
and the gentiles hearing and receiving the gospel and submitting them selves by
faith unto the doctrine of Christ, became Gods people again, and his visible
church, and so the true religion has remained among the gentiles in one place
or other until this day, and of this number are we of the church of England
one happy part: The Lord our God, and merciful father in Jesus Christ be
praised therefore.

3. Now in all these times, notwithstanding that the outward face of the
church, by the ceremonies and manner of government, did very much differ: yet
in all these was but one substance of religion, consisting in the knowledge of
one true and living God, and in the worship of his divine majesty, by faith in
the holy promise of Jesus Christ: which promise was made unto Adam, Abraham,
and David, declared by the prophets and preached to the gentiles in the gospel.
For so Adam Genesis 4.1.2.3
trained up his sons by sacrifice to worship God, arguing their expectation of
the Messiah or seed of the woman to come. And therefore Heb. 11.2.3.4.
Abel, Enoch, Noe, and Abraham are well reported of, for their faith and to have
pleased God. Unto 1. Pe. 3.10.11
Noe the ark, and unto Abraham circumcision, being types and figures of Christ,
were helps in this faith and religion: so in the law all the priests, and
their sacrifices and service, yea all the law, Romans 10.4. Gal. 3.22.
ponited out Christ, as thend thereof and concluded all under sin, that the
promise, by the faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. And
the prophets which best understood the law, show the maine substance of their
religion to be in faith, when they say. Esai 26.16.
He that believes in him (meaning Christ) shall not make have. Aaback. 2.4.
The just shall live by faith. Psalm. 34.8.
Taste and see how gracious the Lord is, blessed is the man that trusts in
him. Which thing witnesses the Apostle saying. Romans 15.4.
Whatsoever things are written before time, are written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the scripture might have hope, and that the
2. Tim. 3.15.
scriptures (speaking of the law and prophets) are able to make one wise unto
salvation through faith in Jesus Christ: And lastly touching the gospel, it is
most clear, that by Gal. 3.26. Act. 24.14.
belief in Christ we are made Gods people, and in this belief we worship and
serve God, as in one true and pure religion. Therefore they which are taught
Math 28.19. Act. 2.38. cap. 16.31. Jacob. 1.6. Heb. 11.6.
are baptized, when they believe and so received into the church: such are said
to be saved, such are said to pray aright, and generally such are said to
please God.

4. Now to conclude this place we may observe, the wonderful administration of
God, in upholding of this one true religion and faith of Christ in all ages of
the world; and that in two things. First in his judgments, and secondly in the
diverse manifestation of his spirit: as concerning the first, the old world
falling into a most horrible apostasy, Genesis 6.
by profane and unequal yoking of the children of God, with the children of
men, God stirred up Noe the preacher of righteousness and in his family,
preserved the true faith when all the whole world was fallen away, and
therefore drowned by waters. Then after the flood some 400. years, when idolatry
had ouercrept the world in the posterity of Noe, namely after the confounding
of the languages, and that they were become many nations: God Genesis 12. Ioshuah.
24.2.
called Abraham and taught him the faith and pure religion of Christ, when he
gave him the promise. That in his seed all the families of the earth should be
blessed, and in his posterity namly of his son Genesis 17.19. Act. 14.16.
Isaak, when all the nations of the world were left to their own ways the same
was preserved: and although the Israelits Ps. 78. and 106
many times departed from the true God, to follow the manners and fashions of
the gentiles, yet he reduced the^ home again, by his plagues and punishments,
and sometimes by his 1. Kin. 18.3^. Esai 6.13.
prophets, and sometimes destroying the multitude reserved a small remnant, as a
seed plot, among whom he preserved the true faith and religion. And last of
all, when they had many times provoked God by their unbelief and rebellion, he
cast them utterly off and ingrafted the gentiles; and although among these there
has bin great The first 300. years after Christ.
persecution, and a most horrible apostasy both by Mahomet and the Pope.
east and west, yet has he always had his witnesses, who keeping the faith,
have professed the true religion of Christ, and now according to hise word,
the same is renewed and takes hold again in the open eyes of all the world,
among the elect of God and his chosen people, who^ he calls by his gospel. A
thing verily, fore prophesied by Genesis 9.27. Genesis 12.3. Deuteronomy. 32.21. Esai 49.6.
Romans 15.18.
Noe, taught and promised to Abraham, threatened by Moses, plainly foretold by
the prophets, and fully accomplished by Christ, and of these things we have now
had 1602. years trial and experience, the Lords most holy name be praised. But
as touching the manifestation of the spirit, mark with me, that the same
promise, which to Adam was general Genesis 3. cap. 12. cap. 49.10. Esai 9.6.7.
Matthew. 1.
in the seed of the woman, was more special to Abraham to be in his seed,
and in his posterity more certain in Judah, and yet in Judah more particular in
the house and lineage of David, and yet more plainly and nearly by the prophets
that he should be borne of Esai 7.14.
a virgin; yea he is also so thoroughly described in the prophets, that there
is scarce any action of Christ, or accident befalling him, which Matthew the
evangelist, in his history does not confirm by some prophet or other: Yet is
John Baptist more clear then they all, when he could point out his very
person, saying, Ioh. 1.36.
Behold the lamb of God, Howbeit that grace of revelation which was in the
Apostles, excelled all the rest, for the very 1. Pet. 1.12. Ephe. 3.10.
Angels admire the manifold wisdom of God, as it is now taught in the church
of God by their doctrine, and therefore in comparison of the clear manifestation
of the gospel, now in these last times, to the more obscure revelation of the
former ages, it is called Colos. 1.26. Ephesians. 1.8.
a mystery had since the world began and from al ages, but now is made
manifest to his saints, and this most abundantly in all wisdom and
understanding. And this was of such power that neither the malicious
gainesaying and tumultuous resisting of the Jews, nor the furious and
outrageous persecutions of the gentiles, for 300. years, nor the subtle
undermining of wily heretics, nor the smoking darkness of Antechrist, could
stand before the wisdom of the spirit, but that the idols of the heathen and
the foolish rudimentes of the world, were scattered before the preaching of the
faith and religion of Christ, as the smoke or clouds are driven before the
wind. And when all the Dan. 3.35.44. 1. Pet. 2.6.
monarkes of the world were broken and became like the chafe of the summer
flowers, whom the winds carries away, this Jesus Christ, as a stone cut without
hands, although he were refused of the builders is not only become the head
of the corner, but also fills the whole earth, and grows to a kingdom,
that never shall have end, so long as Sun and Moon endures. And as this
religion, so the ceremonies and manner of government, ordained by Christ are to
remain until the end of the world: for so says Christ, when he gave
commission for Math. 28.19.20.
the preaching, baptizing and teaching of all his commandments: Lo I am with
you always unto the end of the world: and the Apostle affirms that the Lords
supper is to 1. Cor. 11.26
show the Lords death till he come, Ephesians. 4.12.13.
and his ministers are to gather together the saints, till we all meet in the
unity of faith, and he must 1. Cor. 15.24.25.
reign till all his enemies be put under his feet, and in the end deliver
up his kingdom to his father, and then God shall be all in all.

5 All which things if the Atheistes of our time, and such as be of no
religion, or of the popish and heretical superstition, could see and consider,
they would come home to us, and cast themselves down before Christ and say:
God is with you of a truth. But this continuance of one unchangeable truth in
religion, by the administration of Gods judgments and manifestation of the
spirit, being found with us in this realm of England (as hereafter in this
treatise does evidently appear) shall be a witness against all such in the day
of judgment, when they should remember, that they in their lives time,
willingly would not know, nor obey the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. I pray God open our eyes, that while the light is among us,
we may believe it, love it, and walk in it, as the children of light, to the
glory of God and our own comfort and everlasting salvation, in Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

CAP. III. Here is more largely showed, the unity of faith in all ages, and
that the religion openly professed at this present in England, is the same
ancient and only Catholic faith of Abraham, Moses and the prophets, and which
Christ and his Apostles preached and taught. Where 1. is declared that Abraham
received it of God, both for the Jews and also for all other nations. 2. The
particulers are compared in 15. several articles of the most weighty points
of doctrine.
Having entered thus far, that the Christian reader may as in a glass: in some
reasonable sort behold in his conscience, that from the beginning of the world,
there has been but one religion in which a man could ever be saved, one law
of faith, one law of love, taught and allowed by God in his Church catholic
and universal, for all places and times, to remain unchangeable unto the
worlds end. Now will I (through the merciful assistance of the same my
gracious God) more largely and particularly show the very same things: and
that the same is the religion, which in this our time, is now by public
authority professed, preached, taught, and defended in this realm of England,
by and under the most happy reign, golden days, and peaceable government of
the Lords anointed and blessed handmaid and servant, our dread sovereign,
dear nurse-mother, faithful and elect Lady and Queen Elizabeth: for whose
heavenly joy, Christian honor, long and prosperous life in wealth and
godliness, all true hearted Christians and faithful subjects, continually
and instantly do pray. Here thou shall see (God willing) what God taught
Abraham what Moses sent of God taught Israel, what the prophets inspired of
God taught in Judah, what Christ and his Apostles taught the primitive Church,
and that all these differ not in the doctrine of faith and love, but being all
one and the same way of salvation, the same true and undeceivable religion, the
same everlasting God and Savior: And thou shall plainly and clearly see,
that the very same and none other, has our most loving God, of his free and
kind mercy, now above forty years together taught us English men; and his
heavenly wisdom in our streets, and high places and assemblies, by his
faithful ministers has called us thereunto. So that we, to the stirring up of
our thankful hearts, to praise our good God, may say with the Psalmist Psalm.
147.20.
He has not dealt so with every nation, neither have they known his
judgments. And in this treatise concerning the first of the three times of the
world, which was of the fathers before the law or any part of Gods word was
written, I make special choice of Abraham for two causes. First because that
in the history of the fathers before his time, which contains some 2083.
years, the holy Ghost is very brief, and therefore not so full and plain in
diverse points, as after in the story of Abraham. Howbeit thou shall find in
the same, the doctrine of one God, the trinity, promise of Christ, and
salvation to come by faith in him, Baptism, of the arc and sacrifices for the
latter sacrament, seals of the covenant, and of duties, diverse examples in
Abell, Sheth, Enoch, Noe, and great punishments for the contrary, so that the
substance is one and the same, though that it be after more largely and
particularly taught in the story of Abraham. But because my purpose is to
show, that the particular parts of the doctrine of our religion be most
ancient and catholic, I find it more fit to take the pattern from
Abraham, in whose story I may gather these things more plainly, and also
many more several branches thereof. But my second cause is more special and
of greater wayght, namely that God made choice of Abraham in calling of him, to
be the father of all belieuers, and that the same faith which he received of
God, should be the religion of all nations wherein and whereby they should be
saved to the end of the world. Which thing Saint Paul teaches when he says,
Gal. 3.8.
The scripture foreseeing that God would justify the gentilles through faith,
preached before the Gospel unto Abraham saying, In thee shall all the gentiles
be blessed. Where we learn that the gospel which teaches this religion,
that men should be justified by faith was preached to Abraham, and namely for
the use of the gentilles, that they should be made of the same religion with
Abraham, and with him by faith only be justified: as he says in the next
verse: Verse. 9.
So then they which be of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham. This did
GOD signify unto Abraham, when he changed his name saying, Genesis 17.45.
Behold I make my covenant with thee and thou shall be a father of many
nations, neither shall thy name any more be called Abraham, but thy name shall
be Abraham, for a father of many nations have I made thee. Hereof the Apostle
teaches that Abraham's seed is twofold Romans 4.16.
not only of the law (which is meant of the Jews) but also that which is of
the faith of Abraham (that is the gentilles, who not having the law, are yet
his seed through faith) and therefore he adds, He is father of us all (that is
both of Jew and gentil which believe) alleging this place for proof saying
as it is written, I have made thee a father of many nations etc. Whereby it is
pregnantly proved, that Abraham is made, in regard of faith and religion, a
father both to Jews and Gentiles. The Jews are first admitted to be his
children, to walk in his religion and steps of faith: and after we succeed
in their room to walk in the same steps of faith and religion of Abraham: they
as the Apostle else where cap. 11.17.18.
says being natural branches, for unbelief were cut off: But we though
branches of the wild Olive are grafted in by faith. Now because it is here
manifest, that Abraham received the covenant for us, and the whole religion of
God, as well for us as for the Jews, and that God would not have the Jews to
have one religion and the gentiles an other, the one to be saved by one faith,
and the other by another; but both to be of that faith and religion which was
taught and found in Abraham: and that Christ coming of his seed, should be
savior both of Jews and gentiles, Luc. 2.32.
A light to be revealed to the gentiles and the glory of Israel: religion then
being one, and the same one being the same only which was taught Abraham, I
thought it best to choose him and his story, because that neither the law nor
the gospel could or ought to differ in religion and faith, from that of
Abraham: that if our religion in England agree with that of Abraham, then it
might be known to be the true ancient and catholic religion and faith, and
no new broached religion or doctrine, such as that is of the Church of Rome, as
in the process of this book shall be seen. But for thy better help good
Christian reader, I will follow this order: I will show the several points of
religion, which are most material, one after an other, as they are in nature
first and second, and then in every part or article, Abraham's faith first: And
secondly, (except some special reason draw me to alter this order) I will show
how our religion agrees with his faith, and lastly how Moses, the prophets
and the new testament confirm the same. And thus they follow.

The first Article of faith and religion concerning God.
1. There is one true, everliving and Almighty God: and three persons: God the
father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, which are not three Gods but one
God.

THis Article has two parts, first, of the unity of the Godhead, and
secondly the trinity of persons. The first God taught Abraham, when in his
calling he brought him to forsake the Ioshuah 24.2
strange and many Gods of his fathers, to embrace one and the only true God;
showing this perfect mark, that he could set down order what should become of
Genesis 12.3. cap. 15.13. cap. 17.1. cap. 18.14.
all the families of the earth, and particularly of his posterity, that he
was God all sufficient, and that nothing was hard to him. Therefore Abraham
having learned this, professes it to be his faith and religion, calling the
Lord, cap. 14.22.
The most high God, possessor of heaven and earth: and he gave him this Romans
4.18.19
glory of God, that although himself were an hundred year old, and Sarah his
wives womb now dead, yet did he believe Gods word, concerning his seed, being
assured, that he which had promised was also able to do it. The second God
taught Abraham, when he Gal. 3.8.
preached the gospel unto him in these words: Genesis 28.18.
In thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed. For by the seed
being understood Christ, namely the son of God to be made man of the seed of
Abraham: God speaking in these words to Abraham concerning his son, Abraham
must needs understand the first person of the father, in him that speaks, and
the second person of the Son, in him that is spoken of. And of this second
person in the knowledge and faith of Abraham speaks Christ, saying: Ioh.
8.56.58.
Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it and was glad. And again,
before Abraham was, I am. And as concerning the holy Ghost the third person,
Abraham understood that in all the words, because they are as the Apostle
teaches, Gal. 3.14.
the promise of the spirit, which thing you shall perceive if you look upon
Abraham's seed, for it came not by the natural virtue and power of man, but by
the holy Ghost, as first Isaacke was borne, (when Abraham and Sarah were past
age, of the natural begetting and conceiving of a child) by the virtue of the
promise of God, which being performed by the power of the holy ghost, he is
said sometime Romans 9.7.8. Gal. 4.23.29.
to be borne by promise, and sometime to be borne after the spirit. Secondly
Christ the seed of Abraham, by whom all are made blessed, is also borne a man
without the seed and begetting of any man, only of a virgin, and conceived by
the holy Ghost, as the Luke 1.34.35.
Angel in Luke declares. Lastly, all the faithful which are the spiritual
seed and children of Abraham, and made blessed by this promise of Christ, are
no otherwise made partakers of this blessing, but by the holy ghost as Christ
plainly Ioh. 3.5.
expounds, saying; No man can enter into the kingdom of God, except he be
borne again by the holy ghost. Abraham doubtless, being taught the true
meaning of these words who spoke, and of whom, and what manner of promise this
was, and how it should be performed, could not but behold therein, and learn
the most excellent mystery and doctrine of the trinity. And in this sense and
meaning does the church of England hold this article of religion with Abraham,
as may appear, not only by the universal and notorious knowledge of our
profession, but also by four Creedes, set down in the book of Common prayer
to be heard, learned and confessed of all men, The Apostles creed, Te Deum,
Athanasius creed, and the Nicen creed, and in the first article of religion
agreed upon by our church, and established by law: Ann^ 1562. Moses consent in
this article is to be seen in these words; Deuteronomy. 6.4.
Here O Israel, the Lord our God is Lord only. Where this word Lord, being in
Hebrew, Jehovah notes out the true God, being all sufficient of him self, and
therefore Moses was Exodus 3.14.
taught to call him Eheie, that is, I am or shall be, meaning a continuance
without beginning or ending. Secondly, this clause, our God, in hebrew is,*
Elohenu, a word of the plural number, notes out the plurality of persons,
and then adding in the singular number that he is Lord, or Jehovah, only,
signifies that although there is plurality, that is, three persons, yet there
is but one God. And therefore that which is spoken Psalm. 95. of the tempting of
God, out of Deuteronomy. 9. ver. 8. where is said by Moses, they provoked Jehovah to
anger, the prophet Esai 36.10.
Esaias and the epistle Heb. 3.7.
to the Hebrews expound it to be the tempting of the holy ghost, 1. Cor. 10.5.
and S. Paul to be tempting of Christ, so that Moses by these places is to be
understood to have taught the same doctrine of the Trinity, namely one all
sufficient Jehovah, and the same three persons, God the father, God the son,
and God the holy ghost? The prophets, who are the true and perfect interpreters
of Moses, do utter this doctrine yet more plainly speaking in the person of
God, Esai 44.6.
I am the first, and I am the last, and beside me there is no God. Cap. 4.3.13.
Before the day was I am, there is none that can deliver out of mine hand,
45.21.
a just God and a Savior and there is none beside me, Malach. 3.6.
I the Lord change not, Nahum 1.5.
The mountains tremble for him and the hills melt etc. And as touching the
Trinity in plain terms thus. Hag. 2.5.6.
I am with you says the Lord of hosts, with the word wherewith I couenanted
with you, when you came out of Egypt, and with my spirit remaining among you:
where you see the father by excellency called the Lord of hosts, the son being
the mediator of the covenant; is called the word, by whom and for whom God
couenanteth, and the holy ghost, his spirit placed in his church, by his
manifold gifts and mighty works: Heb. 2.4.
the like place is in Esai 63.7.8.9.10.
Esaias, where in the person of the father is showed Gods mercy, love and kind
providence over his people: and he points out the second person, by the name
of the angel of his presence, who saved them, and the holy ghost he calls his
holy spirit whom they vexed. But the new Testament is plainest of al. First,
Math. 3. where the father witnesses of the son and the holy ghost in the shape
of a dove comes upon him, and Christ commands to Math 28.19.
Baptize in the name of the father and of the son, and of the holy ghost. And
1. Ioh. 5.7.9.
S. John calls this the witness of God, that there are three which bear
record in heaven, the father, the word, and the holy ghost, and these three
are one. In which article we must understand the three persons, not as we do
three persons of men, who though they be but of one nature, which is the nature
of man, yet are they in such sort 3. persons in one nature as they are also 3.
diverse men, But in God is a more near union, namely that they being 3. persons
distinguished in property the father begetting, the son begotten, the holy
ghost proceeding: yet these three so distinct in person, are not only of one
kind of nature, which is to be God, (for so they might be understood to be
three gods, as Peter, James and John, though of one nature are yet three men)
but also of one and the same essence in unity of number, namely that the
father, son and holy ghost are all in one God, and do make and be all but one
and the same God, of the same inseparable power, eternity, will, wisdom; and
goodness, as is very excellently expounded in the creed of Athanasius.

The second article is of the Cause of Causes.
2 By the decree of God, all things were fore ordained how they should be, and
concerning man, who should be saved by faith in Christ, and who should be
damned for their sins.

THis doctrine GOD teaches Abraham two ways, first in the promise, Genesis 12.3.
how all the families of the earth should be blessed, in which there is the
revelation of Gods decree, what should become of all nations in the world,
namely that they of al nations which attain blessedness should have it by
Christ, and all other should be damned; then Cap. 17.
when he seperateth the Jews by circumcision, and kept out the gentiles till
the fulness of times, it argues that according to his decree, he dispenses the
times, and seperateth the nations, and that in the matter of the salvation and
damnation of men, even as saint Paul expounds it saying. Ephesians. 1.9.10.
And has opened to us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure
which he had purposed in him self; that in the dispensation of the fulness of
times he might gather together in one, all things both which are in heaven and
which are in earth, even in Christ. The other way is in trying of Abraham, when
he was so old before he had his son Isaac, for having made the promise to
Abraham generally: First, Genesis 12.3. cap. 15.5.
In thy seed and secondly, So shall thy seed be. Sarah finding her self
barren, Genesis 16.
gave her maid to Abraham, thinking to have the seed that way; and he went
into her, and she brought him forth a son when he was four score and six
year old, and he called his name Ismaell. But after this God Cap. 17.15.
commanded Abraham to change his wiue Sarahs name, from Sarai to Sarah, because
he would give her a son and bless and multiply her seed. Here Abraham
entreated God for Ismael saying: O that Ismael might live in thy sight: by
occasion whereof God opens his will more plainly and says. Sarah thy wife
shall bear thee a son in deed, and thou shall call his name Isaac, and I will
establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant and with his seed
after him. And after Cap. 18.
appearing unto him in Mamre, he repeteth this manifestation of his will saying,
I will certainly come again unto thee, according to the time of life, and lo
Sarah thy wife shall have a son; At which time Sarah laughed in her self as
though it were a strange or impossible thing, that she should have a son being
so old, and Abraham also was very old; And God rebuked her saying, that
Nothing was hard to God, and for certainty repeateth the promise. At the time
appointed will I return unto thee, and last of all when Cap. 21.
Abraham was one hundred year old, Sarah in deed brought him forth a son at
the season which God told him, and he called his name Isaac. And after when at
the weaning of this his son Isaac, he made a great feast, Sarah saw Ismael
the son of the bond woman which was now some 14. years old, mocking her son
Isaac, therefore she says unto Abraham, Cast out the bondwoman and her son
etc. and this grieved Abraham; but God admonished him, not to be grieved, but
to do as Sarah spoke, because that in Isaac his seed should be called: and so
Abraham put the bond woman and her son Ismael out of his house. This story
shows the decree of god, and namly touching the salvation and damnation of
men, that as Abraham and Sarah diversely regarded Ismael, and thought he might
be the seed (as appears by his generation, Abraha^s entreaty and grief for
him, and Sarahs laughing) yet were they altogether deceived of their mind and
will: but Isaac, whom God decreed to be of Sarahs body, and so promised,
became in deed, to be the only seed in who^ the covenant should be established:
So thereby is taught, that no man is saved by chance constellation of stars, or
by man's will, choice, or works, or any other way within the compass of man's
reach, or wisdom, but according as God has ordained and fore appointed: and
they whom he has not appointed to be saved, shall never be saved. This durst I
never so interpret of mine own head (nor many other places of like sort in
this treatise) but that the holy ghost, the same spirit, whereby God taught
Abraham; has opened it, in the new testament, as by the holy Apostle is
plainly showed: where it is thus said. Romans 9 6.7.8.9. etc.
Notwithstanding it cannot be that the word of God should take none effect, for
they are not all Israel, which are of Israel: neither are they al children
because they are the seed of Abraham, but in Isaac shall thy seed be called:
that is, they which are the children of the flesh, are not the children of God,
but the children of the promise are counted for the seed. For this is a word of
promise, in this same time will I come, and Sarah shall have a son. Neither he
only felt this, but also Rebecca, when she had conceived by one, even by our
father Isaac: for ere the children were borne, and when they had neither done
good nor evil (that the purpose of God might remain, according to election,
not by works but by him that calls) it was said unto her the elder shall
serve the younger, as it is written, I have loved Jacob and hated Esau, what
shall we say then is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid. For he says to
Moses, I will have mercy on him, to whom I will show mercy and will have
compassion on him on whom I will have compassion. So then it is not in him that
wills, not in him that runs: but in God that shows mercy, which plainly
tells us, that both this preferment of Isaac before Ismael, and that of
Jacob, before Esau, do prove and teach that general doctrine which God spoke
unto Moses, namely: that Gods mercy in saving, regards no ma^s works or will,
but only his own holy will and pleasure; so that we may say here as Christ in
the same case says. Math. 11.26.
It is so O father, because thy good pleasure was such. Agreeing to which the
church of England, describes, Artic. 17. of predestination and election.
Predestination to life, to be, the everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before
the fou^dations of the world were laid) he has constantly decreed, to deliver,
from the curse and damnation, those whom he has chosen in Christ, out of
mankind, and to bring them by Christ, to everlasting salvation, as vessels made
to honor etc. Now Moses in his consent, not only opens this point, in that
which we have before seen alleged by saint Paul, but also where he
entreating for Israel and for their salvation, wishes his own damnation in
these words, Exodus 32.32.
Raze me out of the book which thou have written, which book is Gods decree
and purpose touching the salvation of his elect, as appears by that in the
revelation, Revel. 20.15.
Whosoever was not found in the book of life was cast into the lake of fire.
Also that which is spoken in Moses touching Pharao, Exodus 9.16.
For this cause have I appointed thee etc. which the Apostle Romans 19.17.
expounds to be of Gods eternal purpose: and such is that of Moses song,
Deuteronomy. 32.8.
When the most hie God divided to the nations their inheritance, when he
separated the sons of Adam, he appointed the borders of the people, according
to the number of the children of Israel, which shows gods decree and
providence touching dividing of the nations, and choosing Israel to be his
church before all other, which saint Paul expounds, where he says that God
Act. 17.26.
assigned the times which were ordained before, and the bounds of their
habitation. So then Moses teaches Gods eternal decree touching al things,
touching his church and elect, and his providence effecting the same. Now let
us see with what terms the prophets interpret this. They say Psalm. 135.6. and
33.11.
Whatsoever pleased the Lord, that did he in heaven and in earth, in the sea
and in all depthes. The counsel of the Lord shall stand, and the thoughts of
his heart thorough all ages. Hier 27.4.5.
Thus says the Lord of hosts the God of Israel etc. I have made the earth, the
man, and the beast, that are upon the ground, by my great power and by my
stretched out arm, and have given it to whom it pleased me etc. whereby it
appears, that by Gods eternal counsel and will, the prophets understand,
that all things come to pass, in all ages, in all creatures and namely among
men, such as is the translating of kingdoms. But as concerning the salvation or
damnation of men, they say thus Pro. 16.4.
God made all things (or men) for himself, yea even the wicked for the day of
evil: which words shows that the counsel of God, in making all things,
regarded this end: Gods glory, not only in those which are elected unto
salvation, but even in those which are reprobated unto evil, that is to
damnation; as in Malachie he also says; Malach. 1. ver. 2.3.
Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated, which words are before cited by
saint Paul for Gods eternal decree touching man's salvation and damnation. But
the new Testament is somewhat plainer, where we are taught to confess Gods
eternal purpose, before the creation, how all things should be, in these
words, Revel. 4.11. Romans 11.36.
Thou art worthy O Lord to receive glory and honor and power, for thou have
created all things, and for thy will sake, they are and have been created. And
again: Of him, and through him, and for him are all things, to him be glory
for ever, Amen. But more particularly touching man it is said, first for the
elect, Ephesians. 1.4.
He has chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the world etc. And of the
reprobate: Christ is 1. Pet. 2.8.
a stone to stumble at, and a rock of offense, even to them which stumble at
the word, unto the which thing they were even ordained. Which is so plain that
all men may see evidently, that the counsel and decree of God rules over all
and in all things. His holy name be blessed for ever Amen. Therefore in this
Article, our English belief is the same which God teaches Abraham by
himself, and Israel by Moses and the prophets, and both Jews and gentiles by
his Christ and his Apostles.

The third Article of the estate of man, by the fall of Adam, and before his
calling.
3 The heart of man before and without the grace of God, is altogether corrupt
by original sin, descending from Adam: so that in him there is no power to
do any work of godliness pleasing God.

THis Article does show the damnable estate of man before he have faith in
Christ, in three things: 1. in the universal corruption of his soul by
original sin, which consists in the want of knowledge and freewill unto
godliness. 2. That it comes from Adam, descending from father to son 3.
And in that before grace all his works are sin in the sight of God. Before
the fall, Adam being made Genesis 1.26. Colos. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.24.
after Gods image in knowledge holiness and righteousness, could not be corrupt
in soul, but as the preacher says: Eccles. 7.3. Genesis 1.31.
God made man righteous. And Moses says, God saw all that he had made and lo
it was very good. But after Adam Cap. 3.
had eaten of the forbidden fruit, the tree of knowledge of good and evil,
then lost he this holy image and goodness of soul, as appears in that he
could not abide the presence of God, he was ashamed and hid himself: and when
God called him to an account, he posted the matter to his wife, and in a sort
charged God saying: Verse. 12.
The woman which thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree etc. Which
declares how he was utterly void of goodness in that he showed no
inclination to repentance or submission to God, and this further appears in
his sons Caine and Abell: Genesis 4. Heb. 11.4.
the one being without faith, alas altogether set on evil works could not
please God with his sacrifice, and the other by faith (showing his new birth)
offered an acceptable sacrifice. So that it is apparent that this corruption is
exceeding great, and is hereditarie descending from Adam, and so from father to
son, making every soul unable to do any godliness. Wherefore when the world
was multiplied in people, they became most shameful in wickedness, which God
not able to abide, and therefore minding their destruction, shows the ground
to be this original sin, namely: Genesis 6.5. cap. 8.21.
All the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart were only evil
continually. And again, the imagination of man's heart is evil, even from his
youth. Where thou may see, that being in the heart, and from the youth: this
corruption is natural and original coming from the parents, and being only
evil and imaginations, it shows the universal corruption, and then being
continually, this bewrays the emptiness of knowledge and free will unto God,
and also that nothing can be done by a man unregenerate, godly and pleasing to
the Lord. Now look we upon the story of Abraham; Noe was a just man, and he
and his three sons, had seen the great plague upon all the world by the flood,
yet there posterity fell from God, and this was found in Abraham and his
fathers house, so that they were clean fallen from God, and worshipped other
Gods, which in deed were no Gods, which doubtless had not been, but by this
original corruption. For what did they either by understanding or will, to
prepare or dispose themselves to grace, or what work find we they did to
please God? just nothing. But God called Abraham and in calling of him, endewed
him with faith, and so he by faith obeyed and pleased God, as is interpreted by
the holy ghost in the Epistle to the Heb. 11.8.
Hebrews: By faith Abraham, when he was called obeyed God etc. And if it were
by faith, it must needs be merely the supernatural gift of Gods spirit as the
Apostle says: 1. Cor. 12.8
To one is given by the spirit the word of wisdom, to another the word of
knowledge by the same spirit, to another is given faith by the same spirit.
Then surely before this gift of the spirit Abraham's heart was altogether
corrupt: which the prophet Ezechiel opens more plainly: who Ezec. 16.3.4.5.
etc.
speaking of the first founding of the church of Israel and Jews, in the person
and calling of Abr. co^pares that time of their first ingrafting into the
covenant, to be made Gods people, unto the time of a child newly come into
the world. Namely, that God saw their father Abraham, in whom he adopted them
to be his church, and Sarah his wife their mother, as a child whose nauel was
not cut, nor washed with water, nor softened, nor swadled with clouts, whom no
eye pitied, but was cast out in contempt of his person: and then says God (to
the whole generation of Israel as one man, and that began in Abraham.) When I
passed by thee I saw thee polluted in thine own blood, and I said unto thee
when thou wast in thy blood, thou shall live. And a little after, I spread my
skirt over thee, and covered thy filthiness: yea I swear unto thee and entered
into covenant with thee, says the Lord God, and thou becamest mine etc. In
which words allegorically he does show, that all Israel in Abraham, and Sarah,
their father and mother, had utterly perished, with the rest of the world,
through this original corruption, had not God called them, endewed them with
faith and given them the covenant. And as a child newborn, whose navel is
uncut and walloweth in his blood, and cast out in contempt, has no cleanness
in him, nor power to prepare himself unto cleanness, must needs have all
from the hand of them that take pity on him: So was Abraham void of all good
knowledge and will unto godliness until God purified his heart by faith. And as
this was found in Abraham, so he learned and believed the same, observing the
like in others, whom God had not called as he had him, for when Genesis 12.10. cap.
by famine he was feign to go into Egypt, and afterward into Gerar: his wife
Sarah being a fair woman, he feared to acknowledge her to be his wife,
because he knew that the people being without grace and faith, could not but
incline to lust after her, as the sequel did plainly declare, and he shows
a reason: verse. 11.
Surely the fear of God is not in this place, and they will slay me for my
wives sake. Where by the want of the fear of God (putting the effect for the
cause) he understands that they were void of the grace of God, of and in
themselves so corrupt, with this natural deprauation, that he could not look
for any good but evil to come from them: even as Christ says Mat. 12.33.
Either make the tree good and his fruit good, or else make the tree evil and
his fruit evil: Apolog. of England. cap. 19. diuis. 1
And this is also the faith of the Church of England, for we say: That every
person is borne in sin, that no body is able truly to say his heart is clean
etc. Articles of religion Artic. 9. and 10. Of free will, and original sin.
The condition of man after the fall of Adam is such, that he can not turn and
prepare himself, by his own natural strength, and good works, to faith and
calling upon God: wherefore we have no power to do good works, pleasant and
acceptable to God, without the grace of God by Christ, preventing us, that we
may have a good will, and working in us when we have that good will, and
Artic. 13. of works before justification.
works before the grace of Christ have the nature of sin: Which is altogether
agreeing in sense and meaning with that which is before showed of the fathers
time and of Abraham: therefore let us now hear Moses and the prophets. Moses
says: Deuteronomy. 9.5.6.
O Israel, thou enterest not to inherit their land, for thy righteousness, or
for thy upright heart, for thou art a stiff necked people. And again, Cap.
29.2.3.4.
Ye have seen all that the Lord did before your eyes in the land of Egypt
unto Pharaoh etc. Yet the Lord has not given your an heart to perceive, and
eyes to see, and ears to hear until this day. Where it appears plainly
that Moses taught them that without Gods gift they could not understand nor
obey, but were rebels against God, and stiff necked. And the prophets
declare the very same Psalm. 51.5.
Behold I was borne in iniquity and in sin has my mother conceived me.
Proverb. 20.9.
Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am clean from sin. By which is
manifest, that this original corruption descending from Adam, makes the heart
so corrupt, that it can not prepare it self to any cleannes of righteousness,
but of it self runs headlong to all evil. Therefore because that in this
respect, the heart in the faithful is made as it were new: the Lord says by
the Prophet Ezech. 36.26.
A new heart will I give you, a new spirit will I put within you. Yet is the
new testament more evident, for it says Ioh. 3.3.
: Except a man be borne again he can not see the kingdom of God: Ephesians. 2.1.2.
ye were in times past (that is before our calling and regeneration) dead in
sins and trespasses etc. walking in the lust of the flesh and fulfilling the
will of the flesh of the mind, Tit. 3.3.
and were by nature the children of wrath: we were unwise, disobedient,
deceived, serving the lusts and diverse pleasures, living in maliciousness and
envy, hateful and hating one another. Then which, what can be more said? the
mind, the will, the affections, words, and deeds, be all ill, even as a
dead man that has no moving, but must be newborn, before he can have any
sight, is not such an one universally corrupt, void of knowledge and free will
unto any godliness, and unable to do works pleasing unto God? yea and
therefore the Apostle is bold to say, that it is: Philip. 2.13.
God which works in us the will and the deed, of his good pleasure. Then you
see, that the fathers, Moses and the prophets, Christ and his Apostles, do all
agree in the same doctrine of the estate of man after his fall, before his
calling in Christ: and that it is the same which we profess in England.

The fourth article, enters into the consideration how we are delivered from
this corrupt and damnable estate.
4 There is one only way of righteousness and salvation, which is by faith in
Jesus Christ.

THis is very apparent in the story of Abraham when God says: that all the
families of the earth should be blessed in his seed. Where by blessed is
understood the deliverance from the corruption and damnation which came by
Adam. This seed is Christ: when he says, all families, or that shows that
whosoever in the world shall be saved, must be saved by Christ. And there is
no other seed or faith by which one man can be saved: therefore he received the
covenant as is before declared, for Jews and gentiles, that men might not look
for righteousness or salvation in any other thing, but only in and by faith in
Jesus Christ. And so says Moses as the blessed Apostle interprets it Romans
10.6. Deuteronomy. 30.11.12
The righteousness which is of faith speaks on this wise, say not in thine
heart who shall ascend into heaven (that is to bring Christ from above) or who
shall descend into the deep? (that is to bring Christ again from the dead)
but what says it? The word is near: eue^ in thy mouth and in thine heart:
this is the word of faith which we preach. For if thou shall confess with thy
mouth the Lord Jesus: and shall believe in thine heart, that God raised him
from the dead, thou shall be saved. Where thou see by Moses docttrine, that
we must not seek righteousness or salvation any where else but in the faith of
Christ, which the prophets express thus: Esai. 28.16.
Thus says the Lord God, Behold I will lay in Sion a stone, a tried stone, a
precious corner stone, a sure foundation. He that believes shall not make
have: Malack. 4.2.
Unto you that fear my name shall the son of righteousness arise, and
health shall be under his wings etc. The gospel more plainly shows that
where Christ is not known Math. 4.16.
the people sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death: and that he Luc.
1.78.79.
is the day spring from on high, giving light to them that sit in darkness
and in the shadow of death. 2. Tim. 1.10.
And that he brings life and immortality to light by the gospel. And that
God is so far from allowing, that any man should be able in any other mean
to attain unto righteousness or salvation: thus he speaks expressly, that
there is no Act. 4.11.
Salvation in any other: for among men is given no name under heaven whereby we
must be saved. Now what confesses the Church of England in this regard?
Namely that Artic. 18.
they are to be had accursed and abhorred, that presume to say, that every man
shall be saved by law or sect that he professes etc. For holy Scripture does
set out unto us only the name of Jesus Christ, whereby men must be saved. So
that here you see, the faith of Abraham, Moses, the prophets and Apostles,
determine one way of man's restoring unto righteousness and salvation: and the
very same is the faith of the church of England.

The fifth article: of Jesus Christ, the only author of our salvation: What we
ought to know and believe of him.
5. Jesus Christ (in regard of his person) is perfect God and perfect man in
one person, and (in regard of his office) mediator between God and man, of
the covenant of mercy.

IN this article we embrace two things. First, what Christ is in himself;
where we understand, not that God alone, or man alone is Christ: but God and
man is one Christ. By God we understand, the only and everlasting begotten son
of God, the second person in the trinity; by man we understand that he came
of the seed of Abraham and David, and a very natural man, borne of the virgin
Marie, having body and soul, and all faculties and qualities, of mind and
body as we have, only sin excepted, and that the two natures in Christ are
not confounded nor separated, but united and distinct: as the body and soul of
a man, having their several natures and properties, make but one thing, which
is a man: So the godhead of Christ, assuming the manhood, cha^geth not it self
nor the nature of man assumed, but God and man united in one person, make one
Jesus Christ and Savior, who by his incarnation and obedience, suffering,
death, resurrection, assention, sitting at the right hand of God, and lastly by
his judgment, has and will save all the elect of God, and declare, and make
manifest the just condemnation of the wicked and reprobate. And these are the
works of his office of mediatorship, which office of mediator we thus
understand; that where all mankind being dead in sin, there whole nature
corrupted, and under the wrath of God and damnation of body and soul, had in
himself (as is before declared) nothing sound, being unable to do any thing,
that could please God, for his restoring unto righteousness and salvation:
Christ by the will of his father, and of his free love, came into the world,
and became a man: that where man had sinned, by man might come deliverance from
sin. But because we men were wicked and void of strength he was also God,
that he might be able perfectly to save us: And so being God and man he was a
fit mediator to make peace: that where by sins we were enemies to God, he
being righteous and suffering for us, paid the ransom for our sins: and as
God, being the son of God, was apt to reconcile us unto his father, being
beloved of his father, his doing and suffering set us free, from the curse of
the law and the wrath of God: and brought us so far into Gods favor, that by
him we are made righteous, adopted children to his father, and heirs under
hope of his everlasting kingdom, and in all things in and through faith in him
our hearts being purified, God is well pleased with us. In which office he is a
priest and a king: In his priestly office, first (as a prophet) he brings
unto us the oracles and word of God; and secondly performing perfect obedience,
he offers himself an immaculate lamb, a pure and undefiled sacrifice for
our sins, and continually makes intercession for us: As he is King, he has
all power in his hands, he is Lord and head of his church, and rules it by his
word and spirit, and sits and reigns at the right hand of the glory of
God, til all his enemies, (which are the enemies of his church) be destroyed,
and al things being restored he will deliver up his kingdom, into the hands
of his father, that God may be all in all. This person and office of Christ
being thus briefly (but faithfully) described: See we now whether it be not
that ancient faith, which was taught Abraham. First, for the godhead of Christ,
Genesis 18.
he appeared unto Abraham in the plain of Mamre, where one of the three angels
is called Jehovah which is proper unto God only. And again Cap. 22.
when he offered up his son Isaac, an angel called to him from heaven, saying.
Now I know thou fear God, seeing for my sake thou have not spared thine
onley son: this must needs be understood of the son of God, for the father
is no where, entitled by the name of an angel: but the son is Esai 63.9.
else where called The angel of Gods presence: and by special name Dan. 10.21.
Michael our prince, which is by interpretation: who like God, which fitly
declares his godhead; for so is it said in the Psalms. Psalm. 89.8.
O Lord God of hosts, who is like unto thee, a mighty God, and thy truth is
about thee. Secondly the manhood of Christ, to be assumed by Christ, in the
fulness of times was taught Abraham, when God preached the Gospel to him saying,
In thy seed, which argues the incarnation of the son of God, that he should
be made man, of the seed of Abraham, as it is expounded by the holy ghost,
saying: Heb. 2.16.17.
He in no sort took the angels, but he took the seed of Abraham: Wherefore
in all things it became him to be like his brethren etc. that is to say,
seeing he came to save man, whom he would make his brethren by adoption, it
became him to take the seed of Abraham, that he might be a very true and
natural man, his office is directly taught, in that, All the families of the
earth by him should be made blessed, that is, delivered out of that cursed
estate of original corruption, the wrath of God and damnation, into the estate
of righteousness, salvation and favor of God, this did his Ge. 12.17. and
22.9.13. and 17.10.
alter which he made, and sacrifices which he offered, and his circumcision
which God gave him, mystically shadow and teach him, as the holy ghost
interpreth those things, that Christ should Heb. 9.18.
once be offered for the sins of many, and that he should be our cap. 13.10.15
alter, in whom we should offer our sacrifices of praise always to God, and
that Colos. 2.11.
by him we should put off the sinful body of the flesh. But amongst all other
things this person and office of Christ, is most lively figured out unto him,
in Genesis 14.17.18.
Melchizedeck, king of Salem, priest of the most hie God, who met Abraham as
he returned from the slaughter of the Kings and blessed him, to whom Abraham
paid tithe of al his spoils. For in that Melchizedeck being a very man came
forth and met Abraham, and brought him bread and wine for his soldiers, he
represents the manhood of Christ: and in that the story leaves out the
mention of his father and mother, and tells not, when he was borne or when he
died; he represents the godhead of Christ, who has no beginning of days nor
end of life, and in that he is called a priest of the most hie God, he
represents the priestly office of Christ. And being called Melchizedeck, that
is, king of righteousness, and again king of Salem, that is king of peace; he
represents the kingly office of Christ, who as a king, by his 2. Cor.
5.19.20. Romans 1.16.17. cap. 5.1.
ambassadors, which are the ministers of the word of reconciliation (which is
the gospel) he teaches us righteousness by faith and peace toward God. And so
does God himself declare and expound this story, saying concerning Christ:
Psalm. 100.4.
The Lord swear and will not repent, thou art a priest for ever after the order
of Melchizedeck, which thing is interpreted to belong unto Jesus Christ by the
holy ghost saying. Heb. 6.20.
This Jesus is made an hie priest for ever after the order of Melchizedeck cap.
7.1.
For this Melchizedeck, was king of Sale^, the priest of the most hie God, who
met Abraham, as he returned from the slaughter of the kings and blessed him: to
whom also Abraham gave the tith of al things, who first by interpretation is
king of righteousness, after that he is also king of Salem, that is king of
peace, without father, without mother, and has neither beginning of days nor
end of lif: but is likned unto the son of God, and continues a priest for
ever. And this is verily the faith of the church of England touching Christ:
for we confess and affirm that, Artic. 2. of the word or son of God.
The son, which is the word of the father, begotten from everlasting of the
father, the very and eternal God; of one substance with the father, took
man's nature in the womb of the blessed virgin, of her substance: So that two
whole and perfect natures, that is to say, the godhead, and manhood, were
joined together in one person, never to be divided, whereof is one Christ,
very God and very man, who truly suffered, was crucified, dead and buried,
to reconcile his father to us, and to be a sacrifice for all sin both
original and actual. Artic. 4. of the resurrection of Christ.
Christ did truly rise again from death, and took again his body etc.
wherewith he ascended into heaven, and there sits, until he return to
judge all men at the last day. Wherein express terms the union of the two
natures in Christ is declared, the office of his mediatorship reconciling us to
the father, his priesthood in his sacrifice; his kingly office in the judgment
and sitting at the right hand of God, which will yet appear more plainly, when
we shall speak in particular of his sacrifice, and of his kingdom, how he is
head and Lord of his church: Let us then hear Moses most sweet consent:
First, he shows the godhead of Christ and his kingly office: Exodus 23.20.
Where God promises his angel to go before him, and bring him to the place
which he has prepared to the Amorits, Hittits, etc. and he says of his angel.
Beware of him and hear his voice, and provoke him not, for he will not spare
your misdeeds, because my name is in him, and least this phrase were not
sufficient to expres his godhead, he calls him his face, saying: Cap. 33.14.
My face (or presence) shall go with thee, and I vvil give thee rest: and
again, Deuteronomy. 7.21.
Thou shall not fear them, for the Lord thy God is among you, a God mighty and
dreadful. Thus does Moses describe the Godhead of Christ, to be Gods angel, in
who^ is Gods name, that he equally may be called God as well as his father,
who is the true face and presence of God, that is, the brightness of his glory
and engraven form of his person. Lastly he is a God mighty and terrible, and
that he is there king, he would have him obeyed, and to rule, lead, and defend
them. And therefore where as Moses says, when the Number. 21.4.5
people were sore grieved, because of the way, when they compassed the land of
Edom, that they spoke against God: The holy ghost shows that he meant Christ,
saying. 1. Cor. 10.9.
Neither let us tempt Christ as some of them also tempted him and were
destroyed of serpents. The manhood, priestly office of Christ, his mediatorship
etc. Moses teaches when he said: God would raise up a prophet, from among
their brethren like unto him etc. and by all the leuiticall priesthood,
sacrifices, sheding of blood etc. as is most lively expounded by the holy
ghost in the Epistle to the Hebrews and the 9. Chapter, Exodus 9.10.
so plainly that a very child might understand it, if he do but carefully
read it: where thou may see, that he calls all those things, a e figure for
the time present, until the time of reformation, and as there was an hye
priest, 7.11.
so Christ is called an hye priest, and as there was 12.13.14.
blood of goats and calves etc. so Christ's blood was offered without spot; and
as 7.24.
the hie priest entered into the holiest of all once every year, so Christ is
entered into heaven to appear in the sight of God for us. The prophets speak
more familiarly and call him Esai 7.14.
Emanuel, that is God with us, or as the Apostle declares 1. Tim. 3.16
God manifested in the flesh, and thus they speak both of his person and of his
office. Esai 9.6.
Unto us a child is borne, and unto us a son is geeuen, and the government is
upon his shoulder, and he shall call his name wonderful, counselor, the
mighty God etc. cap, 53.10,
he shall make his soul an offering for sin. Zach. 6.12.13.
Behold the man whose name is the branch, and he shall grow up out of his
place, and he shall build the temple of the Lord: even he shall build the
temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule upon
his throne, and he shall be a priest upon his throne, and the counsel of peace,
shall be between them both. And many other places, where his godhead, manhood,
mediatorship, priesthood, and kingly office, are expressly described. But yet
most abundantly and most evidently in the gospel, where of his person it is
said: Romans 1.3.4.
He was made of the seed of David, according to the flesh, and declared
mightily to be the son of God, touching the spirit of sanctification, by the
resurrection from the dead. Romans 9.5.
Of the Israelites concerning the flesh Christ came who is God over all,
blessed for ever. Touching both person and office: When the fulness of time was
come, God sent forth his son, made of a woman, made under the law, that he
might redeem them which were under the law, that we might receive the adoption
of sons. 1. Pet. 3.18.
Christ has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might
bring us to God: and was put to death concerning the flesh, but was quickened in
the spirit. His kingly office thou have, where it is said: Ephesians. 1.20.21
God set him at his right hand in heavenly places, far above all principality,
power and might, and domination and every name, that is named, not in this
world only, but also in that is to come; and has made all things subject
under his feet, and has appointed him over all things to be head to his
church, and his priestly office in these words, Heb. 7.24.
This man because he endures for ever, has an everlasting priesthood.
Wherefore he is able perfectly to save them which come unto God by him, seeing
he ever lives to make intercession for them. O blessed harmony and sweet
consent, in so joyful a description of our loving God and savior. Happy art
thou O England who have fellowship with Abraham, Moses, the prophets and
Apostles, in so heavenly, holy 1. Tim. 3.16
and great mystery of godliness. Which God does not reueile to all people but
only to his Colos. 1.26.
Saints. All thanks therefore be given, unto the most glorious name of our
good God, for his most excellent gift and rich grace. Amen.

The sixth Article, of the applying of Christ.
Faith only justifies, and who so ever believes in Christ shall be saved.

THe meaning of this Article is: that there is not in man either before or
after he believe, any inherent righteousness, or goodness of mind, neither any
kind of works done by him, which can either deserve any thing at Gods hands,
or in any part satisfy his wrath whereby we should be accounted righteous in
his sight: but that Christ alone has paid our ransom for our sins, and we
are saved by the mere and free grace of God, through his blood: and we are
then only accounted just and justified before God, and made inheritors of
salvation, when by a true and unfeigned faith and belief in Christ blood, we
acknowledge embrace and receive this grace and favor of God: and this faith
only in this sort apprehending Christ, makes us righteous and justified
before God. And thus surely it befell unto Abraham our father: For first he was
taught it: Secondly he found and felt it. Thirdly God wrote it for ever, with
great and golden letters in the image of his house, that all posterity might
read it, and learn it, to their everlasting comfort. That he was taught it,
is apparent in that God finding him void of all goodness and righteousness
(as is before declared) gave him the promise, that Genesis 12.3.
in him all the families of the earth should be blessed. This the Apostle
interprets to be meant, that the nations should be justified by faith in
Christ and not by works: saying Gal. 3.8.
The scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles: through faith,
preached before the gospel unto Abraham: saying, In thee shall all the gentiles
be blessed. Where thou may observe two things. First that this uttering of
this promise to Abraham was the preaching of the gospel. Secondly, that the
sum of the gospel is, Justification is by faith only. And that all nations
should have no other but the same order of justification, which God taught
Abraham, namely, by faith only. In the second place Abraham found and felt
this, when he Genesis 15.2.
mourned to God, because he had no child, and God showed him the stars and
said, look now up into heaven, and tell the stars if thou be able to number
them, and he said unto him, So shall thy seed be. And Abraham believed the
Lord, and he counted that to him for righteousness. Which the Apostle does
interpret, to be understood, that faith without works does justify, not
only in the person of Abraham, but also that it pertayneth to all other in the
like and very same manner to be justified, and in none other. First of Abraham
he says: Romans 4.1.
What shall we say that Abraham our father has found concerning the flesh?
for if Abraham were justified by works, he has wherein to rejoice, but not
with God. For what says the scripture, Abraham believed God, and it was
counted to him for righteousness. In which words it is plain, that Abraham was
justified by faith only, and if he had been by works he had had no
rejoicing with God. And as touching all other, that it is the only and
perpetual rule of justification, he says: Verse 23.
Now it is not written for him only that it was imputed to him for
righteousness: but also for us to whom it shall be imputed for righteousness,
which believe in him which raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead. Thirdly,
the great and golden letters wherewith this doctrine is written in Abraham's
house, be Sarah his wife and her son Isaac, and Hagar his bond servant and
her son Ismael: in whom God has set forth as in a wide open book, the two
covenants: the covenant of works and the covenant of mercy, the one of the law
and the other of the gospel. For Sarah represents the covenant of mercy,
and the estate of the Church under the gospel; and her son the true and
faithful believers in Jesus Christ. Read Genesis 16. and 21.
Hagar represents the covenant of works, and the state of the Church under
the law, and her son Ismael such as seek righteousness by their works.
Now as Sarah being the free woman, her son Isaac was the heir unto Abraham,
and remained in his house for ever: so the covenant of mercy, and the state
of the Church under the gospel being free, the true believers, being children
of that church, are justified through faith, made heirs of God, through hope,
and remain in Gods house for ever. And as Hagar being a bondseruant, her son
could be no otherwise but a bond slave, and so both were cast out of Abraham's
house for ever. So the covenant of works and the estate of the church under
the law (in them which sought righteousness any where but in the promise made
before unto Abraham) in as much as no man is able to perform the law:
engenders unto the bondage of sin, death, and damnation, and as many as
seek to be justified by their works are under the curse, and therefore to
be cast out of Gods house for ever, even as in the examples of Jews and
gentiles the Apostle speaks plainly. Romans 9.30.
What shall we say then? that the Gentiles which followed not righteousness, have
attained unto righteousness, eue^ to the righteousness which is of faith. But
Israel which followed the law of righteousness could not attain to the law of
righteousness: wherefore? because they sought it not by faith, but (as it were)
by the works of the law. Here I do humbly confess, that I should never have
been able to have read this doctrine, in these great letters, if the hand of
the master builder, the Apostle of the gentiles, had not pointed it out unto
me, by the finger of Gods spirit. For in the Epistle to the Galathians: having
proved and declared by many arguments, that we are justified by faith, and not
by works at all, and showing the use of the law to be so far from
justifying by works, that it was ordained only to drive us from works unto
Christ, to be justified by faith in him. At the length he calls his reader to
look upon this table, wherein this doctrine is purtraied, in the house of
Abraham, and so plainly interprets it, that every nouice in religion may
perceive it, saying: Gal. 4.21.
Tell me, ye that will be under the law, do ye not hear the law, for it is
written that Abraham had two sons, one by a servant, and one by a free woman:
but he which was of the servant was borne after the flesh, and he which was of
the free woman was borne by promise. By the which things an other thing is
meant; for these mothers are the two testaments, the one which is Agar of mount
Sina, which gendereth unto bondage, (for Agar or Sina is a mountain in Arabia,
and answers to Jerusalem which now is) and she is in bondage with her
children, but Jerusalem which is above is free, which is mother of us all,
etc. Now (that we may hear Moses consent) this very doctrine does the law it
self teach. For although it be called the ministry 2. Cor. 3.9. Romans 4.15.
of condemnation, and that which causes wrath, yet is it not in the nature of
the law so to do, for it is Romans 7.12.
holy and pure: but in the corruption of our nature infected with original
sin. Who first are unable, either with Verse. 24. Jacob. 4.2.
grace or Romans 8.7.
without grace, to fulfill it, and therefore the law accurseth us saying: Deuteronomy.
27.26. Gal. 3.10.
Cursed is every one which continues not in all the words of this law to do
them. And secondly without the special grace of God we cannot use the law of
God aright, for there Cor. 3.13.14.
hangs a veil of ignorance and hardness of heart over our eyes, in reading of
the law, that we can not see the end why the law serves; and so we are
enthralled as were the Jews, as the Apostle teaches: h They being ignorant of
the righteousness of God, and going about to establish their own righteousness,
have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God. But if we turn to
the Lord, and his spirit set us at liberty, then shall we see, how that the
law and covenant of works (which unto unbelievers, and them which seek to be
justified by their works, engendereth bondage) is a very good and necessary
servant and handmaide to the gospel, as it is written: Romans 3.21.
The righteousness of God is made manifest without the law, having witness of
the law and the prophets, to wit, the righteousness of God by faith of Jesus
Christ, unto all and upon all that believe. And this service of the law unto
the gospel, in bearing witness the Apostle most lively expresses where he
says: Gal. 3.22.
Is the law then against the promise of God? God forbid. For if there had been
a law which could have given life, surely righteousness should have been by
the law, but the scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by
the faith of Jesus Christ should be given to them that believe. Whereby you
may learn that the law is so far from justifying, that thereby it should
hinder the justifying by faith only in the promise: that it determines all
men to be sinners, and makes it manifest, that if we desire to be
justified, we must run to the promise by faith in Jesus Christ. And in
another place he shows a further witness of the law, saying: Romans 5.20.
The law entered that the offense might abound, nevertheless where sin
abounded, there grace abounded much more. Whereby he teaches us two things:
first that the law making sin appear, and (as he says else where) Cap. 7.13.
out of measure sinful, was a schoolmaster to drive men to Christ, that
believing in him they might be righteous, by not imputing their sins. The
second, that by so much, as by the law man sees his own corruption and cursed
estate for breaking the law, by so much the more abundantly does appear unto
him the rich grace of God in Jesus Christ. And this is not all the witness of
the law. For all the priesthood of Aaron and of the Levites, the Tabernacle,
Altars, the Arc and all the instruments, sacrifices, washinges, feasts, etc.
What do they argue? but (as the holy ghost says) Heb. 10.7.
a remembrance of sin every year, and so declared that they need a better
sacrifice, which was Christ, by which they should be purged: as it is taught
else where: Heb. 9.15.
For this cause is Christ the mediator of the new testament, that through
death, which was for the redemption of the transgressions that were in the
former testament, they which are called: might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance. So did the 1. Cor. 10.1.2.
rock streaming out water after them, send them to Christ, and the man was a
spiritual meat to show them Christ. Yea this very way of justification, did
the brazen serpent teach them when they were stunge with fiery serpents, in
the wilderness, Numb. 21.4.8.9.
for tempting of God. That as they had nothing in or of themselves, to ease
them or free them from present death, and God caused this brazen serpent to be
set up, that by only looking thereon, they should be healed: so did it
signify that by only faith in Jesus Christ, the sting of sin being done away
we should be justified and saved. As our sweet Savior himself does
testify, saying: Ioh. 3.14.15.
As Moses lift up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the son of man be
lift up, that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal
life. Now the prophets draw near and are ready to protest unto us, and to
show their witness. First to teach us that we cannot be justified nor
satisfy by works: Thus they cry out, Psalm. 150.3.
If thou Lord, straightly markest iniquities, O Lord who shall stand, etc. Psalm.
143.2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall none that
lives be justified. And that faith only justifies God himself says: Esai.
53.11.
By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, for he shall bear
their iniquities. And again, Aback. 2.4.
Behold, he that lifts up himself, his mind is not upright in him, but the
just shall live by faith. Who can speak more plainly? Therefore the Apostle
by this place excludes works, saying: Gal. 3.11.
That no man is justified by the law in the sight of God, it is manifest, for
the just shall live by faith. And again he alleges it, to teach that by
faith we are justified, saying; that by the gospel: Romans 1.17.
The righteousness of God is reueiled from faith to faith, as it is written,
the just shall live by faith. Hear we also what the gospel says: Ioh. 20.31.
These things are written, that ye might believe, that Jesus is the Christ
the son of God, and that in believing ye might have life through his name.
Which is opened in another place, excluding works of merit or satisfaction.
Romans 3.23.
There is no difference, for all have sinned and are deprived of the glory of
God, and are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption which is in
Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation, through faith in
his blood. And that it may appear that works are altogether shut out, and
faith the only instrument of justification, he says a little after, upon
diverse arguments, ver. 28.
We conclude that a man is justified by faith without the works of the law,
and in an other place: Ephesians. 2.8.9.
By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the
gift of God; not of works, least any man should bost himself, unto al which
the church of England subscribeth, and calls the Lord Hier. 26.6.
our righteousness, and says: Artic. 11. of the justification of man.
we are accounted righteous before God, only for the merit of our Lord and
Savior Christ, by faith, and not for our own works or deseruings. Wherefore
that we are justified by faith only, it is a most wholesome doctrine etc. Thus we
see the honor of faith only: that is to justify and save through the
apprehending of Jesus Christ. So learned Abraham, Moses, the Prophets and
Apostles, being taught of God: and so believes and professes the Church and
Realm of England. The Lord increase it more and more in us and among us, in
all heavenly wisdom and spiritual understanding, according to the blessed
Gospel of our loving Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

The seventh article, of the estate of the regenerate, in regard of his
sanctification or inherent righteousness.
7. In this life, the regenerate in Christ, offend in many things, through
sinful concupiscence: and the best works of the just man (were it not for his
faith) could not abide the severity of God.

IN this article are two things, imperfection in the good works, of the
regenerate, and many escapes into evil, and in both the cause is this: that
there is in the regenerate, concupiscence remaining after Baptism, which is
sin, and rebelling against the spirit, it brings forth sin, and staineth our
well doing. Yet being under grace through faith, it should not have dominion
over us, to destroy us, because (as in the former article) we are just and
saved by faith in Christ only, so that the gift of regeneration and newnes of
life, is but as it were a thing begun in this life; as the knowledge of a
child is imperfect: But when corruption and mortality shall be done away, in
the resurrection of the just: we shall be delivered into the glorious liberty of
the sons of God, and then shall we be perfect, resting in the place, 2. Pet.
3.13.
Wherein dwells righteousness. This imperfection you shall see in Abraham, if
you consider, how through weakness, he Genesis 12. and 20. and 16. and 11.
twice hazarded his wives honesty, to save his own life: that his wife
devised, and he consented, to take his bond servant; lastly that he grieved to
put away the bond servant and her son, although God accepting for their faiths
sake the good works of his servants, does cover their sins, and therefore does
not bewray, or express Abraham's wants in the good things for which he is
commended, as namely and especially in offering up of his son Isaac: yet for
so much as the holy ghost declares, that the excellency and Heb. 11.6.17
goodness of them stood in this, that they were done by faith and so by faith
pleased God: it argues, that God covers their corruption, in his free
covenant of grace, to encourage all other his children; that although her
works cannot be but vnferfect, yet they would walk in faith and truth as did
their father Abraham: A witness hereof was his alter wherein he offering prayer
and sacrifices, to be accepted in Christ, did by this manner of doing,
acknowledge his wants even in the best of his dooinges: otherwise he needed
not to approach unto God, under the shadow of a mediator. But that which is
not so plainly set down in Abraham, is more apparently reueiled in his seed by
Moses. Moses, Aaron, and Miriam, who seemed to be the most sanctified of six
hundred thousand, are yet found guilty, by their works, of Gods displeasure.
Exodus 32.
Aaron makes the golden calfe: Number. 12.
Miriam for murmuring against Moses is made a leaper for certain days: and
Cap. 20.10.11.12.
Moses for his unadvised words, that he sanctified not God at the waters of
Meribah, has this mark of imperfection set upon him, that he must not pass
over Jordan, into that good land, which was promised to their fathers, and for
which he brought Israel out of Egypt. There have you Leuit. 12. and 13. and
14. and 15
a punishment for him that smites his neighbor unawares, or against his will,
and 4. and 5.
there have you a sacrifice for the magistrate, near whose city any man is
found slain, yea there is a sacrifice for the leaper, the running issue, for
women newely delivered of child, and for touching any unclean thing, for
unwittingly speking or doing any evil which one perceives not, all sins of
ignorance had their sacrifice: what do all these mean, but the sin of
concupiscence and imperfection in the regenerate. And when he says thou Exodus
20.17. Romans 7.7.
shall not lust, he declares plainly that this concupiscence in the regenerate
is sin, as the holy Apostle does expound it. And as touching the want or
uncleanness in good works, there is an especial feast Leuit. 16.
of reconciliation, to purge the holy sanctuary, the tabernacle of the
congregation, to cleanse the alter, and to make atonement, for the priest and
for all the people of the congregation, and that this shall be don once every
year, where in every soul shall humble himself: what does this argue; but
that the best things and works of the best men are unclean, and have need to
be cleansed by faith in Jesus Christ's holy sacrifice. But the prophets speak
yet more plainly: First the Psalmist says: Psalm. 19.12.
Who can understand his faults? cleanse me from secret faults: Psalm. 119.5.
O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes. Psalm. 141.4.
Set a watch before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips, incline not my
heart unto evil etc. These words show directly and expressly the sinful
concupiscence in man regenerate, to cause sin unawares and secret, and that
the children of God, saw their own inhabilitie unto good things: and that no
regenerate man could do all Gods commandments, especially at all times; to
which the preacher accords saying: Eccl. 7.22.
Surely there is no man just in the earth, that does good and sins not: and
as touching the sin of their good works, they teach the Church to confess
and say: Esai 69.6.
We have been all as an unclean things, and all our righteousness, as filthy
cloutes, upon this the gospel speaking of the regenerate says, Gal. 5.17.
The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and
these are contrary one to an other, so that ye cannot do the same things
that ye would, wherefore the regenerate man confesses this and says: Romans
7.19.
I do not the good things which I would, but the evil which I would not, that
do I, which shows expressly the imperfection of the regenerate and
righteous man in this life, that he has sin in him and cannot but sin;
yea in his best deeds. For where such resistance is, there must needs be
weakness, and sin; and therefore in this place, ver. 7.
concupiscence in the regenerate is directly called sin. And Saint Jacob. 3.2.
James confesses that in many things we sin all. And that we may further
see our imperfection in our best doings; this also does the regenerate 1. Cor.
4.4.
acknowledge, that although in some one thing he do know nothing by him self
(as the Apostle in his ministry) yet he is not thereby justified, thereby
teaching that a good man cannot see what escapes there be in his perfectest
doings, as God can: therefore he will not clear himself, no not in that wherein
he cannot accuse himself: for seeing as elsewhere he affirms Romans 7.21.
When he would do good, evil is present with him: it must needs follow that
although the regenerate man do not in every action perceive it, yet this evil
concupiscence which is always present with him, does make his good deeds
imperfect and sin, that it cannot answer to the righteousness of the law,
nor stand before Gods judgment seat: if he should judge by man's deeds,
according to the law, and not by his faith according to the gospel, and
therefore the spirit of God 1. Ioh. 5.3.4.
teaches that the reason why Gods commandments are not grievous to the
believer, is our faith, by which we have victory over the world. Then may I
boldly conclude, that Abraham, Moses, the Prophets and Apostles felt and found
this doctrine to be true, that in the regenerate man, there is sinful
concupiscence, which dwelling in our hearts, and resisting the spirit, does not
only make us sin in many things, but also stayneth our best deeds, with
grievous spots of corruption and imperfection in Gods sight: so that only
faith in Christ must be our Ephe. 6.16.
shield against the fiery darts of the Devil: and 1. Pet. 1.5.
by faith only does God preserve us through his power unto eternal salvation.
And this is for certainty the doctrine, which the church of England now
holds: For we publish to all the world; that Although (for Christ sake)
Artic. 9. of original sin.
there is no condemnation to the regenerate and believing, yet concupiscence in
it self is very sin; and that Artic. 12. of good works.
our good works, which are fruits of faith, and follow after justification,
cannot put away our sins, and endure the severity of Gods judgment. And that
Artic. 15. Christ only without sin.
Christ only was without sin, as a lamb without spot, but we, although we be
baptized, and borne again in Christ, yet we offend in many things. Apolog.
cap. 19. diuis. 1.
The most righteous person is an unprofitable servant: the law of God is
perfect, and requires of us perfect and full obedience; we are able by no
means to fulfill that law in this worldly life: Therefore it is clear that in
this article also, we consent and agree to the most ancient and catholic
faith, of the fathers, law, Prophets, and Apostles of Christ.

The eight article, of the right place and use of good works.
8. Good works are the fruits of the justified Christians, and do make known
their true and lively faith: and where they are not, their faith is dead.

THis article does declare, that although, by faith only we are just in Gods
sight, and made heirs of salvation, without any works of our own, as causes
adiuuant and concurrent, and that the law cannot justify or save any man: yet
in the true religion, allowed of God, good works are not excluded altogether,
neither is the law so abolished, as that it were not our duty to live godly
and uprightly according to the law. But according to the law of justice they
having no place in the matter and causing of salvation should yet have their
own proper right, place, and honor, according to their dignity, use and
virtue. For if by the law and good works we all have been justified, it had
been their due place, to have joined them in that article of justification, and
to have honored them with the glory of merit and deserving: but because we
men are so corrupt that in this life, our good works, attain not, to the
righteousness which the law exacteth: we must grant them a lower place, even
so great dignity as they do properly and naturally require. Namely that it is
1 Thessalonians. 4.3.4.5.
Gods pleasure, that they whom he freely iustifyeth by his grace, and cleanses
by faith, should not wallow in the puddle and filth of sin, like the gentiles
who know not God; but show themselves to be the redeemed of the Lord, his
saints and children, by their godly life and honest conversation. And for this
cause sanctifying those whom he justifies, he would have them approve their
faith by their good works, as it is written, Ephesians. 2.10.
We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God
has ordained that we should walk in them: 1. Ioh. 3.9.
whosoever is borne of God sins not: for his seed remains in him etc. In
which two places, first you may observe our sanctification, in the words,
creation and seed. For by the one is signified our new birth and renewing of
the holy ghost, and by the other the spirit sanctifying, which as seed
begins a godly life in us. Secondly our faith in being in Christ and gods
children: for we are no otherwise in Christ and gods children, but by faith.
The doctrine of these places agrees with the article, that they which are made
Gods children by faith, are so far sanctified and renewed by Gods spirit, that
they walking a more upright course of life then infidels, do make manifest
their faith by their works, and they which be otherwise have no faith. Here
me thinks I see Abraham, approouing himself to have a lively faith, by a
most constant change of life, in following of God, and attending upon his
word. First he frankely left Genesis 12.1.3.8. Heb. 11.8.9.
his country and kindred, and forsook all strange religions and idolatry, to
follow God: Secondly, he contentedly abode in the land of Canaan as in a
strange land, and walking from place to place remained in tents, and in every
place showed his godly devotion in making an altar, and calling upon the name
of the Lord: Cap. 13.8.
he kindly yielded to his nephew Lot, and 14.19.
for avoiding of contention: and 24.1. and 18.23. and 20.17.
charitablie rescued him when he was taken prisoner: carefully provided a wife
for his son Isaac: fervently entreated for the City of Sodom, and meekly
prayed for him that had taken away his wife: and 23. and 25.
decently provided for his wives burial: and wisely before his death set an
order between his children, concerning his substance, according to Gods word.
And is Cap. 18.19.
honorably commended by God himself for his good instruction to his household,
children, and posterity, that they might walk in the ways of the Lord. But
above all other he approved his faith in this, that upon Gods commandment, he
so readily offered up his son Isaac, being (after Ismaels expulsion) his
only son, his beloved son, and concerning whom he had received the
promise of life and salvation, and the establishment of the covenant: by this
work, he made known to men and Angels, that he had a true and a lively
faith, whereupon Saint James interpreting this fact of Abraham to be wrought by
faith, brings this example to prove, that faith without works is dead. And
thus he speaks: Jacob. 2.20.21.
But will thou understand O vain man, that faith without works is dead: Was
not Abraham our father justified through works, when he offered Isaacke his
son upon the Altar? See thou not that faith wrought with his works, and
through the works the faith was made perfect: and the scripture was fulfilled
which says, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness
etc. Here I am enforced, because of S. James manner of speaking, to clear a
doubt before I can conclude this point. For in as much, as Saint Paul Romans 4.
contendeth that Abraham was not justified at all, by works, but by faith
without works: and here saint James seems to auoutch the contrary, saying,
was not Abraham our father justified through works: it is to be considered how
these two may be reconciled. For the clearing of which difference. I answer,
that in deed they both use one word, but not in one meaning, nor to one and
the same end: For Saint Paul by this word (justified) means, that God
freely imputes righteousness unto him as namlie, Read Romans 4.1.4.5.6.15.16. and
cap. 3.24.25.28.
justified by faith, in saint Paul's mind is as much as to say: righteousness is
imputed unto him for his beleefes sake, and for nothing else. And his end was
to prove that no man can be justified by works in the sight of God, but that
this blessedness to be just before God, comes by faith without works. But
Saint James having to do with such as boasted of faith, and took to them
selves license to sin, had this end; namely, to prove, that faith without
works was in deed no faith properly, and in the sight of God but a dead faith,
and therefore by this word justified means only this, that by works a man is
declared and made known, tn be justified by faith, that is, that he has not a
vain, dead and fruitles faith. And therefore seeing that Abraham was so
justified, that is, declared, and made known to be a just man, of a true and
lively faith, testified by such a notable work: he being our father we must
be found to have such a woorking faith: or else we cannot be known, to be any
other but hypocrites, of a dead and counterfeit faith. And that this is the
true and proper meaning of Saint James: First consider, that this word
(justified) is diversely used, and to be taken in the holy scriptures (as all
other words be) according to the scope and purpose of every place. For Romans
6. where he says: Romans 6.7.
He that is dead is justified from sin; there it signifies to be free, as it
is by some translated. And in Cap. 7.29.
Luke it is said that the Publicans justified God, being baptized with the
Baptism of John; where it signifies, to praise God for his mercy, goodness,
and righteousness. In Math. 11.19.
Matthew it is said: Wisdom is justified of her children; where it signifies
acknowledged or professed or declared just. In which places this word of
necessity has such sense and meaning, as the scope of the several places
aforde. So here Saint James intention being, to teach the vanity of him, that
boasts of faith, and yet lives wickedly; by all reason must be understood to
mean by the word justified, the declaring of the righteousness of his faith, by
his works. And this will easily appear, if you mark his propounding of this
question, the order of his reasoning and his conclusion. First his proposition,
verse. 14. What avails it my brethren, though a man says he has faith, when
he has no works? can the faith save him? where you may perceive, he speaks
against pratlers and hypocrites, which say they have faith: and secondly that
such a faith which is only in saying, and brings forth no works cannot
save: where you are to note that he proposes to himself* the confutation of a
vain and idle faith, which is only in saying, and that he does not enter to
entreat of this question; whether faith only (being true and lively) do
justify, or so far to prefer works, that they justify or save us, with or
without faith. And this meaning does all the order of his reasoning declare:
First ver. 15.16.17. where he teaches, that as to make a show of liberality
in words, and in deed to minister nothing, does beway but a counterfeit
liberality: So faith without works is dead in it self, where mark that he
says, in it self, or by it self: for thereby he shows that if it were the
true justifying and lively faith in it self, it would bring forth lively
fruits to declare the same: and hereupon he opens the meaning of his
proposition ver. 18. that a man is to show his faith by his works, namely
that it is a thing, which a man will ask for, of him that says he has faith:
then ver. 9. he shows that such an idle faith, is that of the devil, which
believes there is a GOD and trembles: So these vain pratlers may have a
general belief, and sometime tremble to think upon Gods power, and yet never
have the true faith in Jesus Christ which justifies: wherewith whosoever is
rightly endowed he has Christ Romans 8. ver. 9.10.
dwelling in him by his spirit, by whom the body of sin is slain, and the
life of righteousness is as it were a new created: as it is said else where, 2.
Cor. 5.17.
if any be in Christ he is a new creature: but the devils and wicked men
destitute of this true faith, are void of this grace, and therefore do not
bring forth good works. Now then Saint James bringing in the story of
Abraham, offering up his son, upon this proposition and order of reasoning:
and namely prefixing these words, But will thou understand O thou vain man,
that faith without works is dead. What other thing can he mean by the word
(justified,) except he abruptly go contrary to all his own former speech,
but only the declaring, showing, and making known of his faith, not to be
dead, vain or only in saying, and not that works make a man just before
GOD, which appears by his reason in this example, in that he says: Faith
wrought with his works and through works was faith made perfect, which
signifies that in offering up of his Son; his faith wrought to bring forth
this work, and that this work being achieved, it made manifest that he had
a true and perfect faith, his works then in Saint James meaning, perfected his
faith, that is made it appear perfect, but it did not meddle with the making
of the man Abraham to be just and righteous in the eyes of GOD by that work so
wrought. And then adding: The scripture was fulfilled which says, Abraham
believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness; he understands that
the offering up of his Son, did make manifest that Abraham believed in deed
and a right: and therefore that scripture was approved true: that God imputed
righteousness to him (not for a vain saying and hypocritical dissimulation)
but for a true belief and an unfeigned faith in Gods promise. In the same
sense, verse 25. he alleges the story of Rahab. Now lastely the conclusion
being by a comparison, of a man to be dead, which has not a spirit that so
faith without works is dead: shows that there is a spiritual working of
faith, which if it appear not by works, it declares that faith is dead in it
self. So that Saint James speaks only against a dead faith, meaning not, by
any terms to derogate from a lively faith, as though it had help of works in
the matter of justification before God. Further if we consider the story of
Genesis out of which it is taken, you shall find that Saint James could not
have any other meaning. For it was before Genesis 15.16. and 17.11.25. and 21.5.
and 22.
Ismaell was borne, that Abraham was justified by his faith, without respect of
works: Then Ismaell was fourteen years old when Isaac was borne, and
Isaac was of some pretty years, that he was able to bear a bundel of wood
wherewith he should have been burned; therefore it must needs be between
twenty and thirty years, after the time of Abraham's justifying, that he
offered up Isaac: which being so, it cannot be understood, that that work
justified him, least it should destroy and Read Romans 4 10.11. and Gal. 3.17.
disanul his justifying by faith so long before. And therefore God himself does
express the power and use of this work, not any whit to justify him, but only
to make his faith to be known: where he says: Genesis 22.12.
Now I know that thou fear God: seeing for my sake thou have not spared
thine only son. And therefore does the holy ghost interpret it thus. Heb.
11.17.
By faith Abraham offered up Isaac when he was tried etc. teaching us that
this was a fruit of the just man's faith, and not a work to make him just or
meritorious in Gods sight. Therefore we may boldly conclude, that Saint James
in saying; Abraham was justified by works when he offered up his son does
only contend for this, that it was of necessity, that faith should be
declared and made known by works, because our father Abraham did so, by
works show himself to be justified by faith, therefore we his children are
bastards and not sons, if our faith be idle and unfruitful, even as Christ
says to the Jews: Ioh. 8.39.
If ye were Abraham's children ye would do the works of Abraham, which words
do directly show this article, we have in hand. First that Abraham did works
approouing his faith: and secondly that this also is to be looked for of his
children (that is of all believers) that they quite themselves to have a true
faith, by their good life and obedience to God: or else they be no believers,
or children of Abraham. The same faith does the church of England profess
namely: Articl. 12. of good works.
Good works are the fruits of faith, and follow after justification: they do
spring out necessarily of a true and lively faith, in so much as by them, a
lively faith may be as lively known, as a tree discerned by the fruit, and
again; Apolog. cap, 20. diuis. 1.
A true faith is lively and can in no wise be idle. Exodus 20.
Moses consent in this doctrine may be found, where God pronounces the law,
of the ten commandments teaching all duties of good works to God and man:
saying, I am the Lord thy God, and upon this infers all their obedience to
those commandments, for what is, I am the Lord thy God? but the covenant of
faith, to be their God, in the promise of Christ, upon this he requiring
obedience in a godly life, does insinuate, that they which profess the faith
that God is their God, must declare their faith by obedience to his
commandments; and therefore he says in an other place. Deuteronomy. 6.11.
Beware thou forget not the Lord thy God, not keeping his commandments etc.
which shows plainly, that where disobedience is there is no faith; for how
can he have faith, that forgets him, in whom he should believe. Hereupon,
all their disobedience, rebelling and provoking of God in the wilderness, is
said to be this; Psalm. 78.22.32. Heb. 4.1.
They believe not God. And this does Moises aim at, when he says; Thou have
set up the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep
his ordinances etc. whereby it appears, that unto faith in couenanting with
GOD, this is an inseparable consequent: that if we embrase God by faith, we
ought to follow his commandments by our deeds, and he that does not this
latter bewraieth that he has not, with a true heart and faith received the
former: Therefore the prophets which expound the law, in the person of God say
thus: Mat. 1.6.
A son honors his father and a servant his Master; If then I be a father,
where is my honor? and if I be a master where is my fear etc. Now we know
that we are sons no way but by faith: Therefore this prophet intends, that
we are not joined to the Lord by faith, either as his people, children or
servants, or that he is our God, father and Lord; except our deeds show the
vnfainednes of our faith, in honor and fear. Therefore says an other prophet:
Psalm. 116.10.
I believed and therefore I spoke, making it a most assured thing, that a
lively faith, cannot be secret and idle, but will show it self, by the
outward deeds and namely profession. Therefore a just and righteous man in
the prophets is thus described: Psalm. 37.30.
The mouth of the righteous will speak of wisdom, and his tongue will talk
of judgment, for the law of his God is in his heart etc. Who is righteous, but
the believer, and how are we righteous but by faith? this teaches then, that
the believer, having the law of his God in his heart, cannot but bring forth
good works, both in word and in deed: even as the unbeliever cannot bring
forth any other but evil deeds: therefore by the prophets, evil doers and
believers are made contraries, as it is written: Verse 9.
Evil doers shall be cut off: but they which wait upon the Lord shall
inherit the land. And again, Psalm. 32.10.
Many sorrows come to the wicked, but he that trusts in the Lord, mercy
shall compass him.

But the Gospel does show this, yet more brightly, as namely where it is
said: Gal. 5.6.
In Jesus Christ neither circumcision, avails any thing, neither
uncircumcision, but faith which works by love: that is to say, faith does
not only take hold on Christ, for righteousness: but also buddeth out before
God and man, the sweet blossoms of love, in the works of piety and honesty.
And therefore Christ challenges them for no believers in him, which walk
disobediently, saying: Luke 6.46.
Why call ye me master, master, and do not the things that I speak. Whereupon
the blessed Apostle is not afeard to say, that he which is not a new man in
holiness and righteousness, but runs greedily after his lusts in
wickedness, has not Ephesians. 4.10.11.
learned Christ as the truth is in Jesus. And S. John speaking of the hope of
Gods children, what they shall be at the joyful appearance of Christ: constantly
affirms, that 1. Ioh. 3.3.
every man who has this hope, purges himself even as he is pure. And
again, Verse. 10.
In this are the children of God known, and the children of the Devil:
whosoever does not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not his
brother. So that as clearly as the sun is seen to shine in the midst of
the day: it is most apparent both by Abraham, Moses, and the prophets and also
by Christ and his Apostles, that our faith and doctrine taught in England
touching works, is most sound and catholic: namely that works necessarily
follow faith, declare it to be a true and a lively faith, and he that lives
licentiously and wickedly has not faith.

The ninth Article, of the means of religion, which is the word of God.
9 The word of God, is the only and perfect rule of religion: teaching all
things whatsoever is necessary unto salvation, and the same is fully, wholly,
and only contained in the holy and canonical scriptures of the old and new
testament.

IN this Article it is first necessary to know distinctly what is this word of
God. For some men confound this with the second person in the trinity, because
the son of God is called the word by the holy Evangelist Ioh. 1.1. and 1.
Ioh. 5.7.
S. John. Where they are to know, that we consider in God two things, what he
is in himself, and what outwardly he does or comes from him. Now the word
which is the son of God which is the second person in the trinity, is
always in God, very God as we truly say, The father, the word, (or the
son) and the holy ghost are over the same God. But the word of God which we
here speak of, is the knowledge and revelation of Gods will touching
godliness: therefore called Gods word; because it comes not, nor can come by
the will or understanding of man, or any creature: but by God himself is
delivered to his saints, as it were spoken by Almighty God: as we see in our
first parente Genesis 3.
Adam, after his fall, he was dead in sin, he had no will, wit nor
understanding, touching salvation: till God called him and taught him by his
word, and gave him the promise of Christ, saying: The seed of the woman should
break the serpents head. For which cause it is called Ephesians. 1.9. Colos. 25.26.
The mystery of Gods will. Which God in diverse manners and in diverse times has
reueiled to his church, Numb. 12. c. 7.8. 2. Pet. 1.21.
In dark speeches by dreams and vision, and openly and plainly as unto Moses,
and by inspiration of the holy Ghost. Of which it is thus written: Heb. 1.1.2.
At sundry times and in diverse manners God spoke in the old time to our
fathers by the prophets: in these last days he has spoken to us by his son.
And therefore these phrases in the prophets are plentiful. The Esai. 1. Hier. 1.
Lord has said: The word of the Lord came etc. And many such like as all men
know which are acquainted with the holy scripture. Now this being understood,
we are to observe in this Article two things: The use and power of this word,
and the true touchstone how we may know, or where we may find this word. The
first is touching religion, that Gods word is the only rule thereof, which
only teaches the doctrine of righteousness and salvation. And this is very
well to be seen in the story of Abraham, that he had no savor of religion,
before God taught him by his word, neither can we find that he added any thing
of his own. And this will evidently appear if you consider how God first
preached unto him Gal. 3.8. Genesis 12.1.2.3.
the gospel, and so from Cap. 15. and 17 and 18.
time to time revealed more and more unto him: and that God acknowleged him to
be a Genesis 20.7.
prophet and such an one, as would Cap. 18.19.
command his sons, and his household after him, that they keep the way of the
Lord. What is all this else, but that God by his word taught him the true
religion and godliness, what he should believe and do. As for Moses, he
makes the word of God so absolute a rule, that the Church ought not Deuteronomy. 4.2.
to put any thing to it, nor take any thing from it, and the prophets are also
very confident in this point, saying: Proverb. 30.5
Every word of God is pure, put nothing to his word, least he reprove thee,
and thou be found a liar. And the reason of this perfection is plain, because
it makes, Cap. 2.1.9.
a man to understand righteousness and judgment, and equity, and every good
path, and to exclude all men's inventions from ordaining any part of religion,
God says by his prophets, that Esai. 29.13.
The wisdom of the wise shall perish, because their fear toward God was
taught by the precept of men. Which Christ intepreteth to this sense: Mat. 15.9.
That they worshipped God in vain, teaching for doctrines, men's precepts. If
this suffice, not then let us hear this point in express words of the
Prophet: Psalm. 19.7.
The law of the Lord is perfect converting the soul. So likewise our Savior
Christ in the gospel gave to his Apostles and Church no other thing but the
Ioh. 17.8.
word, which God his father gave him: pronouncing, that this is Verse. 17.
The truth by which they should be sanctified Cap. 15.3.
made clean, Cap. 8.31.32
and free from sin, Cap. 5.24.
and by hearing thereof they might have everlasting life. Therefore the
Apostles finding the absolute sufficiency thereof, do forsake all wisdom of
men for the same, calling it the words of eternal life. Cap. 6.68.
Hereof it is that Saint James says: Cap. 1.19.
Be swift to hear, and slow to speak, because we men must not put forth our
own wisdom, in matters of faith and religion, but submit our selves to
learn of God: as he after expounds, saying Verse. 21.
Receive with meekness the word that is grafted in you, which is able to save
your souls. And thereupon Saint Paul condemns all shows of Coloss. 2.22.23.
wisdom in voluntary religion, after the commandment and doctrines of men,
giving charge that no man Verse. 8.
spoil us through philosophy and vain deceit, according to the traditions
of men, according to the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. And the
ground of this, is this, that in Verse. 3.
Christ are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Now as touching
the second point which is the touchstone to try the word of God, where and how
to find and know it. This is The holy inspired writings of the old and new
Testament: wherein is contained all the word of God touching religion,
necessary for the Church and Gods elect to know for their salvation. Which
although it were not written in the time of Abraham and of the fathers, but
after by Moses, the Prophets, the Apostles, and Evangelists: yet is it so
absolute a rule and canon, that we ought not to believe any thing of faith and
religion touching salvation, to be or to have been the word of God which may
not be rightly gathered, taught or proved, confirmed or allowed by the writings
of Moses and the prophets in the old testament, and in the new testament by the
Evangelists and Apostles of Jesus Christ. And this will appear very
evidently to the conscience of all faithful and wise hearted Christians, if
they consider what the spirit of God teaches in all these times. For the
first (a most glorious writer) was the Deuteronomy. 5.22.
finger of God, writing the ten words in two tables. Then Moses by his
direction, wrote all the Exodus 24.4.
words of the Lord, and a little before his death he wrote the whole Deuteronomy. 31.9.
law and delivered it to the priests the sons of Leui. So that then and from
thenceforth the law written became the canon of the Church, and the only rule
to measure religion by, as may appear, because it was published in this sort:
Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Cursed be he that confirms not all the words of this law, to do them, Cap
30.10.
which is interpreted to be the commandementes and ordinances of the Lord,
written in the book of the law. And Ioshuah being of the same times, knowing
it to be such an absolute rule, charge the people a little before his death,
to Joshua. 23.6.
observe and do all that is written in the book of the law of Moses, that they
turn not there from to the right hand nor to the left. By which it appears
that in his time the writings of Moses were this touchston, to know the word
of God, and as it were the ark of God, wherein the tables of the covenant
written with the finger of God were kept: which will somewhat more be seen, if
you consider with me, that in Moses writings, and in and by nothing else, we
learn all the word of God, revealed and made known to the Church, not only
touching the creation and old world, but also concerning Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, and whatsoever God spoke and would have to be known to be his word in
his time, which he committed to writing for the perpetual use of the people
of God. And after him, God added the pen of the prophets, for the more perfect
manifestation of this word, and mystery of Gods will: and yet so as nothing in
substance did differ from the written law of Moses. Therefore the prophets
pronounce the same writings to be a most perfect Canon, not to be added to nor
taken from, saying after this manner: Esa. 8.20.
To the law and to the testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it
is because there is no light in the^. And again, Malach. 4.4.
Remember the law of Moses my servant, which I commanded him in Horeb, for all
Israel, the statutes and judgments. Here you see that the prophets having the
same spirit of truth to lead them and their pen, which Moses had in his
writings, avouch the perfection of Gods word in Moses books: so far as they
would be understood, to do or speak nothing that should not agree unto that
word, so written, and whosoever did otherwise had not the light in him. Now
because, Moses and the prophets agreed in their writings, in declaring and
making manifest the same truth and word of God, which he would have to be the
known canon and rule of religion: Our Savior Christ rejects all Math. 15.3.
new devises, writing, traditions and customs of men, and sends us to the
Luke 16.29. cap. 24.44.
law and the prophets, bidding us to Ioh. 5.39.
search the scriptures. Which also to be a most certain rule, Saint Peter
says: We have a most sure word of the prophets. And Saint Paul, 2. Tim. 3.16.
The whole scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach
us that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good
works. What can be a more perfect rule or touchstone, then that which is most
sure, inspired of God, profitable every way in righteousness, by which a man may
be absolute and perfect unto all good works. And hereof it comes, that the
writings of the new testament are not a new Canon or additament of rule in
religion, but only a more plain revelation, and fulfilling of that which was
before taught by Moses and the prophets, and therefore you shall find that
Christ and the Apostles every where do approve their doctrine by the
testimonies of the scriptures, of the old testament. Wherefore Paul
acknowledges, that Romans 16.26.
God commanded the preaching of the gospel to be by the scriptures of the
prophets, and Peter Act. 3.22.24.
appealeth to Moses and to all the prophets from Samuel and thenceforth, that
they foretold of those days, that is of the time of the gospel, and the
things which should be manifested therein. And therefore Paul protested that
he Cap. 26.22.
witnessed both to small and great, no other things then those which the
prophets and Moses did say should come. Wherefore the whole scriptures of the
old and new testament, is one and the same rule of religion: Although
peradventure (as is before declared) there may be some difference in ceremony
and manner of government, yet is the first even in those things a witness of
the last, and the last a true and faithful expounder and fulfiller of the
first. Hereof it is that Matthew and the other Evangelists do confirm all the
doctrine and doings of Christ, by several scriptures. Yea those things which
in form and order differ, are yet proved, that so they ought to be by Moses
and the prophets as the ministry of Math. 3.3.
John Baptist, Act. 2.16.
and of the Apostles, Heb. 7.1.12.
the priesthood of Christ, and his changing of the law, 1. Cor. 9.9.13
providing for the ministry, though not by tithes, and many such like. But as
for the most substantial parts of the doctrine of faith and salvation, I hope
it shall appear to the godly Christian, by reading this Chapter throughout,
that there is but one canon and rule of truth. Therefore to conclude, let the
reader observe, that this writing of Gods word is done by the spirit of God, to
this use and end, that we might be sure to know, and how to try, and find
out, what is the word of God, by examining all things, we hear, by the Canon
of the scripture. As did Act. 17.11.
the noble men of Berea. Wherefore Saint Cap. 1.3.4.
Luke affirms, that the end of this writing was, that we might acknowledge
the certainty of those things whereof we have been instructed. And Saint
Paul says, that for the Church Philip. 3.1.
it was a sure thing, and this sure thing is expounded by the Evangelist, who
says: Ioh. 20.21.
These things are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ the
son of God, and that in believing ye might have life through his name.
Therefore as Moses which first wrote, showed the absoluteness of this Canon
of Gods word written by Deuteronomy. 4.2.
forbidding all adding to and taking from: So the last book of this Canon,
seals up all the writings of God with the like admonition: saying, Reuelat.
22.18.
I protest to every one that hears the words of the prophecy of this
book, If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the
plagues that are written in this book.

Now in both parts of this Article, agreeing to all these testimonies of holy
scripture, is the judgment and profession of the Church of England. For we
say: Artic. 20. of the authority of the church.
It is not lawful for the Church to ordain any thing, that is contrary to
Gods word, written: Articl. 6. the doctrine of holy scripture.
Holy scripture contains all things necessary to salvation: so that
whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be
required of any man, that it should be believed as an article of the faith, or
be thought requisite and necessary to salvation etc. Apolog. cap. 9. diuis. 1.
We receive and embrace all the Canonical scriptures, both of the old and new
testament etc. they be the very sure and infallible rule, whereby may be
tried: Whether the Church do swerve or err; and whereunto all ecclesiastical
doctrine, ought to be called to account: and that against these scriptures
neither law, nor ordinance, nor any custom ought to be heard, etc. In all
which we do acknowledge, this most absolute canon of Gods word: agreeing with
Abraham, Moses, the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles.

The tenth Article of the people who follow the right religion: that is, the
Church of God.
10 There is but one Church of God, and the same is catholic and spread over
all the world, holding only the true faith of Christ: and it is made visible
and known by the profession of the same faith: which is in the preaching of
the pure word of God, and right administration of his holy sacraments.

IN this Article is a double description of Christ's Church, first in regard of
the nature, and second, in regard of the visible marks. The nature is in three
things, unity, and universality, and faith: The marks are declared by their
profession, which is preaching and administering the word and sacraments. By
unity we understand, that God has not diverse Churches of diverse sects, in
diverse places or times, but howsoever times and places may have some external
and temporal differences, yet in all times and places, the people whom God
allows and accepts to be his church, are but one mystical body, whereof
Christ is the head: and as it were one sheepfold, whereof Christ alone is
sheapheard. And therefore the Church of the fathers before the law, and the
Church of the Jews under the law, and of the gentiles under the gospel, are
not three Churches but one, in one fellowship with God, by one Savior Jesus
Christ as it is written: Ephesians. 1.1^.
That in the dispensation of the fulness of times, he might gather in one all
things both which are in heaven and which are in earth, even in Christ. Then
must it needs follow, that distance and difference of time and place, nation,
or language, does not disanul this unity, so long as it may be said Act. 15.9.
: God put no difference between them and us after that by faith he had purified
their hearts. By universality we understand that the Church is not tied unto
any one place person, nation, or language, city or country, but as Saint
Peter says: Act. 10.31.
In every nation he that fears God and works righteousness is accepted
with him. How be it in the dispensation of times, there is some difference: for
it pleased God for the wickedness of the nations, for a time to place his holy
oracles and couenantes in that one nation of the Jews, until these last
days, when Christ came and took away the partition wall, and opened the
kingdom of heaven for all people to enter in, and to be made one church with
the Jews. Yet although the sins of the gentiles did shut them out for a
season: God so disposed it that the time of the fathers and Moses and the
prophets do witness that now in the end of the world they should be admitted
into the same fellowship, and no nation barred from being of the Church of God.
The last point in the nature of the church is the chiefest, without which they
cannot be the church: for it is Christ 1. Pet. 3.18.
that brings us to God. And as S. Paul says, Ephe. 2.18.
we both (that is, Jews and gentiles) have an entrance to the father by one
spirit. Therefore this is the true, proper and only being and nature of the
church: That Gal. 3.26.
we are all the sons of God by faith in Jesus Christ, and have 1. Ioh. 1.3.
fellowship one with an other, in the fellowship which we have with the father,
and with his son Jesus Christ. Now this faith and fellowship does appear to
the world by our profession, and that is commonly seen and discerned in all
constituted churches by these two marks, Gods word and sacraments. And this
thou may directly learn in the story of Abraham, first for the nature of
the church, where God preached the gospel to him, there he describes what it
should be: First the universality, when he says, all nations or families of
the earth: secondly the unity, when he propounds the^ united in one seed, in
one and the same happiness. And lastly seeing that this seed is Christ, and this
happiness is the blessed estate we have in the fellowship with God, in whose
presence as the Psalm. 16.^^.
psalm says, is the fulness of joy. It must needs follow, that God herein
taught Abraham, that this should be the nature of his church, To be in his
favor by fath in Jesus Christ. This very thing in all these three respects,
was further showed him, Genesis 17.
in the change of his name, and addition of circumcision, as is plainly
expounded by S. Paul in the fourth to the Romans. Then as touching the marks,
Abraham professed the true and living God and faith in Jesus Christ: which is
testified Genesis 18. and 12. and 15.
by teaching his family the way of the Lord, that is, the word of God and
sacraments, by his altar, circumcision and sacrifices: and so was Abraham's
house known to be the visible church of God as it is written: Genesis 20.22. 1
Cor. 14.25.
God is with thee in all that thou do. And verily such is the church of
England, which having bin taught of God as Abraham was, does also believe
concerning the Church of God in the very same manner: For we say, that Apolog.
part.
We believe that there is one Church of God, and that the same is not shut up
(as in times past among the Jews) into some one corner or kingdom, but that
it is catholic and universal dispersed through out the whole world. So that
there is now no nation which may truly complain, that they be shut out and
may not be one of the church and people of God: and that this Church is the
kingdom, the body and the spouse of Christ, and that Christ alone is the
prince of this kingdom, and that Christ alone is the head of this body, and
that Christ alone is the bridegroom of this spouse. And again: Artic. 19. of
the church.
The visible church of Christ is a congregation of faithful men, in the which
the pure word of God is preached, and the sacraments be duly ministered,
according to Christ's ordinance etc. Which our belief (if you mark it)
nothing differs from that of Abraham's time, and is further confirmed by Moses.

Moses tought Israel this unity and fellowship of faith in one Church: when
he gave them 1. Cor. 10.1.2.
all one spiritual Manna, and made them all drink of the spiritual rock,
which followed them, which rock was Christ, and he taught them that there
should be an universality; namely that the gentiles should be of the church as
well as they, and together with them, where he says, Deuteronomy. 32.43.
Sing ye gentiles with his people, Which the Romans 15.10.
Apostle does interpret to mean the calling and ingrafting of all nations,
into the same fellowship of the Church. The marks are clear in his time. For
they had the preaching of Deuteronomy. 4. verse. 6.
Gods word and nothing else, and the administration of such sacraments as God
did ordain for that time, as the Exodus 12.
passover and other sacrifices: therefore Moses taught and constituted no
other church then is before described.

But the Prophets open this matter more fully in many places, but I will only
recite that where God says concerning Christ Esai. 49.6.
: It is a small thing that thou should be my servant, to raise up the tribes
of Jacob, and to restore the desolations of Israel: I will also give thee for a
light, that thou may be my salvation unto the end of the world. Where is
plain to be seen the universality of the Church, in that all nations are
restored in and by Christ as well as the Jews, the unity and fellowship with
God is plain in that, one Christ saves Jews and gentiles. Wherefore in
anohter place it is said Zachar. 13.1
: In that day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David, and to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness: Cap. 14.8.
And in that day shall their waters of life go out from Jerusalem, half of
them toward the east sea, and half of them toward the uttermost sea, and
shall be both in summer and winter. And the Lord shall be king over all the earth:
in that day shall there be one Lord, and his name shall be one. What is this
fountain but Christ which is of the house of David, and what is the opening of
this fountain and flowing of waters, but the preaching of the gospel, as the
prophets also say: Esai. 2.3.
The law shall go forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord out of Jerusalem.
What is this east and uttermost sea, this one Lord and king of all the earth.
But that the Church should be made universal and one in Christ, being of one
faith throughout the world. And they note out the visible marks of the church:
first the preaching of Gods pure word, where prophesying of the church of the
gentiles it is said Micah. 4.2.
: Many nations shall come and say, come and let us go up to the mountain of
the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways
and we will walk in his paths, etc. And concerning the sacraments: Christ
Malac. 3.3.
shall sit down to try and fine the silver, he shall even fine the sons of
Leui, and purify them as gold and silver, that they may bring offeringes unto
the Lord in righteousness etc. Whereby is taught, that where God gathers his
Church by Christ, there he places his word, and there he teaches them to
worship him aright, which as it was by offeringes in the law, so it is by
sacraments in the gospel: therefore by these things they are to be
discerned. For when these things failed, and the people Esai. 5 24. Hier.
16.10.11 Hos. 8. and 1. and 2.
cast of Gods word, and his ordinances in sacrifices and sacraments, God cast
them out of his sight, and out of his grace, as a people without the true
marks of Gods church.

In the gospel this universality and unity in the nature of the church is
taught, where Christ says: Ioh. 10.16.
other sheep I have also which are not of this fold: them also must I bring,
and they shall hear my voice: and there shall be one shepherd and one fold.
Where when he says other sheep not of this fold, he signifies that in
election and promise the gentiles should be of the Church: this notes the
universality, and when he says he will bring them and they shall hear his
voice, he understands their calling, and ingrafting into the same church in
the same unity of faith. And lastly it should be but one, as one fold under
shepherd: which he expounds where he sends Math. 28.19.
his Apostles to teach all nations. The end whereof (as the Apostle Ephesians. 3.6.
teaches) is that the gentiles should be inheritors also, and of the same body
and partakers of his promise in Christ by the gospel. For which cause it is
said. Gal. 3.28.
There is neither Jew nor Grecian, bond nor free, there is neither male nor
female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus, that is to say, there is no
exception of country, estate or sex, but if they believe in Christ Jesus, they
are all of the same true and catholic church as citizens of the same city,
children of the same house, and stones of the same building, built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the chief corner
stone. The outward marks are set upon this church thus, when the Apostles
preached. Act. 2.41.42.
Then they that gladly received his word were baptized, and the same day were
added to the church about three thousand souls, and they continued in the
Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and breaking of bread and prayers. Where you
may see, that the doctrine of the Apostles, which is the word of God, and the
sacraments, are marks of separation, to discern the church of Christ from
others. Hereof it is, that S. Paul commends the church of Colosse, to have
the right badge of gods people, where he said, that in his spirit, he saw
Colos. 2.5.
there good order and steadfast faith in Christ: for amongst other things the
due administration of the sacraments, was a good note of their good order, as
in the contrary the 1. Cor. 11.17 20.34.
Corinthians are reproved: and that the right preaching and profession of
Christ shows their steadfast faith, the Romans, and the Thessalonians are
greatly extolled by this mark, that Romans 1.8. 1 Thessalonians. 1.8.
their faith was published throughout the whole world, and spread abroad in all
quarters. And that you may perceive the virtue of these marks, and first for
the preaching of the pure word of God, harke^ what the holy Apostle affirms,
when the ministers 1. Cor. 14.24.25.
prophecy (that is preach) If there come in one, that believes not, or
unlearned, (that is, who never knew the difference of the church of God from
others) he is rebuked of all men, he is judged of all (that is, all the
preaching ministry, by the pure word of God, do show him his wretched and
evil estate) and so are the secrets of his heart made manifest, and so he will
fall down with his face, and worship God, and say plainly, that God is in
you of a truth. What is all this? but that he discerns by the preaching, that
they are a people among whom God dwells, that is to say the visible church of
God: The like he teaches us of the sacraments, where he says, 1. Cor. 10.21.
You cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of the devils etc. which
words manifestly teach, that the sacraments are such a mark, proper to the
church, that they which be in the church and partakers thereof, must separate
themselves from all pollutions of idolatry and abominations of the heathen and
wicked men, and to be known to be of the visible church of God by the right
use and celebration of Christ's holy mysteries: as it is also written, 1. Cor.
11.26.
As often as you eat this bread and drink this cup, ye show the Lords death
till he come: When then the true English Christian shall see that both in
profession and practice, the church of England has the very nature of of the
true church of GOD, and also by the true marks, it is visibly known and
discerned, to be a right member of the universal body of Christ: he shall
have great cause to glorify almighty GOD, that has vouchsafed him that
mercy and honor, to be of that fellowship, which is with God the father and
with his son Jesus Christ agreeing with Abraham, Moses, the Prophets, and
with Christ and his Apostles.

The eleventh article, of the exercises in religion, in general: how to be
used in the church.
11. We ought to worship God only, and namely to pray to him alone.

THis article is plain needing no explanation. And we may see it clearly in
the story of Abraham, that he being called from the Josh. 24.2.3.
woorship of strange Gods; for ever after woorshipped the only true and living
God: Genesis 12. ver. 14. and 15. and 17. etc.
to him he made his alter and called upon his name, swore by his name, and in
all religious woorship, as sacrifice, circumcision and vows, he did still keep
himself always to worship God only. Such is the mind of the church of
England. For we say: Artic. 22. of purgatory.
The Romish doctrine concerning purgatory, pardons, worshipping, and
adoration, as well of images as of relics, and also invocation of Saints, is
a fond thing, vainly feigned, and grounded upon no warrant of Scripture, but
rather repugnant to the word of God. For hereby we understand, that the
Scripture teaches, that we should worship God only and pray to him only,
and therefore we condemn al woorship and prayers, which are not made, given
and directed to God only, and therefore we command the ten commandments to
be read in our churches, to teach men to acknowledge one god and him only to
worship. Moses also (if we will here him) shows the same truth. First in the
affirmative he says: Deuteronomy. 6.13.
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God and serve him and swear by his name, which
words our Savior Christ Matthew. 4.10.
alleging in their meaning shows that they command us to worship and serve
God only. And in the negative Moses, Deuteronomy. 4.14. etc. cap. 12.2.3. etc. cap.
13. and 21.8. Number. 6.24.
testifying that God showed the people no image of the likeness of any thing
whatsoever, forbids them the making of all images of the likeness of any
thing whatsoever, and the worshipping of any such image or likeness of any
thing whatsoever, directing them in all causes to turn to him, to pray to him,
and to bless in his name. To this also accord the Prophets, in whom God
speaks on this manner: Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me etc. Esai 42.8.
I am the Lord this is my name, and my glory will I not give unto an other,
neither my praise to carved images: Cap. 45.23.
I have sworn by my self the word is gone out of my mouth, in righteousness
and shall not return, That every knee shall bow unto me, and every toonge
shall swear by me. And therefore on the one side he reprooueth them, Zepan.
1.5.
which woorship and swear by the Lord and Malcham: that is, do any way
communicate Gods worship to others: and on the other side teaches us to pray
only to God, as it is written: Psalm. 62.8.
Trust in him alwaie ye people, power out your hearts unto him, for GOD is our
hope: Psalm. 95.6.
Let us worship and fall down and kneel before the Lord our maker.

And this is also the rule of the Gospel: as where our Savior teaches us to
pray: Matthew. 6.9.
Our father which art in heaven etc. saying when ye pray, pray after this
manner, there you may perceive all other excluded: For we cannot say to any
other, Our father which art in heaven, or Thine is the kingdom, the power and
the glory, therefore if this be the manner of prayer, we must pray to none
other but to God. And the Apostles in their doctrine Act. 14.15. 1 Thessalonians. 1.9.
called men from dumme idols to worship and serve the living God. And that I
may not use many words in so manifest a matter, I only observe this, that
this phrase, Revel. 19.10 and 22.9. Act. 10.25.26. Romans 1.23.25.
Worship GOD, in the new Testament, shuts out all creatures men and angels
from all manner of religious worship: which service being due to him, should be
given or done to none other. And so it is very apparent, that in this article
we are of the most ancient and Catholic faith with Abraham, Moses, etc.

The twelfte article, of certain special exercises of religion, and marks of
the church: that is the Sacraments.
12. A Sacrament is a sign and a seal ordained of God, to assure us, of the
covenant of mercy, which is in Christ Jesus.

And there be two, Baptism and the supper of the Lord. The first is a sign
and a seal of our first entry, into the fellowship of God and his church, and
of our adoption and regeneration. The second is a sign and a seal, of the
communion of the body and blood of Christ, continually strengthening us and
confirming us, in all the graces of God unto eternal life?

IN handling of this article, if I declare two things, (First that these three
times of the fathers, of the law and of the gospel, agree in the description of
the nature of a sacrament: and herein that these two: Baptism and the Lords
supper are only for the new Testament; and namely, according as they are here
described and no otherwise: And secondly that herein the church of England
agrees with the holy scriptures of all these times, as a true obseruer of
Gods word therein:) I shall sufficiently prove that the church of England
holds the most ancient, true, and catholic faith. In the first there are
three things to be showed, the nature, the number, and the special difference
of the sacraments. In the nature we see what is general and common to all
Sacraments: and this is in two points: who made them, and whereof they consist,
the first is, they are ordained of God, and this is so far off the nature of
a sacrament, that none can be so, without God be the author: for who can give
man a special sign and seal of Gods favor etc. but God himself? amongst men
he is guilty of treason that will make a seal of a princes letters patents in
the kings name, except he have the seal delivered him by the prince for that
purpose: So and much more, for so much as God is more excellent and honorable,
then any prince of the earth, and his will more unsearchable, and the freedom
and glory thereof, more hie and heavenly; no man may or can, ordain a
sacrament, to assure us of Gods good will, whereof he has no warrant or
authority from God. For if (as the Apostle says) No man does know the things
of God, 1. Cor. 2.11.
but the spirit of God? surely much less can any man ordain a Sacrament which
is such a thing, as by it we may be assured of Gods free grace and mercy in
Jesus Christ. Therefore you shall find that in all times, the church (so long
as it was obedient and not idolatrous) never adventured to make a Sacrament: as
you may see in Abraham, who had sacrifices and circumcision, although we may be
assured, that by the spirit of prophecy, he was instructed in these things,
yet shall you also find that he had an Genesis 15.9. cap. 17.9.
express commandment. So Moses in all the four books of Exodus, Leuiticus,
Numbers, and Deuteronomie, shows plainly, that he ordained, neither
passover, nor any sacrifice, or other ordinance, but by express commandment
of god. So the prophets when they showed any sign of Gods good pleasure, they
gave it by his authority and assignement, as Cap. 7.18. and 37.22.30. and 38.7.
Esaiah unto Ahaz and unto Ezekiah, 1. King. 18.
Eliah before Ahab etc. And this is John's Baptism Math. 3.3. and Ioh. 1.33.
by the commandment of God. And for the same Baptism to be perpetual in the
church, and also the Lords supper, Luke 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.23. Matthew. 28.19.
every one that reads the new Testament, must needs be very negligent, if
he do not perceive, when and where they were commanded of God.

Now the second thing in the nature of a Sacrament is whereof they consist,
and this all men know to be of an outward thing, which may be seen and
discerned by the senses: and of an heavenly and spiritual thing, which cannot
be seen, but commended to the understanding. The first is called a sign,
because it is not there to serve according to his own proper nature, but to an
other special use appointed of God, that is, to represent an other thing which
it self is not: and not only to be a bare sign, but also such a sign as is
a seal, which being set to a writing does make it authentical: so this is
appointed to assure us, of the partaking or having of the very thing it self,
which this outward sign does signify. The thing signified or sealed is the
covenant of mercy, which is in Christ: which covenant is, that God promises
forgiveness of sins, righteousness and salvation, to all that believe in
Jesus Christ, as is taught out of the prophet Hieremie, in the Heb. 10.12.16.
Epistle to the Hebrews, and I say: In Jesus Christ, not only because, that
(as is taught to the Galathians) The Gal. 3.17.
covenant was confirmed of God in respect of Christ: but also because, that (as
is taught in the Epistle to the Hebrews) Heb. 9.15.
by the death of Jesus Christ, we receive the promise of eternal inheritance,
and so the Testament our covenant is confirmed, by the death of him that made
the Testament. And therefore the sacraments do so represent and assure unto
our souls, this covenant, as they do apply unto us his very death, his
body broken, and his blood shed, as the perfect ratifying and establishing of
the covenant: so that in receiving the Sacraments, we must by faith (as it
were) wash our selves with his blood, and feed upon his body and blood, to
the sealing up of our everlasting salvation, in the assurance of the covenant.
And here is to be observed, that these things are to be understood
distinctlie; the sign, the thing signified, and wherein the power and
operation of the Sacrament consists. The sign is not changed into the thing
signified, neither has it the nature power or operation of the thing
signified, but only represents, and as a seal applies the thing signified:
Secondly the thing signified is the very matter of our happiness, which is to
be in covenant with God, engrafted, cleansed, nourished and strengthened in
Christ, unto eternal life: but the power comes of the institution, that as
God has ordained them to be signs and seals, so they are in deed: and the
working is of the holy ghost, for he by his spirit does make the^ effectual in
all believers, for the strengthening of their faith in the holy covenant, and
for the lively applying and fruitful feeling of the death, and bloudshedding
of Jesus Christ the mediator thereof. And this is to be all and the only
nature of Sacraments, may appear in all times.

And first in Abraham's time, there is Genesis 17.
circumcision which is of the fathers, the sign whereof is the cutting of the
foreskin of the flesh, and the signification is the covenant of God with
Abraham, to be his God and the God of his seed: It is not only called a
Verse. 11.
sign of the covenant, but also Verse. 10.13.
the covenant: thereby to show that it is not only a bare sign or token, but
also an assurance, as a firm seal. And so Saint Paul interprets it saying:
Romans 4.11.
After he received the sign of circumcision as a seal etc. Again, here are
three distinct things; the sign is not turned into the covenant, neither has
it the nature and power nor the operation thereof. For the covenant is in the
promise, and the sign does represent that promise, and that promise respecting
Christ, is the matter of Abraham's happiness, by which he was made and Esai.
41.8.
called the friend of God. Who before this covenant in his fathers house could
not but worship other Gods, and so was an enemy to God and therefore
miserable. And this appears as the Apostle teaches, because he Romans
4.9.10.11.
was justified by faith in Christ before he was circumcised, and after received
the sign of circumcision, as a seal of the righteousness of the faith, which
he had when he was uncircumcised. Now the power, it had thus to work as a
sign and a seal, was of Gods institution, who ordained it to be such a sign
and a seal: yet the operation and effect, was only by the holy Ghost, for else
all men circumcised should have been happy and saved: and therefore the
Apostle teaches us that he is not a Cap. 2.28.29.
Jew, which is one outward, neither is that circumcision, which is outward in
the flesh, but he is one within, and the circumcision is of the heart, in the
spirit not in the letter, teaching thereby, that the outward work of cutting
the fore skin has no effectual working, but when God by his spirit does
circumcise the heart, according to that comfortable speech of Moses: Deuteronomy. 30.6.
The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, that
thou may love the Lord thy God, with all thine heart, and with all thy
soul, that thou may live.

Now concerning the time of the law, the most memorable sacrament, is the
Passover, whereof we Exodus 12.11.13.
find the like description. For the lamb is sometime called a sign of the
passover, and sometime the passover it self: to teach that it was both a
sign and a seal. And this having his chief fulfilling in Christ, the Apostle
calls (...)
Christ our passover: to show that the sacrament of the passover, did
concern the covenant of mercy in Christ. Now the institution being set forth,
and in all sorts explaned by God, as the other sacrament of circumcision does
show the distinction of the thing signified in regard of the nature power and
operation, eue^ as is before said of the other; for if there were difference,
the Lord would have mentioned it by some word or other. The like teach the
prophets of the sacrifice, as in the psalms it is said: that the people make a
Psalm. 50.5.
covenant with God by sacrifice. Where thou may perceive the solemn
acknowledging and auowching of the covenant was by sacrifice, as an outward
sign testifying the agreement of both parties. And so God charge the people
(in the time of Hieremie the prophet) Hier. 34.18.
That they kept not the words of the covenant which they had made before him,
when they cut the calfe in twain, and passed between the parts thereof. So
then you see that the covenant and the words of the covenant is one thing, and
the sacrifice is an other, even a sign: yet not a naked and bare sign but
also a seal ratifying the covenant. And therefore Exodus 24.8.
Moses did sprinkle the blood of the sacrifice on the people saying: Behold the
blood of the covenant, which the Lord has made with you: which use or power so
to be, comes of institution who ordained the sacrifice to that end. But the
operation and effect to be only of Gods spirit appears, because that this
people, though couenanting by sacrifice, are found far from the covenant, as is
plainly declared by the psalm and place of Jeremy before alleged, which yet
is further opened by Cap. 36.27.
Ezech. by whom God says: I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to
walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them.

And in this manner are the sacraments described in the new testament: as namely
where it is said: 1. Cor. 12.13.
By one spirit are we al baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or
Grecians, whether bond or free, and have been all made to drink into one
spirit. Where this phrase into one body, into one spirit, notes the covenant
of grace in Christ, that as members of one body, so are we united in
fellowship together, with God through Christ, by his spirit working faith in
our hearts. Baptized, notes the one sacrament; and drink, notes the other,
which is the Lords supper; a part which is one sign, set for the whole which
are two signs, bread and wine, eating and drinking. Now when he says,
baptized into one body: that shows the use of baptism, is to be a seal to
confirm the covenant unto us, and not only to be a bare sign: and this
phrase, drink into one spirit, does argue the same thing of the Lords supper:
but making mention of the spirit he shows that the effect and operation is of
the holy ghost. So the^ there be signs, the thing signified, and the power and
operation of them both. The signs, water washing, bread wine, eating and
drinking: the thing signified, the fellowship of the covenant which is in
Christ. The power is of this: that God ordained this baptism and supper of the
Lord to be signs of such importance, as to seal and confirm unto us the
covenant of grace, but the operation is of the spirit of God, which makes us
really, and in deed partakers of the things promised. So that there is no
difference in our sacraments, from the sacraments of the old testament, and
that you may perceive it is even so, examine with me their institution. First
Baptism is ordained by these words: Math. 28.19.
Go and teach all nations baptizing them in the name of the father and the
son and the holy ghost. And again, Mark. 16.15.16.
Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature, he that
shall believe and be baptized shall be saved. Here first the covenant is
published by teaching and preaching: then the parties receive the covenant by
belief: and lastly the same is confirmed by baptism. As in the practice may
appear. Peter preaches Christ, the people are pricked in heart, asking what
shall we do, and he teaches them by these words: Act. 2.22.37.38.
Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the
remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy ghost. Where the
word Metanoesate.
Repent notes out the change of the mind, not only unto amendment of life,
but also by turning unto God by belief, and therefore to declare the same,
sometime belief is joined with it, as where it is said, Mark. 1.15.
Repent and believe the gospel, so that hereby he bids them so to repent
and convert, as by faith they may receive the covenant of grace in Christ: and
then adding that they should be baptized in the name of Christ for remission
of sins, he teaches that baptism should be unto them an assurance of that
covenant which contains remission of sins, which thing they should perceive
by the gift of the holy ghost, accompanying the same. Hereupon Philip Act.
8.36.37.
being demanded of baptism by the Eunuch before he baptized him required the
acceptance of the covenant, by these words: If thou beleeuest, thou may?
And least we should think any power to be in this sacrament, otherwise then
the institution makes it to be a sign and a seal of the covenant, or that
the work wrought, that is the very outward sign, being applied by the
minister, when he washes or dippeth the person baptized, did effect the thing
signified. Saint Peter does 1. Pet. 3.21.
expound it saying; Baptism does save us. But how? Not the putting away of
the filth of the flesh, but in that a good conscience makes request unto God
etc. That is, it is not the outward washing or work of the ministry, but Gods
spirit working in our hearts faith, with a good conscience receiving the
covenant, which saves us. And in this sort also Christ Luke 22.19 1. Cor.
11.23.
instituteth his supper, the holy communion. First taking bread and after
thanksgiving breaking it he says, this is my body and then taking the cup he
says: This cup is the new testament in my blood. Then secondly, for a
commandment to his Church he says, do this in remembrance of me, etc. where
ordaining a sacrament he uses such phrases and manner of speech, as God did in
the same kind in the old testament: sometime calling the sign signifying by
the name of the thing signified, as when he says, This is my body. And
sometime again, least we might think it made a further change, then was of old
in the sacraments, he adds, Do this in remembrance of me: by the latter
making it a sign and holy memorial of Christ and his covenant, and by the
former making it more then a bare sign, even a seal of assurance unto the
faithful believers, with the same terms and order as the sacraments were
ordained and instituted in the old testament, as we have seen before in
circumcision, the passover and the sacrifices. So then the sign, the thing
signified, and the power and working, should remain distinct in that very
manner and order, as is before declared in Baptism and all the other
sacraments.

Now if any man would here press upon me the change of times, that therefore
the sacraments of the new testament have more power and virtue in the work
wrought, then they of the old: as though that now such a grace were in the
outward action of the minister, ministering the Sacraments in due form, as was
not in the sacraments of the old testament. I answer that this can not be
showed by any words of the new testament. For if they allege that baptism
is entitled, by the very work it signifies: as it is called: Tit. 3.5.
The washing of the new birth: and the bread in the Lords supper is thus
expressed by Christ: This is my body. We may answer that so and in the same
sense, circumcision is called the covenant, and the lamb the passover. And as
in the old testament God opens his mind, when he calls the same
circumcision by the name of a sign. So here does the new Testament express
the same meaning, as where Christ is said to sanctify and cleanse his Church,
Ephesians. 5.26.
By the washing of water through the word. Where the water is not understood
to do any thing of it self, but as it is joined to the word as a sign and
seal thereof: for Christ teaches directly that it is the Ioh. 15.3.
word that cleanses us. And as I showed before Saint Peter says, It is not
the putting away of the filth of the flesh, (that is, the outward washing of
water) that saves us. And again, Christ calling the cup the new testament in
his blood, does also to open his mind, add this, as often as we drink it we
should do it in remembrance of him. And least we should dream of a further
power in our sacraments, then in them of the old, Saint Paul does of purpose
teach the contrary to the Corinthians, showing that the read sea and the cloud
was unto Israel that which baptism unto us: saying, 1 Cor. 10.1.
They were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea. And that Manna
and the rock was that unto them, which the Lords supper is unto us, saying: And
did all eat the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual
drink, for they drank of the spiritual rock, which followed them, and the
rock was Christ. Which may further appear by his reason: notwithstanding
these sacraments they were overthrown in the wilderness: therefore they were
but outward signs and seals effectual only in the believers, Verse. 6.11.
as is expounded, Heb. 4.2. which being compared unto us by an equal
comparison, when he says, These are ensamples to us, etc. And again, Now all
these came unto them for ensamples, and were written to admonish us. It must
needs be, that he makes the virtue of the sacraments of both times equal,
seeing that giving the same terms to those sacraments which are given unto
ours: he infers that if we do as they did, we shall have the same
punishment. And it sounds that way that he says a little Verse. 16.17.
after, that we by eating of our sacrament of the Lords supper, are partakers
of the body and blood of Christ and all members in one body. And that they
which verse. 18.
eat of their sacrifice, were also partakers of the alter: that is of the good
graces of God in Jesus Christ of whom the Heb. 9. and 9. cap. 13.10.15.
alter was a figure. Therefore it cannot be that a greater grace or virtue
should be in the sacraments of the new Testament, above the sacraments of the
old. And where as some think, that in the Lords supper the bread is changed
into the body of Christ, and so consequently there should be a great
difference, from the old sacraments: this may not only be overthrown, by
this, that Christ follows the same order and terms, in instituting of these
which were used, in the institution of the other, as is already sufficiently
declared: but also because the holy ghost by diverse other arguments does make
this most apparent, namely that the sign remains distinct from the thing
signified, and never changed into the same; First he says: 1. Cor. 11.26
As often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye show the Lords death
till he come. Where note, first: that in teaching us the meaning of this
Sacrament, he tells us that it is a showing of the Lords death: a great
odds then from being his body. For it is one thing to show his death, and an
other thing to make it his body: and least it might be taken, that both might
concur, he opens himself saying: Till he come, thereby teaching that this
is an outward testimony of his death till he return from heaven where he now
is, for it cannot be said til he come, if he be there in presence: and yet more
fully when he says by eating this bread etc. we show his death etc. which
makes it manifest that this eating and drinking is the Sacramental sign and
this showing of his death is the signification, and the reason till he come,
that is, because he is absent in body, he has left this sacrament, as a
pledge and seal of his death till he come again in his body: and therefore
he calls it bread ver. 26.27.28.
three times in this place, and that even then, when it is eating, after the
words (as they say) of consecration. And last of all it is to be considered,
that there is no ground or reason, reueiled by God in his word, that the same
manner of speech, in the same kind of thing; in the new Testament, should
differ from the old in signification and use. Secondly, when he says This cup
is the new Testament in my blood, why may we not as well take the cup to be
changed into his blood, as to say the bread is changed? seeing there is no more
exception in the one then there is in the other. Thirdly if the heavens must
contain him (as saint Act. 3.21.
Peter says) until the time that al things be restored, and that no where it
is reueiled, that the consecrating of the bread and wine is accepted, how can
there be his bodily presence? And to conclude, if he shall so come, as he was
seen go into heaven, (as the Angel Act. 1.11.
taught the Apostles) and that we must Math. 24.26.27.
not believe them which say He is in secret places, but as Christ teaches, he
shall come as the lightning comes out of the East, and shines unto the West:
Then it must needs follow, that we cannot conster or understand this any
otherwise: but as the sacraments of the old Testament, so our sacraments of the
new Testament, are only signs and seals of the covenant of mercy in Christ
Jesus: which the holy ghost does use as holy mysteries, to stir up and
quicken and increase all good graces, and the work of faith in us, according
to Gods free promise in the covenant. Now for the number of sacraments: That in
the new Testament, there are and should be but two Sacraments of the covenant:
This will appear if it be showed that the old testament did shadow out these
two only, and that the new Testament commands no more. First for Baptism;
Saint Peter says that the 1. Pe. 3.20.21
Ark of Noah was a figure of our Baptism: and Saint Paul Colos. 2.11.12.
auowcheth that our Baptism is come in the room and place of circumcision.
Secondly touching the Lords supper, Christ instituting it, after he had eat the
passover, did thereby declare, that the same succeeded the passover, and that
the passover being fulfilled and finished by his death should give place unto
his supper, or holy communion; which is confirmed by the practice of the
Apostles, who ever after instructed the church to receive this and leave out
that: as in the constituting of the several churches it does and may appear.
Again that place 1. Cor. 10.1.2. comparing the cloud, going through the read
sea, the manna and rock unto our two Sacraments; shows plainly, that the
equity of Gods proceeding; which under the law was figured in these two
sacraments, should be preserved. Namely one, for the first entry into the
covenant, and an other, for the confirmation of the same; that although there
were many, yet they had no more but the substance of these two, and therefore
these two were to remain perpetual, and be in as great value and use unto us,
as if they were many. And I am fully persuaded, that no honest man, by any
learning can show any place pregnant, either in the old or new Testament, for
any other third, or fourth, or more to be shadowed out in like manner as these
two. Now in the new Testament, it is apparent that these two are comanded: by
that which is already spoken. But that there be no other, let a man examine
whatsoever is or may be pretended, by this diffinition of a Sacrament, and the
holy scriptures wherein and whereby I have declared and approved the same, he
shall find they come short and beside the mark: for either, they lack a
commandment from god, or else an outward sign, or else are not declared signs
of the covenant: As for example if any would make penance a Sacrament, he shall
find that God commanded not penance by satisfaction, but only the
satisfaction, which is made already by the blood of Christ, and there is no
sign appointed by God thereunto, if any other will make orders a sacrament, he
shall find their wants the covenant of mercy; for that imposition of hands in
orders is a sign of the grace of the ministry, and not of the covenant of
salvation. If some other should set forth matrimony for a sacrament, there
wants a commandment to make it a sign: secondly it is in no place any
otherwise, but as (infinite other things) a comparison, and similitude or
metaphore: And so it may be truly said of any thing else, which is colourablie
thrust upon the church, by the name of a sacrament.

Now lastly the difference between Baptism and the Lords supper in sealing
of the covenant, is that Baptism is for the first sanction of the covenant and
entering into the church, A seal of our adoption and regeneration, this was
circumcision to Abraham and his seed: and the cloud and read sea was this unto
all Israel, who were led by the hand of Moses. And that Baptism might be for
the first sanction of the covenant and entering into the church, the Apostles
were Matthew. 28.
commanded to preach, and to receive such as believed, by Baptism into the
church: and so Act. 2. and 8. and 10. and 13. and 14. etc.
they by this mark separated the christians from others, when they first won
them to the gospel, as all examples of their practice do show, so well known,
as I need not to rehearse them. But for the other part, you have for
regeneration these words: Tit. 3.5.
The washing of the new birth and the renewing of the holy ghost: and for
adoption these words: Gal. 3.26.27.
Ye are all the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus: for all ye that are
baptized into Christ have put on Christ. Where the putting on of Christ by
Baptism being alleged to show our being Gods sons by faith, teaches that
Baptism is a seal of our adoption. And for this also, Baptism is but once
ministered; because we once enter into the church, and are but once borne again
and adopted to be Gods children. Then as for the Lords supper, that it is a
seal of our communion in the covenant, these words directly show: 1. Cor.
10.16.17.
The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of
Christ? the bread which we break is not the communion of the body of Christ?
for we that are many ar one bread and one body, because we al are partakers of
one bred: where it is called communion etc. because by this sacrament, we are
confirmed in the participation of Christ, as by a true seal of the covenant,
and assured to be of his mystical body: As touching the continual strength we
have hereby; the often receiving does notify the same, and the kindness of
creatures, the manner of applying and the nature of working. For we being daily
subject to sin and weakness, are here on, as on a banquet to feed for our
daily inward strengthening, and bread and wine familiarly show us, that Christ
is the bread from heaven, and his blood is the joyful wine to glad man's heart;
which when Christ bids us to use in remembrance of him, what is it else, but
that, by the taking, eating, and drinking of these things for such an end, we
should stir up our hearts, in the assurance of the forgiveness of sins, and
of the continual grace and mercy of God, 1. Cor. 11.
which Paul confirms when he says, we show the Lords death etc. For by it we
are confirmed, so that we thereby profess before all the world, 1. Cor. 10.
that so we believe and are assured that our savior will come again to
receive us into glory. And in that it is called (as before) a communion with
Christ, what other woorking can it have, 1. Cor. 12.
but to strengthen our faith, and to increase in us, every good gift by the
spirit. And hereof the Apostle says: we are made to drink into one spirit: as
if he should say, as we drink wine to cherish our fleshie heart; so here we have
a spiritual drinking of Christ's blood, to cherish our souls unto eternal life.

Thus you see the sweet consent of the old and new Testament touching the holy
Sacraments; what they are in nature, how many ought to be under the gospel,
and how these two differ in their special and particular use. The confession of
the church of England is altogether so, and of the same consent. For as
touching the nature of a Sacrament we say the same in substance of truth: a
Sacraments ordained of Christ are not only badges and tokens of Christian men's
profession: but rather they be certain sure witnesses and effectual signs of
grace, and Gods good will toward us, by the which he does work inuisibly in
us, and does not only quicken, but also strengthen and confirm our faith in
him: and again, Articl. 25. of the sacraments.
Apolog. part. 2.10. diuis. 1.
We allow the Sacraments of the Church, that is to say, certain holy signs
and ceremonies which Christ would we should use that by them he might set
before our eyes, the mysteries of our salvation, and might more strongly
confirm the faith, which we have in his blood, and might seal his grace in
our hearts, and in the same places there are no more but two sacraments
acknowledged which properly ought to be called by that name, and as touching
the special difference. First we say of Baptism: Articl. 27.
that It is a sign and a seal of our new birth, whereby as by an instrument
they that receive Baptism, are grafted into the church, the promises of
forgiveness of sins, and our adoption to be the sons of God, by the holy
ghost are visibly signed and sealed etc. and of the Lords supper we say:
Articl. 28.
The supper of the Lord, is not only a sign of the love that Christians ought
to have among themselves: but rather it is a Sacrament of our redemption:
Insomuch that to such as rightly, woorthely and with faith receive the same,
the bread which we break, is a communion of the body of Christ, and likewise
the cup of blessing is a communion of the blood of Christ. If all these things
be compared together with the Scriptures, you shall see, that they do very
fitly agree: so that in the doctrine of the Sacraments, we are of the ancient
faith of Gods elect, and of the holy universal church.

The thirtenth article, of the order of religious exercises, and service of God.
13. All religious exercises, as prayer and Sacraments etc. ought to be done,
in the toonge or language, which the people best understand, and as is most to
edification.

HOw the pride and presumption of man brought this great plague of many
languages into the world, and thereby great separation of people and nations,
and diversities of religion, as Genesis 11.
Moses does declare the original; so the story and experience of all times do
witness. And as it caused great toil and contention among men: so it came to
pass in tract of time, that the true religion was found but in one people and
language, and that of Abraham and his seed the children of Israel. Howbeit
when the fulness of time was come, that the most glorious son of God our
blessed Savior, sanctified all nations unto God by his death, then were all
languages made Phil. 2.11. Esai 45.23.
holy unto the Lord, that Every toonge should confess, that Jesus Christ is
the Lord, unto the glory of God the father. Therefore what people so ever it
pleases God, to call to be of his church, and teaches them his holy
religion, the language of that very people, is made holy to the Lord, to talk
of his word, to confess his name, to pray to his goodness, and to celebrate
his heavenly worship. This appears by the story of Abraham, being an Genesis
14.13. and 11.16.
Hebrew, coming of Heber, that God revealed his word unto him and his seed
in the Hebrew tongue. In that tongue which was to them natural and known, he
and they used all their prayers and holy exercises: and in that tongue did
Moses and the prophets write all the oracles of God. Save only when Judah was
in captivity, Daniell wrote some Chapters which concerned the Chaldeans and
all nations in that language of Calde, which they best understood, and fittest
at that time for all nations, the Emperor of the world being of that language:
and by mixture with other people the Hebrew writings of the prophets, do
somewhat savor of the language of the people, among whom they dwelt. Therefore
it does appear that God was careful, as a matter best for the Churches
edification, to have his will revealed unto his people, in that tongue they best
understood. So when all the world in all nations was called by the gospel, to
know and worship the true and living God, then were the scriptures written in
Greek, (namely so much as then was written by the Apostles and Evangelists)
which language was at that time the most Act. 21 37.
common language of the world, in so much as all Gal. 3.28.
nations are called Grecians in opposition to the Jews and their language.
Also God Act. 2.
endued his Apostles with the gift of diverse tongues, that even in that gift it
might be made manifest, that all languages are sanctified in Christ, and that
he thought it need, that every country and people should worship him in their
own language. And therefore the Prophet Daniel prophesying of these days,
directly says: Dan. 7.14.
All people, nations and languages shall serve him. Hereupon Saint Paul, least
the use of gift of many languages, should be abused, spends one Cor. 14.
whole chapter about this matter: and therein teaches, that it was most to
edification, that the prayers and exercises of Gods worship, should be in a
language known to the vulgar and meaner sort of people, a thing so familiarly
known, that I need not repeat it. Therefore without any amplification in this
point, I may conclude, that seeing the Church of England (both by practice as
is seen in our daily service of God) by the book of common prayer, and also
by our confession in the Apology Apolog. cap. 18. diuis. 1. Artic. 24. of the
common prayers.
and Articles of our religion, published for that purpose) does allow no other
but the usual language, best known to the people, as best to edification: it
follows that herein we agree with the ancient and catholic riligion and
order of Almighty God, and of his servants Moses, the prophets and Apostles.

The 14. Article of liberty in religion, whether it take away any natural
comfort or duty among men.
14 The true and catholic religion forbids no man or woman of what caling
soever, to marry, so it be in the Lord: and commands all sorts of men,
and that of all callings, as well ecclesiastical as civil, to be subject to
the civil magistrate and higher power: and to obey him in the Lord.

IN this Article are two specials as marriage and the duty to the magistrate:
which two may be as an instance for all of like sort: for in the first kind we
understand to be meats, times, and the manner and order of many things both
civil and serving to Gods worship, that they are al left free, so that in all
these things, God and his word has given free liberty, and not inthralled his
Church, but only requires an orderly comely use, directed to his glory. And
in the second sort is the duty to parents, to husbands, to wives, to children
and such like that no man under the color of religion cast away such duties.
Therefore I will only speak of these two, which being well marked I hope the
wise and careful reader will see, what is the true duty of religion in all.
And first look upon Genesis 12. and 15 and 20 and 21. and 25.
Abraham: he was a prophet, yet had he his first and second wife, and by virtue
of Gods promise, when he said: So shall thy seed be, he was made strong, even in
his old days to beget many children, and it was not an unclean thing unto him
though he were a prophet so to be married. In Moses and his priesthood you
see: that he being a prophet, 1. Cron. 23.14.
begat children, and the priests and Leuits had their wives. So in the prophets
it is found that they were not restrained from this benefit, for it is
expressed that 1. Sam. 8.1. Ezec. 24.15.16 2. King. 4.1.
Samuel and Ezechiel had wives, and the children of the prophets. And where
Jeremy is forbidden, it is expressed, not to be in regard he was a prophet;
but only because of the Hier. 16.2.3.5.8.
troubles of his time: for which cause he is also forbidden the house of
mourning and of feasting: because that he might teach the people by such
speeches, as by a figure in his example, there great calamity, which hung over
their heads.

And in the new testament we know that the Math. 8.14.
Apostles had wives before their calling, and it is no where expressed, that
they were forbidden to keep them afterward, but rather the contrary, as
where Paul says: 1. Cor. 9.5.
Have we not power ta lead about a wife being a sister, as well as the rest of
the Apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord and Caephas? As touching the
ministers of the congregations, they were so far from barring them from
wives, that they do expressly prescribe 1. Tim. 3. and Tit. 1.6.
what they should be, and how their children should be governed, pronouncing
the forbidding of marriage to be 1. Tim. 4.1.2
doctrine of devils, and that Heb. 13.4.
marriage is honorable among all men. Therefore in this point is the practice
of England sound and catholic, and our profession the ancient and unchangeable
truth. For we say Artic. 32. of the marriage of priests. Apol cap. 8. diuis. 1.
: Bishops, priests, and deacons, are not commanded by Gods law, either to
vow the estate of single life, or to abstain from marriage: therefore it is
lawful also for them as for all other Christian men, to marry at their own
discretion, as they shall judge the same to serve better to godliness.

As touching the Magistrate, you see in Abraham, how he kept only the
government of his own house, and how lowly and humbly he carried himself in
Genesis 12. and 20.
Egypt and Gerar, where there were kings of the country: And Melchisedeck,
though he were priest of the most high God, usurped not authority over other
kings, but being a figure of Christ, he blessed Abraham for a special
mystery, as is expressed and taught in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 7.
shadowing the royal priesthood of Christ above the priesthood of Aaron.
Therefore in this time religion abridged not any duty, but rather fulfilled
them. Moses, when he describes the order of a king over Israel, he shows
that God would make a king over them. Where he uses Deuteronomy. 17.14.15.
these words, in the person of all the people: I will set a king over me: And
again unto them: Thou shall make him king over thee. There me and thee,
contain all estates and orders ecclesiastical and civil. And so was Ioshuah
the first Captain, Ioshuah. 1.18 and cap. 3.
the commander of all, neither is there any syllable exempting any one estate
more then other. When this came in practice in the time of the prophets, were
not the priests and Samuel subject to Saul. 1. Sam. 19. and 22.
Nathan and other seers, unto David, and all other prophets with the priests
subject to Solomon, Iehoshaphat, Ezechiah, Ioshiah, etc. Did not they command
and order the building and repairing of the temple, place and displace high
priests, call the people to the pure worship of God, and command the priests
in the holy administrations? And they themselves were subject to none, 1. Cron.
23. and 24 and 25. and 26. etc. 2 Cron. 2. and 3 and 4. etc. and 28. and 29.
and 30. etc.
but to Gods word, that by his books and word they should be ruled and
guided, and by no man, Deuteronomy. 17.18.19. Josh. 1.8. 2. Cron. 34.
or man's word or commandment whatsoever.

So our Savior Christ commands to give Math. 22.21.
Caesar his due, and to God his due: and though he were Lord of all, yet
because his kingdom was not of this world, Cap. 27.
Math. 17.25.
he paid tribute, and meekely yielded himself when he was wrongfully judged.
And the spirit of truth which he gave his Apostles, did guide them in the same
steps that for themselves it is not found they usurped any civil authority
by color of religion, but commanded every soul Romans 13.1. 1 Pet. 2.13.14.
to be subject to the higher power, and namely to the king as to the superior
and to the governors under him. Therefore also the practice of our Church in
this behalf, is very godly and beseeming the religigion of God: and that we
herein profess is a most ancient and catholic verity. For we say, Artic.
37.
The Queens Majesty has the chief power in this realm of England, and
other her dominions, unto whom the chife government of all estates of this
realm, whether they be ecclesiastical or not, in all causes does appertain,
and is not, nor ought not to be subject to any foreign jurisdiction. So then
we may boldly conclude, that as touching this holy comfort of marriage and
duty to the magistrate, our Church follows the right, everlasting and
unchangeable truth.

The fifteenth Article of the hope, which is in the true religion.
15 Jesus Christ will come again with glory: and then all the dead shall rise
again in their bodies: And he shall judge the quick and the dead, and will
crown all believers with everlasting righteousness, salvation and life with
God for ever.

THis Article shows the last work of Christ in his kingly office: namely of
his return again unto judgment, at which time he will raise up all the
bodies of men, which are departed this life (which our Creed calls the dead)
and all they which shall be alive at his coming (which in our Creed are
called the quick) shall be changed, and the Devil and all wicked men being
cast out of the presence of God: all faithful believers shall be delivered
from all things hurtful from the devil, death, and wickedness from the
curse, sorrow, and tears, and from corruption and mortality, into the
glorious liberty of the sons of God, into the fullness of joy in the
presence of God for ever.

This hope had Abraham when Genesis 12. and 22 and 25.
he dwelt in Canaan as a stranger, and going from place to place, lived in
tents when he offered up his son Isaacke, and when he dyed: as is plainly
expounded, where it is said, Heb. 11.9.
By faith he abode in the land of promise, as in a strange country, as one
that dwelt in tents, with Isacke and Jacob heirs with him of the same
promise. For he looked for a city whose maker and builder is God. And again,
Verse. 13.
All these died in faith etc. And again, Verse. 19.
he considered that God was able to raise him up from the dead. And God taught
Abraham the last judgment in two respects, when he showed him the overthrow
of Sodom, and preserved Lot alive. For by it he shadowed out unto him how he
delivers the righteous out of tentation, and how he keeps the wicked till
the last judgment to be punished. In which sense this story is expounded and
applied by Saint Peter in these words 2. Pet. 2.6.7.
God turned the cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into ashes, condemned them and
overthrew them, and made them an ensample unto them, which after should live
ungodly, and delivered just Lot etc. (and a little after applying it to this
purpose) Verse. 9.
The Lord knows to deliver the godly out of tentation, and to reserve the
unjust to the day of judgment to be punished. Secondly, in that the Sodomites
were suddenly consumed, when they deemed no such thing fire and brimstone fell
upon them: And Lots wife looking back was suddenly turned into a pillar of
salt. So it teaches, that this last coming of Christ shall be sudden, as our
Savior teaches, where he says, Luke 17.28.
As it was in the days of Lot they eat they drank etc. 30.
After these ensamples shall it be, in the day when the son of man shall be
revealed. 32.
And again, Remember Lots wife etc. And in the promise of the blessing in his
seed, God teaches Abram all this for what is the perfection of this blessedness,
but that after the resurrection, there shall be no more curse but we shall
happily enjoy his ioifull presence for evermore. And such is the faith of
England: for we believe, that Articl. 4. of Christ resurrection.
Christ with his body ascended into heaven, and there sits, until he
return to judge all men at the last day: and again Apolog. part. cap. 21,
diuis. 1.
We believe, that this our self same flesh, wherein we live, although it die,
and come to dust, yet at the last, shall return again to life, by the means of
Christ spirit, which dwells in us: and then verily whatsoever we suffer
herein the mean while for his sake, Christ will wipe away all tears and
heaviness from our eyes: and that we through him shall enjoy everlasting life,
and shall for ever be with him in glory.

Moses learneth and teaches the resurrection of the faithful unto life, when
God appeared unto him in the bush and said: Exodus 3.6.
I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob; which our
savior Math. 22.31.32.
Christ does so expound, because God is not the God of the dead but of the
living: and confuteth the Saduces who denied the resurrection. And in the story
of Balaam he does not obscurely show the resurrection, of the dead and the last
judgment, where he makes Balaa^ to speak of christ, calling him Number. 24.17
Astem of Jacob, and a scepter that shall rise of Israel, he says, I shall see
him, but not now: affirming that, he shall smite the coasts of Moab, and destroy
all the sons of Sheth: that is to say. Balaam thought to^ see christ in the
resurrection, and that christ should subdu all the adversaries of his church, and
reign til al his enemies were made his footstool, and deliver up his kingdom
after the resurrection unto his father, that God may be all in all, as is in
plain terms in the cap. 15.24.25
first Epistle to the Corinthians: Also these words of God unto Moses, Exodus
33.19.
I will show mercy to whom I will show mercy etc. are applied by the Apostle
to declare the holy predestination of God, Romans 9.15.16.22.23.
of some men unto salvation and some to damnation, which is not accomplished,
but by the resurrection and last judgment: again that which is in Moses Deuteronomy.
32.35.36.
song; vengeance and recompense is mine: and again; The Lord will judge his
people, is likewise Romans 12.19.
applied to this purpose, that the children of God should not revenge, but
commit their cause to God against the day of the resurrection and judgment,
which is 2. The. 1.6.7
the time of rest to Gods children, and trouble to the wicked: and Heb.
10.26.28.30.
to declare the fearful day of judgment, and the violent fire which shall
devour the adversaries.

But the prophets are much more plain in their teaching of this article: when
they Esai 9.7. Psalm. 110.1. 1. Cor. 15. Esai 45.23. Romans 14.11.
say: Christ kingdom shall have none end: Sit thou on my right hand until I
make thine enemies thy footstool. Every knee shall bow to me; but especially
where it is said. Dan. 12.2.
They that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake, some to everlasting
life, and some to shame and perpetual contempt. Yet much more plentifully is
this doctrine taught in the new Testament, and namly in the thirtenth and five
and twenty of Matthew, Ioh. 5. and 6. Act. 10. and 17. Romans 2. 1. Cor. 15. 1.
These. 4. 2 Thessalonians, 1. etc. All which places in plain words teach thus much.
That Christ shall come with his holy Angels and sit on his thorn of glory,
all the dead shall rise first, and they which then be alive shall be changed,
and so of these two sorts all nations shall stand before him, and receive
sentence according to their works, some to eternal life for their faith
approved by their works, and some to eternal pain, for their unbelief,
showed by their evil deeds. So that in this point of doctrine, the glory of
the churches of England, in the sweet harmony, with Abraham and Moses time,
and with the preaching of Christ and his Prophets and Apostles is most
comfortablie sealed up and confirmed: the Lords name be praised therefore.

The Lords name, I say, be praised: who has bin so merciful and gracious unto
this little Ileland, that passing over many greater, richer and mightier
nations, has set such an especial love upon us, as he has vouchsafed to
prefer and exalt our nation above many other to be of his holy and catholic
church, of the blessed communion of his saints, and a true member of his
visible people, upon whom his name is called. That we may truly, justly, and
boldly say, that the religion which we follow and the faith and doctrine which
we confess is the faith of Gods elect, the knowledge of the truth according
to godliness, under the hope of eternal life, the very true and only way of
salvation, which God and not man teaches. Which he has taught all the fathers
before the law was given, or any part of Gods word written during the space of
2517. years. In the end of that time Abraham our father, even the father of
all believers, 430. years before Moses when the world began to be corrupted,
received and professed for all nations which should be after him. Which Moses
and the Prophets proclaimed, and maintained some 1445. years until the
blessed time of Christ's holy incarnation. And which the same Jesus Christ the
glorious son of God, even the Lord of life, preached in his own person, and
his holy Apostles which heard him and saw al his great works did witness and
publish to all the gentiles and was confirmed by gods holy testimony from
heaven, with great signs and wonders and gifts of the holy ghost. And which
the same everlasting God even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, commanded
to be taught unto all people, out of the holy Scriptures of Moses the Prophets
and Psalms, and has opened and made manifest by the holy inspired writings
of the Evangelists and Apostles and left and commended unto his Church for the
salvation of his elect unto the worlds end. By which al gods people ar to be
known, by which God will be glorified in his saints, and out of which no man
has been, shall be or can be saved. I say therefore again: the Lords name be
praised for ever, Amen.

CHAP. IIII. Where is declared: First that antiquity, universality and
visible succession, is no perfect mark of the church, much less of the popish
Synagogue, which is but of yesterday: 2. The measure and order of the visible
succession of the Church from Christ's time forward, is showed by the Scripture.
3. Therefore the papists do prove themselves to be no church, when they ground
themselves on this false principle, the church cannot err: 4. How the true
religion has showed it self by many witnesses from the Apostles time even
unto our days.
THE Synagogue of Rome, claims antiquity, universality and succession
visible from the time of Christ's Apostles, to be undoubted marks of the church
of God, and so of the pure religion: addinge thereunto, as it were the sinews
and ioints, to make them all hold together, the faithful and constant grace
of the church visible, under the gospel, namly (this false principle) that,
It cannot err. And therefore when they are convicted, to have fallen from the
true christian religion, and find themselves openly bewraied, being tried, by
the perfect touchstone of Gods holy written word, to be lately vpstart and of
a new devised religion, doctrine and faith, brought forth into the world, by
the fanatical and superstitious humor of heretical prauitie and human folly,
and begotten by the cunning insinuations and coulorable suggestions of him,
which uses all spiritual craftines and profoundnes of wisdom, to bruise the
heel of the woman's seed, and to darken the glorious light of the heavenly
faith of Gods chosen (least happily they should not be found, the very true
Antechrist, after the manner of him, that tra^sformeth him self into an angel
of light (they would bear down the world, with the vain titles and goodly
show, of antiquity, universality and visible succession, and of the unerring
and unchangeable persistance of the visible church in the truth: and leave out
altogether (that which is indeed, the very nature and foundation of the
church) the true religion, faith and doctrine of Apostles and Prophets of God.
But alas, these are but the fig leaves of Adam, which cannot cover their
shame: for as all men know, that the serpent cannot prove himself a man, by
his ancient continuance and remaining in the world, unless he had those
essential properties of body and soul, whereof every man does naturally
consist: So, for so much as all these things, antiquity, universality etc.
are such as heretics and Ethnikes, did and could claim, from Caine and Cham
or Iaphet; as well as Christians from Seth and Shem: and that the true nature of
the church consists in the fellowship of the true religion, doctrine and
faith: the sygnogoge of Rome, unless it hold the true faith and religion,
cannot for these things be the true visible church of God. For no antiquity,
universality or succession, can make the whore of Babel to be the true and
chaste spouse of Christ. And who knows not that Caine was before Sheth and
that their two posterities, were the two churches one which is of Caine called
the children of men; because their religion came of a runnagate man: and the
other was called the children of God, because their religion was given and
taught them of God. Likewise in the Apostasy of the time of Abraham, the
nations were almost settled upon the dregs of their filthy idolatry, when
Abraham was now but newly called. Ismael and Esaue, which fell out of the
church and house of Abraham, became goodly states and monarkes before Jacob was
established and the people of Israel were gathered into a known and visible
floorishing form of a church, which was 430. years after the calling of
Abraham. Lastly the gentiles, continued in that apostasy and idolatry
ouerspreading all the world, from the time of Abraham until Christ, eighteen
hundred years, when the Church was but in a little corner of the world, the
land of Canaan, and of that a great space in the territories of Judah and
Jerusalem only. Because Caine, Ismael, and Esaie calling antiquity and
visible succession before Sheth and Isaac and Jacob, is their religion the
true religion? or were they the true church? or shall the Gentiles justify the^
selves, to be the true worshippers of God, or to have the true God, because
they can brag over the Jews and christians, with all these terms of antiquity,
universality, succession, visible, etc. therefore he that reads the stories
shall find, how they scoff at the Jews and christians, even as the papist do
at us: because that although they have no truth on their side, yet they think
these painted paper walls, and leaden weapons of long continuance and open
appearance and flowrishing in the world, does sufficiently cover and defend
their filthy folly. Whereas they foolishlie know not and consider not, or at
the least, thorough maliciousnes and hardness of heart, will not know, that an ill
thing, the more universal, the longer, the larger, the stronger, the more in
custom, use authority and open familiarity of men, the more dangerous,
infectious, incurable and deadly it is. And this gentilisme and popery, are so
much the more strong in dilusion, for the damnation of souls, by how much
they being void of godliness and truth, are and have been ancient; universal,
visible, etc. And therefore it hah cost the more sweat and blood unto the
faithful servants of Christ, to cure the infected people, and to bring them
again into the bosom of Abraham and arcke of Noe, the fold and church of
Christ. We may then boldly say, that such ministers are to be obeyed who (as
an Ian. lib. 4. cap. 43.
ancient father says) together with the succession of their Bishoprics
according to the good will of God the father, have received the certain gift
of the truth, which while the church of Rome, that now is, has not done,
because they do not believe in those things which are, they are fallen into
those things which are not; and having forsaken, the pure and chaste nature and
beutifull ornaments of the true spouse of Christ, which is the sincere doctrine
of holy scripture, they are feign to array themselves in the counterfeit and
common whorish apparel of all the filthy idolaters of the world, the vain
pretense of antiquity, universality etc. But yet this suit of apparel will
not serve them, no more then that can fit a child borne yesterday, which is
large and wide for a man of a great and full stature. For how do these terms
agree to that apostalical sea of Rome which is one of the last and lowest borne
children of superstition begotten of the devil in this last fury of his old
age, even now he knows his time is very short. For as it shall appear in
the latter part of this book, (through Gods gracious assistance) the synagogue
of Rome will want at the least 4500. years of that antiquity, universality, and
visible succession, which I have here, already showed to appertain, to the
true ancient catholic religion of Gods most holy and undoubted church
founded in Adams promise, separated in Abraham's posterity, published and
offered to all the world by Christ's most blessed Apostles. For an introduction
into which matter I will in this Chapter (through my Lord Christ's favor and
grace) show unto thee (good Christian reader) how this religion of ours, now
professed and openly maintained in England (which is manifestly proved
already in the Chapter going before, to be the ancient true faith, from the
beginning of the world, and namely and especially from our father Abraham) now
in these latter days has descended and continued by succession visible in the
world, from the Apostles time unto ours. For although we brag not of
antiquity and universality, yet we do humbly thank our loving God, and
merciful father in Jesus Christ, that unto us the pure doctrine and true
Christian religion is come and is fruitful, as ever it has bin in any part of
the world, and we are made the children of Abraham through faith in Jesus
Christ.

2 And that you may understand this the better, you are to know the measure
hereof by the holy scriptures of God, which as a line being gone over all the
world does show the tract and footesteppes of religion, among the gentilles
unto the end of the world. In the 24. of Matthew, the 17. and 21. of Luke, and
in the Revelation of Saint John, is fore described, the treading under feet of
Jerusalem and the Jews, until the times of the gentiles be fulfilled, and
that in these times should arise false prophets and false Christ's and deceive
many, yea great chaunges and alteration in religion should be in all the
Christian world. The kings and princes of the earth should obey the will of the
least, and this obedience should be so universal, that no man should be
permitted to buy or sell, without his mark in their foreheades: the prophets
and witnesses of Christ should be slain, and there should be the patience
and trial of the Saints. Smoke coming out of the bottomless pit covers
the air, and hides the Sun Moon and stars. What does this show but that the
world should be found a continual enemy to the true religion, and that the
faith of Christ should not always be universally professed and maintained, but
that the Christian Churches should fall into errors: and that the true
religious and faithful people of God, should pass through the furnace of the
fiery trial, and be as it were here and there certain scattered stones of
a building, that is witnesses standing up for the truth, testifying that there
is a pure religion ordained and accepted of God: And not that the Church
should be always a beautiful pauilion and goodly temple wherein the King
dwells, seen and admired, and honored of all men. According to that of
Christ: Math. 24.13.
Because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold. And this
coldness shall be so great and so universal, that the true professors of
Gods true religion Verse. 9.
shall be hated of all men, and men Ioh. 16.1.2
shall think they do God service, when they kill any of them. And the ground of
this Saint Paul shows saying: 2. Tim. 4.3.
The time will come when they will not suffer wholesome doctrine etc. And yet
it seems to be more fully opened where he foretells, that there must be
an 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
Apostasy or falling from the faith, before the world could have an end, and
the man of sin disclosed, 4
which is an adversary, and exalts himself against that is called God, or
that is worshipped, so that he does sit as God in the temple of God. And a
little after: 7
For the mystery of iniquity does already work etc. Wherein he teaches
plainly four things. First, that there should be a general decay of
religion in the Church. Secondly, that it should be by such an adversary of
Christ as should reign in the Church. Thirdly, that he should be revealed in
his time. And fourthly, that this was an hid and secret thing, which did
begin to work secretly, even in the Apostles time. By which we may
perceive the succession and universality of the Church, in the visible show
and flourishing of the true religion, is not to be found nor looked for in all
the times of the gospel after the Apostles days, but that by little and
little it should be darkened corrupted and hidden. For how can that be said
to be the true visible Church of Christ, where his adversary dwells, and
bears all the rule aduauncing himself as God? And whereas touching the true
faith the people are fallen into an Apostasy? And the reason he gives,
confirms it directly, that it should undoubtedly fall out and so come to
pass: for he afterward affirms that it comes of the righteous judgment
of God upon the reprobate saying: God shall send them strong delusion that
they should believe lies, that all they might be damned, Verse. 12.12.
which believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness: which
thing if it be well seen into and uprightly waied, it will convince the church
of Rome, to be of the false religion and antechristian church: and their
bravery of profession, their antiquity universality and visible succession,
to be the sitting of the man of sin in the temple of God, that is the plague
and running soar of the Church, the damnation of many souls, and that now
within these few years, the gospel teaching the true Christian religion, has
revealed their Apostasy: and that so openly and clearly, as every man may see
it, if he do not wilfully blind his own eyes.

3 Now if they say that the Church cannot err, and thereupon build their
antiquity, universality, succession etc. Namely, that they must needs be
the true Church being so actiuely and universally visible in their continued
succession: because it belongs to the Church under the gospel (as they say)
to be as the Moon that never is ecclipsed, nor covered under a cloud, but
always appears glorious and beautiful unto the world: then do they
evidently declare, and prove themselves to be the false sinagogue of Satan,
and their religion to be his delusions and lies. Because the word of God does
so manifestly say there shall be an Apostasy and falling away in religion and
that the enemy of Christ should reign in the place of Gods temple. And least
happily we should be deceived in thus judging: even in this one point of
their religion that they hold that the church cannot err, they convince
themselves to be Antechrist, many ways; especially in that they make the
authority of the Church above the scriptures, that they might be judges of it
and not of them. What do they herein more truly then profess to all the
world, that there sits amongst them the adversary, that exalts himself
against all that is called God: for what is there in the whole world, by which
God is known or can be known truly and rightly to be God, and by which God
is exalted, and all his honor, truth and word magnified, and his will wisdom
and goodness glorified and worshipped, but only the inspired writings of the
blessed book of God? If they having no truth on their side to maintain
themselves to be the Church of God, they will foist in with a brazen face,
contrary to evident scripture this untruth, that the church cannot err, and
thereupon usurp authority over this book of God, and after it to have no
authority, but such as they allow, and to have no other meaning or sense, but
such as they give: and so God and his holy law, must look for no other name,
credit and dignity, but as it pleases them being men to give. And so again,
God and his word should not be builders and describers of the Church, but the
Church builders and describers of God and his word, does it not then
necessarily follow, that they are very Antechrist and the seat of Apostasy.
Moreover, if Christ say this Apostasy should be so great, that if it were
possible Math. 24.24.
the very elect should be deceived. Are not they very Antechrist, to make
the Church always visible, and not able to err? And let the godly Christian
reader consider what use there is of these rules and precepts. Math. 7. 1. Ioh.
4.1.2. 2. Ioh. verse. 9.
Beware of false prophets, believe not every spirit etc. hereby shall you know
the spirit of God, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God: whosoever
transgresses and abides not in the doctrine of Christ has not God, etc.
Again there is prophesied of a woman whose name is, Reuelat. 17. and 18.
A mystery, great Babylon, the mother of whordoms and abominations of the
earth, which is a great city, which reigns over the kings of the earth, and
all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication: And God says
to us, Go out of her my people, etc. If the true use of these scriptures teach
us two things, first that we must try and judge the false prophets, the
spirits and whosoever may call themselves the Church, by the doctrine of Christ
expressed in the scriptures, and that under the time of the gospel, a city by
false doctrine should poison all nations, and we ought to go out of that city:
how can any man judge the City of Rome, which calls her self the mother of
all Churches, and usurps over all nations, seeing that it has forsaken the
truth, and yet claims universality and perpetual succession visible, and
refuses to be tried by the holy oracles of God, these rules and Canons of holy
scriptures, how I say can any man judge otherwise, but that it is the very
seat of Antechrist? And in this that it would be maintained, by saying it
cannot err, it erreth most apparently. And therefore that only is the true
Church and house of God, whether visible or invisible, Heb. 3.6. Math. 18.20.
which holds fast the true faith, where two or three are gathered together in
Christ's name, and not that which pretends visible succession, and says it
cannot err.

4 Howbeit in all this time it was not, as the church of Rome would bear us in
hand, that our religion which is that ancient religion of Abraham, had such an
eclipse, that it cannot be traced in these 1600. years after Christ: for as
before the coming of Christ, it lay hid in comparison of the universality
of the whole world, in the house and posterity of Abraham, and sometime more
then other appearing and shining forth, when God made his glorious truth to
cast the beams of light far and wide, at such times as he made his saints
glorious by deliverance as out of Egypt and Babylon: And in subduing the
Cananites, in prospering, David, Solomon, Iehoshaphat, Ezekiah, and Ioshiah. So
in this time of Christianity among the Gentiles, there has been as it were an
ebbing and flowing, and as I may say, a morning and an evening. For the gospel
beginning with small degrees, and like a grain of mustard seed, was
persecuted by the universal world at the first. And yet prevailed mightily
through all those bitter and intolerable persecutions of the first three
hundred years, in so much as in the first Christian Emperors days, namely
Constantine the great, when he summoned the first general Council of Nice,
for the cause of Arrius, there came 318. Bishops, and these were from all
parts of the world, West as far as Spain, and North in a manner at the
very North Pole. So that all the world stood amassed, at the glorious shining
of the son of righteousness in those happy days. Yet men know that read
the stories of the church, what whiles that blasphemous heretic did work,
how many friends and abettors he had, what great afflictions that good
Catholic Bishop Athanasius, had, and what persecution for many years
together, the true believers endured after the death of that good Emperor, by
the ouerspreading of the Arrians and their followers. Howbeit although that
persecution much afflicted the faithful, and darkened the beauty of the
Church, and many heretics invaded them very sore, and diverse living in
wilderness and solitary places, devised strange forms and services of God:
yet for the space of six hundred years and more, the universal Church was
not so much tainted; but God raised up notable pillars of truth and lights of
his church, by whom the truth of faith and found religion had all that time a
most excellent witness. For the Apostles ended at the death of John the
Evangelist, Anno 99. Ignatius lived about Anno 110. having been John's
disciple, and Bishop of Antioch. Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, and Justinius
martyr at Rome, Anno 140. Iraeneus Bishop of Lions in France Anno 175.
Tertullian in Afric flourished about Anno 190. Origin of Alexandria about
Anno 210. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage Anno 255. Arnobius, 310. Lactantius
Firmianus 325. Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria in Egypt 340. Hilarious B. of
Pictauia in Aquitania, 360. Basilius B. of Caesarea in Cappadocia, 370.
Gregorius B. of Nazanzen. Epiphanius B. of Cyprus, Ambrose B. of Millain.
Hieronymus Stridonensis, Augustine B. of Hippo, John Chrisostom B. of
Constantinop. Possidonius, Prosper, Fulgentin Casiodonus, Gregorius first of
that name B. of Rome. These and very many more very good writers, beside
infinite others lived in that first 600. years and some after by whom the light
of Gods truth and the pure religion, was defended against diverse and sundry
sorts of heretics, and declared by sermons and godly interpretations of holy
scripture, which may evidently appear, even unto him that can but read the
English toonge, if he peruse the writings of our reverend Bishops and teachers
of this land. First the challenge was made by master Jewel, in a Sermon
preached at Paul's cross, Anno 1560. the Sunday before Easter, that for 600.
years after Christ our religion might be defended by the writings of fathers
and counsels: secondly the defense was most truly and fully performed, by
the same master Jewel against Harding, by master Horn against Fecknam, master
Pilkington against the man of Chester, master Punet against Th. Martin, as also
by master Noel against Dorman, master Edward Deering to Hardings reioinder,
master Calfils answer to Marshals defense of the cross, master Fulke against
Allin, Sanders, Bristow etc. and by the conference in the Tower with Campion,
and that of master Reinolds with Heart. In these and diverse others very notable
english books, all points of our Christian faith, are not only maintained by
the writings of the foresaid ancient Fathers and Counsels of the first six
hundred years: but also by diverse other wrighters and Counsels followinge in
other ages, yea by diverse Papists as the Schoolmen, popish decrees,
decretals and historiographers. But we do frankely confess that six hundred
years after Christ being past, the visible church not so well seasoned, nor
the true faith so openly universally and faithfully maintained, but more and
more decayed, obscured and darkened: until the revelation of Antechrist, which
has been since Luther. Neither do we take it to be any derogation to the
truth, seeing that these last nine hundredth years, were the days of darkness,
and the time of the punishment of God, that they which regarded not to know
God, should be given over to lies and fables, as is before manifestly proved
by the scriptures. Notwithstanding in all this time, it was not so obscure and
hidden, but that the stories of these mystie days, do afford us sufficient
matter and marks, whereby we may find, where, how and in what sort, the true
faith and religion strove with the foolish and unthankful heart of man,
offering him in all this declining and apostatical generations, the ioifull
light of truth and the right way of peace and salvation, but they would not,
but they fought against it: and herein I will not stand to rehearse all
particulers (which would ask a great volume) but only mention that which is
most general and notoriously known, until this 600. years the churches by
east and west were in unity and the christian faith continued, his universal
and visible succession, but shortly after, by reason that Bonifacius the
third, obtained the supremacy over all Bishops and brought it into the sea of
Rome, there grew discontentments, which continued up and down, until
Hildebrande came up about An. 1237. all which time the Greek church eastwarde,
held the ancient catholic faith, as we now do; but by means that the Greeks
condiscended not to the unmeasurable pride of the popes, there was made a
separation, and so the faith was found only in the Grecians, amongst whom it
also remained, as it may appear by this that in the time of the counsel of
Basil, about An. 1440. Engenious the fourth in a private convocation at
Florence, labored the grecians to condescende to the latin church to allow of
purgatory, of the popes supremacy, of unleavened bread in the communion and
of transubstantiation, so that the east churches, which contain not only
Grecia, but also the Ethiopians, Syrians, and many other great nations, did in
some good measure hold out the true faith until this time. Now in the west
parts, there were certain men called Waldenses or Albigences, and Pauperes de
Lugduno, who first at Lions in France, and after in diverse other places, as
Meridoll and Cabriers and in many towns of the country of Piemont, in great
numbers showed themselves, from An. 1160. till the time of Luther, John
Wickliefe and his fellows, and with them the good christians called Lollards
did show themselves in England in the time of Edward the third about the year
1371. and thenceforth and in the time of Richard the second whereof followed
great persecution many years. John Husse and Hierom of Prage, with the country
of Bohemia, were famous for the true religion, at the counsel of Constance
about, Anno 1413. and many years after; So that when Luther came up, he found
not the gospel and true religion without witness in diverse places. Therefore
(leaving out Berthramus in France, John Scotus in England, and very many
notable men in diverse countries, whom God stirred up here and there, even in
these evil days of darkness, some by writing, some by preaching, some by
suffering and by death, to give testimony, in these west parts, and under the
Popes nose) I may boldly conclude this Chapter with humble and hearty thanks
to God, that the religion, which we hold and profess in England, is the
only true ancient catholic and universal religion, wherein and whereby God
has been truly served and worshipped, his elect saved and the true faith
confessed from the beginning of the world and namely from Abraham, even unto
our days, which is now 5528. years, and the gates of hell could never
prevail against it, no power of men subdue it, no heresies overthrow it, no
wisdom or learning confute it, no persecutions destroy it, no policy nor
cruelty subvert it, no tract of time wear it out, no changes or subuersions
of kingdoms, countries or states over whelme it, no laws, edicts, counsels,
canons, cursses, decrees or decretals, put it down or banishe it. Magna est
veritas and preualet: Great is the truth and prevails, Blessed be the God of
truth: And herein is fulfilled, that which the prophet says, Psalm. 19.9. and
102.27.28.
The fear of the Lord is clean and endure for ever: And thou, O God, art the
same, and thy years fail not, the children of thy servants shall continue,
and their seed shall stand fast in thy sight.

The second part; of the newnes of Popery.
CHAP. I. How the Romish superstition disagreeth with the true ancient
catholic religion and faith of Gods elect, where is declared, 1. How many
ways in this sort, disagreement is to be found, 2. And that in all the
former fifteen articles they disagree very greatly.
THere are two things, which do evidently argue, the new and late begetting
and birth of Romish heresy. The Ante-christianitie or disagreement it has,
with the pure holy and old faith, which God has once given to the Saints, and
the conformity and agreement it has with all heretical prauitie. For seeing
that all men know and the papists themselves must needs confess, that it is
come forth, within these last times of the world (for the face thereof never
saw the son before) if it agree not with the wholesome truth of the inspired
scriptures of God, and so not of the ancient catholic faith of Gods chosen;
but resembles and bears the express and indeleble charecter, of filthy newborn heresy: it must needs leese those dainty terms of unity, antiquity,
universality, visible succession and of the old and catholic religion. And
so the truth is: For as then the Popes of Rome, became most lofty and proud
and advanced themselves above all estates, when they used in their style, the
lowly terms of seruus seruorum, Servant of Servants: so seized they then to
be truly and in deed Catholic or universal, when cutting of themselves from
the true universal church and religion, they tied the name and honor of
Catholic church to one place, calling it, contrary to the holy creed: The
catholic church of Rome. Therefore as I have in the former part showed the
ancient and unchangeable religion, what it is and how it has continued unto
this our age, so now I doubt not but that it shall appear, through Gods grace
to every honest conscience of any reasonable capacity, not forestalled with
the prejudice of willful blindness; that the church of Rome and the religion
thereof is not of the same generation, and has no affinity with God and his
truth; but is altogether, earthly, sensual and devilish. And first of the
disagreement it has with the true faith: that is, what it is not: and then of
the agreement, with heresy, that is, what it is. In the first part the reader
is to understand that disagreement is in diverse sorts: sometime direct and
plain contrary, as light and darkness: sometime contradictorie, where one
saying is the destruction of an other, as to say: A man is a reasonable
creature, and to say: a man is not a reasonable creature. Sometime they
disagree by having a differing nature, though not so directly set on against an
other, as a stone, an egg, and a tree differ from a man, sometime the
disagreement is hidden, and underhand, when there is a show to maintain the
truth in words, and yet in deeds, coming in by some hidden and closely carried
circumstance, men overthrew the same truth. 2. Sam. 3.27.
As Ioab spoke with his mouth peaceable unto Abner, and with his hand he smote
him under the fifth ribbe, that he died. And there is yet an other difference
which is expressly named in holy scripture, that is, when in a matter taught in
the scripture definitiuely, men either take away something and make it too
short or too little, or else add something and make it too long or too great.
Wheresoever there is any of these disagreements, they cannot be said to be one
and the same, and so the church of Rome, in all points of Christian religion,
differing in some one of these kinds, cannot be said to be of the true
catholic religion. As in the first kind, the true religion 1. Tim. 4.1.2.3.
says; It is the spirit of errors and doctrine of devils, to forbid marriage
and to abstain from meats. The sea of Rome say directly contrary: that by the
holy ghost and spirit of truth, they forbid marriage and to abstain from
meats. In the second kind the true religion says: Romans 3.28.
A man is justified by faith without works: they say, A man is not justified
by faith without works. In the third kind the true religion says: Heb. 1.3.
Jesus Christ has by himself purged our sins: they say we are purged also, by
satisfaction, purgatory, indulgences and diverse other things. In the fourth
kind the true religion says: that Jacob 1.21.
the word of God is able to save our souls. The synagogue of Rome do so say
also in words, but in deed they cut the throat of Gods word, by equalling or
preferring of traditions, canons, decrees, decre^als and human customs, even
as Christ Matthew. 15.6.
speaks of the pharisees (who also in words pretended Gods word) that they
make the word of God of no effect or authority by their tradition. But as
touching the last disagreement, that shameless whore of Babylon, diminishes
and takes from Gods word, when they keep the cup from the common people: and
add unto Gods word, when they cause the sacrament to be lifted up and adored:
and very many such things they do. Therefore if I show that in all parts of
religion they disagree from the truth in one of these kinds: it will be
sufficient, to prove, that their abominations are nothing sauouring, of the
true ancient religion.

2. And this I will do (God willing) in two sorts: First in this Chapter, by
showing how they disagree with the articles taught out of Gods word in the
former part; and secondly in the next Chapter, how dissent, from the doctrine
of S. Paul, and S. Peter, (who^ they say to have bin at Rome and to be
planters of that church) and in this first I must desire the reader, to look
upon every article as before cap. 2. and he shall easily see the disagreement,
for I will but a little open and briefly point out their error, and the
disagreement will be manifest of it self. Mark therefore (good Reader) what
I say, and be not partial. And first of all they seem to be nearest the truth
in (that which I have placed for the first article) the faith and doctrine of
the trinity, and in words speak very distinctly both in Canons, decrees,
decretals, and also in other writings: So that some notable learned men hold
them sound in this matter; and others go further, that by this and one or two
more, they would draw them into the holy communion of Saints. But if in these
they are (as Ioab only in words, and that their hands strike through this
doctrine, so that in the hearts of men this doctrine cannot live; because they
are taught and believe and do such things as overthrow the same; then are they
not to be held and reputed sound in this article. And first touching the the
unity in the godhead, whosoever gives that to any other thing, which is
natural and essential unto god, he makes that other thing to be god; and so
consequently if the sea of Rome do so to any creature, they make mo gods then
one. But that they ascribe to creatures that which is proper and essential to
God, may be seen in three things. First in the virgin Marie and the Saints,
first they Hone in laud. beat. vir. Mar. ad vsum Romans
call her the Queen of heaven. Matter gratiae, matter misericordiae, mother of
grace and mother of mercy, domina angelorum lady or mistres over the angels;
princeps mundi and regina, prince and Queen of the world; and they say unto
her. Virgo singularis inter omnes, malis nos culpis solutos, mites fac and
castos etc. O virgin singular among al, make us being freed from al faults,
gentle and chaste, give us a pure life, prepare us a safe way, that seeing
Christ we may always rejoice together, and unto her and Io. theuangelist they
pray. Vobis duobus ego miserimus peccator etc. unto you two I a most miserable
sinner come^d this day my body and my soul, that at al hours and mome^ts you
would vouchsafe to be my sure keepers and devout intercessors unto god, unto
Peter they say. Miscate Roman. S. Aug. S. Pet. ad vincent Alleluia.
Solue iubente deo terraru^, Petro, catenus etc. loose O Peter by Gods cu^mand
the chains of the earth, who openest the heavenly kingdoms to the blessed of
Frances the minorite they say; Lib. confor. mit. Franc. ad vitam xli. lib. 1.
sunct 4. and lib. 2. funct. 3.
cordiu^ vidit arcana, he saw the secrets of the hearts, al things created were
obedient unto him: they which hold the leading of blessed Fra^ces cannot be
ruled by the darkness of error, and by the light infused granted him of god, men
are so enlightened that the conscience of one man is naked to an other. Now if
it be properly apertaining to theuerlasting being and al sufficie^cy of god, as
his word teaches, to be governor of the world, Lord of angels father of mercy
and grace, to make a man gentil, chaste and pure in life, to be every moment
keeper of body and soul, to open heaven, to know the hearts, to whom all
creatures are obedient; Then it follows, that seeing by their custom of
prayer and otherwise they give these things to the virgin Marie and to Saints
they underhand overthrow the doctrine of one God, and make many Gods. And when
they make Test. Rein. Revel. cap. 2. ver. 22. Compendium cor terta. D. Ioh.
Bunder. tit. 23. Arti. 11. Non visit quis dinum Job, vt scabie careat.
Saints patrons of countries (as Peter and Paul over Rome) and healers of
disseases, (as Job to cure the scabbe) what other thing do they, but (as the
heathen did) make several Gods for several offices. Secondly this making of
many Gods may be seen in the Pope. For of him they say Gratian. decret. pars
2. cause. 17. quest. 4. cap. Si quis and nemini. Greg. decretal. lib. 1. de
translat. Episc. tit. 7. cap. 3. Gloss. 16.
De iudicio summi pontificis disputare non licet: it is not lawful to dispute
of the judgment of the hiest Bishop. c Non homo sed Deus seperat quos R.P. not
man but God seperateth, whom the Bishop of Rome seperateth etc. which is
declared by the gloss that hereof he is said, Habere celeste arbitrium, and
ideo etiam naturam rerum immutat etc. to have an heavenly judgment, and
therefore also he changes the nature of things, applying the substantial of
one thing unto an other; he can make of nothing something, and the sentence
which is nothing he makes something, in those things he will, his will is to him
in steed of reason, neither is there any man that can say unto him, why do
thou so? for he can dispense above law, he can make justice of injustice by
correcting the laws and changing them, and he has the fulness of power. But I
will not load the reader with that which here might be alleged only, I
desire him to consider, whether the Pope do not herein arrogate the power and
majesty of God. For what can be said more of God, then that we may not dispute
of his judgment, that he has the heavenly judgment and power to give
sentence to change the nature of things to make nothing something, to make
injustice justice, to dispense with law, and to have such fulness of power that
his will is law and reason and no man can say why do thou so? is such a thing
the gift of God to any man? do they not make the Pope another God, or else a
fourth person in the Trinity? The third thing is the sacrament, wherein this
blasphemy of making plurality of gods is also to be seen. For when they say
Cstrists body in the sacrament, consecrated, at one time in a thousand places,
or if it should happen over all the world, that then in all those places is
one, and the same Christ's body, and that realie truly and wholly, and yet the
scripture teaches he is truly, really and wholly at the right hand of his
father in heaven, let wise and learned men consider, wheather this be not to
make a new God of the manhood or body of Christ to give that to his manhood,
which belongs to his Godhead, of which it is said: Psalm. 139.7.
He is in the heavens, he is in hell, and he is in the utmost part of the sea.
Again when they say of the priest in consecrating (when they speak best) that
he makes the body and blood of Christ, do they not give unto him more then
the power of a creature. And yet being not content with this they fear not to
add and to say: Sermon. discip. ser. 111.
Sacerdos est altior regibus, faelicior angelis, creator creatoris. The priest
is hier then kings, happier then angels, and creator of his creator. Tell me if
this be not to make the priest God, and more then God: for greater is he that
makes the creator, then he that makes the creature. If any man mislike this
collectio^, let him in his conscience only way this whither that by this
transubstantiation, they do not make a babble or a toy in steed of God, when
they can make him at their pleasure with the intent of the church: which will
be as much against this article as can be, for verily if they believed there
were a God, and considered what belongs to his glorious majesty, they would
not thus presume and exalt them selves and think him or his manhood at their
commandment. As touching the trinity, in words they say: Greg. decretal. tit.
1. cap. 1. firmiter credimus.
Firmiter credimus and simpliciter confitemur etc. we firmly believe and
confess, that there is one only true God, everlasting, infinite unchangeable,
incomprehensible, omnipotent and ineffable the father, son and holy ghost,
three in person, but one in essence etc. this holy trinity, according to the
comune nature is undivided, and according to the personal properties distinct.
All this sounds well; but alas it is but as saint Paul says: Tit. 1.16.
They profess they know God but by their works they deny him. For in setting
up the rood and cross in the churches and in glass windows to be crowched
unto, where they make God the father like an old man, and God the son like a
young man, and the holy ghost like a dove: by their deeds they overthrow that
which they say they firmly believe: For if they believed that God were
exceeding all measure, in comprehensible and unspeakable: then would they not
dare, to draw him out and set him forth by an engraven image, which can in no
part represent his divine and infinite Romans 1.23.
glory. Again how can the common people, or almost any the staydest man in the
world (especially if he come with devotion to worship that image) but that in
beholding the same, he shall have in his mind, an inpression, of an earthly and
visible shape and likeness to be in God. and when he severally sees these three
pictures and images, how can he avoid the imagination, that these three persons
in the godhead, are as three separate persons of men among us, as of Peter,
James and John, which is contrary to their sayings, that this trinity in regard
of the common nature undivided, as we may say in number to be one and the same.
And this is utterly contrary to the catholic religion, to have such a vile
imagination of god and of his invisible and unspeakable power as you may read
in the old testament in these words: Deuteronomy. 4.15.16.
take good heed to your selves: for ye saw no image in the day that the Lord
spoke unto you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire, that ye corrupt not your
selves, and make you a graven image, or representation of any figure, whether
it be the likeness of male or female etc. and in the new testament: Act. 27.29.
For as much as we are the generation of God, we ought not to think that the
godhead, is like unto gold or silver, or stone graven by art and invention of
man. In the second article the disagreement is, that they of the sea of Rome,
make not God the cause of causes; but tyeth him to second causes, and that his
Test. Rhem. a note, Romans 9. ver. 11.
eternal counsel respected men's works, and determined according to works
forseene: and Nic. Dorbet distinct 41. Artic. 2.
would have al men to be saved, quantum in se est, as much as lies in him, and
they say, Sicut presciuit and predestinauit quae ipse fecit etc. Gratian pars 2
cause. 23. Q. 4 ca. Nabucho.
As he foreknew and predestined the things he did, and gave us to do: so he
foreknew only and did not predestinate, the things which neither himself did,
neither required that we should do etc. without doubt all things which God
forknoweth shall be, shall be done in deed, but some certain of them proceed
from free will. In which you may see all these points contrary to the true
faith: First, free will is made author of some things and God only forknoweth
it: 2. Gods will is debarred to have to do in those things he commands not: 3.
That he decrees only the elect, and only forseeth touching the reprobate:
Lastly that his will was to save all men as much as in him was, as if they
should say, if he had been able. All these do limit the hie and unsearchable
counsel of him which is the cause of all causes, and setteh the will of man in
the foresight of God to be his instructor; most contrariant to the holy
religion of Gods elect, which humbly confess unto God, in the old Testament,
thus: Hier. 10.23.
O Lord I know that the way of man is not in him self, neither is it in man to
walk and to direct his steps, and in the new, thus: Revel. 4.11.
Thou art worthy O Lord, to receive glory and honor and power: for thou have
created all things, and for thy will sake they are and have been created.
Touching the third article, the conspiracy of Rome do accurse the true
religion: namely Council. trident sess. 6. canon 4.
If any man say that man's free will, being moved and stirred by God, does
nothing at all, work together, by ascenting to God, as he stirs and
calls, whereby he does frame and prepare himself to obtain the grace of
justification: and again, Canon 7.
If any man say, all works which are done before justification, whowsoeuer
they be done, to be truly sin, and deserve the hatred of God, and therefore
they say that Test. Rhem. in Math. 12.
It is in man's own free will and election to be a good tree or an ill tree, and
again. ver. 33. in marg. and in Act. 10. ver. 2.
Such works as are done before justification, though they suffice to salvation,
yet be acceptable preparatiues to the grace of justification, and such as
move God to mercy, and again: Nich. Deorhel distinct 41. sent. 1. Artic. 1.
Cum peccator facit quod in se est, meretur de congruo iustificari etc. When a
sinner does that which in him is, he deserves of congruitie to be justified,
or after a sort, by the Condosentia diuinae liberalitatis.
beseeming or becoming of the divine liberality. Here thou see three
things of Popery contrary to the christian verity: First that man's heart is
not altogether and universally corrupted by Adams fall: Secondly that Gods grace
does but stir up and move man's free will, and thridlie by congruitie the
works before faith diserue and prepare unto grace and please God. And they
have yet a fourth namely that; Council. trident. sess. 5. Apendix.
The virgin Marie was not conceived in sin. Certes al these are contrary to
the true religion; which in the old Testament says: Genesis 6.5.
All the imaginations of the thoughts of man's heart are only evil continually:
and in the new; 2. Cor. 3.5.
we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves, but
our sufficiency is of God.

As touching the fourth article, how we are delivered from the corruption and
damnable estate, wherinto we fell by Adams transgression: There be many ways
and religions forged, in the great cage of Antechrist, full of unclean birds:
out of which, as out of the botomles pit, come great swarms of locustes,
bringing with them a mist and cloud of darkness, which hides all godliness and
true religion. But to leave out very many devises till another place, I only
wish the reader, to call to mind, the holy Eremits, Munks, Friars, and Nuns,
and namly amongst the manifold broods, one Frances, and an other Dominick. This
latter bread the religion of the obseruant preaching black friars, and the
former the devout host of the beggarly minorites, and out of these two many
seckes of diverse rules and names of religions, who by their vow and straight
observation, by them devised, set down diverse rules to subdue this corruption
and to obtain eternal life, therefore they are by an excellency of speech
called by the name Gratian decret. pars 2. cause. 19. Quest. 3. Bonauentur. de
profectu religios. Antho. de Rampegol. fig. Biblia. Catholicon a Johan. de
Ianua. in virgo.
of religion or religions, and al other are called seculer, because they
renounce the world, and by fulfilling of three perfections, which they observe,
that is to say. Poverty, chastity, and obedience, (by which they are compared
unto angels) the blessed crown, which is given unto such (as they say) they
shall obtain, even the special reward of the learned, being presented unto
Christ in the heavenly kingdom. And the opinion and devotion of these
religions grew to be so highly esteemed of men, and their life to be so
angelical, that in steed of christ and his merits, men would leave al things
whatsoever to follow them; ye the very coule and garment of Frances, was
thought to be of such virtue, that some Ioh. Sleiden lib. 12.
noble men, some very learned of those times, have taken order to be buried in
them, yea and they are not afraid Iere. Bouch. in his conformities.
to compare him with Christ in all things. Therefore you may perceive they had
forgotten the true religion and way of salvation which is in christ; Genesis 12.3.
in the old testament is called the seed of Abraham, in whom all the families of
the earth were appointed to be blessed, and in the new testament he is called,
Ioh. 14.6.
the way, the truth, and the life; and the rule of this religion is, that cap.
3.16.
that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life.
Therefore here is no agreement between these popish religions, and the true
ancient and catholic religion, seeing they teach many other ways to heaven,
beside that which God has taught us to be the only way for all the families
of the earth to be blessed.

Concerning the fifth article, these bastardly counterfeites of Rome are more
like the strange beast of Arabia and Ethiopia, then the obseruers of the true
religion. For they greatly wound the doctrine of Christ's person under a color
of honoring him, and they overthrow his mediatorship by pretense of devotion.
For while they give godly honor to his body in the sacrament, and make him to
be a very man under the forms of bread and wine, invisible and in all places
where the priest does consecrate, do they not make him a man in fancy, to
have an heavenly body, in no part to be like a true natural man? do they
not hereby make him to have but one nature which is God, or else that the
manhood is swallowed up or confounded with the Godhead? for it is the nature of
God and not of man to be invisible, incircumscriptible, and in many places at
once: therefore in stead of the seed and son of David and Abraham, they
teach us to believe they cannot tell what. But as touching his office, all men
know, how many mediators and intercessors they call upon beside Christ, (Though
1. Tim. 2.5.
Gods word say there is but one mediator) Marie, Peter, Paul, all the Apostles,
martirs and foolishly canonized Saints, are made mediators. Then against
Christ's sacrifice (by whose perfection all sacrifice should cease as Heb. 10.18.
God teaches) they have a new devised sacrifice for quick and dead, they have
masses, diriges, pilgrimage, shrift, penance, purgatory, indulgencies,
satisfaction, merit, devout observations, numbering of prayers, Auemaries,
creedes, fastes, alms, works of supererogation, vows, vestementes, crosses,
tapers, relickes, shrines, ointinges, coniurings, and I know not what other
trumperie, and beggarly rudimentes of this world, by which they would make
perfect the works of Christ's mediation, for our redemption righteousness and
salvation. Which the more they be abundant and ouerflowing, the greater is
their disagreement with the true religion of God: which teaches in the old
testament, thus: Esai. 53.5.6.
God laid upon Christ the iniquity of us all, namely, that he was wounded
for our transgressions and broken for our iniquities, the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. And in the new
testament, thus: 1. Ioh. 1.7.
The blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from all sin. Now if Christ
blood cleanse us from all sin, and by his stripes we be healed; alas what
need we make so much ado? why do we forsake the Ioh. 1.24. Esai. 55.1.2.3
lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world with the sure mercies of
David, and seek after vain things in which there is no help? why should we
commit these Hier. 2.23.
two evils to forsake God the fountain of living waters, and to dig unto our
selves pittes, even broken pittes, which will hold no water?

In the sixth Article, the opposition is plain and apparent, for although they
whom Christ teaches say, that all Philip. 3.4.
righteousness taught by works is but dunge in comparison of the doctrine of
righteousness which is by faith only: yet they of this whoorish Babylon deny
it, and Antidigma Coloniens. cap. de iustificat. and per quas causas. Council.
Trident. sess. 6.
make faith with hope and love the formal cause of our righteousness, they
make an inherent righteousness: And affirm directly, that a man is not
justified by faith only, but also by works. Is not this a very great
disagreement, where as the true religion teaches the Church of God to say: as
in the old testament, thus; Psalm. 143.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall none that
lives be justified. And in the new testament thus, Romans 3.23.24.
There is no difference for all have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of
God: and are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in
Christ Jesus: 25.
whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood etc.

In the seventh Article, there are three contradictories of the lying and
erring multitude of Rome, unto the true religion. For they Council. Trident.
sessi. 5. and sess. 6. canon. 18. and 25.
say that Concupiscence in the regenerate after baptism is no sin, although
they confess Saint Paul calls it sin. 2. That there is nothing in him
displeasing God, but he is pure, innocent and immaculate. 3. A justified man
can keep all Gods commandments. If these men had learned and believed the
true religion, they would not dare to speak so directly contrary to truth,
seeing God teaches far otherwise. First in the old testament where the church
is directed to say Esai. 64.6.
: We have bin all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness as filthy
clouts. And in the new testament, 1. Ioh. 1.8.
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves and truth is not in us. Which
two places being spoken of the people being by the sacrament of initiation (or
Baptism) entered into the Church, do show plainly that original corruption is
a sinful matter in the flesh of the regenerate, by which they are made unable
to do any one work perfect, much less to do all Gods commandments at all
times, in thought word and deed, a thing which every man's own conscience
does testify, if he be not too much besotted with the looking upon his
fruitless peacockes tail. In the eight Article they make additaments, namely
that Council. Trid. sess. 6. canon 24. 33. 20.
good works are also causes of the increasing of justification, and truly
deserve eternal life and increase of glory, and that the observing of the
commandments of God and the Church, are the condition of the promise of
eternal life, to which the justified man is bound if he will be saved. By
which while they rob Christ of his merits, and give more honor to the
corrupt life of man, and less to the redeemer, and lay an other burden upon
Christians, then that which God lays, and such as no man can bear: they
lead themselves so far from religion, that either by a vain hope of that
which is not, they forsake their own salvation: or else by a grievous desperate
downe-fall, finding themselves (as the truth is) unable to fulfill the
condition, they lay themselves open to everlasting perdition. But God allows
no such additamentes, where he teaches us in the old testament to say unto
him: Psalm. 16.2.
Thou art my Lord, my well doing extends not to thee. And in the new, Luc.
17.10.
When ye have done all those things, which are commanded you, say we are
unprofitable servants etc. And the condition of fulfilling the commandments,
is called Act. 15.10.
a yoke which neither we nor our fathers were able to bear: and if it were
possible to do the commandments, yet the holy Ghost te^^eth us, that Gal.
2.21.
if righteousness be by the law, then Christ died without a cause.

Against the ninth Article the Romists do diversely oppose themselves, showing
themselves to be of no religion. For first they add the commandment of the
church, making it equal unto Gods written word, saying: Great. decre^. pars 1.
did. 20. cap. de libellis.
They which receive not indifferently their Canons, they profitablie
effectually and to purpose hold or believe, neither the catholic faith, nor
the four holy Evangelists. They add moreover, that Distinct. 19.
all the decretals and constitutions of that sea, yea though it decree things
scarce to be borne, yet must they be borne with a godly devotion, though
there be (as Decret. abbreuiat. in versibus.
they say in one book of decrees) above 3000. Again, they say that Council.
Trident. sess. 4. decret. 1. pari pietatis affectu and reuerentia.
Traditions pertain to faith and manners, and that they do receive and embrace
them with equal godly devotion and reverence, as they do the holy scriptures.
Lastly they set the Church before the scriptures, as that by Test. Rhem. note
upon. Gal. 2. verse. 2. and 6. D. Smith brief treatise. cap 2. and 3.
it the scriptures are so far made known to all Christians, as they are not
bound so to take them, unless by the authority of the Church they knew them.
And that the authority of holy scripture depends and hangs upon the
judgment of the universal or catholic church, and that there are many
unwritten verities left by Christ and his Apostles to be believed and obeyed
under pain of damnation. Here is the mouth of blasphemy, if we may believe
the undoubted word of God, how he teaches us to esteem of the holy
scriptures and of the Church: for in the old Testament he says: Esai. 8.20.
To the law and to the testimony, if they speak not according to this word,
it is because there is no light in them. And in the new: 2. Tim. 3.13
The holy scriptures are able to make thee wise unto salvation etc. Let then
every wise man judge, that if the scriptures be able to make a man wise unto
salvation, and that there is no light (that is to say knowledge of truth and
godliness) in them, which agree not to the holy scriptures, what canons,
decrees, decretals, traditions, or unwritten verities, can have any authority,
unless they agree to the written word of God? or that they can contain in
them any thing not written in the scripture, which is of necessity to
salvation, or which not to do or believe is damnation. Again, how can the
scriptures take their authority from the church, seeing that the church is of
no light, unless it be found agreeable to the scriptures: and therefore no
church except it be approved by the scriptures, and so the scripture is judge
over the church and not contrary. And if (I say) the scriptures can make a man
wise unto salvation: it is the greatest folly in the world to clogge the
people of God with so many thousand of needles, canons, decrees, decretals,
traditions, and unwritten (falsely called) verities, and so make the light and
easy yoke of Jesus Christ most heavy and burdenous. If these diuilish
blasphemies were true, alas who could be saved? For who was ever found that did
or could do all the foresaid Canons and traditions? Therefore in them is
fulfilled which is said by the Lord of Hypocrites, Math. 23.4.
They bind heavy and grievous burdens not to be borne, and lay them on men's
sholders: but they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers. Let
us abandon therefore these painted sepulchers and enemies of all true
godliness, which burden Gods house with such great volumes of new laws made by
men, contrary to the true faith and religion: when God tells us expressly
that his Psalm. 19.7. Deuteronomy. 4.
law written in his word, is perfect and conuerteth the soul, and that to it
nothing is to be added or taken away.

In the tenth Article, the contradiction is manifest to the whole world; for
all men see that they restrain the word Catholic to one place, and that the
whole Church should be ruled by her square, and the whole universal world
made catholic by one city: whereas one city cannot be the universal church of
the whole world, which contains the meanest and smallest part of the whole.
Besides this, they do not hold and profess the only true and catholic
faith, but do most earnestly, fearsely and cruelly persecute Christ and his
members, and stand only upon vain titles of antiquity, universality, visible
succession, and other false grounds, which are common to all the wicked and
pagans, and which notwithstanding their brags, can not be found in their
sinagogue and profession. And as is their faith, such is their preaching, man's
traditions and devises, altogether strangers from the life of God: and their
sacraments (as they handle the matter) are not only full of unclean mixtures,
but also perverted and without authority from God. All which, to him that
considers, will be found true, in the examination of the articles going
before and following after: namely that they have nothing (in doctrine or
practice) of the nature of the true Church of God, nor yet those visible marks
which do indeed and truly show, discern and make known the true church and
chaste spouse of Christ.

In the eleventh Article there need but few words, for when they worship the
Roode and other idols, relickes of Saints and the sacrament, and when they pray
to the virgin Marie, to the Apostles, and all canonized Saints of that sea:
every man may by and by perceive that they worship not God only. And if they
would shift us off with their blind distinction of Latin doulia and
hyperdoulia, it is not the daliance of terms that can help the matter, except
the word of God made such a difference. Again, they themselves Preceptoriu^
Nider. precept. 1. cap. 6. Latria idem est quod seruitus Deo exhibita etc.
teach, that latria, which themselves say is a worship due and proper to God
alone, may be done and might lawfully be done to these: namely, to the trinity
of the persons divine, to the three Angels whom Abraham saw, to the done
appearing upon Christ, to the voice of the father, to the words of the holy
scripture, in as much as they proceed from God, to the manhood of Christ
united to his Godhead, to the cross of Christ, to the image of Christ, to the
sacrament of the Eucharist, to the garments, nails and spear of Christ. If
here the proper honor and worship of God be not given to creatures, and that
these things be not disagreeing to the holy and ancient religion, allowed by
God: I know not what is. Let it be tried by that which God says in the old
testament: Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. And in the new Christ speaks in the mind and meaning of the
old: Math. 4.10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

In the twelfth Article there are many disagreementes of Romish superstition
and idolatry, from the true catholic religion. First in the general nature
of a sacrament they add a further power, namely that the sacraments contain
grace, and give grace, and Council trident ses. 7.
that of the work wrought, yea and this always and unto all, on the part of
God; and that without them, or the vow of them a man does not receive of God
the grace of Justification, and that the intent of the Minister is required, at
least according to the general intent of the Church. In which are two manifest
cutthroats of the nature of a Sacrament: for by containing grace etc,
understanding that grace is in the outward sign, and so by the only outward
ministry, as it is wrought by the Minister grace is given: this makes it
more then a sign and a seal of the covenant, and gives that to the outward
sign and work wrought of man, which is due to the spirit of God. And secondly
the necessity of the Priests intention is made an efficient, bearding and
outfacing the institution of God: as though that the being of the Sacrament,
depended not only and wholly upon Gods ordaining and institution, but that it
must have the intent of the minister, to make it a Sacrament. And here they are
to be understood of the Sacraments of the new testament: therefore let us hear
how God in the new law of the gospel does teach the contrary. For he applies
the virtue of both Sacraments to the spirit saying: 1. Cor. 12.13
By one spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or
Grecians, whether we be bound or free, and have been all made to drink into
one spirit: therefore the power is not in the outward sign or work, but only
in the spirit, because that, Ver. 4. and. 11.
the diversities of gifts come of the same spirit, and he distributeth them to
every one severally as he will. And as for the Priests intent, he says in
the same chapter. Ver. 6.
There are diversities of operations, but God is the same which works all in
all. If then God work all, where is the ground of the Priests intent, and if
the spirit distribute as he will, where is the work wrought, etc? There is
yet a third addition, namely that they lay upon these sacraments, the grace of
justification, which God says evidently, is imputed to faith without any
works, even as Romans 4.1.2.3 11. etc. Gal. 3.6.
Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness. Secondly,
for the number: the presuming sea adds five, matrimony, orders,
confirmation, penance, and extreme unction, not one of them having the true
nature of a sacrament, for they are no where ordained and commanded of God to
any such purpose, except we would childishly say as they do, namely Manipul.
curat. cap. 1. de instit. sacra.
that he ordained confirmation, when he laid his hands upon children, and
said, suffer little children to come unto me, and orders when he said: Do this
in remembrance of me, and penance when he said to leapers: Go show your selves
to the Priest, and extreme unction; when he sent his Apostles to anoint and
heal the sick, and that he made matrimony a sacrament when in the womb of
the virgin M. he would join our nature to the divine, in the unity of person,
etc? So might we make a multitude of sacraments, making of clay to heal the
blind, his stooping down to the ground to write, washing his Disciples feet,
and many such like. Thus might we play the fools with Guilhermus Durandus in
his rationale diuinorum, turning all things into mysteries, and make trifling
and profane sport, with the school men, turning vpside down the true sense
of holy scripture, by allegorical, moral and anagogicall interpretations, and
when we have done; come as near the meaning of God, as the east is to the
west. But if they be sacraments ordained of God for his Church, they ought to
bring forth the commandment of God, such as is for Baptism: Math. 28.19. 1.
Cor. 11.23.
Baptize in the name of the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost: and for the
Lords supper. Do this in remembrance of me. Secondly, let the^ show out of Gods
book, the sign in penance, and the rest that they pertain, to the general
covenant of grace and promise of Christ. As that matrimony is any more but a
similitude or allegory, or that confirmation was any more but the taking of
the children unto him at one time, to bless them particulerlie, or that orders
is any more but for the grace of the estate of the ministry: and their unction
was but for the body that they might live, and not for the soul at the very
point of death: therefore here is great presumption to father upon God, their
own beastly inventions. Thirdly, in that which is special in either of the
two sacraments they commit very great absurdities, by most ridiculous and
idolatrous additaments. First, in Baptism, they thrust in a strange Look
Manipul. curat. c. 8. de Anex. Bapt.
Catechizing and a filthy exorcising. In the first they put the finger in his
ear, to signify that his ear should be apt to hear Gods word, and spit in
his mouth, that he may be prompt to speak of faith. 2. He crosses him in his
breast, that in breast and mouth he confess the faith of Christ, and cross
him in the forehead, that he be not ashamed of the faith of Christ. 3. He
puts salt in his mouth, signifying wisdom. His filthy exorcisme is to
conjure the devil that he depart from the soul of the party to be baptized,
and give place to the holy ghost. And in baptizing they make three other
crosses in declaring whereof, I am lost to defile this paper, they are so
foolish and so greatly derogatorie to Christ's holy institution: for on the one
side they dash baptism out of countenance, with so many goodly shows and
uses: and secondly they blaspheme God to conjure, especially in the place and
time of Gods worship: but one babble I may not omit, that they Ib. cap. 7.
Godfather and Godmother may not marry together by Popery.
give baptism such a power to make a spiritual cosonage, namely, that it
hinders matrimony and breaks a contract. See here if Antechrist presume not
as God, nay above God: for they make that unlawful, Heb. 13.4. Math. 19.6.
which God has made honorable among al men, and put asunder the^ whom God has
coupled together. But yet there are more abominations, and heretical
presumptions. For in the sacrament of the Eucharist, they amend the sign, and
put water to the wine: secondly, they take away one of the signs from all the
communicants saving him that makes the sacrament: thirdly, they drive away
both the signs altogether by their fiction of transubstantiation, and set in
the room thereof (if we may believe them) the body, soul, and Godhead of
Christ, that very body which was borne of the virgin Mary, and crucified under
Pontious Pilate, and so being changed they give godly honor unto it, they lift
it up and carry it in procession, and hold it forth to be publicly worshipped
of all men, they offer it up for a sacrifice for the quick and the dead, and
keep it very devoutly in the pix, to be ready at all times to comfort them
that need. Surely it should seem that Christ and his Apostles were but
children unto those, both in wisdom and in power. For they never once dreamed
of these things, and being matters of very great importance, it is marvel
they never had leisure to commit at the least, some of them unto writing, that
it might be found in holy scripture: but being not found there, they have their
holy traditions of equal reverence with Gods word, or else the plenarie power
of their Apostaticall sea, sufficiently to warrant whatsoever, to them whom
God has given over to believe lies. This is the profoundnes of Satan, good
Lord God, and merciful father, keep it ever out of this land, that it never
deceive thy people any more. First the mingling of wawith the wine is Council.
trident ses. 6. ca. 7.
brought in upon three goodllie reasons. 1. Christ is thought to have done so:
2. water came out of his side: 3. water in the Apocalips signifies people,
therefore it shows the mystery of union of the faithful people with Christ.
Lo here a forgerie of a new mystery, why might they not put in nails or
stakes, that might signify the fastening of Christ to his people, because the
Eccl. 12.11.
preacher speaks of such a mystical fastening. If men may add thus upon
conjectures, and set Anathema and a curse (as they do) upon all that consent
not; how shall we find the measure of truth? or how shall they avoid the
curse of God, which says: Revel. 22.
cursed is he that adds to this book. But alas poor men how little effect
this devise has brought forth? For by and by, as soon as it is a sacrament,
(for before the words of consecration, as they call them, it is no sacrament)
the wine is clean gone (they say) where is the^ their new mystery? How can
they represent, which have no being in rerum natura, in the world. Again, how
can it signify this to the people, when they keep it from them, and bless
them with the empty cup. This is a second presumption against the express
commandment of Christ, which says: Math. 29.27. Mark. 14.23.
drink ye all of this, and they drank all of it. Thirdly in
transubstantiation, see how many monsters they feed. First we must believe
there is no wine or bread though we see them and taste them, though they have
the same quantities and qualities, and effects they had before, though they
corrupt and putrify as before, and we must believe that Christ, God, and Man,
is under those forms, quantities and qualities, though we can see, hear, or
feel no form, quantity, or quality of a true or natural body or man. Here
is a monsterous man, which if you look upon him is all over covered with a
little round piece of starch not surmounting the greatness of a man's hand. Here
be all the properties of bread and wine, and their natural operations, but they
are not bread nor wine, but a man; here one subject has accidents, and
essential qualities of an other subject. And accidents are and have a being,
without their true substance and proper and natural subject. A body which is
a thing circu^scriptible, and by the divine law of Gods creation and providence
is always, and can be but in one place at one time; is here made and set in
diverse places, and yet still one and the same, and that at one time: in heaven
and earth, at Constantinople, at Jerusalem, at Rome, at Carthage, and every
where. But how ca^ they shift here, the making of God to assume these forms
(as they call the^) into the unity of his person, that so God and man and the
forms of bread and wine make not one Christ; for by their doctrine these
forms have no being, but in Christ, and Christ is under the^. I quake to write
it, yet say they, we must believe this change, for nothing is impossible to
God. They must not so blind our eyes: for it is impossible to God, to have
already done that which he never did, nor never will do, such is this
transubstantiation of theirs. It is impossible for God to deny himself, such is
this transubsta^tiation, it is impossible for God to lie: such is this
transubsta^tiation. Again, how can this be a sacrament when the outward signs
be gone, and a remembrance of him that is present? but rather that himself is
the sign of himself, and a remembrance of himself present, neither yet is this
so: for we cannot see him, feel nor understand, how he is present, that he
might be a sign or a remembrance of himself, but a third thing is present,
the accidents or forms of bread and wine, this is a new learning to teach
Christ and his Apostles to go to school, nay this is the monster of all
mo^sters. Teach we the Indians that this is the God of the christians, may they
not think rather, the sun or moon more likely to be God, and to have a more
express majesty of a God? may not the devil laugh in himself, that he has so
far passing measure, bewitched the wise and grave learned me^, to believe that
which a child may easily perceive to be mere folly. Infinite is the blood that
has bin shed to maintain this fancy: and who would not willingly spend all
the blood in his heart, rather the^ to yield to such blasphemy. But the devil
is not herewithal content, but that he might lead the^ every way as slaves, in
triumph against God and his Christ: he makes the^ to worship these forms and
host (as they call it) and carry it about in procession, that all men might
adore it as God. And this Council. trident. Ses. 6. September. 17. 1562. Cap. 1.
ses. 3. canon. 5.
they build upon these words of Christ. Do this in remembrance of me: for by
them (as they say) the Priest has power, to make a sacrifice propitiatory,
and then being turned into God (they say) it is meet and fit that he should be
worshipped, whom God bringing into the world, commanded the Angels to adore:
But herein first they gainesay the Scripture, which teaches the end of all
sacrifices by the Priesthood of Christ, as is by many arguments proved from the
sixth till the eleventh Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews; Secondly, when
they cause it to be worshipped, and yet God instituted it to be taken and eaten
only; what do they but pervert the ordinance of God? and they say we must
worship the sacrament, or else Christ in the sacrament. If they say the
sacrament then they cannot say Christ, because he is not the sacrament, but the
sacrament is a sign of him; or else the sacrament is no sacrament. I so they
say in the sacrament, the^ they say no thing; because that by their doctrine,
there is no such thing; but only the forms of bread and wine, for the bread
and wine, is turned into Christ's body and blood (as they say) and so there is
nothing left to be the sacrament. Yet if it were so as they say: what man can
appoint a new form of worship, to be performed unto God, without his express
commandment or authority? Math. 15. Look in the Mass book ordinarium
Missae.
For Christ says that all such worship as is by the precept of men is in
vain. And lastly consider how this can agree, when they offer the sacrifice,
they desire God to accept that sacrifice, again, when they show it the people,
they cause them to worship it, a strange and new kind of God, that must be
prayed for, and prayed to. But howsoever, it is a manifest thing, that the
popish sacrament and sacrifice, is not the same which Christ instituted, and
therefore not of the exercises of the true Catholic religion. For if Saint
Paul, when there was among the Corinthians but a little abuse, in the mixture
of eating, 1. Cor. 11.20.
in the congregation at the time of the celebration of the Lords supper,
whereupon there was coffeehouse between rich and poor: if I say hereupon
he called them to the plain and simple institution, saying: I have received
of the Lord that which I have delivered unto you etc. And therein adds
nothing to that which is written in Matthew, Mark and Luke: what does he
infer, but that it should be observed without all additions: and therefore
upon this ground forbids their eating in the church. What would he have
done, if he had seen such swelling boiles and filthy bunches, standing up so
abominably, as these Romish additaments, which altogether take away the very
form of Christ's institution? This shows how little these men have of the
gospel of Christ: the teachers whereof are enjoined to teach the church to
do, Mat. 28.19. 1. Tim. 6.4.
whatsoever he commanded. And to keep this commandment, without spot and
unrebukable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore we
are not bound to 1. Cor. 11.1.
follow them any otherwise, but as they follow Christ.

In the thirteenth Article the sea of Rome is directly contradictory, to the
christian religion. For they say: Council. Trident. de sacris ling. peregrin.
cap. 8.
Et si missa contineat populi fidelis eruditionem etc. Although the mass
contain great instruction of the faithful people, yet it seemed not
convenient to the fathers, that it should be celebrated every where in the
vulgar tongue: And their mass book, which contains prayers, celebration of
sacraments, reading of holy scriptures, etc. is set forth to be used in the
latin tongue: But says Manip. curat. cap. 10. de rit. quo deb. miss. celebra.
one of that side: Sciendum quod missa tribus linguis etc. It is to be
understood, that the mass is celebrated in three languages, that is to say,
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. For Alleluya, Amen, Osanna, Sabbath, are taken of
the Hebrew. Kyrie eleeson Christ eleeson are taken of the Greek, all the rest
are Latin. The mass is said in these three manners, because the title of
Christ hanging on the cross, was written in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. Where
you may see three strange things to be done of these holy fathers, first to
celebrate that in an unknown tongue, which contains great instruction to the
faithful people: as if it were meet in their eyes, that the meat which was
good, and appointed for them, ought to be kept out of their sight. Secondly,
that this order must be learned of Pontius Pilate, who put Christ to death a
very good an Apostle, for an Apostaticall Church. Thirdly, this is expressly
repugnant to holy scripture, which says, 1. Cor. 14.26.28.
Let all things be done to edification: and that, he which speaks in a
strange tongue should keep silence in the Church.

In the foureteenth Article they be also contradictorie to the truth. And
first touching matrimony, they have three degrees of contradiction. Council.
trid. sess. 8. canon. 9.
First absolutely forbidding all priests and ecclesiastical persons to marie.
Canon 11.
Secondly, they forbid marriage certain times in the year, as in Lent, etc.
And Canon 3.
thirdly take upon the^ to dispense with the order of God Cap. 18.
in Leuiticus touching the degrees of kindred prohibited, and also to add and
ordain more degrees to be prohibited, which God has not forbidden: And
whosoever does maintain the Christian liberty herein, they pronounce him
Anathema, accursed. Forgetting what Act. 10.15. Reuelat. 3.7.
God said to Peter, That God has purified, pollute thou not: and that Christ
the head of his Church has the keye of David, that opens and no man shuts
etc. Wherefore seeing that Christ has made Heb. 13.4. Tit. 1.15.
marriage honorable for all men: and that by his ordinance, To the clean all
things are clean: do they not herein bewray their apostatical presumption to
challenge authority more then ever Peter durst even above Christ: when they
make marriage dishonorable in certain times and persons: and dispense by
giving liberty, where Christ forbids: and making restraint where he gives
liberty. Now in the authority of the magistrate, how unlike the Pope is unto
Peter every man sees: For clean contrary to all religion and honesty he
takes upon him not only to be universal Bishop above all Bishops: but
also universal ministerial head in earth, above all power and potentates,
kings and Emperors, that is above all that is called Psalm. 82.1. The Pope
above all called God.
God. Therefore we need not use many words in this place: seeing the Pope
usurps that which Christ himself never did in his own person, neither gave
to any other after him. For he meekely submitted himself to the civil power,
saying directly, Ioh. 18.36. Mark. 10.43.
My kingdom is not of this world: and forbidding others he says, It shall not
be so among you.

In the fifteenth Article the disagreement by addition, that where the true
religion by holy scripture have this hope of the bodies rising at the last
day. The sea of Rome teach another arising: namely of the soul out of Limbus
Patrum, out of purgatory, and out of Hell, before that great day of judgment
come. As first that Test Rhem. annot. Luc. 16.22.26. Dorbel. distinct. 2 sent.
4. In miss. quotid. pro defund. offert.
Christ descended into Hell, and delivered the fathers some out of Limbus, some
out of purgatory, which had lien there till that time. And that in hell a man
may suffer part of his temporal penance, which being ended he is free from
thence: and therefore they pray in their Mass: Domine Jesus etc. O Lord Jesus
Christ deliver the souls departed etc. Which dreaming additament of hope
concerning the dead bewrays it self, to disagree from the Christian
religion: in as much as God does teach men, that after death the faithful do
only rest, till the last day. First in the old testament, thus: Esa. 57.2.
Dan 12.13.
He shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their beds. Thou shall rest and
stand up in thy lot at the end of the days. And in the new Testament: Reuelat.
14.13.
Blessed are the dead which hereafter die in the Lord: even so says the
spirit, for they rest from their labors. If they rest, and that till they
stand up: then no translation out of Limbus, Purgatory, or Hell. And if they
rest, then no penance in hell or purgatory for the faithful. Therefore I may
conclude in this place, that the popish superstition has very little or no
affinity with the true ancient and catholic religion, but it has very many
great and intolerable disagreements from the same.

CAP. II. Of the disagreement, that popish superstition, now taught in Rome,
has with the religion which Saint Paul taught the Romans, and with the
doctrine Saint Peter taught the Jews.
IT will also appear how new the superstition of popery is, if we find they
keep not the doctrine of the blessed Apostles and founders of Christ's Church,
Saint Paul and Saint Peter: upon which two they father all their authority
and doings, and call them founders and protectors, and patrons of the church of
Rome. If then they be fallen from the faith, which these two holy Apostles
taught by the spirit of truth, they must needs be accounted vpstarts and of an
apostatical newborn generation. Mark therefore (good Reader) and consider.
Saint Paul taught the Romans, that it was an hethenish wickedness, Romans 1.23.
to turn the glory of the incorruptible God, into the similitude of a
corruptible man. The sea of Rome that now is, clean contrary to that
doctrine, does make images to represent the Trinity, and to represent God the
father, by the likeness of an old corruptible man. The doctrine which Saint
Peter taught the Jews, says that Act. 2.23.
Christ was delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, to
be crucified and slain, by the hands of wicked men. The sea of Rome that now
is does say: that God did only foresee, but not determine or ordain any thing
which he commands not: and it is certain he commanded not the Jews to
crucify Christ, therefore in these two points they agree not with Paul and
Peter's doctrine. S. Paul taught the ancient Romans, that Romans 8.7.
The wisdom of the flesh (that is to say, the knowledge and will of man as it
is infected by original corruption, before we be regenerate) is enmity against
God, and that it is not subject to the law of God, neither in deed can be. And
the doctrine of Peter to the Jews is, that we 1. Pet. 1.22.23. cap. 2. 1. 2.
2. Cor. 3.5.
are borne again as newborn babes, showing that without the spirit of God we
have not one good thought: But these new Romistes say, that man's will only
stirred up by the grace of God, can prepare it self to the grace of
justification, and does works of congruitie pleasing God, and works
together with the grace of God unto merit and deserving of salvation, S. Paul
taught the Romans, that Romans 8.8.
they which are in the flesh (that is the unregenerate) can not please God. And
again, Cap. 3.12.
They have all gone out of the way, they have been made altogether
unprofitable, there is none that does good no not one. And he opens himself
else where saying: Ephesians. 4.17.18.
The Gentiles walk in the vanity of their mind, having their cogitation
darkened, being strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance that is
in them etc. that is to say, their ignorance is so great that they cannot do
any thing but sin, which he confirms by this maxim to the same Romans:
Romans 14.23.
Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Therefore his doctrine to them is this
that, by their exceeding ignorance the unregenerate did nothing but such as
was sin in Gods eyesight. These late Romistes do Council. trident. Ses. 6.
canon. 7.
accurse this doctrine of Saint Paul, and all them that say, that all the
works of the unregenerate to be truly sin. Saint Peter taught the Jews,
Act. 4.12.
That there is salvation in none other (meaning none other but Christ) for that
there is given none other name under heaven, whereby we must be saved. These
degenerate pretenders of Peter, place salvation in others, as in merits,
satisfaction, and works of supererogation: and say there be other names by
which we must be saved, as diriges, religious orders and vows, pilgrimage,
pardons, relickes, and many other names by them devised. Saint Paul taught the
ancient Romans, that Romans 4.25. and 8.33.34.
Christ dyed for our sins, and rose to make us righteous, and being hereby
justified of God, nothing can be laid to our charge, nor condemn us. By
which it appears that the obedience and suffering of Christ, was the perfect
working of our salvation. These bastard Romans do say, that we yet need
the sacrifice of the Mass for quick and dead, and that the doing and
fulfilling of Gods commandments and the Church, is the condition on our
part. S. Peter's doctrine says that all the faithful 1. Pet. 2.5.9.
are an holy priesthood, To offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by
Jesus Christ. These counterfeit successors of Peter, add a new devise, saying:
that their priests have an especial office, to offer up sacrifice, namely their
Host. S. Paul taught the old Romans, that Romans 8.34.
Christ sits at the right hand of God, to make intercession for us. These
declined Romistes say, that the virgin Marie, Peter and Paul, and the Saints
are intercessors for us. Saint Peter taught the Jews: that he the said 1. Pet.
5.1.2
Peter was an elder as other elders and ministers of Christ, and that such
elders should not be Lords over Gods heritage, but that Christ was the chief
shepherd. These stately prelates make themselves Lords of sea and land:
disdaining at the low estate of the Apostles and elders of the primitive
church. Saint Paul taught the Christian Romans, that Romans 3.28.
A man is justified by faith without works. These Antechristian Romans say:
that by doing good works a man is just and justified, and not by faith alone.
Saint Paul taught the Christian Romans that, Romans 7.7.
Concupiscence in the regenerate was sin, and though he did will that which
was good, yet he could not perform it. These Antechristian Romans do say,
that concupiscence is not sin in the regenerate after Baptism, but only
left for the spiritual battle to be resisted. Saint Peter's doctrine to the
Jews says, That we must do good works 1. Pet. 2.12.15.
to show forth the virtues of God, and to glorify him, and to put to silence
the ignorance of foolish men. The new learning of these men is, that we must
do good works, that we might win heaven thereby. Saint Peter's doctrine to
the Jews says, 1. Pet. 1.23. and 2.1. and epist. 2. cap. 3.1.15.
That the Gospel is the word of God by which we are borne again, that it is
sincere milk, and commends unto them his own and also S. Paul's epistles.
And S. Paul taught the faithful Romans: Romans 1.2. and 16.26.
That God promised the gospel before by his prophets in the holy scriptures,
and that God commanded that it should be taught all nations by the scriptures
of the prophets. These Romans of the new learning, do say: that the Read
Martin Peresius Aila de traditionibus.
scripture can not teach all the gospel, but we must learn somewhat touching
faith and salvation by tradition, canons, and the magisteriall power of the
Church, and equal these with holy scripture, to teach that which cannot be
found and learned in the written word of God. Saint Paul taught the Romans the
universality of the Church, when he said, Romans 10.12.
there is no difference between the Jew and the Grecian; for he that is Lord
over all, is right unto all that call upon him, and S. Peter's doctrine agrees
thereunto, where he says: Act. 10.34.35.
God is no accepter of persons, but in every nation he that fears him and
works righteousness, is accepted with him. These late builders place the
Church in the city of Rome, and call it the Catholic Church of Rome. S.
Peter's doctrine to the Jews, says, 1. Pet. 1.3. and 2 5.17.
that he prayed and blessed God, and that the Christians should fear God, and
offer spiritual sacrifices unto God. And S. Paul Romans 1. and 10 and 15. and 16.
taught the believing Romans, by his own ensample in diverse prayers, and by a
general example of the Church in these words: whosoever calls on the name of
the Lord, etc. that they should worship and pray to God only: These new
deuisers give this honor of God, to Saints, relickes, and images, and teach
men to serve, worship, and pray to them. S. Paul taught the Romans of the
Primative Church, that after Romans 4.11.
justification by faith, the sacraments are signs to seal the righteousness of
faith: and S. Peter's doctrine to the Jews says, that 1. Pet. 3.
Baptism saves us, but not by the outward washing away of the filth of the
flesh, but by the spirit working in our hearts a good conscience to God. 21.
These new forgers of doctrine and sacraments, make the sacraments in the work
wrought to contain and to confer grace, and to justify together with faith,
and that without baptism there happens no justification. Saint Paul and S.
Peter, wrote both in the Greek tongue, which was fittest for all nations to
learn Gods word, and wheresoever they gave instructions, This appears Act.
2. and all the whole story following.
they did it in that language which might best be understood of the people: but
these new religion makers, deliver instructions, and teach men prayers in an
unknown tongue, and give them images to be their books. Saint Peter's doctrine
touching marriage appears, that he being 2. Cor. 9.5. 1. Pet. 5.2.
an Elder, had a wife, as the other Apostles, and laid no other burden upon
Elders but to feed the flock of God: and yet these new law makers forbid
marriage, to the which Peter called elders. S. Paul taught the Romans that Romans
13.1. 1. Pet. 2.13.
every soul should be subject to the higher powers, and S. Peter commands
submission, to all manner ordinance of man. But these proud usurpers, take upon
them to dispense, with the oath and obedience of subjects, bringing all
superior power under their servant, the Pope of Rome. S. Peter taught 1. Pet.
5.9.
to resist the devil steadfast in faith: these afterwitted men teach us to do
it by coniuring, by crosses and by holy water. Saint Paul taught the first
child of the Romans, that Romans 14.2.3.4.
in meat and days, men should not judge and condemn one another: these men
under the name of the Church, forbid and command, judge and condemn men, in
meats and in days, and that under pain of damnation. S. Peter taught the
Jews, 1. Pet. 1.5.
that we are kept by the power of God, thorough faith unto salvation: these
me^ say, that faith without hope and charity cannot perform it. S. 2. Pet.
3.18. 1. Pet. 3.15.
Peter would have every man grow in the knowledge of our lord Jesus Christ, and
to be so far instructed in the gospel, that he might be able to give a reason
of his faith. These Antipetrians would have men to content themselves with
ignorance, and to believe as the church believes, and by this color that
ignorance is the mother of devotion, they keep the common people from knowledge
of the scriptures. S. Peter's doctrine does say Act. 3.2.
that the heavens must contain Christ, until the time that al things be
restored: and S. Paul taught the Romans, Romans 8.24.
that Christ is at the right hand of God: yet say these shameless forgers, that
Jesus Christ, very God, and very man is really and locally, (by the intention
of a Priest uttering certain words, which they call consecration) is in the
sacrament (as they call it) of the Altar. Saint Peter taught the Jews, that it
was Acts. 15.10.
a tempting of God, to bind Gods people to keep the law, because it is a yoke
that neither we nor our fathers were able to bear. These presumptuous
backesliders do say, that it is a condition of our salvation and
righteousness, to do the commandments of God and the Church, and that a man
is able to fulfill the commandments of God. Saint Peter Act. 10.25.26 Math.
17.24.
forbad Cornelius a Captain of a band, when he fell down at his feet, and
worshipped him, saying, that he himself was a man, and being directed and
commanded by our Savior Christ, he paid tribute and pollemonie unto Caesar.
But the Pope the counterfeit successor of Peter, refuses no kind of honor
even to the kissing of his feet, done by Kings or Emperors: and takes toll
and tribute out of all lands whom he can make his vassals and underlings. Saint
Act. 3.12.
Peter in the good works which he did, renounced in plain terms, his own
power and godliness, and labored by all means to set forth the name of
Christ, that Christ only might be glorified. These filthy changelings have no
end in advancing the power of Peter, and therein of the name, authority, and
glory of the Pope. Saint Peter neither Act. 8. and 11. and 15.
having nor taking upon him any sovereignty above other Apostles, or above any
estate, was sent by the Apostles at Jerusalem, to do some Apostolical work
in his ministry, and S. John equally with him, and he obeyed his brethren,
submitted himself to give an account of his doings, for his going to the
Gentiles, and gave place to James to determine the controversy, touching
circumcision, and the law of Moses to be imposed upon the Gentiles, and had no
greater title in the counsel, nor in any place of scripture, then Simeon,
Peter, or Cephas, servant and Apostle of Jesus Christ, or Elder. Also he Gal.
2.7.8.9.11.
acknowledged the same authority in Paul over the Gentiles, which he had over
the Jews: and therefore he meekelie suffered reproof, for his weakness, at
the hands of Paul, and Act. 5.40.41.
with all patience and ioyfulnesse took stripes, with the rest of the Apostles
for the name of Christ. The Pope his pretended successor takes upon him far
otherwise, namely the Primacie above all Bishops and Patriarchs, above all
Princes and Magistrates, and makes Cardinals and Archbishops his Ambassadors
and Legattes, disdaineth to give an account of any thing, and takes upon him
to confirm all counsels, and to annihilate, whatsoever is concluded without
his consent and authority, entituling himself Bishop of Bishops, chief
Pastor and head of the universal Church of Christ. He is so far from being
reproved, that he will judge all men, but himself be judged of no man, and
that his determinations must not be reasoned nor disputed upon: and not only
over the Jews, but also over all nations he usurps authority, and is so
far from meek bearing of reproof or stripes for the name of Christ, that he
raises up sedition, rebellion and cruel wars against the lawful superior,
and puts down Emperors and Kings for his own name sake, and maintenance
of his own pride and usurped jurisdiction. In all the story which is in the
new testament concerning Paul and Peter, we have not one word, that Peter
should be head of the Apostles, much less head of the universal Church, or
over Princes: neither is there any direct, or indirect collection to be made
out of holy scripture: that if Christ had given him such authority, the same
should have descended and gone to his successors. And if to his successors, yet
it would be doubtful, whether Babylon, or Samaria, or Ioppa, or Jerusalem,
might not be the place of succession: for at these places, it is expreslie
said, he was and remained. And as for Rome, there is great reason to think,
that he was never there, or at the least some very little while, and if he
were there at all, yet never was he Bishop of Rome. First, it is clear that
S. Peter kept at Jerusalem till the conversion of Saint Paul: Act. 8. and 9.
and 10. and 15.
which was sometime after the Apostles had begun the planting of the Church of
Jerusalem, and the Martyrdom of Steven the Deacon. Then Gal. 1.18.
three years after Paul visited Peter at Jerusalem, and Gal. 2.1.
fourteen years after that he communicated with Peter, James and John at
Jerusalem; and then after this Act. 12.1.2.3.
was Peter cast into prison by Herod, after the martirdom of James the brother
of John, after Act. 24.17.
which time Paul met with Peter at Antiochia. Now Act. 24.17.
many years after it was before that Paul was taken at Jerusalem and sent to
Rome; whether when he came, the Act. 28.
holy story makes mention of the brethren, that came to meet Paul, hearing
of his coming near unto Rome: and that Paul being committed to a Souldior to
keep, communed with the Jews, and for two years space remained in an house
hired for himself, and received all that came unto him and preached the
kingdom of God: where there is no mention of Peter, who being so worthy a
person, no doubt it is likely, that in all this space the Evangelist would have
said somewhat of him if he had been at Rome. Now if as the stories say he and
Peter died, the 14. or 12. year of Nero which was about the year of Christ
ascension 70. there might be as some calculate 37. years of Paul's preaching,
from which diduct some 18. years before he went to confer with Peter, James,
and John, and add the time that James was slain at Jerusalem by Herod, and
after that the time that Peter was at Antioch; and lastly those many years
before Paul was taken and brought to Rome, and his being there two years, all
which may easily make up the other years, and way there withal, that as some
think his coming captive to Rome Acts 28. was the eleventh year of Nero,
then join hereunto, that he wrote from thence as some think, the Epistle to
the Galathians and to the Ephesians, making no mention of Peter's being at Rome.
But in the Epistles to the Cap. 4.
Colossians, and Cap. 1. and 2. and 4.
Philippians, where it appears plainly that Paul was at Rome in bonds, and
had Aristarchus his prison fellow, he makes mention of Caesar's hoshold,
Tychicus, Onesimus, Marcus, Luke and diverse others, and there is no word of
Peter. Again his Cap. 4.
second epistle to Timothy was written from Rome, when he was now ready to be
offered, and the time of his departure (out of this life) at hand and he had
finished his course: he shows that no man assisted him in his answering, and
there he makes mention of Linus, Eubulus and Pudeus and diverse others, and
tells that Demas had forsaken him, and Luke only was with him. If a man ought
to prefer the credit of the holy writings of God, before other stories, we
may here plainly gather, that rather Peter was never at Rome, or else it was a
very little while: For doubtless if Peter had suffered with him, he had either
been his prison fellow, or else some way with him as Luke, and not Luke only,
and he would as well have assisted Paul as resisted Simon Magus: therefore it is
not without great reason to think that Peter was never at Rome. Moreover add
hereunto, that he being an Apostle over the circumcision that is to the Jews,
and Paul to the Gentiles: and then staying so long at Jerusalem, and after at
Antioch, and last of all as himself testifies being at 1. Pet. 1. and 5.
Babylon, he wrote to the strangers, that is, to the Jews in Pontus,
Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithinia, And in his Cap. 1.
second Epistle, when he knew his time at hand, to lay down his tabernacle
(that is his life) seeing that in all this there is no mention of the Romans,
nor scarce of the Gentiles, so that he seemed preciselie to attend upon his
Apostleship over the Circumcision, there can hardly be any good reason to prove
he ever was at Rome: but that he was Bishop of Rome no reason at all. For
seeing his Apostleship was over the Circumcision they offer violence, that will
draw him to be Bishop of Rome, considering that one may trace him in the
scriptures, until the time almost of his death, and no mention made of his
being at Rome, nor of his care over the Romans: his abode and his Epistles are
directed to the Jews. Further, if we consider how unfitting it is for an
Apostle to be a Bishop of one city, who was Mat. 28.19.
equally to go to all places, and to preach in all places (as indeed he
travailed to many places) to 1. Cor. 3.10. Ephesians. 2.20.
lay the foundation, with the other Apostles, of Christ's Church, and secondly
how unlikely it is that such should have successors, to whom it belonged to 1.
Cor. 9.1.
see Christ, to be called Gal. 1.1.
only and immediately by Christ, from whom only the commandments of Christ
should be taught to al nations, to whose working it was adjoined to 1. These.
4.2. 2. Pet. 3.2.
do wonders, and to speak with strange tongues, and whose work especially
was to lay the foundation. Act. 2. and 8.
If the Pope can show such marks of his succession, he were the more to be
borne withal. But seeing the holy Ghost has altogether neglected that sea,
and hidden the life of Peter from appearing in Rome, under the light of his
inspired writings: it seems unto me, and I am verily persuaded, especially
upon the consideration of the doctrine before examined and compared, that the
good spirit of God would in no wise be accessarie to this great folly and
Antechristian and diuilish apostasy, of the papal pride and new devised and
usurped primacie of the sinagogue of Rome that now is, and has been in a
consumption even fourscore years. Praised be God, who has withdrawn our
shoulders from that most grievous burden.

CAP. III. Of the agreement of Popish doctrine with all kind of heresy, where
it is compared, how the popish heresy, resembles the ancient heresies of the
primitive age of Christ's Church.
Having showed the newnes of popery, in that it disagreeth with the ancient
religion of God, his prophets and Apostles: and namely with that which Paul
taught to the Romans and Peter to the Jews. It will be an other evidence of
their late arising and breeding, if it be made apparent, how they agree with
the heresies, which sprang up in the Apostles times, and in those few ages
following, which came nearest to the Apostles, both in years and doctrine. And
this is in two arguments: First in the matter and form of doctrine, and
secondly in the order and course of time. For if they have no better matter or
form of doctrine then heretics, and rise up in the later times as heretics
did: then it must needs follow that they are not of the true ancient
catholic religion, but of a new vpstart, heretical prauitie and
superstition. And first let us see in this Chapter, their agreement in the
form and matter of doctrine. Andiani heretics about Anno 338. began to be
known, and after them Anthropomorphitae, creapt out of Monkish rudeness:
affirming that God was like unto the image of a corruptible man, having arms,
feet, and ears, and other members like to a man. And there is another heresy
opposed unto Sabellius, which some call Tritheitae or Triformiani, Anno 370.
which make the three persons in the trinity three Gods, like as we account
and know, Robert, Richard, and Nicholas to be three men. So the Papists not in
words, but in deeds do the very same: for in their roode, crosses and glass
windows, they engraue or paint the likeness of God, like the image of a man,
and the three persons like two several men, an old and a young, and like a
dove. And when they Hoar in laud. beat. virg. Mar.
give the virgin Marie power to make men gentle, chaste, and of a pure life,
they have too much resemblance unto the heretics called Melchisedechiani, who
thought that Melchisedeck was the power of God. And what odds in substance of
matter is there between them, and the Simonians who hold Simon Magus for a
God, or as it is in the Acts of the Apostles, Act. 8.
the great power of God. For they Test. Rhem. annot. in Luke cap. 15.10. and
Math. 22.10.
say, that our hearts and inward repentance, be open to the Saints, and that
they can hear our prayers and help us, be they near or afar of. Which to
do doubtless is not of any creature but only of God. Now when they make
saints, patrons of people and countries. What do they else but as the
Tetratheitae, make many Gods? As Mahomet the heretic ordained that it should
be death, if any man disputed against his pestilent laws: So the Popes canons
forbid any man to judge or dispute of the decrees of their (falsely called)
Apostolical sea. The Pelagians deny predestination altogether and the papists
deny it in regard of the reprobate. The heretics Basilidiani tie
predestination, to works foreseen: and so do the papists. The
Priscilianistes tie men's actions to the government of the stars, and the
Maniches make two beginnings, one good and another bad: unto which two heresies
the papists seem to lean, indeed (though not in word) when they shut out Gods
decree from ordaining, and his providence from administering and ordering any
thing which he commands not: and that God regarded what man's free will would
choose in such things. For either they make man's will a first cause or chance or
the stars, or that evil beginning. And so by their assertion there will be
some thing of equal power with God, as an other beginning and first cause of
evil things, wherein God medleth not. Touching free will and original sin,
Pelagius said, that grace is given unto men, that they might the more easily
fulfill by grace those things which they are comanded to do by their free will:
so the papists say, that free will is but moved and stirred up by the grace of
God, and works together with his grace. The Pelagians say that a man without
grace may do all the commandementes of God: and the Papists say that it is
Test. Rhem. in Math. 12. verse. 11. in margin.
in man's own freewill to be a good tree or a badde. The Pelagians say, that
the grace of God, by which we are delivered, is given unto us, according to
our merits, so the Papists say: when the sinner does that which is in him,
he deserves of congruitie to be justified. As touching the recovery of man
out of the damnable estate of sin, all heretics had their several heresy,
wherein they put their trust, and despised all other, and the true way of
salvation which is by Christ. So the church of Rome as compact of all heresies,
has diverse new means of recovery out of damnation, and many religions, as of
friars monks and Heremites. The Turkish Mahomet had his Alcoran, and the
papists have their canons, decrees and decretalles of the church under pain
of damnation. There were certain heretics called Messaliani and Euchetae, who
attributed all the power of the salvation of their souls unto prayer and
supplications. So have you with the papists, certain prayers, Auemaries,
creedes and psalms to be numbered up, for the souls both of quick and dead.
And an other sort of heretics called Heracleonitae, are said to redeem their
fellows and associates by oil, balm, water and prayers. So these Romistes
have holy water to fright spirits, and as their Set forth by Pius 5. ordo ad
faciend' aqua^ benedictam.
mass book says: they exorcise (or conjure) the salt (which is put into the
water) for the salvation of believers and that it should be to all who take it
health of soul and body. They have also extreme unction, where with ointing
and prayer they promise the very like unto a man, that is at the point of
death, which the Euchatae did. The Simonians called Simon Christ, the Sethians
Seth. The Ophilae and Maniches, the serpent, Elcesaitae made two Christ's, and
many more are to be found of like heresy: So the papists have many mediators
or Christ's: The virgin Marie, the Apostles, and I cannot tell how many
Martirs and Saints, to whom they fly as unto mediators. There were heretics
called Artotyritae so called of their offering: For they offered up bread and
cheese. So the papists have the host of bread, which they call the form of
bread, which they offer up for a sacrifice. The heretics called Ebionites,
Cathari, Donatists, Pelagians and diverse others held justification by works,
and not by faith only, and so do the papists most earnestly. Heretics called
Hierarchitae said that little children pertain not to the kingdom of heaven,
because there is not in them any merit of the combat or striving, by which
vices should be overcome. So the papists hold that concupiscence is left for
the combat to strive withal, that their actions might be the more
meritorious, and they pronounce damnable sentence upon children unbaptized. The
heretics called Iouianistes (as Saint Austen says in his younger days) did
hold, that a man could not sin having received the lauer of regeneration, (that
is to say Baptism.) So the papists say, that after Baptism, concupiscence in
the regenerate is no sin, and that there is nothing in him displeasing God.
The donatistes affirm of themselves that they live a perfect, righteous, and
angelical life. So the papists say a regenerate man may do all Gods
commandments, and their religious men live a seraphicall and angelical life
in their orders. Concerning the word of God, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap 13.
there were heretics called Appellitae, which blamed the holy scriptures,
with very painful and earnest reprehension. So do the papists call the
scriptures a thing without life and dumb, John Sleid. coment. lib. 23. Literi
Cleme^tis de sinodo Trident. colligend.
and like a nose of wax, that may be drawn every way, having no certainty
without the judgment of the church. The heretics called Pepusiani, made
Christ author of their filthy revelations. So the papists make him author of
their unwritten verities. And as the Tacians, Maniches, and Mahomet, equal
their devises and traditions unto the holy scriptures, so do papists. And as
papists prefer the authority of their Church before the holy scripture, so
these allow so much and so far of holy scripture, as serves for their purpose
and devised wickedness. And as the heretics called Nazarai, did confirm
their dotages by revelations and false miracles: so traditions and much ragged
stuff in popery, be made warrantable by miraculous operations and
apperitions. The heretics aforenamed Pepuziani do send al men to a city in
upper Phrigia called Pepuza, naming it the celestial Jerusalem, and the city
whereof the prophets spoke, as though there were no other heaven. So the
papists call us to the church of Rome, as though the universal Church were tied
to one place, out of which there is no salvation or way to heaven. As
concerning the worship of God, Simon Magus the root of heretics, caused his
own image and of his harlot to be worshipped of his disciples. So the
papists set up images of their canonized Saints to be adored. Angelici were
heretics which worshipped Angels. So the papists have a Missa votina de
Angelis.
special mass of the Angels, and pray unto Angels. Marcellina companion of
these heretics, called Carpocracians, worshipped the images of Christ and
Paul, etc. So do the papists. Collyridiani worshipped the virgin Marie the
Sethians worshipped Seth. The Abelonites worship Abell, and diverse others do
the like according to their sect. So the papists according to their sect,
pray unto all their canonized Saints and worship them. The heretics Armenij
worshipped the cross of Christ, and so do the papists.

Concerning the sacraments, the heretics called Donatistes, measure the power
and effect of the sacraments, by the dignity, holiness, and hand of the
minister. So the papists assign the power of the sacraments to the work
wrought of the priest, and that the intent of the minister is necessary to
make it a religious action. And as the papists permit weomen to baptize,
cloistering their holy and religious nuns. So their progenitors the
heretics Pepuziani, admitted weomen to the ecclesiastical ministry: and
the Marcionites taught that weomen might baptize. The heretics called
Messalians say, that the force of baptism pertayneth only to the signs: and
so do the Papists. And as the papists in Baptism, have salt, spittle,
crossing, and other annexed ceremonies with coniuration, by which it is as it
were changed into a new thing. So did the Simonians and Marcitae old
heretics their natural fathers, defile and in a manner blot out baptism. In
the Lords Supper the heretics Aquarij were not content with the two outward
signs of bread and wine, but added also water. So do the papists mingle water
with the wine in the cup. And the Marcitae aforesaid professed that by words
and incantations, they changed the wine in the cup, into the blood, and bring
the grace of God into the same cup: so the papists profess that the
sacrament is changed by their words of consecration and coniuring into the
very body and blood of Christ, and that grace is contained in the sacraments.
And here they resemble the Apollinarians which made Christ's body to be
heavenly and not earthly: for the papists say, that it is the body of Christ,
though it be not seen felt nor heard: and they are like the Marcionistes which
accounted Christ's body fantastical: so these will have men believe the
sacrament to be his body, though it have no quantities nor qualities of a
body. And they are like the Timotheans, which confound the two natures of
Christ: and the Euticheans, who affirm the humane to be swallowed up of the
divine: and to the Nestorians, who make his manhood equal to his Godhead. For
the papists say, that the same body or man is in heaven and in earth, and
that in as many places of the world at one and the same time, as it is or may
be at once consecrated and made by their priest, which property of being in
many places at once is not of the nature of man, but of God: therefore herein
they are near in affinity with these heretics? The heresy of Vincentius
Victor, has this amongst others, that the sacrifice of Christians (that is the
sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ) is to be offered for them, which
being not baptized, are departed out of the body: So the papists have their
sacrifice for the dead. The Maniches refuse the old testament, and partly
mangle and curtoll, and partly cast away the new: So the papist, though in
words they acknowledge both, yet in truth they refuse both keeping them from
Gods people and reading them in a strange tongue, that the people cannot
understand, which unto them, is as good as if they were cast away. The
Heracleonites, make a superstitious calling upon God, with strange and unusual
words, especially to drive away devils: such is the mass of the papists all
in a strange tongue, and their exorcismes are of the same fashion. The heretics
called Taciani, Origeniani, Hierarchita, Saturniani, and diverse others, make
marriage an unholy and unclean thing, and of the devil, and shut it out of
their congregation: So the papists not only prefer a single life before
marriage: but also with such like terms, make it as an unclean thing not
meet for their priests; and allure both men and weomen to the vow of
chastity, as a purer and holier life, then matrimony, and therein they are
also like the Eustachians who despised the married priests. And as the papists
have their Friars, Monckes, and Nuns of a strange and differing habit from
other men and weomen, and that servants upon a vow may leave their Masters,
and some of these vowed persons, profess the renouncing of worldly riches,
and worldly doings, to walk a more near course to heaven: so these heretics
the Eustachians, had their differing habit from other men, servants by this
habit despised their Masters, and ritche men which did not renounce all which
they possessed, were accounted without hope toward God, also these heretics
counted the eating of flesh unlawful even as the papists do. And as the
papists forbid flesh and as they call it white meat, so their graundfathers
the Maniches abstained from flesh eggs and milk. And there were heretics
which put religion in going barefoot and therefore called of some Nudipedants:
so are the franciscans and others amongst the papists of such religion. The
donatistes deny the magistrates authority in matters of religion, and namely
in punishing of heretics: So the papists shut out the magistrate in causes
ecclesiastical: and as the papist give the pope the primacie above the
magistrates in all causes, and at their pleasure put them down with their
great curse: so these their predecessors the heretics called donatistes, do
most vilelie rail against magistrates, and beat them down with menacing
words. These donatistes had many vile things in them, wherein they fitly
father the papists, they were circumcellions and counterfaited an austere
life, like the popish monks, heremites and friars, living in caves and selles.
They ran upon christians whom they met or came by, even as we read of the
papist in France in our days, most cruelly murdering Gods beloved Saints. And
as the papists have their coniurations of their holy waters and Agnus dei and
exorcismes in Baptism: so these wicked donatistes with those abominable
heretics called Basilidians and Eunomians, had their enchantments and
coniurations: These filthy heretics the donatistes, together with that
horrible heresy of Arius, did so far account themselves the holy and
catholic church, that they would baptize again them which were of the true
church, making themselves only the catholic church: And there were other
heretics called Apostolici, that is apostolic, which so termed themselves,
because they thought themselves more apostolic then others, and namly because
they received not into their communion, married persons and such as possessed
goods proper to them selves. So find we among the papists these unmarried
persons and religious without propriety of goods: and the papists call
themselves the holy mother church of Rome, the Catholic and apostolic
church: and are in deed very like their fathers these heretics, having in
deed no more but the name of the holy catholic and apostolic church:
banishing from them, and by fire and sword persecuting the true religion and
doctrine and faithful members of the holy catholic and apostolic church. But
what should I endeavor to show all the popish stock, lineage and kindred? what
near affinity they have with Iudaisme, in plenty and manner of ceremonies,
traditions of elders, meritorious righteousness, and fained holiness? what
bastardly conformity they have with all pagainisme, in innumerable idols, and
sorts of religions and in sundry patrons of saints and Gods of countries and
nations? what perfect consanguinitie they have with Mahumetisme, making up (as
it were) one entire body of Antechrist: engendered bread compact and compound
of all heresies, religions, superstitions and rudiments of this world
whatsoever: by east and by west, raising up wars, seditions and all manner of
vilaines, to put down the glorious and blessed name and gospel of Christ, by
their own Alcorans, laws, decrees and decretals with innumerable forgeries;
that they them selves may reign as the chief prophets of GOD and head of his
church? Only this one thing would be remembered, that after Anno domini 600.
these two monstrous twins, began to come forth into the open sight and light
of the world, and to show them selves blasphemous against God and his Christ,
being engendered with the cursed seed of Satan, and of a long breeding in those
former heretics, even from the Apostles times, of which times and generation
it is said by Saint Paul, the blessed servant of Christ: 2 Thessalonians. 2.
The mystery of iniquity does already work. Therefore one of their own
popes, Gregory (whom they call) the great, the first of that name and Pelagius
his predecessor, resisted most mightelie John Patriarch of Constantinople: for
presuming to take unto him the name of universal patriarch, priest of
priests, or Bishop of Bishops: affirming that he which so did, was the
forerunner of Antechrist. And so indeed it fell out, for it was not long after,
that Mahomet came forth in the East and began to supplant the church of Christ,
with his abominations. And pope Boniface the 3. (which in a few years after
this Gregory) got this universal title of Bishop of Bishops, and so began
Antechrists first birth, in the open eyes of the world. And these two brothers,
have since grown to their perfection; and the more they have grown, the less
has been the honor and name of Christ, and the knowledge of his gospel
amongst the sons of men. Till now it has pleased God of his gracious goodness
and free favor, to make them known what they are, and by the breath of his
mouth to consume the^; Now the glory of Christ crucified and the truth of his
gospel begins like the morning light, to take hold on the corners of the
earth. The Lord our God and merciful father, be blessed and praised therefore.
Amen.

CHAP. IIII. Of the original of popery. Wherein is declared, 1. that by the
precedent Chapters it may appear to be of a late birth. 2. That neither the
difference os calculation in stories, nor forging of writings nor managing of
good authors do hinder the knowledge of their new birth. 3. Their own toongs
and traditions prove popery new. 4. Many particulers are rehearsed out of
popish authors, and the former counsels. 5. Five foundamentall points more
largely examined by antiquity. 6. The latter ouergrowing, and lopping, and
daily now sprowting of popery. 7. That popery is not yet a perfect body of
his fulshape proportion and members.
NOw am I come to the arising of popery, how it therein agrees with heresy.
For if it may be plainly and directly showed, how popery had his beginning
(both in regard of the author thereof, and of the time wherein it bread and
came forth) diverse and a disagreeing and separate from the true religion,
whose authority and time came from God: and that it is of a later generation
and offspring: then every wise christian, will readily see and acknowledge,
that it is borne in these last times, with other filthy heresies, and that it
cannot be the true ancient and catholic religion: but newborn and late
vpstarted superstitious and counterfeit like as 1. King. 3.16.
she that pleded for her self to be mother of the live child, was found by
wise Solomon, to be in deed the mother of the dead child. And this by gods
grace I doubt not but to make manifest, to every honest man, who will not
wilfully blind his eyes against the known truth. And this I may so much the
more boldly affirm, because that unto him that marketh it well, it does
already sufficiently and plainly appear, by that which is written before.
And that by four arguments of great demonstration, in my conscience. First
because that the true religion is the same which is now in England, and this is
proved to have been from the beginning of the world by Gods ordinance set
forth in holy Scripture, and because by the learned men of this land it is
evidently taught and defended in the chief and maine heads thereof, out of the
fathers for 600. years after Christ's incarnation, and by history known to
have remained in the greek church, and in diverse parts of the west till our
time. Secondly because the religion of Rome is directly contrary and
disagreeing thereunto. And thirdly that they follow not the doctrine, taught by
Saint Paul and Peter, and lastly that they agree with the heretics of the
primative Church, and be as it were compact of many heresies which sprang up in
the first 600. years, which four things being apparent in the former
Chapters of this book, there needs no more to prove, the new learning of
popish superstition, to be of a late offspring and generation.

2. Howbeit I will here add a fifth argument, which is this, that popery may be
showed how it is risen up, without Gods authority, by men, how, where, and
when since the pure times of the blessed Apostles, and founders of Christ's
church and religion; yea and that in most of the particulers. Wherein my purpose
is not, to enter so far as might be spoken; (for I cannot make in so short a
room, an exact treatise) but only as briefly as I can conveniently, so far
to show the christian reader, as he may sufficiently see and perceive, that
popery has his original from men and not from God, and that it came up since
and under the Christian religion; like unto the Iuie that comes up after the
oak and takes hold thereon, and by little and little so ouerspreadeth it, and
covers it from the sight of men, that we can scarce see or discern the oak.
Histories differ in setting down (...) times.
And here I am to advertise the reader, that history writers and reporters of
antiquity differ much in these causes about the times: so as the cronologie
writers find themselves encombred, how to set down the certainty in many
things: yet notwithstanding though the authors disagree about the certain
time, yet the matter is made undoubted, when they all agree that it is found
out, to come in after the Apostles times. Wherein I make choice, to take our
testimony from hearty and unfeigned papists, that the truth of this cause, may
the more appear when themselves cannot but yield, unto us sufficient warrant
and proof of their newborn superstition. Two devises to hide the newnes of
popery.
They have two great helps to maintain the antiquity of their folly. First
the authorizing of counterfeit writings, such as are the decretall Epistles of
Clemens, Anacletus and others of the primative Church, which not only
disagreeing in style and matter from the times they pretend, but also telling
of those things and persons, which were many years after, do very much argue,
that when the papists, are feign to run under the shadow of such muddie and
unsettled Wales of forged authority, their foundation is not so deep, in their
own conscience, as they would bear the world in hand. Their second help is;
that they proine, pare, and loppe, and engraft the writings of ancient fathers
and others, teaching them by a new devise called Index Expurgatorius, hatched
in the late Counsel of Trent, Anno 1571.
to speak as they think best, for there sea of sin, and to hold their
peace where they like not of their sayings. If they may thus authorize false
witnesses to speak for their purpose as they list, and gagge the toonges of
the true witnesses, they can speak no further, but as they give them leave:
then may every simple man see in them, that an evil conscience, findinge
themselves to have no antiquity of truth, does cause them to invent shifts
to color and cloak their wicked forgeries and new devises: by which they
have many years abused Gods people. But GGD be thanked (who brings the
hidden and secreate things of the wicked unto light) he has confounded their
wisdom, that all this does not hide their filthy and earthly generation. For
the prophecy of Saint Paul concerning such perverse and cursed speakers, which
have a show of godliness, but have denied the power thereof, is now in the
eyes and knowledge of all men come to pass: For he 2. Tim. 3.9*
says: They shall prevail no longer for their madness shall be evident to all
men.

3. And this verily is brought to pass by the righteous judgments of God,
causing their own tongs to take them, and making the counsel of the wicked to
be foolishness. Mark therefore and consider how they confound the glory of
their inventions ad devises. Martinus Peresius Aiala, a Bishop and a very
zealous papist, seeming to have taken great pains in reading of antiquities,
writes a Printed at Paris 1549.
book of traditions, dedicated to Phillip king of Spain, where he In his
preface. nisi attramento mortuo in sacris codicibus expressu^.
calls the inspired scriptures of the word of God: Dead incke in the holy
books: and affirms that if we should follow only the holy scriptures (which
he calls a pestiferous opinion) Christian religion and ecclesiastical
policy should utterly be destroyed: auouching beside the canonical scriptures
another kind of doctrine, called Tradition, the head and seed plot (as he
says) of almost all controversies between us, and if herein we agreede, all
discord now in religion would quickly cease. And in this book he makes 3.
pars. assertio 6. fol. 6. Diuina authoritas, magisterium apostolicum. Episcop.
maxim Romanorum a Deo concessa authoritas.
three fountains of traditions. First they call divine authority, that is, such
as Christ (in their devise) instituted and delivered which were not laid up in
the scriptures: the second fountain they call the Apostolical mastership,
where they have traditions, some in the canons Apostolical, and some in holy
men's writings: the last fountain is the mastership and authority of the
Bishops and most of all of the Roman Bishops, which they also call the pars 2.
assert. 5. fol. 44.
mastership of the church. Wherein is a power as they say to judge and
determine what is canonical scripture and to make diverse laws and
ecclesiastical discipline. And this last gives power to all the rest: for
here (as they say) we know which is the true word of God, here the
authority of decretalles is made firm, and this being a gift and privilege,
that cannot err, is of that autenticall authority (if we believe them) that
no man must once reason against it. Out of these fountains they draw their
traditions, of the rites of Baptism, of confirmation auricular confession and
penitential satisfaction, the tradition of order and his rites, the fearful
sacrifice of the alter transubstantiation, prayer for the dead, communion under
one kind, purgatory, extreme unction, worship and intercession of Saints,
worship of relickes, images exorcismes, Lent, fastes, single life, vows of
chastity and such like. In handling of which traditions he Postulat. 3. fol.
aut quia legi Dei repugnant and proximae sunt occasiones peccandi etc.
gives us a rule, to discern humane traditions from divine saying: Traditions
which are not good, are either contrary to the law of God, and are very near
occasions to sin; or derogate to the glory of Christ; or they are frivolous,
burdensome and of no profit. If it be lawful for us to follow these three
rules, we shall easily prove popery to be no good tradition, but a mere humane
invention of their own. For the first rule: I having before showed that all
their popish religion, is contrary to the religion which God taught Abraham,
Moses and the Prophets taught the Jews, and Christ and his Apostles taught all
nations, and contrary to the doctrine which Paul taught the ancient Romans,
and which Peter taught the Jews: it must needs follow, that these traditions,
being (as they confess, not found in holy scriptures) cannot be good: if the
first part of their rule be true. Secondly, if it be of the nature of the
scripture (as we have proved) to contain all things necessary to salvation,
and some of these, as their dreadful sacrifice of the mass, rites in
baptism, confirmation, purgatory, prayers for the dead etc. are (by popish
doctrine) necessary to salvation, and yet are not to be found in holy
scriptures, then it follows that they are contrary to the law of God, when
they stand up to show themselves available to salvation: because they falsely
accuse the scripture, not to contain all things necssarie to salvation: yea
they accuse the scripture of a lie: when it says, 2. Tim. 3.15.16.17.
They are able to make thee wise unto salvation, and that the man of God may
be perfect and absolute unto every good work. But what can be more
contrary to the law of God then to make his inspired word written to tell a
lie? Here then by their own rule fall down their traditions, forged upon
Christ and his Apostles, and presumed by their Church, and if the scripture be
true there can and ought to be no such thing: and therefore of necessity by
their own doctrine, these are but devises of men and traditions not good. Now
for the second part of this first branch of their rule, where they say that
the naughty traditions, are very near occasions of sin. These traditions
break that rule also. For beside that they are all sin, in that God never
commanded them, and come under that check: Math. 15.2.
In vain they worship me, teaching for doctrines man's precepts: they can
never deny by any good reason, but that by these traditions they give
occasions of sin many ways. As in Baptism, men cannot discern the true
work of Baptism for the multitude of ceremonies, unto which are given the
very power and operation of Baptism, by the sacrifice of the mass, relickes,
images and praying to Saints they are led unto sin, being directly against
that commandment, which says, Math. 4.10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God and him only shall thou serve. And their
vows of chastity and single life give occasion of all filthiness, buggery,
and murder, and sodomitrie. But if in these traditions there be a direct and
particular contradiction to holy scripture, then where is their foundation? as
for example, the holy scripture says, Heb. 18.
There remains no more sacrifice for sin: they say the sacrifice of the
mass is for the quick and the dead: the holy scripture says it is 1. Tim.
4.1.
a doctrine of devils, to forbid meats and marriage. These traditions make
priesthood, vows and holding the child at Baptism to hinder marrige, and
that Lent and ember days must not see any flesh and that for conscience sake.
The scripture says thou Precep. 2. Exodus 20.
shall make no image nor worship them, and they say thou may and ought
to worship them. And there are a great many more, as is before apparent to be
seen, whereof I thought good to give the reader a taste, that he might the
better remember what has been before written. For the second part of the
rule, to know a naughty tradition, to be of men, and not of God: they say it
is naught, if it be derogatorie to the glory of Christ: I pray you look upon
all and every of these traditions, and you shall find that they are set forth
for merit and remission of sins, for satisfaction and justification. All
which as is before proved, are the glory of Christ, because there is Act. 4.12.
no other name given under heaven whereby a man may be saved. These being new
names challenging that which belongs to him, cause men to give his glory
unto others. And therefore by this rule, seeing they derogate from the glory
of Christ, they are no good traditions, but mere inventions of men, not
sufferable in the Church of God. Lastly, they are frivolous and burdenous etc.
which is the third part of their rule to know traditions to be of man, do but
look upon the number. If Gratians decrees.
one book can show us 3090. decrees, whereof most of them be of these
traditions: and that there be besides these in decretall and extrauagants, I
cannot tell how many thousand more, then how can they avoid the name of burden.
And as for their profit if we may judge by holy scriptures, which teaches
that Heb. 1.3.
Christ by himself purges our sins. What profit can there be in any or all of
these? except we may say, that Christ has not purged our sins. But their
own conscience tells them, there is no need of them. As for example, when
they can Manipul. curat. cap. 8. de annex. bapt.
say of all the rites of tradition in Baptism, that they are not of the
essence of Baptism, because that without them Baptism may be well given in
case of necessity: which having as great a warrant as any of the rest, we may
verily conclude, that they are all but frivolous, and superfluous,
ouerspreading outslippes of men's devises. What shall we then determine of this
goodly popish trash? but that they cannot be ancient and autentical after Gods
word seeing they cannot agree to their own rules, whereby they would prove
them to be of God. Therefore that is most blasphemous, that they call the word
of God, as it is in the holy books, dead incke in comparison of their
tradition, unless it be warranted by tradition, and understood in the sense of
the mastership of their church. We are then come thus far that popery is a
tradition, not written with dead incke in Gods holy books; but some other
kind of doctrine, which by their own rules cannot be found worthy the name
of a good tradition: and therefore a mere devise of man's foolishness, that is
to say, very fables much displeasing and abominable in the holy eyes of
almighty God.

4 Now let us look into the particulers. Here come the Antididagma printed at
Louan. 1544.
reverend Canons of Colen, who in the general joining with this great clearke
Peresius, in many things cry with him: Traditum est, or traditum tenemus, that
is, it is a tradition, or we hold it a tradition. And this they do, where
they are to show their original: and in deed it is an easy matter to
maintain any foolish or wicked thing by such a devise, yet are these learned
men of Colon content to tell us one or two originalles. First Page 70.
they say, It is true that Christ gave the Sacrament to his Apostles under both
kinds of bread and wine, and that the church observed that order a long time
after: therefore they teach us that to keep the cup from the common people is
but new learning. So also they Page 143.
say their holy days reckning by name 22. to have been celebrated above a
thousand years, which yet they cannot say to be enjoined the Church, but by a
counsel of Lions which they can hardly show, or by Gregory the ninth about
the year of the Lord 1210.

There is another very learned man devoutly given to the sea of Rome, called
Johannes Stephanus Durantus, who having taken great pains in a Printed at Romans
1591.
book Deritibus ecclesiae, dedicated to Pope Gregory the 14. does mightily
labor to show the ancient original of the popish worship and service of God,
searching authorities both old and new, yet is he feign to sing the same song
with others of Traditum est, and to allege many corrupt and partial authors.
Howbeit he is an help to us in many things: that we may know by their
confession, that they worship God in many things by the precept of men. Namely
that in Lib. 1. Sap. 1. Sectio. 8.
the gospel, and unto the time of Irenaeus priests were called Presbyteri and
patres, that is, elders, and fathers. Secondly he can tell us, that Cap. 8.
sect. 5.
Lactantius lib. 6. cap. 2. and after him the counsel Elibert cap. 37. And
Hierome against Vigilantius, have taught men to deride the use of candles in
the church, namely, that they taught, that to light candles for the honor of
martirs, appertains unto the ignorance and simplicity of seculer men, and
of religious women, which have indeed a zeal, but not according to knowledge.
He would have us know that Cap. 11. sect. 2.
Zepherinus the 16. Pope ordained a dish of glass to say mass in, and that
Vrbanus the 18. Pope made them of gold. And the Cap. 12.3.
corporal to be of linen to wrap the body of Christ, he will have us think
to be ordained by Eusebius. And as for the Cap. 16.9.10.
reserving of the host, he would have us to believe the late Counsel of
Trent, to have good cause to affirm, that the custom is ancient, reaching to
the Council of Nice: though himself cannot find it in the council, nor in
Gratian but only in Rufinus. As for baptism he confesses Cap. 19.2.
that in the beginning it was used simply in rivers or fountains: but process
of time bringing forth more honor to religion these goodly fontes and
ceremonies, now used in the Church of Rome, by degrees came up. Also
notwithstanding this he would have us think that Cap. 21.2.
Alexander the fifth Pope from Peter, did command water sprinkled with salt to
be blessed, to sprinkle the Christian people withal. This man would have us
fet the Cap. 22.6.
hallowing of bells at the Synod of Colon under Pope Julius the first, Anno
338. that the devil might be made afeard by the noise of belles, calling
Christians to prayers. The worthy Lib. 2. ca. 1. 6.
name of the mass he tells us out of Burchades decretals, to be very
ancient, even from Euaristus the third Pope of Rome. Concerning the Cap. 2.2.
sacrifice of the mass, the first strength he would have us take out of the
Canons, falsely termed the Apostles, and out of the council of Nice, and of
diverse fathers, because they make mention of offeringes and sacrifice: Who in
deed have no such meaning, but only use these terms by allusion to the old
law, to signify our thanksgiving and memory of Christ's sacrifice in which
sense it may be called an offering or sacrifice: but you should not find them
say that their priest did really and truly offer up unto God his son or the
whole man Christ, under the forms of bread and wine for the quick and dead:
therefore this is but a new devise of their own. Howbeit his first Cap. 4.1.4.
invention of public mass he lays upon the counsel of Carthage about Anno
389. and the private mass as they now use it, when the priest alone does
communicate, he would have us think (though he show no reason) to belong
before Gregory's time that is An. 606. yet if men believe him, this mass
public and private is but new learning, as he teaches it, whereof neither
Christ nor his Apostles can be proved authors, but men who lived after their
time. Hereof it is, that although he boldly affirm, many patches of the mass
to be ancient even from the Apostles time (which no man that reuerenceth the
holy Scriptures as he ought, can do in such manner as he does) yet is he
willing to teach us the beginning of some of them. Namely that the confession,
Cap. 12.4.
which is made in the beginning of the mass is of a doubtful parentage,
whether of Damasus or Pontianus. But Cap. 14.1.
Gloria in excelsis he says Talesphorus 7. Pope from Peter to have ordained:
Cap. 21.1.
of the tract he cares not, if we believe Gelasius to be the author, or else
Celestinus, and that he made the gradnale. Cap. 27.1.
Alexander the fifth he says appointed wine mingled with water, and the Cap.
28.6.
washing of hands in the mass, he teaches out of Thomas Aquinas a new
writer, to be as it were instituted of the Church, as a certain convenient
thing. The Cap. 32.1. and 37.1.
Canon of the mass, which he says is the lawful and reguler making of the
sacrament, he coniectureth to be long before S. Gregory, because that S.
Ambrose (as he says) makes mention of Benedicta ascripta, rata, rationabilis
etc. so that he teaches that before Ambrose time, there is no proof of any
unlawful and reguler making of their sacrament, and therefore it is not of God
but of man: especially seeing that to a reasonable man this is but a streined
proof of antiquity, Ambrose mentions these terms, therefore the Canon was
in his time before Gregory's time, which being so I marvel how Cap. 38.1.
Alexander the first being fifth pope, could (as he says) add that part of the
Canon. Quipridie, when the ancient Canon was long after him: yet he gesseth
that Cap. 38.6.
the co^secrating of the bread round like a penie is not new, because he
finds in Gregory oblationum coronas, the crowns of the offerings, and such
like sandy foundations. Cap. 42.9.
Leo the first he says adds this particle Sanctum sacrificium immaculatam
hostiam. The Cap. 43.2.
memory of the dead in the mass, he warranteth by the second prouincial
counsel called Concilium Arelatense, holden under pope Siluester, Anno 320.
The Cap. 47.1.
preface before the Lords prayer, Oremus preceptis salutaribus moniti, has his
testimony from the ancient time of Charles the great, Anno 880. This man
thinks that Cap. 51.8.
Albertus was deceived, to think that Sergius ordained the breaking of the
host, he would have us look hyer, but so as we may see it was of some man. 53.
1.
Pacis osculum in the mass, he sends unto Leo the second or Innocent the
first as fathers perhaps thereof. That Cap. 55.18.
for the holy singular reverence of the mystery, the lay people should not
touch with their hand; the Eucharist, but the priest should thrust it into the
mouth of him that eats it, he says the church ordained in an odd counsel of
Rhotomag, As for the lib. 3. cap. 2. 7.
canonical hours, Roane
he would not have us to believe Polidor and others which refer them to Hierom,
or to Pelagius 1. or 2. but he has found them out (as he says) in Clement
Basil and other fathers; but we looked to be shown them in the oracles of
God. The Cap. 4.2.
vigils he would fasten upon Tertullian: and the Cap. 17.4.
Antiphonae, that is, singing or saying by turns and courses he fathereth upon
Ambrose. So that the pope allowing this man's writing, we may believe, all
their worshipping of God, mass, sacrifice, and canon, to be man's devise,
earthly and devilish: a very new learning in comparison of the true
worshipping of God, taught by Christ and his Apostles.

Pope Grigorie the 13. has helped us to the knowledge of something, by his
Printed at Antwerpe 1589.
new Martyrolege, restored (as it is entitled) to the truth of the
ecclesiastical story. For there is told Ian 1. page 2.
that Odilo abbot of Clunia first commanded in his monastery, the
commemoration of the faithful being dead, to be the first day after the feast
of all Saints, which rite afterward the whole church receiving did allow,
and this man died as they say, Anno 1048. And this book does Quint id. Maij
page 212.
ascribe unto Mammertius B. of Vienna, the days of letanies, that is the
rogations before ascension, and after him, the church universal allowed it, he
lived about Anno 460. yea this legende Pride. id. Maij page 217.
does father upon Pachomius an Abbot of Egypt (who died as they say) Anno
406.) the rule of Munkes, Quam angelo dictante didicerat.
and that we may know these trumperies came of the devil they say, that he
learned it at the mouth of an Angel. For so the Apostle Saint Paul teaching
righteousness and salvation only by belief in Christ, charge us to hold him
or an angel accursed, that teaches otherwise, therefore these things come not
of God.

But Polydor virgill, a very zealous patron of Romish superstition; For the
honor of that sea, searched many antiquities, therefore by In his book De
inuentoribus rerum.
him we may be informed of the birth of much of this new found doctrine, and
service papistical, he Lib. 6. cap. 1. Auriculer confession.
affirms that Innocentius the 3. who lived about An. 1200. did first ordain
auriculer confession, to be at the least once in the year. But he would have us
think that Lib. 5. cap. 3. Extreme unction.
Faelix the 3. being pope An. 526. commanded that men dying, should be
anointed: that is extreme vnctio^. And as touching marriage of priests he
shows how in Lib. 5. cap. 4. Priests single life.
the west, it began to cease, namely first that Syricius being pope about an.
387. forbad marriage unto priest and deacons, and that Pelagius the second
coming almost 300. years after decreed that subdeacons should put away their
wives. But Gregory the first who succeeded him, thought that to be wicked, and
therefore he bound the subdeacon, to promise chastity before he were made
subdeacon, after them many laws and decrees were made about this matter, yet
did it never prevail, to be generally put in execution, till about An. 1074.
when Gregory the 7. by great violence and labor, brought it to pass. And this
is a very plain thing in all stories, that the Bishops after this time
labored mightily with their priests, to make them put away their wives, and so
by little and little one country after an other, yielded to this slavery (as
Polydor terms it) of constrained chastity, which he auowcheth to be a
shameful blot: thinking it very good that the right of matrimony might one
day, be restored again unto priests. This man can tell us that Lib. 5. cap. 11
Many parts of the mass.
in the beginning among the Apostles, all things were naked, and the mysteries
simply and plainly delivered of Christ, all the order of ceremonies was naked,
having more godliness then outward show or decking. But after them other
increased this holy mysteries, and diverse men in diverse ages added diverse
things. Clestinus made introitam missae, Gregory the saying of Curie nine
times, and diverse other things, Leo the 3. that frankincense should be burnt
on the alter, after the manner of the Jews and heathen, and many other such
things he rehearses by their first parents (much like as is before said by
Durantus.) Therefore he affirms that the canon was neither made al of one man,
neither digested into the same form that it is now, unto which if we add that
of late, the mass is restored by the decree of the Counsel of Trent, and set
forth by Pope Pius the fifth, we shall see that this kind of massing, which is
used in the popish Synagogue is a devise of man, and of a new and variable
composition. This Polydor tells us that, Lib. 4. cap. 7.
that Caius being Pope about Anno 284. did first distinguish the orders of
porters, readers, exorcistes, acoluthes, subdeacons, deacons, priests, and
Bishops, by which as by certain steps they should ascend to a Bishopric.
Also he shows that Lib. 4. cap. 9. Cardinals.
Cardinals, were first certain selected Priests to bury and Baptize,
therefore called Cardinal because they had more special charge then others,
like as we call the four winds great or cardinal winds, About Anno. 610.
but after that Bonifacius the third obtained of Phocas to have the prerogative
above all Bishops this name of Cardinal became more honorable, when such as
were of that company were of the popes assistance and senate. And by little
and little through the contention of the Emperors and people about the creating
of the Pope, they got the prerogative and right of the choosing of the pope,
and so about Anno 1244. Pope Innocent the third decreed they should ride upon
an horse, with a red hat, and so they came to their great dignity, and grew
more and more famous and attained that glorious estate they now take upon
them: lib. 5. cap. 8.
He makes Alexander the first, pope of Rome, author of holy water to drive
away devils: lib. 6. cap. 12.
And Stephen the first to have ordained holy garments, and couerings after the
manner of the Hebrews, where as before they clad themselves within with
virtues, and took no care for outward vestures in their holy ministration.
But when this man speaks of Monks, Nuns, and Friars, which as new religions
are lately sprung up in this bastardly kingdom of Abaddon, in many families,
like swarms of locustes filling the Chistian world, he very honestly
affirms lib. 7. cap. 1. Nouus and varius viuendi modus.
that they are not of the gospellike and apostolic life, but a new and
variable manner of living. And he cuts off 400. years auouching, that Paulus,
Antonius, Hilarion, Basilius, Hieronymus, and many others in those primative
ages, had nothing like the popish monks and friars. They were free, and tied
to no certain rule of life, Vestimentum honc stum.
after the ceremonies that now Monks observe, their garments were comely as
to every man was fit: they had no band of vows, and were free to go any
wheather and might leave that order of life, if at any time they repented: and
if says he this kind of Monks might have remained unviolated, by the laws
of men: we should have had at all times very holy Monks, and these were
given to prayers, fastinges, watching, and study of learning, they lived
hardly and excercising themselves with their hands, gave an example of well
living to their posterity. But after growing into many families, and every
of them prescribing a rule of life, it came to pass that the Christian people,
which embraced one law and one religion, was divided into diverse sects and
kinds of religion, and this came to pass (as he says) because the
monastical laws being humane, did not continue long uncorrupted: Cap. 2.
First out of Benedick, which was an hundred threescore and six years after
Anthony, the Monks of the order called Claniacensis in Burgandie came up,
Anno domini 916. Secondly the order called vallis vmbrensis in Apenninum, Anno
1060. and the Montolinetensis, Anno 1407. and Cistercienses, Anno 1098. Then
Cap. 3.
he tells of rising of the Hieronymians, Canonick regulars, Augustinians,
Catusians, Carmelites etc. Cap. 4.
After he speaks of two new fountains of friars: Dominicke and Frauncis, one
begetting the preaching and the other begging minorites Friars whose first
appearing was in the time of Innocent the third, about Anno 1215. but what
swarms following there came out of these, he does signify saying: that the
common people being astonished, suspected that godliness was not so much beloved
of many as ease and idleness. But of these religons I need not to speak much:
seeing the papist themselves do frankely acknowledge that they are new, and we
can out of them show how they rent the unseamed coat of Christ's holy religion,
into so many pieces, cullers and changes of religion, that it would require a
great volume to handle their story and several descriptions, rules, habits,
dissentions, rising and fallings. Yet let us learn lib. 8. cap. 1. The year of
Jubilee, and pardons.
of him the year of Jubilee, wherein the pope, gives his indulgencies, full
remission of sins both from pain and guilt, unto those that visit the holy
places of the Apostles at Rome, he teaches that Boniface the 8. Anno 1300. did
first of al set forth the Iubily to be every 100. year; but fifty year after
pope Clement the 6. established the Iubily to be celebrated every 50. year,
seeing the age of a man would scarce attain to the Iubily of an 100. years; and
lastly Sixtus the 4. brought the Jubilee to be every 25. years, and this was
Anno 1475. and thus then the use of pardon, which they call indulgencies began
to be of great fame. Howbeit he would have us think, that their original came
from Gregory, but being not certain by any good antiquity: he makes John B.
of Rochester in a work against Luther, to speak for him on this manner.
Parauenture it moves many not to turst so much to these indulge^ces, because
their use in the church seems somewhat new, and very lately found out among
Christians: to whom I answer, It is not certain of whom they first began to
be given, but there was some use of them as they say among the Romans in
ancient times, which may be understood by the stations, and he after says.
Truly no catholic doubts whether there be purgatory, Purgatory not among
the ancient fathers.
of which notwithstanding among the ancient fathers there was none or very
rare mention, and also the Grecians believe it not to this day. For as long as
there was no care of purgatory, no man sought for indulgencies, for of it
depends all the estimation of pardons, if you take away purgatory, to what
use serve indulgencies; therefore pardons or indulgencies began after men
trembled a little while at the torments of purgatory. So much the Bishop.
Quae tu forte, cum tanti sint momenti, vt magis certa ex ore Dei expectabas.
Now here says Polydor to his reader these things: by which things thou
peradventure, seeing they are of so great weight, did look for as things
more certain out of the mouth of God. Here we may see, that these papists
when they speak truth as their conscience bears them witness, they can tell
us that purgatory is but a new invention, and has no certain original, and
that these indulgencies and Iubilies and their after birth, are newborn
bables, never coming out of the mouth of God. Which as the same Polydor
further says, being as green corn grew by little and little after Gregory,
but very many sometimes gather no small harvest thereof, as especially Boniface
the 9. in whose times such pardons like other merchandise every day were sold
all abroad. So far Polydor, in whose writings thou may read a great many
more of popish devotions, to be new devised toys: some taken from the Jews,
and some from the heathen idolaters: wherein they forsake the ancient religion
taught by the holy wrytings of GOD, and follow late vpstarte superstition of
man's devising. Now let us go to another. Platina as zealous for popery as who
in his time was most, living in Rome, and in office under Pope Pius the second,
about Anno 1460. in the very earnest devotion he has to popery, In his book
De vitis pontificum.
shows us most of the foresaid inventions to have risen since the time of
Pelagius the second, who lived about Anno 600. in the time of Mauritius the
Emperor, out of whom some few things I will observe over and above the former.
And first this Platina reckons up many things in the mass devised by
Gregory the first, In vita Gregorij.
Pope next after Pelagius. And that he made the large supplications called the
Letanies, and the stations of Rome, and namely them of Saint Peter, the day of
the nativity of our Lord, the days of the kings the first sunday of the
passion, and of the ascension, of Pentecost, of the nativity of the Apostle,
the day of Saint Andrew, the day of the chair of Saint Peter, when they say
the great Letanies etc. yea he says he made so many works that one cannot
reckon them. And if we may believe him, in this time was found out the gown
of Jesus Christ, which fell by lot unto one of the soldiers, when Christ was
crucified, in a village called Zaphat. For we must suppose that Christ woare
durable clothing, which would not waste in 600. years, and that the soldier
kept it as some holy relicke, and gave it or sold it to some Christian. But I
will not trouble the reader with such bables, only let him observe and mark
that here ignorance and blind devotion began to spring, and to draw men away
from the pure truth of the gospel. This Platina tells us that Theodatus
ordained, that the son of the godfather, Godfathers not to marie.
should not marie the daughter which his father held at the font: this is a new
kindred. Boniface the 5. Sanctuary for offenders.
ordained that one should not be drawn out of the church by force, but the
church should be a place of refuge for offenders. Organs and music in the
church. The pax.
Vitalianus ordained organs in the church, and musical instruments. Leo the
second founded the Pax, to be given the people in the mass time. A strange
chair.
This Platina tells of a new and strange chair at Rome, called Seeds
Stercorea, wherein the new created Pope sits and underneath the last deacon
tries him whether he be a man, which newly came up by this occasion, that Pope
John 8. Anno 855.
as he went to the Church of Lateran, Mass for the dead.
was delivered of a child, and therefore the Popes after that going to that
Church pass not that way, and are thus tried. Benedict 3. ordained that the
priests, deacons, and the Pope, should be present at the funeral of a
Bishop, to give honor to the corpse, and to pray for the dead man's soul, and
commanded all priests to say mass when the Pope died. In the time of Formosus,
which was about Anno 890. He says, The Emperors and Popes holiness lost at
one time.
that (he could not tell for what cause) in one time, the truth of the
Emperors and of the Popes and their holiness was lost and abolished. Steven the
sixth brought up this new custom, that one Pope did undo and annihillate the
doings and decrees of his predecessors, wherein the Christian reader by the way
may consider that we are to believe them when they make the Popes decrees
equal with the scripture, seeing themselves can so easily put down such
authentical doings. And here is not to be omitted how grievously Platina In
the life of Sargius, and of diverse others.
complains in rehearsing the lives of many wicked popes about this time,
calling them cursed and bastardes from the virtues of the good Popes. Of John
the 16. he says, that he converted the goods of the Church to the use of his
kindred, brothers, parents, and carnal friends, and of that sprang a
custom, which the Popes coming after did observe and keep, that not for the
faith and devotion of Christianity, but for the treasures of the Church, the
Popes sought that honor, namely to enrich themselves and their friends,
brothers, sisters, cosens, nephews, etc. About which time Book 6. Anno 990.
Polydor Virgill in his story of England observes, that the Monks
degenerated and the priests into tyranny, by means of their riches. This
Platina can tell you that Syluester the second came to his popedom by
negromancie, and that Benedick the 8. after his death appeared upon a black
horse, for hiding up money that was given for the poor. And Benedick the 9.
sold his Popedom, and so also after his death appeared like a monster and
horrible idol. Syluester the third through money became Pope, Anno 1000.
and also Gregory the 6. for at this time this new learning was ruled by money
and friends. Damasus the second occupied that room by force without the
consent of the people and clergy: so the custom was, that the ambitious
obtained the papacy. This Platina commends Gregory the seventh, although
for that he tells of him, he might rightly be called Hellbrand, for his
presumption over his Lord the Emperor, and for his hellish and blasphemous
bulls, wherein he makes Peter his God, saying: O glorious Peter, prince of
the Apostles, incline thine ear and hear thy servant, whom thou have
nourished up from his infancy, and preserved and kept from the hands of his
enemies, unto this present time etc. And in his statutes, (a little after) he
describes the man that does as appertains to a Christian, by this: To fear
God and S. Peter. To fear God and S. Peter.
And in another curse he says to Peter and Paul: I have not chosen you, but
you have chosen me, and laid this most grievous burden upon my shoulders, etc.
By these and such like he utters words of great dishonor to God, and makes
Peter in virtue and power and worship equal to God and Christ, which are new
broached errors, and fearful in the ears of true Christians. And such as
Peter would earnestly have detested, if he were alive Act. 10. Cap. 14.
who rebuked Cornelius in a less matter. And Paul would have rent his clothes
and said: O men why do you these things, we also are men subject to the like
passions as you are? He can tell us also of Urban the second, that he began the
wares against the Sarasines and Turks. And that from thencefoorth the cheifest
labors of Popes, have been in wars for Peter's patrimony, deposing kings and
Emperors, and translating of kingdoms and dignities. Out of which goodly
root there sprang up the bloody factions of the Guelphes, and Gibellins,
Florentines, Venetians, Genenois, Cecilians, etc. The Anno 1260.
Romans refuse to obey Urban the 4. And these garboiles grew so strong, that
the Popes were feign to be nonresidents for seventy and four years,
beginning at Anno 1310.
Clement the fifth, until Gregory the eleventh. Then out of this engendered an
other new thing, 1380.
a scisme of nine and thirty years, wherein were someime two sometime three
Popes at once, till the council of Constance. And so this time in wars
canonizing of Saints, breeding and enlarging of pardons and many other
trumperies continued until the time of Luther. Here I ouerskip Boniface the 8.
with his two swords, and his angels be set in the night to persuade Celestinus
to surrender his pope seat, and John 23. a deuisor of new things, he would
make and unmake, Bishops of Abbots, and Abbots of Bishops, new canons and
dignities in the church, and by and by in another fashion. And thus have they
handled the religion of Christ. Like unto a potter, turning his wheel, who
makes the clay now of one fashion and now of an other, that no certainty of
truth and ancient godliness can be found in that sea. But as the Prophet Esaias
says, Cap. 29.19.
Your turning devises shall it not be as the potters clay? If we read the
wars, sedition, tumults, bonefires, massacres, rebellions, treasons, murders,
and all manner of hurly burly: between Pope and pope Cardinal and Cardinal,
between pope and Cardinals, Emperors, kings and people, between city and
city, subject against their Lords, and one nation against another. From the
first arising of Hildebrands fire which he brought from hell until our time,
which have been raised, procured, maintained and continued by that wicked
generation, we may well say of them as the prophet Esaias speaks of the
wicked Cap. 57.20.
The wicked are like the raging sea, that cannot rest, whose waters cast up
mire and dirt.

But he that would read Clemangis, Sigebert, Aeneas Siluius, Sigonius, Mathie
Parrisius, and other such writers which lived in those times, shall find a
great many more monsters, newborn in the church of Rome, then in this short
treatise I am able to set down: yet for the further help of the reader I will
lead him a word or twain from these story writers to the Counsels. If
happily we may find some of this new brood of popery by them. The Canon. 6.
Anno 330. The primacie of Bishops.
Nice council, summoned by Constantin the great, consisting of 318. Bishops out
of all the parts of the world ordained (according to the custom of the church
in those days) that the Patriarch of Alexandria and of Antioch, should have the
like authority in their Bishoprics as the Bishops of Rome in his. This was as
Gratian says the first general counsel. Therefore when the pope is gotten to
an higher presumption, he is in this respect of a new religion. About this time
the counsel of Ancyra Canon. 14. eating of flesh.
condemned those ministers, that did account flesh unclean and abominable. And
the counsel of Canon 2.
Gangrena a little after calls them Anathema acursed, which condemn a man
for eating flesh in faith. But this late counsel of Trent and Synagogue of
Rome, do command abstinence from flesh upon reward or vengeance of God, and
their practice of severity in punishing such for heretics, as eat flesh in
days by them devised and canonized, we well know and remember. The same
council of Gangrena Canon 4. and 9 and 10. single life.
does accurse whomsoever, that put difference between a married priest or any
other touching the service in the ministry: and also such as for virginity
sake judge marriage abominable. But all men know that the Romish Harlot is of a
new learning, putting more holiness in single life and vows of chastity,
especially in their priests, then in honest and honorable wedlock. A counsel at
Antioch somewhat after Canon 2. the sole communion.
ordained, such to be cast out of the Church, which entered the Church and
heard the scriptures, and did not tarry to receive the communion with the rest
of the people. And the like you may find to be the order of the church in
ancient time, Anno 480. Canon 18.
in the counsel of Agatha, a city of France. But now our new sinagogue has
devised a private mass, that the priest should bless the people with the cup,
and make them to worship his idol, and he himself eat all alone. A council
at Laodicea, An. 368. Canon 16. and 59.
judged that the gospels and other scriptures were to be read on the Sabbath
days; and that of the unlearned there ought not to be said in the Church,
Canonical scriptures only to be read in the church.
psalms made and vulgar (which as I judge were balads) neither to read books
which are out of the canon, but only the canonical books of the old and new
testament, and there they reckon up the books which we hold for canonical.
But we know that the Romish Apostasy has afterward brought in legends and
other Apocrypha writings, to iustle out the holy scriptures of God, keeping
them secret in an unknown tongue. The 4. counsel of Carthage says: Mulieres
baptizare etc. Let not women presume to baptize. Women bapt.
But we know by what devise the sea of Rome have brought in women to baptize.
In the sixth counsel of Carthage, Anno 430. Appeals to Rome.
wherein was S. Augustine Bishop of Yppo, and Legate of the province of
Numidia, it was tried and found out, that it was not (as Bonifacius Bishop of
Rome would have usurped) lawful by the council of Nice to appeal to Rome, out
of other Bishops provinces, Epist. Council. Africa ad and lestinum.
but that they saw most wisely and justly, that all business was to be ended,
where it was begun, neither should the grace of the holy spirit be wanting to
any province whereby equity might be wisely seen of Christ's priests and
constantly holden. And after that the Mileintane counsel Canon 22.
forbad all people to appeal over the sea out of their province, but only to
the counsel of Africa and the primates of their provinces: and who so did
otherwise should not be received to the communion in all Africa. But we know that
since that time, the pride of that wicked whore of Rome has usurped
jurisdiction, over al lands, that by any means they cold bring under their
feet, and receive appeals from whom soever; insomuch that we Polydor, hist.
Ang. li. 20 Rich. 2.
read of a Synod in England, An. 1391. which because many were vexed for
causes which could not be known at Rome, ordained that the authority of the
pope of Rome, should stretch no farther then to the Ocean sea: and that who so
appealed to Rome; beside excommunication, should be punished with loss of all
their goods and perpetual imprisonment. In the same counsel of Mileintane, Anno
420.
Canon 5.6.7
It was decreed against Pelagius: that without the grace of Christ we can do
nothing, and that every man should know he has sin in him, Free will and
jurisdiction by works.
as says Saint John Epist. 1. cap. 1. and that in many things we sin all, and
that we must confess with the Psalm, enter not into judgment with thy
servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified which thing is
opened, by an Epist. 72.
Epistle of Aurelius B. of Carthage, unto the Bishops of the province of
Bizanzena, and Arzignitanta, where having showed the error of Pelagius he
declares the faith of the Catholics to be thus. Sixthly to confess, the grace
of God and his help to be given unto all singular acts, and the same not
according to our merits that it may be true grace, that is, freely given by his
mercy, who said I will have mercy, on whom I will have mercy etc. And
ninthlie to confess, when we fight against tentations and unlawful
concupiscences, although we have there even our own will, yet not by that, but
by the mercy of God we have our salvation: because otherwise it shall not be
true, which the Apostle says; it is not of the willer, nor of the runner, but
that we be saved, it is of God which has mercy. Tenthly to confess that
pardon, is given to them that ask, according to the grace and mercy of God,
not according to their merits; seeing the Apostle says: that repentance it
self is the gift of God, where he says of certain men, least God should give
them repentance: which catholic faith is contrary to the new religion of Rome
in those things. First for the preparation unto grace and works of
condignitie: for they say then grace were no grace: Secondly for the
concurrence of free will, to work with the grace of God, and so to merit, for
they give all to Gods grace, and all pardon and salvation to Gods free mercy.
Lo here christian reader) thou see, that the papists can tell us of the
particular original of the most part of their trumperie, and that the old
christian churches in their counsels and determinations were protestants
touching the authority of Bishops and provinces, touching marriage, eating of
flesh, private mass, and receiving the communion; touching the holy
scriptures and the reading of them; touching weomens Baptism and appeals to
Rome, and touching the grace of God, freewill and merit: therefore the heresy
of the church of Rome, being gathered since those primative times, must needs
be of a new generation, and lately sprung up and come abroad into the world.

5, And that thou may, yet further see, Popery has lost the life and breath
of christianity.
how they have lost the very life and breath of all religion, and so are
clean fallen away, from being any member in Christ's church, and to have no
part in the communion of Saints, as in any sort to be called Gods visible
people; I will show thee five other points which are fundamental, and so far
of the foundation of christian religion, that without them, no man can be a
member visible nor invisible of the catholic church: wherein thou shall see
that the protestant was the ancient true primative christian church of God:
Five fundamental points of christianity rased by popery.
and the papist a very apostata, coming in deed of a contrary race even of
the very stock of antechrist. The first is of adoring God only: the second of
the condition of the covenant with God on our behalf: the third of the seals
of the covenant: the fourth of the writings of the covenant: the fifth of the
sovereignty and headship of Christ over his church. And that these are
foundamental, consider with me, that in the 2. Idolatry.
first they break the spiritual wedlock with God, which give his worship and
honor to idols and images: as thou may see God, in Cap. 16.
Ezechiel complaining and saying. Thou have taken thy fair Jewels of my gold
and of my silver, which I had given thee, and made to thy self images of men,
and did commit whooredom with the^ etc. Merits of works 2.
In the second when they join works and the fulfilling of the commandments,
with faith: for they shut themselves from the righteousness in the covenant,
whereby they should rejoice with God: as the Apostle says: Romans 4.2.
If Abraham were justified by works he has wherein to rejoice but not with
God: yea they abrogate the grace of God, and make Christ die in vain, as the
same Apostle teaches saying, Gal. 2.21.
I do not abrogate the grace of God, for if righteousness be by the law, then
Christ died without a cause. 3. Sacraments.
In the third they annihilate and overthrow Christ's institution in the seals
of the covenant, by their transubstantiation and unbloody sacrifice adored,
and make but a fanatical body of Christ and an imaginatie manhood: where as
Christ says, 1. Cor. 11.24.25.26.
Do this in remembrance of me, and Saint Paul expounds it saying: As often
as ye eat this bread and drink this cup ye show the Lords death till he
come. For if he be contained in heaven (as Saint Peter Act. 3. and 21.
says) till the restoring of al things: and that this sacrament is to remember
and show his death till he come: what is it but a new institution, when they
say it is turned into his person and adore him as present? and what can that
body or manhood, which is in heaven, be in the sacrament really and
corporally, any otherwise, but in fancy and imagination, seeing in the same,
(till he come to judgment) he is in heaven? In the 4. Scriptures.
fourth they blot out the writings of the covenant, when as Christ Mat. 15.
says: They make the law of God of none effect by their traditions, while
they equal their own devises with the written word of God, and make it in
sufficient to salvation, and set the church which should be ruled by it and
obedient to it, to be above it; the people above the law and the lady under
the handmaide. 5. Supremacy
Lastly they commit treason against the person of Christ when they set the
pope in his place, without his assignement, that a mortal man should be head
of the universal Church and body of Christ. For Christ only is called: Ephesians.
1.22.28 1. Cor. 3.11.
The head in all things over his Church: and the foundation thereof excluding
all other. Now then, seeing that there can be no foundation of Christianity,
nor Church of God, where the covenant is broken by spiritual whooredome, and
where there is no reioicing with God: and the grace of God and Christ death is
made vain: and where the seals of Gods letters patentes, and his glorious
image which is Christ is defaced, and his holy writings blotted and abased:
and man advanced in the chair of the son of God and office of Christ: it must
needs follow that they being guilty in these things there cannot be any
part of the visible Church of Christ amongst them. I think it therefore good
to take some more pains in these five points, that thou may see, how that
in the first primative ages, the Catholic truth was to be found, among the
Christian protestants, and that the popish heresy in these points, came up
afterward to be openly seen, and closely grew under them. Consider
therefore (good Christian reader) what I say, and the Lord give thee the spirit
of true discretion and wisdom in all that thou read. First in the question
of adoring God: the papist think they do not commit fornication; because they
have a fine shift to say, they do not adore the image, as to account it their
God, to put their trust in it, but only reverence it as a representation of
God, by bowing before it, kissing it, praying before it etc. they adore him
which the image represents. And they think themselves very well discharged
from idolatry, seeing their images are not dedicated unto devils and false
Gods, but unto the true God, Christ and his Saints. But this is verelie, but a
mere sleight of Satan: for the truth of christian religion is not so, neither
was it so reputed in the primative ages of the church: but that to make such
images to God and Christ was abominable, and the worshipping in that sort
idolatrous. For to omit what Christ says: that Ioh. 4.24.
God is a spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and
truth, and that of Saint Paul: Act. 17.29.
For as much as we are the generation of God, we ought not to think that the
godhead is like unto gold or silver, or stone graven by art and the invention
of man. Thereby teaching that both matter and form in this cause is wicked and
unlawful: what shall then the worship be, but plain idolatry? Let us here
the first fathers speak. Irenaeus (who lived about Anno 170. being scholar to
Polycarpus who was Saint John's disciple:) Aduers. here is. lib. 1. cap. 24.
condemns the heretics who called them selves Gnostici, having certain
images painted, and certain also made of other matter saying that the form of
Christ was made by Pilate, and also he Cap. 23.
taxes the heretic Basilides, for using images and incantations and
inuocations: and he calls them Parerga: that is to say nothing to the
matter: even as the prophet says: Esai 44.10.
Who has made a God, or molten an image, that is profitable for nothing. But
Origin which came somewhat after, namely about Anno 270. lib. 7. contra celsum.
is more plain and full in this matter. For having to do with one Celsus who
reproved the Christians (as the papists do us) because they tolerated no
images in Gods worship, accusing them to be like, the most barbarous nations,
the Scythians, Lybians, and Syrians, which were without God; and the Persians
he shows that these nations might do so, either because they feared the
devils might lurk in such places, and matter so framed and shaped, or for some
other cause: but says he: Christians and also Jews, when they hear: Dominum
deum tuum timebis etc. thou shall fear the Lord thy God and him only shall
thou serve, and thou shall have no strange Gods, neither shall thou make to thy
self an idol, nor the likeness of any thing etc. do not only abhor the
temples, and alters and images of the Gods: but if need be they do come more
readelie even unto death, least by any excess and wickedness they should
defile, that which they do very well and rightly think concerning God: Then
a little after he blames Celsus, for the same (which papist pretend) that
they do not believe the images to be God: because the common people, by their
example, whom they thought to be wise, did worship them as God, believing them
to be Gods, which all men reverence: so that they will not abide, to hear
that any man should deny that to be God, which is worshipped by it self.
And where as Celsus affirmed that the images were not counted Gods, but
dedicated to the Gods: he answers that to do and affirm such a thing, is
very plainly apparent, to belong unto men, which err concerning the Godhead.
But we do not so much as account those images to be of the divine likeness;
because that we form (or can form) no image of God, who as he is invisible
so he is without body. And last of all he takes away the objection, that God
made man after his own image, showing that, that is understood in regard of
the virtues of the soul: Whereby you may perceive that the doctrine of the
Christians in those days was, that no man could make any image and likeness of
God, and therefore to make such images of representation, howsoever thereby to
honor God, was far from Christians: not only left the people should have a
godly opinion of those images, by wise men's example: but also that they might
not defile their faith, in the knowledge of the invisible and incorporall God,
the maker of all things: they were then, many degrees distant from our popish
idolatry and new refined imagerie, who would not so much as permit any such
images to be made at all, least they should be defiled: The like we find in
De orig. error. ^ lib. 2, cap. 2.
Lactantius Firmianus, who lived about Anno 335. For he shows, that when the
Christians blamed the gentiles, because they feared their works of their own
hands: the answer of the Gentiles was ready (even the same of the Papists)
that they feared not those images which they made, but them unto whose
likeness they were made, and to whose names they were consecrated. Hereupon
he confuteth this popish shift, by these reasons following. First, that God
being in heaven they should lift up their eyes to heaven. Secondly, God being
always present every where, and the images serving naturally to remember the
absent, they should not worship images, then God being always living, such
dead and insensible things, can not be his image: and lastly, that cannot be
the image of God which is framed with the fingers of men, out of stone, brass,
or other matter, but man himself. But what need I to rehearse many
particulars, seeing the papists themselves confess the antiquity of the
primative church to be against them. First Polydor Virgill De invent. rerum.
lib. 6. cap. 13. Omnes ferme veteres sancti patres damnabant, etc.
says that Hierome testifyeth, That not only they were void of our religion,
but almost all the old holy fathers, did condemn the worship of images, for
fear of idolatry, then which there can be no wickedness more execrable. For
seeing no man at any time saw God, as John says, what form shall we give unto
him, etc. And so he disputes out of Moses and others against such images:
which testimony of Polydor is confirmed by Erasmus Roterodamus (whom Alphonsus
de Castro, writing of heretics, would by no means leave out of the Romish
fellowshippe, but brings the faculty Theological of Paris to speak for
him,) for he In Catechis.
says, Vsque ad aetatem Hieronimi etc. unto the time of Hierome there were men
of an approved religion, who suffered no images in the churches, neither
painted, nor engraven, nor wouen, no not so much as Christ's image, as I think
because of the Anthropomorphites, yet by little and little the use of images
crept into Churches. This Hierom lived about Anno 430. And to him joined
Augustine, who lived as some think till An. 385. And after him lived
Damascenus about An. 455. Of these two Steven Durantus, writing from Rome De
ritibus ecclesiae. lib. 1. cap. 5. sect. 2.
can tell. First that S. August. de fid. and symbol. cap. 7. says: that we
must not think that God the father is circumscriptible with any humane form.
And again: It is wickedness to place such an image unto God in a Christian
church. And Damasc. lib. 4. Orthod. fid. cap. 7. Who is there which can make
the image of God, who is invisible, and without body and circumscription, and
without figure? therefore it is extreme madness, to counterfeit and fashion
the divine power. Guillermus Durandi helps us a little further, until An.
480. De rational. divine. lib. 1. de pictur.
affirming that the council of Agatha forbad pictures to be made in the
church, and that, that should be painted in the wales which is worshipped and
adored. Now this 16.
Durandi and De rit. eccles. lib. 1. cap. 4. sect. 1.
Durantus, with old father Gratian, De consecrat. distinct. 3. cap. perlatum.
do patiently abide and bear, that these images had little entertainment into
the churches of Christians until An. 600. But then they are bold to bring
forth Gregory, living about that time, that they might show the first
original and decree of their error. Namely, that about this time there were
images crept into the church, to be lay men's books, but not to be adored. For
this Gregory Lib. 7. epist. 109.
reproves one Serenus Bishop of Massilia, for breaking images in the church
when he saw them worshipped: but yet he commends him, that he would not have
the people to worship them, wishing to teach the people not to sin by
worshipping them, and yet to learn the story in the wales, which they could
not read in books. So that it can not be found, that unto this time of 600.
years images got any further honor: but to stand or to be painted in the
church, as books to teach the rude people: and then they began about that
time, to forget the scriptures of God, which says: Hier. 10.15. Aback. 2. 19.
They are vanity and the work thereof errors: there is no profit in them,
but they are teachers of lies. But this Romish and hethenish idolatrous
worship, which is now among the papists, had so many enemies of godly
Christians, that from time to time it suffered the repulse, till about the
year 785. And then in the second counsel of Nice it was hatched, hardened and
made bold, to come abroad into open light, and to beard and to face down the
pure adoration and service of God with this pretty By these two verses Nam Deus
est quod imago docet, sed non Deus ipsa. Hanc videas, sed mente colas, quod
cernis in ipsa.
devise and color to hide their idolatry, that they honor not the image it
self, but in it, they worship him, whom the image does represent. A thing so
manifestly condemned by the ancient Christians, that this is the greatest and
the strongest antiquity which the papists have, for the grounding and first
full birth of their idolatry: as thou shall very well perceive, if thou read
the aforesaid authors of this matter, and the Antididagma of the reverend
canons of Colen, and B. Boner upon the 10. commandments, and the counsel of
Trent or any other, that declare faithfully the true story of antiquity.
Therefore let the Christian reader judge if this be not of a new and late
generation: and whether such dainty cloakes of humane folly will shrowde them
well, and safely against the pouring showers of the fiery wrath of God, which
Esai. 45.23.
has once sworn by himself: saying, Every knee shall bow unto me, and
every tongue shall swear by me. And again he says: Cap. 42.8.
I am the Lord, this is my name, and my glory will I not give unto an other,
2. Faith only justifies.
neither my praise unto graven images. The second foundation is of the
condition on our part of the covenant with God: wherein because the gospel
requires no other condition, but only faith in Jesus Christ, therefore the
catholic religion, holds this principle: Faith in Jesus Christ, only, and
without works does justify. Which to be the ancient catholic belief of
Christians: Eusebius Pamphilus, a very learned divine of the primitive age does
testify, he lived about Anno 325. who writing the story of the primitive
Church, shows that this was the faith of the Christians, from the Apostles
unto that age. For speaking of the heresy of the Hebionites, (whose beginning
was in the very first age of Christianity) he calls them poor (alluding to
their name) in the knowledge of the glory of Christ, Histor. eccles. lib. 3.
cap. 27.
and he tells, that they were reputed erroneous in this, that they held, that
the observation of the law was to be kept, and that faith only in Christ was
not sufficient to salvation. Which is confirmed by Irenaeus who Aduers. here is.
lib. 1. ca. 26
says that Ebion refused Paul, calling him an Apostata from the law. Now if it
were not the common and universal faith of the Church, that faith only
justifies, how could Ebion all that 300. years be accounted an heretic for
holding the contrary? But this will more appear, if we hear the ancient
fathers and elder protestants, (both before and after Eusebius time) to speak
and utter their profession. Cyprian Anno 255.
before Eusebius Epist. 3. Caecilio.
says thus: Si Abraham Deo credidit etc. If Abraham believed God, and it was
imputed to him for righteousness, truly whoseouer believes God and lives by
faith, is found righteous. Origin Anno. 235.
a little before him speaks thus, (upon the words of S. Paul Romans 3. verse.
27.28.) In epist. ad Romans cap. 3. lib. 3.
He says, the justification of faith only to suffice: So that whosoever
believes only is justified, although he fulfill no part of works. And to
prove this he brings the example of the thief on the cross, namely: That no
whit of good works is declared to be done by him in the gospel, but for his
faith only Jesus said unto him, this day shall thou be with me in paradise.
Hilarious 345.
lived much about that time, or not long after Eusebius, and Cap. sine Canon. 8.
he says upon Matthew: Fide sola iustificat, He justifies only by faith.
Basilius Magnus as it were Anno 370.
presently after him says: The de humilitate
Apostle says, let him that glories glory in the Lord, where he said that
Christ is made of God unto us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption, that as it is written, let him that glories glory in the Lord:
for that is perfect and every way glorying in the Lord, when a man is not
extolled for his own righteousness, but acknowledges himself indeed void of
true righteousness, and to be justified by only faith in Christ. Ambrose was
not long 380.
after, when he Epist. 71.
wrote to one Irenaeus saying: Let no man glory in his works, because no man
is justified by his doings, but he that is just has it given him, because that
after the washing he is justified: therefore it is faith, which delivers by
the blood of Christ, because he is blessed whose sin is remitted and
pardoned. Hierome 390.
joins close unto him and Upon Romans 4.
says: God justifies by faith only the wicked man, when he conuerteth, and
not works which he has not. And again upon Upon Gal. 3.
these words, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness, (he says) so also unto you, only faith is sufficient unto
righteousness. And a little after, Because that in the law etc. because no man
keeps it, therefore it is said that by faith only the believers are
justified. S. Augustine Anno 400. homil. 6. Upon these words, love your enemies.
stands up as it were with him, and protests: No man is made just but of a
sinner, as we have often song: blessed are they whose sins are forgiven, he
said not: blessed are they which not committed sin, but blessed are they
whose sins are forgiven them. For if thou ask who has not committed, thou
shall find no man. Whereby then shall any man be blessed, unless he be
pardoned that he has done, and covered that he has committed. And a little
after: Think not that by thy merits thou art made such an one, because the
grace of God has made thee such an one. The Milenitane council does Anno 420.
close up this faith, when it will have nothing given to man's will or works,
but ascribes all to the mercy and grace of God, as is showed but a little
before. Anno 450. sermo 30.
Petrus Chrysologus expounds this matter by the cause, where he says: Non
veni vocare iustos, (I came not to call the righteous but sinners) he puts
not back the just, but because that without Christ no man is counted just in
the earth: (I came not to call the righteous but sinners) in so saying, he
puts not back the righteous, but because he finds all men sinners:
harken to the Psalmist: The Lord looked down from heaven upon the sons of
men, that he might see if there were any that understood or sought after God:
all have gone out of the way etc. Let us be brethren, let us be sinners by our
own confession, that by the pardon of Christ, we may not be sinners.
Theophilact. comes Anno 760.
some pretty while after, and yields to this verity saying, upon Upon 3.
verse. 11.
these words, And that no man is justified by the law in the sight of God etc.
he has therefore showed that men are made accursed by the law, and are under
the curse: but the blessings are heaped up by faith: Now he does plainly
show, that very faith, yea even alone, has in it self the virtue of
justifying etc. The ordinary gloss upon the bible, joined with Lyra, being of
Lyra wrote about 1320.
later and more corrupted time, by evidence of truth is drawn to the same
confession Upon Romans 3 and 4.
saying: Works follow him that is justified, but do not go before him that is
to be justified: but by only faith without works going before, a man is made
just. And again: Unto him who has not time to work, if he believe, only
faith is sufficient to righteousness. Bernard Bernardus Clarenallensis lived
in Anno 1120.
living some good time before this, finding the same truth in Gods book,
gives like witness Upon Cantic. sermon. 22.
saying: Quisquis propeccatis compunctus esurit etc. Whosoever being pricked
for his sins does hunger and thirst for righteousness, let him believe in
thee, who do justify the wicked: and being justified, only by faith, he
shall have peace with God. Here the Christian reader may see, that protestants
flourished in the primitive church, and that the ages after did not want
witnesses of this truth. Now if I be asked how the opinion of righteousness by
works came into the Christian society, and corrupted it, I desire the reader
to cast his eyes upon the matter it self, and consider with me, that the way
of salvation is Christ only, and he is made ours by faith, for unless we
learn and believe in Christ we can not be saved. The devil therefore by all
means has labored to keep men from the knowledge of Christ: and first he
drew away the wise and learned of al nations many ages together, that they
thought themselves happy, by their wisdom, virtue, laws and works, with
other devises, but knew not the true God and the righteousness and salvation
which is by Christ: yet God having an eye to his elect whom he called, maugre
the malice of satan, this was otherwise in the church of God. And God called
and taught Abraham Gal. 3.8.
the gospel, namely that men should be righteous by faith only. Here the Devil
has a new work, and in process of time under color of the righteousness of
the law, he caused the church of the Jews to fall from God, by forsaking faith
and seeking to be just by their works: for as Saint Paul witnesses, Romans
9.31.
Israel which followed the law of righteousness, could not attain unto the
law of righteousness. Wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith, but as
it were by the works of the law. Here God resisted Satan, and opened the way
of life unto all nations. For in the fullness of time, when the promise of the
gospel unto Abraham, of justifying the gentiles through faith was now to be
accomplished, God sent forth his son to be the light of the world, and he and
his Apostles preached repentance to all nations, and taught them righteousness
and salvation by faith in Christ only. And then as S. Paul also teaches:
Verse. 30.
The gentiles which followed not righteousness attained unto righteousness, even
the righteousness which is of faith. Here the Devil bestirreth himself, and
first even in the Apostles time, he raises up the Jews, who being Act. 21.20.
zealous for Moses, fight eagerly for the law, Gal. 3.1.2.3
and that the works of Gods commandments be joined unto faith, 1 Thessalonians. 2.14
15.16.
or to be advanced above faith. Against which Saint Paul labors and
writes to the Romans and Galathians, most strongly proouing, that only faith
in Jesus Christ does justify, and that God had so decreed it by his word: Act.
15.
and the Apostles by a counsel determine that the Gentiles are free from the
law of Moses. Afterward the devil prepared diverse heretics to this battle
who in diverse sorts assailed this faith: some fighting against the person of
Christ, as Simon Magus and Arius and their followers: some strove for their
own perfection and righteousness: as Ebion, Pelagious, Donatus, Cathari, and
such like. Against all which God stirred up learned, valiant and faithful men,
who defended and maintained the faith, by the sword of the spirit and kept it
found many years, so that the heretics prevailed not. But in this very time,
and that unawares, a thing that Christian men suspected not, the devil had
under hand a more cunning and sure way to overthrow the faith: namely he
drove men into the wilderness and solitary places, which partly happened by
persecution, and partly by a blind devotion, and so sowed the seeds of
munkerie in the Church of Christ, which as far as I can Polydor virgil. de
invent. rerum. lib. 7. cap. 1. and cap. 3. Histor Ecclesiast. tripertit lib. 1.
cap. 11. About Anno 300.
read first e began in the deserts of Aegyt. These men gave them selves to
holy meditation and religious contemplation of Gods works, and leaving the
perfect book of God written in the holy scriptures they read in an other
book, like the heathen, as nature and reason which is blind in Gods causes,
did lead them, and made a new Philosophy, having this principle, Veram
beatitudinem in cultura dei and legum eius obseruatione, that is: True
happiness to consist in the service of God and keeping his commandments:
which while men perceived not, how it beat upon the foundation, they began to
cast their eyes upon themselves, and by little and little (because by nature we
are prone to think too well of our selves, and as men fond of their own
children, we admire our devises) christians fell in love with this new trade of
life, and the pearcing reflex of the glittering beams of their great and rare
holiness, and new religious devotion, daseled the eyes of all sorts of men.
Insomuch as very excellent men and great clearkes, Basilius magnus, Hierom, and
Augustine, and diverse other, leaned toward this new religion, and began to make
rules for the same. And so the devil coming as an angel of light, made his
first entrance and their priuelie stale in this justifying by works un espied.
For these and other godly fathers in plain and evident places of scripture
being by their conscience constrained, they frankly acknowledge the truth of
Christ Jesus and auow it against heretics: yet oftentimes their eyes looking
backwarde (like the peacocke) upon their own goodly rules and observations,
do with the left hand rob Christ of that, which they so thankfully ascribe
unto him with the right. Yet this meriting by works was not so bold and
bravely attired in the first six hundred years, to assume and take such open
authority and hie glory in the church; as it was afterward; when peace and
wealth made men by wantonness to seek many devises. Some (as the climing popes)
set up decrees and decretals and made themselves men of renown, some by the
knowledge of laws and canons strove for the laurel crown of glory; some by
school learning made themselves admirable, who drawing in Aristle and
Philosophy, to make grounds in divinity, taught the reasonable way of
righteousness by works and the congruitie and condignitie of freewil: some as
friars and cloisters by rules and orders made new religions and ways of
salvation; here comes up purgatory, pardons, pilgrimage, prayers for the
dead, and a thousand new things of rare holiness and meritorious devotion. By
all these did the devil make unto him self many mighty legions of resolute
warriers, to face and weary out Christ, that he might leave the church, that
he by his eldest son Antechrist, might reign and rule alone, and so he
easily thrust out faith only for righteousness, and the true way of salvation.
And brought in infinite traditions, unwritten verities, observations, customs,
mysteries, devotions and revelations. If you would read Guillerimus Durandi
rationale diuinorum, with Guido manipulus curatorum, Bonauentura de profectu
religiosorum, Hieremias Buchius of the conformities of S. Frauncis with Christ,
with such like and join there unto the counsel of Trent, with their mass,
and all the books appendents in service to their Lady and Saints and heap
unto them the thousands of commandments of the church in decrees, decretals
and canons, brought in by popes, scholemen, canonists and ciuilians, it would
make a man's heart to bleed, to think how little regard is had of Christ, and of
his righteousness, wisdom, sanctification, redemption, name and glory. And
that the christian reader may the better perceive these things; let him mark
but this one thing which is yet fresh in memory. When Luther stood up for the
gospel, and took into his hand the spiritual sword of Gods word, and stroke
and hewed at one of the last growing sproutes of this new way of righteousness,
namely pardons and indulgencies, and finding great resistance by the warriers
before named, he began to arm himself with the armor of God, and by little
and little both learning and teaching, the article of justification by faith
only in Christ, by and by all this brave baggage and counterfeit galantnes and
earthly glory of righteous by men's doeings, like a thick mystie cloud
covering the air, did vanish away in the conscience of many thousands, by the
bright shining power of the true sun of righteousness Jesus Christ in and by
faith alone. And of this we have had almost one hundred years experience, that
as 1. Sam. 5.
Dagon of the Philistims could not stand before the ark of God: So all the
whoorish devises of Romish Babylon could not stand before the doctrine of
faith only in Jesus Christ, the Lord be praised. 3. of the Sacraments.
Now look we on the third point of the sacraments and seals of the covenant
of mercy, and let us here whether the ancient fathers of the primative church
were not protestants. First Tertullian offers him self, a very He lived
about Anno 230.
ancient father, he tells us Contra Martio^ lib. 4.
only of two sacraments, and of the Lords supper lib. 1.
he says: Non reprobauit panem quo ipsum corpus suum representat, he refuses
not bread whereby he represents his body. Lo Tertullian an ancient
protestant in the matter of the sacraments. Cyprian likewise shows him self
a protestant, De caena domini.
saying. Mansio nostra in ipso etc. our abiding in him is eating and drinking,
and as it were a certain incorporation etc. and a little after. That which
meat is to the flesh, this faith is unto the soul; that which is meat to the
body, that is the word to the spirit: and in his conclusion he adds. As
often as we do these things, we do not wheat our teeth to byte, but with a
sincere faith, we break the holy bread and divide it, while we distinguish
and separate that which is divine, and that which is human etc. Origin
steppeth in between them both and protests with us, upon leuit. homil. 7.
saying: There is also in the new Testament a letter which kills him, who
marketh not those things which are spoken spiritually. For if thou according
to the letter, follow this same which is said (unless you eat my flesh and
drink my blood) this letter kills. Saint Augustine follows after and
shows him self a protestant in diverse places about this matter, denying
transubstantiation with all the holy martyrs which suffered in Queen Mary's
time, saying: Upon Ps. 98.
Non hoc corpus quod videtis etc. ye shall not eat this body which you see,
and drink that blood which they shall shead, which shall crucify me, I have
commended unto you a certain mystery: which being spiritually understood,
shall quicken you, and again: De ciuitate dei lib. 21. cap. 20. Non solo
sacramento, sed re ipsa manducauerunt corpus Christi, in ipso eius corpore
co^stituti.
They eat not in the Sacrament alone, but in very deed the body of Christ,
being set in his very body, showing thereby that there is no way of eatinge
Christ, but spirituallie, and that the wicked eat the Sacrament of Christ's
body, but not Christ's body indeed, having no faith to be set in him: and as
he knew no real presence in the sacrament, so he knew no adoration nor
sacrifice but a memorial of thanksgiving, as where he Ad. P. diaconum.
says: In this sacrifice there is thanksgiving and a remembrance of the flesh
of Christ, which he offered for us: and again, Contra Faustum Manicheum per
victimas similitudinum.
the flesh and blood of this sacrifice before the coming of Christ was
promised by the sacrifices of resemblances: in the sacrifice of Christ by the
truth of the same: after the ascension of Christ it is celebrated by the
sacrament of remembrance, what a merueilous protestant was he, whose sacrifice
was a remembrance, his adoring was thanksgiving and transubstantiation in a
mystery and not in deed. But me thinks father Barnard will be a protestant
also, for he De diligend. Deo.
says that these words (qui manducat carnem meam etc. he which eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood has life eternal) is as much as to say: who so
does meditate upon my death and by my example mortify his members, which are
upon the earth, has eternal life, that is, if you suffer together you shall
reign together. Transubstantiation came up as yesterday
But here I need not so much to trouble thee with fathers seeing this devise of
transubstantiation was hatched less then 400. years a go, and that Anno 1215.
Read the acts of the counsel and decree all lib. 3. tit. 41. cap. 5.
in a counsel of Lateran under pope Innocent the 3. there you shall find
Francis and Dominicke the head springs of two religions, to be great help to
the pope, there shall thou find auriculer confession, and mysterium fidei
thrust into the institution in the mass. Hereupon Honorius the 3. espying (in
looking upon this new glass of transubstantion) that Christ was made to come
out of heaven into the sacrament, thought it reason to give him reverence;
therefore he 16. cap. 10.
devised and ordained the Eucharist, should be lifted up and adored and
reserved in reverent manner. But it is to be merueiled, that Honorius was so
hasty, before it was perfectly resolved, whether the water were
transubstantiated with the wine. For the forsaid Innocent the third 16. cap. 6.
illa probabilior iudicatur, quae asserit aquam cum vino in sanguinem
transmutari.
does but probably conjecture that it is so, and he says the schoolmen agree
not whether it be so or no. But howsoever, it is apparent by these testimonies,
that this filthy and abominable idol of transubstantiation, with his
adoration, is a newborn monster, adored by them which turn the glory of God
into things corruptible. Therefore God gives them over into a reprobate sense,
to believe lies, because they received not the love of the truth, and to trust
in those things, which if they could see, they would be a feared of, their very
table is made a snare and their prosperity their ruin. The fourth
foundamentall point is of the writings of the covenant, 4. Of the scriptures.
namely the Holy scriptures inspired by Gods spirit. Let us here what the
ancient protestants professed in the primative flower of the christian
Churches among the Gentiles. Irenaeus Bishop of Lions in France a very ancient
protestant: Aduers. here is. lib. 2. ca. 47
protests that the Scriptures are perfect, for they are spoken by the word
of God and by his spirit: and again: lib. 3. cap. 12.
The things which the Scriptures show (or teach,) cannot be showed but by
the Scriptures. And he teaches that lib. 5.
No small punishment belongs to them which add or take away from the
Scriptures. And lastly he lib. 3. cap. 2.
shows that it is a shift of the heretics, when they are convinced by the
Scriptures to accuse the Scriptures, and to say that by the Scriptures the
truth cannot be found of them which know not the tradition. Here you see that
Irenaeus makes these boasting papists heretics, who under color of the
insufficiency of Scripture do foist in their traditions, affirming that they
ought not to interpret the scriptures by their sense or magisteriall power, but
by the declaration of scripture it self, and lastly that they are to be
punished for adding unwritten verities, traditions canons and decrees and such
like tumperie to the perfect Scriptures. In the next age of protestants comes
up that great scholar Origin, and he In Ezech. homil. 7.
protests against the popish doctrine thus: They which tear the Scriptures,
sowing those things, do rent the words from the words and make feined points
of doctrine, do serve idols etc. and a little after. Let us follow no man, and
if we will follow any, Jesus Christ is set before us, to be followed, the acts
of the Apostles are described and we know the doings of the prophets by the
holy volums (or writings) that pattern is sure, that example is sound, which
who so desires to follow does walk without danger. In the next age of
protestants stands up Basilius Magnus, and with open mouth denounces De vera
ac pia fide.
against the arrogant pride of Rome: If the Lord be faithful in all his words,
and all his commandments faithful, established for ever and ever, done in
equity and truth: without doubt, this will be a most manifest argument of
infidelity, and a most certain sign of pride, if any man will reject any of those
things which are written, or bring in any of those things which are not
written. Seeing our Lord Jesus Christ has said my sheep here my voice and a
little before the same said, they will not follow a stranger, but will fly from
him, because they know not the voice of strangers. In the next age Chrysostom
steppeth forth and protests for the sufficie^cy of the holy scriptures Upon
Ioh. cap. 8.
saying: If we would diligently search the scriptures, we might be able to
attain salvation. But Saint Augustine a little before him beats down all
writings of Bishops, provinces, and general counsels, as uncertain and
imperfect, and such as may be amended; but lifts up the scriptures and
writings of the new and old testament, as the only sure and sufficient truth
De baptism. contra Donat. lib. 2. cap. 3.
saying: Who knows not that the holy scripture as well of the old as of the
new testament, is contained within certain bounds, and the same to be
preferred before all the letters of the bishops coming after? as that there
can be no doubt and dispute of (or about) it. But the letters of Bishops, which
have bin written after the confirming of the Canon, or are now written, may be
reprehended, both by the speech (perauenture more wise) of any man more wise in
the same thing, and by the grauer authority of other Bishops, and prudencie of
learned men and by counsels, if perauenture any thing in them do err from the
truth. Also counsels, which are holden in several regions or provinces are to
give place without any staggering, to the authority of fuller counsels, which
are holden of all the Christian world, and those very fuller councels, often
the former may be amended by the latter, when as by any experience of things,
that is made known which was hidden. Cyrillus in that very age shows
himself in this matter a very true protestant Upon Ioh. 20. cap. 68.
saying: All things which the Lord has done are not written, but those things
which the writers have thought sufficient, as well for manners as doctrine, that
shining in a right faith and works and virtue, we may come to the kingdom of
heaven through our Lord Jesus Christ. And Theophilact one of the later writers
of the Greeks condescendeth to this doctrine, Upon 2. Tim. 3.
and says: Nihil est quod nequeat scripturis dissolut, There is nothing, which
cannot be assoiled by the scriptures. Here the Christian reader may see, that
the ancient Christian religion was the same of protestants, holding the
scripture for the only Canon of faith, the rule of righteousness containing
all things necessary to salvation, most certain and sure to discern all
truth, and able to assoile all dobts and questions, and that we ought to
follow no man, because Bishops letters, and the most general and fullest
councels may be amended, and that it is only the holy scripture whereof there
can be no doubt or dispute: so that it follows that it is a new doctrine to
say, that the Churches authority is above the scripture, or that the Church
judges the scripture, and not the scripture the Church, or that we need and
must accept with equal reverence traditions or unwritten verities and canons
of the church, without disputing, and such like blasphemies. Gratian also the
compiler of the decrees who About Ann. 1160.
lived in the chiefest growth of corruption, did publish to all the world, as
an ecclesiastical decree, the sovereignty of holy scripture. For speaking of
divine laws, he shows the determination of ancient fathers, to set the holy
scriptures above all other laws whatsoever. And first above all customs in
Distinct. 8. ca. Si solus Christus.
these words. If Christ only be to be heard, we are not to regard what
any man before us thought meet to be done: but what Christ who is before all
has first done. For we must not follow the custom of men, but the truth of
God, seeing God speaks by Esai the prophet and says, in vain do they
worship me, teaching the commandments and doctrines of men. Secondly, that
it is proper and peculier to the Canonical scriptures For so the gloss
interprets the Canons of the distinction following.
of the old and new Testament only, not to err, Distinct. 9. cap. Ego solit.
saying: I have learned to give unto those writings only which now are called
Canonical this reverence and honor, that I believe that none of them have
erred. And again, Cap. Noli frater.
Do not desire (brother) to gather out of the writings of Bishops, cauils
against so many, so excellent and undoubted testimonies divine etc. Whether
they be ours or Hilarious, or Cyprian, and Agrippinus, before the part of
Donatus was separated. And first this kind of letters is to be distinguished
from the authority of the Canons, for they are not so read, as though a
testimony were so brought out of them, that it is not lawful to think
contrary, if in any place they understood otherwise then the truth does
require. And again, Neither ought we to account the disputations of any men
whatsoever, although Catholic and reverend men like unto the Canonical
Scriptures, that it should not be lawful for us, saving the reverence due
unto these men, to improoue some thing in their wrytinges, and to reiecte it,
if happily we shall find that they think or imagine otherwise then the truth
has.

In the next age after Gratian I find Bonauentura a Franciscan, a man of great
account in De profect^ religiosoru^. cap. 6. He lived about Ann. 1280.
his time, with clear terms to teach the doctrine of protestants in these
words: Nam quod ratio nostra lippa facta est etc. Whereas our reason is become
as bleare eied, and our understanding darkened through sin, that we cannot
find the truth of our selves; God came down unto us, least we should be in
error, and gave us the knowledge of the truth in the scriptures which he would
have us believe, where we might find sufficiently and truly all things
necessary for us unto salvation, that in them we should not follow our sense,
but humbly submit our sense unto the rule of faith, if we will not err.
Nicholas Lyra in the 1315.
next age protests for the scripture in like manner Upon the Proverb. ca. 31.
saying: Sacra scriptura continet firmam etc. The holy scripture contains the
firm and inviolable truth, as in a merchants ship are carried diverse things
necessary for man's life, so in scripture are contained all things necessary
to salvation.

But that I ouercloy not the reader with many testimonies for the authority of
holy scriptures, I will now turn to the other side, to trace the footsteps of
the popish doctrine, how it came up, that the scriptures has lost their first
authority and honor. Surely by the witness of the papists themselves not in
400. or 600. years after Christ. For then says the gloss upon Upon distinct
9. cap. noli me 15.
Gratian, that about the times of Augustine: Augustina scripta and alioru^
sanctoru^ patrum non erant autentica etc. The writings of Augustine and of
other holy fathers were not autenticall, but that is about Anno 1200.
now they are commanded to be holde^ to the utmost Iod. And this Gratian
Distinct. 15. cap. sancta Romana.
sends us to Gelasius for the first founder of the authority of councels,
fathers and decretals, epistles, so that by the papists own account and
confession the holy scriptures reigned alone many ages together after Christ's
ascension as Lady and Queen, to be the only law to rule judge and know the
Church and whatsoever necessary to salvation. And the Church presumed not over
the scriptures, but was squared and ordered by them. This Gratian shows us
Distinct 16. Cap. Canons.
that the Canons of the Apostles were pronounced by He lived Anno 530.
Isidorus, not to have been received of the Church, nor of the holy fathers,
because they were known to be made of heretics under the name of the
Apostles. After he Distinct. 19. cap. Si Romanor. Ann. 865.
tells us, that Pope Nicholas gives autenticall authority to the decretall
Epistles of his predecessors. And that Distinct. 19. cap. sic omnes Anno. 680.
Pope Agatha first breathed out this blasphemy, that all sanctions of the
Apostolical sea, are to be received, as confirmed by the divine voice of
Peter. And Distinct. 20. cap. de libellis. Anno 850.
Leo the 4. followed him in the same rebellion of Gods word, pronouncing, that
they who do not receive al their canons indifferently do not believe the
Apostolical faith and the four Evangelists effectually as they should. And
here the maker of the gloss is touched in conscience for the East churches
that did not receive these decretalles all this while, whether they were not
heretics. Much about this time came in the Legenda aurea, which is Bernard. de
Girard, hist. Franc. lib. 4. Albert. Krant. Saxonia lib. 2.
fathered upon Carolus Magnus. And after this, others in these things kept on
this new devotion and presumption. But the battle was not full and strong,
till Gratian himself Anno. 1160.
came up and set them in array by compiling the book of decrees, containing
more then half a legion; the Ciuilians and Canonistes muster themselves to
make the first squadrant, then Lombardus his brother brings forth a second in
four books of sentences, and in the rear ward march Anno 1270
Thomas Aquinas, and Ann. 1295.
Scotus Duns, with many Franciscans and Dominicans, and make a strong battle
of distinctions, questions, philosophy, Aristotelians, and all the forces of
reason, Anno 1230.
Gregory the 9. brings forth his barbed horsemen of decretall, as flanckers
and to make incursions in five troops or books well armed with Apostaticall
ordinance: and Boniface the eight added a sixth. Then come in the light
horsemen of Clementines and extrauagantes ready for many services: amongst
whom there comes in a monstrous huge Service in a strange tongue came in
after the adoring of Eucharist. Anno 1220. read Lyra upon 1. Cor. 14.
beast, to make way for the rest called Lingua Latina seu peregrina, that is,
service and scriptures in an unknown tongue, which casts such a mist into
the eyes of Gods people that they are brought under the antechristian bondage,
and from the glorious law of liberty, which is the gospel of Christ Jesus
before they be aware. By all these there came up such great and universal
study of the Canon and Civil laws, and such honor of school learning
amongst all the learned and wise men on the one side: and such palpable
ignorance in the common people, that it was impossible, that the word of God
could have his primative dignity, witness the council of Trent, Read Caesar
Baron. upon the Martyrolog. Non Martij.
who often clapped hands, and gave great applause to Thomas Aquinas. And that
when Luther began to preach the gospel, his greatest adversaries fought
against him, either by Canons decrees of some scholasticall conclusion, and
witness the conscience and knowledge of all men that have looked into the
estate of religion. Thus is it easy to see what a strong force the devil had
by this means to bring the holy scriptures of God into a base and low
remembrance, and how in tracte of time he has made his own laws,
traditions, decrees and counsels, not only equal, but far above them: And as
justly complains Anthonius de Rampegolis (a man of their own side, who as
Tritte then De scriptoribus ecclesiasticis.
writes flourished personally in the counsel of Constance Figurae bibliae.
cap. de sacra scriptura. Sacram scripturam in honorantes trahunt in obsequium
philosophiae, faciunt ancilla^ dominam and de domina ancillam.
) many dishonored the holy scripture and made it obedient to philosophy,
causing the handmaid to be mistress, and the mistress to be handmaid, and
thus was fulfilled that which Hilarious wisely observing did Aduersus Arianos.
Et facta est fides temporum potius qua^ Euangeliorum.
say in his time: When the use of writing and innouating of faith began to
be in ure, after it did rather begin to make new things, then keep that
which it had received: it neither maintained the old, nor confirmed the new,
and so faith became to be of the times, rather then of the gospels. That is to
say, men leaving that which they received and learned by the scriptures, and
writing themselves opinions and decrees of their own, it came to pass in
time, that the faith of the Church was not that which the Gospel of Christ
teaches: but such as liked men of the several ages and times, such as
counselles decreed, and Bishops ordained. Which thing Erasmus being a great
Scholar did see to be happened unto the Church of Rome, and thereof gives
admonition to a great Bishop, and amongst other things touching humane
constitutions ad Christoph. Episcop. Basil. de interdicto esu carmum, etc.
he says: Haec primum obrepant honesti specie etc. These things first creep
in by a color of honesty; after they ouerflow more abundantly then after a
while, being confirmed by use, they reign as tyrants etc.

5. Of the supremacy.
Now let us come to the last foundation of popery and banishing of Christ and
his laws. Namely, the royal primacie of the Pope, clyming into the seat of
Christ, and advancing himself above all that is called God. And let us examine
whether it be Evangelical and of the Christian religion and ancient profession
of the primative Church. First it is manifest and clear, that the first six
hundred year never knew him, but they were all protestants allowing no
universal Bishop, but Christ only: and honoring the Emperors and kings
where they lived as Lords and supreme governors over all persons
ecclesiastical and civil, even as they had learned of Saint Paul, who did
command Romans 13.1.
every soul to be subject to the higher power: and of Saint Peter, 1. Pet.
2.13.
who would have them submit themselves to the king, as the superior. And herein
I will call for the papists themselves to be my witnesses. First Gratian
Distinct. 21. cap. cleros.
tells us out of Isidorus, that among the ancient fathers a priest and a
Bishop were all one. And the same thing he Distinct. 93. cap. legimus.
affirms out of Hierome, with many reasons drawn from holy scripture, and he
shows that the first rising of one Bishop over another, was devised for a
remedy against schism. And as concerning the preheminenc of the city of
Rome, he adds: Si authoritas quaereretur, etc. if authority be sought for,
the authority of the world is greater then that of one city: wheresoever
there is a Bishop, at Rome, or at Engubium, or at Constantinople, or at
Rhegium, or Alexandria, or at Thebes, or at Guarmatia, it is of the same merit,
it is of the same priesthood: which the gloss there does interpret, that
discreet learned and wisemen esteem all alike; but idiots and the common
people despise a Bishop of a small or little city. And a little after Distinct
95. cap. olim.
he says. As the elders (or priests) know that they by the custom of the
church are subject to him which is set over them: So let the Bishops know, that
they are greater then the prists, rather by custom then by the truth of Gods
ordinance, and that they ought to rule in common. Caesar Baronius, by the
commandment of pope Gregory the 13. making a new legend called Martyrologiums
after the order of their new callender, in his notes upon that book, Ian. 20.
page 22. at the letter c.
teaches us that this word Papa (pope) was first accounted to come of the
greek word Pappas, signifying a father, and in the same sense came to be a
name of dignity, that the reverend clerks (or clergy men) were called by
that name: Afterward the same name began to be peculiar unto Bishops that they
were called Papae, that is popes or fathers, until An. 850. and then it began
to grow and to fasten only upon the head of the pope of Rome, and at the length
pope Grerory the 7. An. 1071. in a synod ordained, that there should be but one
name of Pope in all the Christian world. This man also Quint. ad April page
160. and 161.
witnesses that it was in times past the old custom of the church, that the
Bishops were not only called Pontifices, prelates: but also summi pontifices,
chief or hiest prelates: because that the office of a Bishop was called the
chief priesthood, this he proves by express examples until the 6. counsel
About An. 645.
of Toletane, and he brings in Saint Augustine saying those words: what is a
Bishop, but the first elder, that is the highest priest? briefly he calls
them no otherwise then fellow Elders and his fellow priests. But after
Baronius adds that the latter custom obtained, that the Bishop of Rome
should be called summus and maximus pontifex, the hiest and greatest prelate
or Bishop. Polydor vergill De inuentorrer. lib. 4. ca. 10.
tells us that the first honor, that was given to the Bishop of Rome, was
this, that he might change his name, when he is created Pope, if his name be
not handsome, and the author of this devise was Sergius, whose name was called
os porci, that is, the mouth of an hog. But more near to our matter: Platina
In vita pelagij and deinceps
shows, that the commandment of the Emperor, did sway all the matter in the
choice of the pope until the time of * Pelagius the second. About Anno 600.
So that when by the extreme fall of waters, they could not go to the Emperor,
the pope was feign to send Gregorious to make his excuse, because the election
was nothing worth without the Emperors approbatio^. And after him in the
election of Gregorious, the clergy and people, desired the Emperor that it
would please him, to confirm the election which was made concerning Gregorius.
And where as John Patriarch of Constantinople, obtained by a Synod the title
Ecromenicus, that is, of universal Bishop. Gregory resisted him, not because
(as Platina says, it belongs to Peter's sea, (as they falsely call Rome) but
because it was a new and blasphemous name; and such as none before them did
ever allow of, or take unto him self. As Gregorious himself in diverse letters
both to the Emperor, the Empress, to diverse Bishops, to John himself does
write, whereof you shall hear some part. First to the Emperor he among other
things Epist. lib. 4. cap. 29. Mauritio August. Epist. 32.
says. Quis est iste etc: who is this! that against the statutes of the
gospel, against the decrees of the canons, presumes to usurp to himself a
new name? Would to God that without the diminishing of others there were one
which desires to be called universal: and a little after. But be it far from
the hearts of Christians, this blasphemus name, wherein the honor of all
priests is taken away, while it is madly arrogated of one unto himself. And
Constantie August. Epist. 34.
to the Empress. It is a very heavy thing, that it should be patiently born,
that al being despised, my foresaid brother and fellow-bishop, goes about to
be called Bishop alone: but in this his pride what other thing is showed, but
only that the times of antechrist be at hand. And unto Epist. 36.
Eulogius Bishop of Alexandria and Anastasius Bishop of Antioch: None of my
predecessors have ever consented to use this so profane a term or word.
Because forsooth, if one be called universal patriarch, the name of patriarch
is taken from others: unto which if you join that of the sixth counsel of
Carthage: That all matters should be ended in the province where they began.
And that of the Milenitane counsel: that no appeal should be made out of the
province over the sea, you may easily and plainly perceive that unto this 600.
years after Christ it does so far appear, that the Pope had no supremacy over
kings or Emperors, that his authority was not so much as over any minister, or
private man out of his own diocese or province, and that to claim any such
title as to be universal Bishop, was new, blasphemous, the overthrow of
priesthood, not sufferable and a forerunning of Antechrist. How the pope
brought under the civil power by growing over the ecclesiastical.
And here thou may observe that in all this time, there was not yet any
question of superiority, over the superior civil magistrate, but over the
Bishops them selves. But how they came to crow over the civil magistrate, the
story of the time following does declare, wherein I might spend much time of
the seed of these things, as the advancing of the honor of Peter (cunningly
pretended to draw on the primacy upon the pope of Rome his counterfeit
successor) and Constantine forged donation; but I shall not need to rip up every
circumstance. For if neither these nor any other were able to compass this
infernal primacy in 600. years, we must look further for it, and to the devils
principal instrument: namely that after this time the emperor made the pope of
Rome, high priest over all the Bishops of the world: and the pope in tract of
time by this very authority of being aecumenical Bishop given them by the
Emperor, rewarded him with this blessing and kindness, to make the Emperor to
kiss his feet and to wait upon him as his vassal. The dignity of Bishops at
this time was in iiij. patriarchs, till after the death of this Gregory, then
presently there arose a new contention, between Constantinople and Rome, which
would be chief, and here Boniface the 3. by some sweat and labor obtained of
Phocas (whose hands were yet blody with the slaughter of his L. Mauritius) to
be this sovereign and chief Bishop of Bishops, and then Platina in vita
Bonif. 3.
came into the popes style. We will and command, and the next pope Boniface the
4. got of the Emperor the temple called Pantheon, and there made a church for
the virgin Mary and al Saints, most lively showing that now they fell from God
to al foul spirits, as the sequel after declared. For these were the
beginnings of all manner of corruptions, yet all this while, the honor of the
Emperor stood still, the first step to pull of the Emperors crown after this,
was: that Constantinus then Emperor granted to About Anno 685.
Benedick the second, that whom soever the people and clergy chose, should
thence forth be pope. After Anno 755.
him Stephanus the 2. of rare love was carried upon the shoulders of the people,
and so the Bishops of Rome began to take that honor unto them. And Anno 710.
Iustinianus a wicked Emperor, to flatter the pope was the first that kissed
his feet, namely of pope Constantine the first. Yet were not the popes above
the Emperors, all this while. For after this the Empire of Constantinople,
being weak and not able to defend the pope, and leaving them to the spoil of
the Lombards, they fled for succor unto France: First to Carolus Martellus and
Pipine, and after to Carolus Magnus Anno 801.
first Emperor of the west: to whom some said the pope gave the power of
chosing and confirming the pope: but Barnard. Girard. Tom. 1. lib. 4. Lois le
papes nauoient aucune puiscana in authority en le ville de Rome etc.
the french Chronicle says he wan it as he did the imperial dignity, by his
sword and law of arms. For then the popes had no power or authority in the
city of Rome, but meddled only in the affairs of religion, of ceremonies of
the church and things pertaining to the soul. Therefore says Polydor that the
successors of Charles the great did use to confirm the election of popes. De
inuenter lib. 4. cap. 10.
But last of all Anno 1059.
Pope Nicholas the second brought the election from Emperor, people, and
Clergy to the Cardinals only, and so the pope of Rome became head of the
church (as he says) by consent of all nanations. And here indeed he began to
tread down the Empire, For An. 1080.
Hildebrand being called Pope Gregory the 7. deprived Henry the 4. of his
imperial crown. Then did the Emperors begin to learn new manners, as to a light
from his horse, and to do honor to the pope as to the vicar of Christ, as did
Anno 1155.
Frederick to pope Adrian the 4. and being unaccustomed to such service (as
Alber. Krant. Saxon. lib. 6. cap. 16.
some say) was blamed for holding the stirrup on the wrong side when the pope
alighted from his horse. And the consuls of Rome learned to swear fealty to
the pope as to Anno 1165.
Alexander the 3. Then could the Pope allow who should be Emperor, as Anno
1200. Decretal. lib. 1. tit. 6. cap. 34.
Innocent the 3. did Otho, and Anno 1230.
makes it as a law, that the right and authority to examine a person elected
to be king and to be promoted to the Empire pertains to the pope, who does
anoint him, consecrate and crown him. Then could the popes make the people
cross themselves to fight against their liege Lord the Emperor, as if it were
against the Turk, under promise of eternal life. As Anno 1230.
Gregory the 9. against Freodorick the 2. And pope Innocent by decree and his
counsel deprived him of his kingdom of Sicile, and so was established the
authority of popes to depose Emperors, Kings, and Potentates. But for the
better enthronising of the pope in this fresh and new shining primacie,
herewithall Read Polydor de invent. lib. 4. cap. 9. and lib. 8. cap. 2. Platina
in vita Bonif. 8. and so forward: and Boniface 13. and his successors, and
Krant. Saxon lib. 5. and 6. and Aeneus Syluius de moribus Germanorum ad Martin
Meyr.
came up the red hats and gay palfries and royal majesty and senate of
Cardinals, the college of scribes and other officers (which Polydor for their
ravening calls Harpeis) and other annats and yearly scotts, peter pence,
bulls, prices of pals, pardons, aduowsons, dispensations, appeals, cases
papal, reseruations, comendums, prerogatives, and I cannot tell how infinite
jurisdiction in heaven, in earth, in purgatory, and hell, they changed,
invented, renewed, put down and lifted up whom, what, and when they would.
And so the estate of the pope became an imperial majesty, far above all
earthly monarkes and principalities, and thrones, and dominions. Now therefore
good christian reader thou may here observe that the order of this supremacy
came up by degrees through the climing pride of the clergy and had many
years in growing. First contending for highness in dignity among themselves,
and namly Constantinople against Rome, and secondly, when the Emperor had
granted the title of universal Bishop to the pope of Rome, then he shifted the
Emperors by little and little out of all dealing in Ecclesiastical matters, as
namely and principally in the elections of Popes, and from this it grew to
sovereign authority over all, even as a bramble, it took hold and grew up
over the highest ceders of Libanon and a fire came out of this bramble and
consumed the imperial glory of the kingdom, and over grew the majesty of the
temporal power. Here shall thou see a very great change: Gregory the first
proclaims the title of universal Bishop, to be blasphemus and not
sufferable. Boniface the 3. and all his successors take it upon them, and make
it their principal strength and glory: Anno 801. Antonius Archb. of Florens,
histor. pars 2. tit. 14. cap. 2.
Adrian with a Synod of an hundred fifty and three Bishops gave unto Charles
the great (as the papists say) the right and power to choose the pope: and
granted him the Apostolical sea and dignity of Senatorship, moreover he
desired that Archbishops and Bishops through every province should receive of
him their inuesting, and unless the Bishop be invested of the King: he should be
consecrated of no man, and this decree was established with a curse and
confiscatio^ of goods, 18. tit. 16. ca. 1. An. 1070.
Gregory 7. having shuffled away the emperor in the election of popes: by a
contrary Synod of an hundred and ten Bishops did accurse all ecclesiastical
persons which received their inuesting by the hand of any seculer person.
Platina in vita Pascalis etc. An. 820.
Pascal the first being chosen pope without the Emperors consent humbly
excused himself and craved pardon: And Gregory the 4. as Platina says was of
so great prudency, and modesty, that he would not occupy the pontifical
dignity although he were chosen of all, until he were confirmed by the
Emperor which was then Lodouicus king of France. But in a Anno 865.
while after pope Nicholas the first obtained of an other Emperor, that no
seculer Prince or Emperor should thencefoorth be present in the counsel of
the Church unless in question of the Christian faith: And Anno 1115. Alber.
Krant. Saxon. lib. 5. cap. 37.38.
in time it came to pass that Pope Paschal the 2. was feign to excuse himself
from the stain of heresy for granting by constraint, to the Emperor Henry
the 5. his right in this cause. In this very time god stirred up the eloquent
and learned pen of Bernhard to admonish the Pope how far he was fallen from
God, amongst many other things with these words, (where speaking of wealth,
riches, and goods he says to the Ad engeniu^ pontif. maximi de
consideratione. About Anno 1149.
Pope) vsus tamen horum bonus etc. yet the use of those things is good, the
abuse evil: the care worse, and the gain more dishonest, be it that thou
may challenge these things by any other way or reason whatsoever; but not by
the apostolical right. For he could not give unto thee that which he had
not; that which he had, that he gave, even the care as I said over the
Churches. What did he give Lordship? hear him self speak; not being Lords,
(he says) in Gods heritage, but being made an ensample to the flock: and
least thou should think it spoken only for humility, and not also for
truth; there is the voice of the Lord in the gospel. The kings of the nations
do reign over them, and they which have rule over them are called gracious
Lords, and he does infer, but you shall not be so. It is plain, that the
Apostles are, forbidden Lordship. Go thou then and dare thou to usurp to thy
self either a Lordly Apostleship or an Apostolical lordship. Thou art
plainly forbidden both, if thou would have both alike, thou shall loose
both: otherwise think not thy self exempted from the number of them of whom
God complains: They have reigned and not by me, they were princes and I knew
them not. Now if it please thee to reign without God: thou have glory, but
not with God. And the addition upon Upon Reuelat. cap. 13.
Lyra not a few years after affirms, that it is manifest, that in the
primative Church from the time of the Apostles unto the time of Syluester the
Pope, when the faithful had no worldly power: then did the Church flourish
most of all in spiritual things. And a little after: But when in process of
time the faithful obtained great secular power, these virtues, (meaning faith
hope, and charity) and if by the mercy of God they did not wholly decay, yet
are they not commonly found to have the same power as they had in the
primative. But behold a marvelous change De moribus Germaniae.
Aeneas Syluius affirming: Power, riches, and strength to be far better in
the Apostolical sea then in any other seculer throne whatsoever. And he calls
the Pope of Rome as Emperor of the Christian army, and a wise king, and
says, That the Senate of the Cardinals do bear the room of the world. And
again he says: Christ appeared poor and humble, not that we should be poor
did he it, but that by that means he might redeem us etc. And a little
after, Now the prelates of Rome ought to be rich men and potentates. after the
same manner for our salvation: therefore he is bold to set forth the earthly
majesty of the Pope, above the glory of all princes saying: And if thou did
see the Bishop of Rome to celebrate or to hear the divine service, thou
would truly confess, that there is no state, nor glory and majesty, but
only the Bishop of Rome, when thou see the Pope sitting on high in his
throne; the Cardinals sitting at the right hand, the great Prelates,
Bishops and Abbots, and protonotaries standing at the left hand, and the
Orators of kings have their place, and the great states theirs. There the
Judges and here the Clearkes of the chamber: there the deputies of the states,
and here the Subdeacons and Accoluthes, and the other multitude do sit on
the ground. Truly thou would say the court of Rome to be like an heavenly
Hierarchy, where all things are honorable, and all things set in order, by
a prescribed and settled manner. Lo here thou see a glorious throne, but not
of God. For which Steven the fifth provides a square stone whereon it might be
set, when he ordained, Anno 890.
Gratian. decret. distinct. 19. cap. enimuero.
That the laws and decrees of the Church of Rome, should be for ever and
without dispute to be observed. Anno 1300. Read John Baleus de act. Romans
Pontif.
Clement the fifth provides a stay for this throne, in that he decrees that,
they which were dissigned in Germany to be Caesar's, although they had the
name of the King of the Romans, yet should they receive of the Pope, the
right and name of the Empire. And Anno 1338. Platina and Balaeus.
Benedict the twelfth prepares both matter and money: for on the one side, he
challenges the Imperial power, in the vacancie of the Emperor till a new be
chosen, and on the other side usurps to himself and his successors the be
stowing of Bishoprics prelacies and beneficies.

6. But see there ouergrowinges: for here they stay not. For they make the
Great. distinct. 12 cap. non decet and cap. preceptis.
Church of Rome mother and head of all Churches, and confirmer of all
religions: and under this power Pars 2. causa. 12. Quest. 1. Cap. dilexissi.
Allow men's wives to be common. And are not ashamed of this blasphemy: as by
decree to say, Distinct. 40. cap. Si papa.
Though the Pope draw with him innumerable souls into hell, no mortal man may
presume to reprove him, who is judge of all men, and to be judged of no man.
Decret. Greg. lib. 1. tit. 33. cap. 6.
So much difference as there is between the Sun and the Moon, so much is
there between the King and the pope Gratian distinct. 34. cap. lector. in gl.
distinct. 82. cap. presbit. in gl. cause. 15. quest. 6. cap. authoritatem in gl.
the pope dispenses against the law of nature and against the Apostle
Distinct. 96. cap. satis euidenter.
the Pope can not be loosed at all nor bound by the seculer power, seeing he
is called God, and it is manifest that God cannot be judged of men. And they
Decretal. Greg. lib. 1. de elect. tit. 6. cap. 4.
arrogate that no counsel should set a law unto the Romish Church, seeing (as
they say) all counsels are both made and receive strength after the authority
of the Romish church, and in their statutes the authority of the Bishop of
Rome is particularly excepted. Where the wise Christian reader may see a
marvelous ouerspreading growth, even the image of Antechrist, made equal with
God and set far above all power amongst men, aduauncing it self above all
that is called God. The noysomnesse of which over rank and shadowing branches
keeping the earth bare, and the Sun from shining, the papists themselves
found to be most grievous and intolerable, and therefore they are feign to
lop and top it, and to pare away many untimely boughs and shaddowing boughs.
For (that I speak nothing of the imperial, English or Frence laws) if you
read the counsels of Ann. 1413.
Constance, and of Anno. 1431.
Basil, thou shall find many proynings and cuttinges of this monstrous bryer:
First three Popes at once as unprofitable heads chopped of and cast by. The
papal dignity made to stoop under the general counsel, translations,
procurations, exemptions, unions, fruit gathering, simony, dispensations,
tenthes, and other burdens of the Church, excommunications, interdictions,
appeals, annuattes, possessions, reseruations, and collaions of benefices,
with the number and quality of Cardinals, partly lopped, partly proined, and
partly set in order and limited, as the wisdom of that erring generation,
being by much vexation and misery compelled, did think, for their own peace
and worldly safety, to be most convenient. But all this did but little hinder
his monstrous ouerspreading, for by and by Anno 1455.
Calixtus the 3. makes a law, that no man appeal from the Pope to the general
counsel. And Anno 1470.
Paulus the second sprowteth out this new sprig of blasphemy, that in the
chest of his breast all right and law did rest, to ordain and abolish decrees
as he listed. About Ann. 1512.
And Pope Julius the second, and Leo the 10. in a counsel held at Lateranum,
undo al again, and set this brier to his climing. And that we may plainly see
that this is the very apostasy of which the scripture speaks: Read Baleus
de act. pontif.
This Julius being a great warrier and going out of the city with his army
cast the keye of Peter into the river Tiber, with these words. Because the keye
of Saint Peter is no more of worth, let the sword of Paul prevail. And this
Leo the tenth being put in mind of the gospel of Christ by a certain
Cardinal called Bembus, answered according to his place, and said: How much
that fable of Christ has profited us and our fellowship, it is sufficiently
known to all ages. What Jew, what Turk, what Heathen, what Atheist could ever
have been more blasphemous? But here God arises to maintain his own cause,
and by Luther, Melancthon, and many others, he blows and blasteth, consumes
and beats down the beauty and blossoms of this presuming bramble, with the
powerful and pearcing breath of his own mouth, which is his gospel contained
in the holy scriptures of the old and new testament. Wherein we may see the
divine providence of our most wise and gracious God, taking the matter into his
own hand in a fit and necessary time: for now when they began like the
tower of Babylon to reach up unto heaven, then did he confound them, and make
their madness openly seen to all the world, whereof Erasmus gives a very
good advertisement, who living himself in the same time affirms saying:
Annotat. Erasm. upon 1. Pet. 5.
Now the common sort of Bishops hears nothing of their learned flatterers,
but lordships, dominions, swords, keys, powers, and hereof the stateliness
of some is more then of a king, and their cruelty more then tyranicall. Now
we flatter the bishop of Rome with great volumes, giving unto him a power
equal to Christ, whereby it comes to pass, that the Christian world one day
will scarce abide the rule and ruffling, and scarce suffice the covetousness
of him and his Cardinals. And this Erasmus (although the papists hold him as
their own) Upon 1. Tim. 1.
complains not a little of the ouerspreading of this new learning. For he
shows that they spent their whole time, in frivolous and unnecessary which
were more pertaining to learning to be unknown then known: For the Divines
of those times made great adooe about both frivolous and wicked questions.
Frivolous, as whether the grace wherewith God does love and draw us, and
wherewith we love him again, be the same grace. And how it can be, that the
fire wherewithal the souls of the wicked shall be tormented seeing it is
material, can work upon a thing without body. And wicked questions touching
God, and touching the Pope: touching God, whether God can command every evil
thing, even the hatred of himself, and forbid every good thing, even the love
and worship of himself. Whether he can in act bring forth an infinite
thing according to every dimension. Whether he could from everlasting make
this world better then he has made it. Whether he could bring forth a man,
who by no means could sin. Whether God in any thing from himself distinct,
be one. Whether this proposition be possible, God the father hates God the
son; Whether the soul of Christ might be deceived: and many such like etc.
Now of the power of the bishop of Rome, men dispute (he says) in a manner more
busily then of the power of God. While they do enquire of his double power,
and whether he be the universal head of the whole Church, and when- he be
above the general counsel, and whether he may abrogate that which is decreed
in the Apostles writings. Whether he may ordain any thing contrary to the
doctrine of the gospel: whether he may make a new Article in the creed.
Whether he have greater power then Peter or equal. Whether he may command the
Angels; whether he may take away purgatory (as they call it) altogether.
Whether he be a simple man or as God, or participate both natures with Christ.
Whether he be more merciful then Christ was, seeing that he is not read to
have called any man out of the pains of purgatory. Six hundred things (says
Erasmus) of that sort are disputed in great published volumes, and that by
great divines, especially famous men for profession of religion, with these
things are the schools of divines earnestly occupied. Mark here good reader,
and consider what an ugly and fearful monster this would have been, if God
had not come down and cut him off with this two edged sword of his holy word.
For beside all these before, how many other new things came forth in the same
generation? First because John Husse was put to death by the counsel of
Constance against and contrary to the Emperors letters pattentes of safe
conduit: there came forth this new head of blasphemy: Fides non seruanda
haereticis, promise is not to be kept with an heretic. And no marvel, for
Platina.
Pope Alexander the sixth, having by three Cardinals in Latin, French, and
Italian, given full remission of sins to all the army of the French under
Charles the 8. coming into Italy for the recovery of Naples: against their
return did way-lay them to have cut them off with Maximilian K. of the Romans,
Ferdinand K. of Aragon, and Lodouich Sforce duke of Millan. Secondly, P. Pius
the 2. made a new order of Scribes Abreuiators. Paul the 2. made a law that
none should wear scarlet bonets but the Cardinals, and gave every Cardinal a
piece of scarlet to cover their Mules. And he would have made their hattes of
read silk, but that some sage Cardinals showed him, that the increase of the
pomp of the Church destroyed the Christian faith. Sixtus the 4. ordained and
increased many feasts. The conception of the virgin Mary, and the
presentation, the feast of Anna the mother of Marie, the feast of S. Joseph,
and of S. Francis. Baleus in vita Clementis octaui.
Nicholas Egmundanus, master of Louen and a Carmelite did teach and write, that
the Pope was Lord of all things, in heaven, in earth and under the earth. And
Paul the third Pope of that name, being an old man found out a new kind of
religion, to the increase of Gods worship he consecrated a little bowl of wood
with his Popall blessing, to gratify a noble matron, that she might carry it,
hanged it on her neck against diverse griefs. The late counsel of Trent has
hatched many new things. First that the Sess. 4. decret. 2.
vulgar translation in public readings, disputations, preachings, and
expositions to be autenticall, whereof Preface of Test. Rhem.
arises great disputation against the Greek and Hebrew text, contrary to the
ancient decree which Distinct. 9. cap. vt veteru^.
Gratian auowcheth: That the truth of the old Testament should be examined by
the Hebrew, and of the new, by the Greek. And Sess. 7.
with an heavy and pitiful curse they establish these school tricks: 1.
That the Sacraments of the new Testament confer grace. 2. By Baptism,
Confirmation, and orders a Charecter is imprinted in the soul. 3. The
intention of the priest is required to the making of the Sacrament. 4. John's
Baptism has less virtue then that which Christ commanded his Apostles and
such like: out of this forge comes the new forging of the Printed at Paris
Anno 1577.
mass book, set forth by Pius the 5. and a Printed at Paris An. 1583
new Callender which was done by pope Gregory the 13. wherein the times of
the year, and of the feasts, and the course of the Sun is set in his right
order that we may know nothing in heaven and in earth to be safe from the
presumption and proud arrogancy of this triple crowned beast, and this holy
prelate has made a Printed at Antwerpe An. 1589.
new Martyrologe or Legend according to this new Callender. And for the better
garding and keeping of their high tower of confusion, they have a set watch
called Index expurgatorius to charm all writers both new and old, and to
fray them that they lift not up their voice so much as one word against their
superstitious folly, and Read Martin Remnicius ex amen concili. Triden. parti
1. page 1. and his book called doctrinae Iesui tarum page 1. etc. Baleaeus in
vita Paul. 4.
here withal sprang up a new religion of armed soldiers to fight their
battails, breeding secretly about Anno 1536. but show themselves openly in
their college at Rome Anno 1553. and since in diverse places, and they go
into all nations to stir up the kings of the earth, the princes and people to
make war against the Saints our English soil has been assailed by this
new brood under the name of Jesuits and Seminary priests. But as the grows
of this monster is strange and fearful, and that in it new religions have
risen up suddenly like padstooles) as De inuentor. reru^ lib. 7. ca. 3.
Polydor virgill says) so from 600. years after Christ until our time, it
could not come to his full grows, yea although the Trident Council, seems
to lick him and shape him as the bear does his whealps to some handsome form
of perfection. For there are many things which are not yet come to their birth
and many which stay at the very birth and are not yet delivered. As namely:
first those 14. controversies of those two worthy doctors of their popish
Apostasy, that is to say: the angelical doctor Thomas of Aquine and the
subtle doctor Scotus the Duns. For one says: God is unto us an end super
natural, and the other says: God is unto us an end Natural. The one says that
Blessedness is merely an effect, super natural, and cannot naturally be had.
The other says, that Blessedness may be had naturally, and that it is natural,
and such like. Which F. Constantius Saruanus co^ciliatio etc. printed at Rome
1589.
a very worshipful Cardinal labors to reconcile, until the churches
determination and mind may be known. And this very Cardinal adds a very
great increase of this new spawne, called directorium theologicum, which has
many worthy conceits of Logic and Philosophy, which perhaps one day may take
life and being by their magisteriall power. There are in these schools deuines
infinite and very deep questions, which their mother church has not yet by
determination brought forth and acknowledged as her children: as namely such as
this is, Petri Tartareti reportata quest. 2. distinct. 10. and deinceps.
whether Christ being very man, in the Ost or sacrament in one place, can see
him self when he is made, being the very same Christ and man, in many other
places, and whether that so many thousands made at one instant in many places
might not be an army of men to meet and fight a battle in one field etc.
Don John a Bononia professor of divinity in his Printed at Louan Anno 1554.
book of predestination and reprobation, dedicated to Charles the Emperor and
king of Spain, tells us that the church has not set down what is to be
believed or received of all Christians, touching that doctrine, For there are
many things which are not yet come which he thinks it ought: Quo plus qua^
reliquis conscientiae nostrae perpetuo exagitantur.
(being a point wherewith our consciences are continually troubled, more then
with other things) yet he doubts not, but the masters of the church, (when
their determination shall be hatched) will embrace his opinion or some such
like. But I cannot a little merueile, that when in the same counsel of Trent,
this mother Church brought forth so many goodly impes, that it forslowed the
travail of so iolie a babe, as a very Zealous Io. Sleidan Com. lib. 23.
Franciscan did bring to the very birth before them all, when in his preaching
amongst them and bitterly enueying against Luther, he did openly say to be S.
Paul's meaning upon the second to the Romans. Namely: that they who have had no
knowledge of Christ, and otherwise have lived honestly have obtained salvation.
Here comes Durandi with his rationale diuinorum, Guidonius with his
Manipulus curatorum, Guiliermus parisiensis de septem sacramentis, it is, and
infinite others both schoolmen, doctors and friars, (whose new learning I must
needs confess I have not, neither have I known the deepnes of Satan) and
these have offered a merueilous great and goodly access and increase to his
tale spreading mother of popish blasphemy, but they hang in the birth,
neither borne nor buried, waiting the good hour, when the churches
determination (without whose midwifeship they cannnot be autentical children)
shall acknowledge them and make them of their holy generation. Alfonsus de
Castro, a learned minority, does open unto us the reason of this matter
namely: Aduersus hareses lib. 1. cap. 2.
that we know many things now, which of the first fathers were either doubted
or altogether unknown: by the change of things does spring the change and
varying of decrees: that the same which in times past was lawful is now
unlawful, but these innouations of decrees comes not of the newness of the
things, but of the new knowledge of those things, which being found, the church
taught by the spirit of God does define, which definition being given, it is
not lawful to doubt of that, where of it was before lawful to doubt: and he
shows an example saying in a an other place: Cap. 8.
Some men say that the divine persons are set in a personal being (as they
speak) respectively: others affirm that they are set absolutely, others
again say that they are not set by any way, but to be them selves persons to
them selves. Now says he: who sees not, some one of these to err, when yet
every one of them stick to his own opinion without punishment or note of
heresy, and a little after: yet if the Church taught by the holy ghost shall
define of that thing, without all doubt, the Church by her definition would
not bring to pass that the persons should be so or so set: but would teach
us, that which although from everlasting it were true, yet did not we know
it; After which definition of the Church, it shall not be lawful to affirm
which before was lawful: To whom accord the wise Rhemist Test. Rhem. Annota.
upon Act. 15.
saying: It is to be noted that the Bishops so gathered in counsel represent
the whole church, have the authority of the whole church, and the spirit of
God to protect the^ from error as the whole church, and these make it a Maxim
or ruled case: that all good christians rest upon the determination of a
general Council. Now gentle reader, if we may believe these great learned
clarks, it must needs follow that Lombardus the father and all his children the
schoolmen, and all other learned men's propositions, questions, and
disputations, are no further autenticall popery, then as the Church of Rome
has all ready determined: and we unless they tell us what is the Churches
determination cannot tell what to believe, to be of their religion. And this
determination is hard to be found out, and very doubtful, whom to believe,
that shall declare us the same. For it is not yet fully agreed amongst them,
weather the pope or the Council be the highest, that we might certainly know
where this determination rests. The counsels of Constance and Basil take
authority above the papal dignity, whereby we might think with the
Rhemistes and diverse others, that the determination is of the counsels. Pope
Pius the second, although he have taken much pains for the honor and
authority of the Council of Basil, yet has he set forth a Bull, with the
greatest curse, forbid and bar all appeals from the Pope to the general
Councels, as though the pope were above the Councels: and the Rhemistes do
help him Upon Act. 15. ver. 7.
where they make the Council to be of no authority, which is not confirmed
by the pope, and they Upon Luke 22. ver. 31.
say that the Pope cannot err iudiciallie, although Alphonsus say he may
err in matters of faith, and Platina shows that those Bastard Popes who
came after Formosus, and altered by a new and evil custom the decrees of one
another, did this by counsel iudicially: If a man mark well this
contradiction, he will hardely know where to find their churches
determination. Again the counsel of Basil, Platina in vita Eugenij Alber.
Krant. Saxon. lib. cap. 20.21. etc.
would not be put down by Pope Eugenius, but constrained him for fear to
confirm their authority; and after for his contumacie deposed him, and very
orderly as Eneus Syluius says chose Faelix in his room, but this Eugenius
would not obey them, and so the scisme of two popes continued til Nicholas the
fifth: so that here was no obedience of the pope to the counsel, nor of the
counsel to the Pope, what shall we think of their determination, where trow
you. it may be found: may we not do as the German newters did: who neither
followed the Pope nor the counsel, but appealed as they thought to an higher
and more certain determination. And whereas the Rhemist and Alfonsus with
others affirm, that the holy ghost teaching the counsel (which is in steed
of the whole church) their definition is the determination of the church, to
which men ought to stand, we are yet more in doubt, upon other further weighty
reasons and considerations. First because this is spoken but by private men;
And the Hist. pars 3. tit. 22. cap. 10.. 4.
Archbishop of Florence is not a feared to term the counsel of Basil a
conuenticle and a synagogue of Satan: Thirdly the last counsel of Trident
cannot be found to be a Baleus in vita Marcelli 2.
free general counsel, because diverse men for speaking freely were thrust out,
and Ioh. Sleidan Com. lib. 22.
the holy ghost that guided all their definitions, was brought in a
portmanteau from Rome, namely that as they had instructions from Rome, so were
their decrees framed and ordained. Beside this, all these latter counsels, have
not been made with universal consent, but the church has been divided into
two parts East and West, until the time of this counsel of Basil, and then
it was sewed together with rotten thread, and presently rent in pieces again
as it were in a moment, and there was one counsel at Basil, and an other set
against it a Florence. Now I say seeing these counsels of Constance, Basil and
Trident, (in which the most part and chiefest of Popery has been in the most
general manner determined and published for the acts and determination of the
church) were but a very small part of the universal church: Namely of the
Western parts, I know not how they can assure us, that in them we have the
churches determination; except they could prove these counsels ecumenical and
universal of all Christian churches: as was the first general counsel of Nice
under Constantine the great. Again the counsels for six hundred years after
Christ, did not decree as they have done since: and the faith of the church was
not the determination of the Church, but the sentence of holy scriptures: and
many points of faith have been since determined, not by, but without holy
Scriptures; what should we esteem, the ancient primative Churches to have
erred in faith? or that they knew not, or held not the true faith, because that
in very many articles they lacked the ecclesiastical determination. Lastly
seeing that every day they bring forth new devises and sanctions, and the
latter many times contrary to the former, who can tell when he is in the truth
or out of the truth, or when the Church has made her true and right
determination? He that reads over Gracian and the Tomes of the counsels,
with the histories of the lives of the Popes, or do but well mark and
consider that little which I have penned out of them in this Chapter, shall
easily perceive, that they are ever learning, but never come to the knowledge
of the truth, they dote about questions which are endless and strife of words,
there is no certainty in their religion, little truth and incessant
innovation. Therefore I may conclude, that as this monster is of a later
generation, and a new continual conception: so no mortal man can tell, when
he will come to his full birth, and be a perfect body, or when he will have
his certain determination, right shape and proportion, and final growth and
complete stature. I will leave him therefore to the high Judge and Lord of all
flesh, until that great and fearful day, Revel. 19.20.
When the beast shall be taken and with him the false prophet, and they both
cast alive into the lake of fire which burns with brimstone. Come Lord Jesus
come quickly.

CHAP. V. Here is showed that all men ought to fly popery. First, because of
the exceeding danger it brings to them selves, to their seed and country.
Secondly, It is of all heresies and Apostasies the most pernicious. Thirdly,
It is not tolerable, or to be wincked at, in any Christian common wealth.
Fourthly, We of England have great cause to praise God, that we have nothing to
do with it.
NO sooner had my pen concluded the former Chapter, but that me thought I
heard the great comaunder of all the world, calling unto all Christians,
concerning the Romish religion and saying Esai. 52.11.
Depart, depart, go out from thence and touch no unclean thing. For seeing
that popery is so directly and manifold, differing from the true ancient and
catholic religion, so agreeing with all filthy heresies, and lately sprung up
out of the unclean brood of humane invention and diabolical suggestion,
bearing down all purity of faith and true holy worship of God, and that
hereby the Romish Church is certainly found to approve it self to be that
great Babylon, which is become the habitations of devils, and the hold of foul
spirits, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird: I can no otherwise
understand the duty of all Christians, but that they be obedient to that
heavenly voice, which else where calls us out of that profane sinagogue of
Rome, saying: Reuelat. 18.4.
Go out of her my people, that ye be not partakers in her sins, that ye
receive not of her plagues. It behooves therefore every soul to consider
wisely of this thing, because of the danger that may happen to himself, to
his seed, and to his country. For as it was no pleasant thing to Noe, to live
among those proud and cruel people of the first world, whose destruction he
knew to be most certainly approaching: and as Lot dwelling at the gate of Sodom,
vexed his righteous soul in hearing and seeing their unlawful deeds, and his
very life was hazarded in the destruction of the wicked, if God had not been
singularly merciful unto him: So all men that fear God, cannot but know, that
such wicked and filthy heresy, as popery is, must needs be as a canker
that fretteth even unto destruction of the soul. For it not only draws us
unto many noisome and heretical prauities, but also to most abominable
idolatry, and the very overthrow of the covenant of grace and true faith; by
which we stand in the favor of God and have the hope of eternal life by Jesus
Christ. They which speak most favorably for papists, and seem willing to
have them in some sort of the visible Christian Church: do endeavor the same
by making their apostasy to be no greater then the apostasy of the ten
tribes of Israel, after their falling away from the house of David, under the
hand of Hieroboam. At which time they left the temple at Jerusalem, and the
pure worship and word of God, and made them calves in Dan and Bethel, and
worshipped God as it pleased the kings of Israel. But if men would consider
the 1. King. 2. 2. Cron. 18. and 19.
story of that good king Iehoshaphat, when he joined affinity with Ahab,
they might easily see this thing, how near he was to leese his life for such
fellowship: what loss he had of ships, and how God rebuked him saying:
Would thou help the wicked, and love them that hate the Lord? therefore for
this thing the wrath of the Lord is upon thee. Lo here the Israelites are
counted wicked and the haters of God; and such as for whose fellowship, Gods
wrath comes upon his children. Therefore seeing the papists are (much more)
worse, it must needs be very dangerous to have any fellowshippe with them.
And if the soul be far, more precious then the body, then is the hazard
the greater. And doubtless no man is able to express the greatness of the
mischief which that wicked brood may bring upon a man, for so much as they
transgress the word of God, and follow not the doctrine of Christ, and have
chosen their own ways, and their soul delights in their own
abominations: For it is written: 2. John. verse. 9.
Whosoever transgresses and abides not in the doctrine of Christ has not
God. And again: Esai. 5.24.
As the flame of fire deuoureth the stubble, and as the chafe is consumed of
the flame: so their root shall be rottenness, and the budde shall rise up
like dust, because they have cast off the law of the Lord of hosts, and
contemned the word of the holy one of Israel. If then it be a perilous thing
and a misery to be without God, and to be as a rotten root and a budde
turned into dust, to be devoured like stubble of the flaming fire: and that
this comes by forsaking the word of God: then woe and twice woe unto all
them, that separate not themselves, from popery and papists, whose foundation
is the forsaking of Gods word, to follow the magisteriall power of men, and
humane traditions and inventions. Again, what soul is there that has learned
Christ, who does not see, what a mischief and inconvenience this brings on
his posterity. And if you forget it, or consider it not, remember 1. King. 11.
and cap. 12. and cap. 14.
Solomon the wise, who was called Iedidiah, that is beloved of the Lord. Behold
what a breach his idolatry made in his kingdom and glory: which befell in
his son Rehoboams days, and continued in his posterity for ever: he lost the
ten tribes of Israel, and his gold was turned into brass. 2. King. 8 18.
And of Iehoram the son of Iehoshaphat it is said, that he walked in the
ways of the kings of Israel as did the house of Ahab, for the daughter of Ahab
was his wife, and he did evil in the sight of the Lord. Cap. 9. and 10.
And when God stirred up Iehu to root out the house of Ahab. For his
abominable idolatry and bluddie cruelty: by this affinity which came
through Iehoshaphates folly, Ahaziah king of Judah, son of Iehoram the son
of Iehoshaphat being found in the company was slain with Iehoram king of
Israel wicked Ahabs son, and forty and two of Ahazias brethren coming to
visit the sons of the wicked. Therefore all wisemen considering these and
such like judgments, upon the houses of Gods children for their fellowship
with the wicked, will know very well, that it behooves them to take heed as of
a poisoned serpent, and to be wary of these Scorpion-like popish Locustes:
whose sting being in their tails, do bring such great wrath of God upon all
that are infected with their heresy: For they know who has said: Ephesians. 5.11.
Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but even reprove them
rather: 2. Ioh. ver. 10
If there come any unto you and bring not this doctrine, receive him not to
house, neither bid him God speed. Heb. 12.15
Take heed that no man fall away from the grace of God: let no root of
bitterness spring up and trouble you, lest thereby many be defiled. Now as for
a man's country consider only the story Judge. 17. and 18
of Micah. Into whose house by his mothers superstition, when images had
entered: it was an occasion and means of the corrupting of the whole tribe of
Dan with idolatry. And that ofg Gideon. Cap. 8.24.25.26.
Who of the earings and jewels that were given him of the spoils of Midian,
making a Ephod (a small thing in comparison of popish imagerie) and putting it
in Ophrah his city, brought a marvelous inconvenience and corruption to the
whole land, and to his own house, as may appear by this that it is said: All
Israel went a whooring after it, Verse 27.
which was the destruction of Gideon and his house.

2 But if you mark it well this is not all. For of all heresies and
apostasies, which have happened from the beginning of the world, this popery
is the most pernicious. For all other have contented themselves to lead the
people from God to idolatry, and by continuance of sin have drawn the
fierce wrath of God, upon countries and nations, and in fine great desolations
and overthrows. But popery as it is equal at the least in all these evils,
with all other wickedness and abominations whatsoever: so it has a certain
excellency in doing evil, above all other infections. Namely, that it
ouerturneth the very course of nature. For we read in all stories of
Assirians, Chaldeans, Meades, and Persians, Grecians, and Romans, that their
superstitions did make them strangers from God indeed, and worthily deserved
they and suffered they his heavy judgments: yet the civil magistrate was
honorable among them, and the beauty of the commonweals, was the freedom to
punish wickedness, as murder and uncleanness: and the people might live in
some reasonable liberty, under the pure and honest obedience of their Lords
kings or Emperors. But the Church of Rome takes away all authority and power
from the civil estate and translateth it to the ecclesiastical, upon every
trifle discharges the people of their obedience to the civil sword, and
keeps them in most strait slavery to themselves, opens the way to all
wickedness, murders, and uncleanness, and utterly weakeneth the estate of all
princes, coningly making them vassals and slaves to all folly and dishonor.
All this the Christian reader may see (before I proceed) if he call to mind the
latter part of the last Chapter. How be it I will help him a little, that he
may the more plainly discern what I say and the true effect thereof. Three
things I observe in a flourishing common wealth: 1. The good virtuous and
commendable living of the people. 2. The wealth and peace of the country. 3.
The honor and safety of the prince and civil state. Where these three are
taken away, there the common wealth must needs be turned vpside down: and
this does the very nature of popery bring to pass, as it were the very bane
of the civil state and common wealth. First look we upon their single life
of their priests, Single life the cause of many evils.
Munkes, Friars, and Nuns, and see what this does bring to pass. These do
naturally diminish the number of people, when so many men and women are kept
from marriage, and these being privileged persons are exempted from civil
service: so that it weakneth the strength of the realm: as Solomon says:
Proverb. 14.28.
In the multitude of the people is the honor of the king, and for the want of
people comes the destruction of the prince. Secondly, these have brought
forth most horrible uncleanness, not to be named amongst Christians, and
infinite murders of poor innocents, such as I am ashamed to explane as it
deserves: only I will show the reader as it were through a lattise, some part
of this evil and chiefly what the papists themselves say: namely that the
inconvenience of this single life was such, that when the priests by Gregory
the seventh were forbidden marriage, Antoninus histor. pars. 3. tit. 16. pap. 1.
21.
there never was a greater scisme in the Church in the time of any heresy, few
men keeping themselves chaste, some feyning continency for gain and boasting,
and many increasing their incontinencie with perjury and diverse sorts of
adultery. Balaeus de Act. Romans Pont. de Greg. Christianis.
It is recorded that Gregory the first, did among the first command single
life unto priests: but after finding that they did commit filthiness secretly,
and that thereof many children conceived were murdered, he did abrogate that
commandment and said, it was better to marry then to give cause of slaughter.
For when on a time, he sent to fish in a ponde, there were found in the same
six thousand heads of drowned children, which he seeing to come of this
constrained single life, mourning and sighting from the depth of his heart, did
forthwith revoke his decree. He that reads the lives of popes, if it were
only in popish writers or could travel and learn the guise of Rome, or could
but understand what the commishioners of King Henry the eight of noble memory,
found and saw in putting down of Abbeys, he would easily in this point
believe the papist Metropol. lib. 9. cap. 34.
Krantius, where he says: That in the city of Rome Continency is more rare
then a white Swanne among seculer men. And this soar is grown grievous, that
every where it is complained of. So that their Campegius read Ioh. Sleid.
coment. lib. 4.
very champions and defenders are forced to confess, that the popish bishops
do not only wincke at the beastly filthiness of their priests: but also
take money to suffer such wickedness: yea they are not ashamed to face it out,
with this whoorish boldness as to say: Shrift foster father of filthiness.
It is a much more grievous sin for a priest to have a wife, then to keep
many whoores at home. This sin of uncleanness shall you also find to be
nourished by shrift. For beside many other things, we Histor. tripart. lib. 9.
cap. 35.
read that Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople, finding by experience, how apt
this confessing to a priest, was to breed and nourish whoordome, took it
utterly away in those Greek Churches. But in the Latin churches remaining
still, one example may suffice to show what a rich and fat dunging unto a
single life this shrift has been and is, to bring forth such unclean and
beastly fruit. We Discovery of the holy inquisition of Spain printed at
London 1569
read of the Spanish inquisition, that on a time it pleased the Lords
inquisitors of the holy house, to cause proclamation to be solempnly
pronounced in the province of Civil, that whosoever knew of their certain
knowledge or by report, that any Monks or other religious or spiritual persons
had abused their holy sacrament of confession to any such abominable use, or
that any ghostly father had dealt in any such sort with their shrift children;
they shall signify it to the house of inquisition. But this proved to be so
great and plentiful an harvest to that holy house: (for so many, so sundry
women of all sorts, yea of the grauer matrons, were touched in conscience to
inform the holy fathers as obedient children) that they were feign for very
shame to leave it of as they began, and secreatly to hang up these holy men
which heard confession, by their purses, whom they durst not for the multitude
call into open question for their adulterous and filthy living. But this
shrieft, The greatest policy in the world did the pope compass by the settling
of auriculer confession.
if you mark it is not only naturally fit to foster this kind of
filthiness, but also all treasons and sedition and all license to every kind
of wickedness noisome to the common wealth. For how think you was the Pope
able to wrestle with the Emperors and Kings of the world, if he had not all
the ghostly fathers at commandment, who under Benedicite might and did lead
the people whither they list: and who is it, that being so easily (as by
confession) pardoned of all his sins, which would not be encouraged to run
after the like or greater exces. Moreover what thing could be kept secreat from
his beastly holiness, when his servants were the princes confessors and
counselors? To maintain thieves, Sanctuaries for maintenance of evil doers.
murderers, and traitors, they have sanctuaries, cloisters and monasteries, to
hide and keep them from the civil power. Their imagery and keeping their
service in an unknown tongue, with conceiling of holy scriptures, kept the
people in such awe and motherly devotion, that they might easily carry the
people not only against their liege Lords on earth: but even against the Lord
God of heaven. Their holy days and fasting days grew to such numbers, that
the meaner people could not tell how to live. Their merits, prayers for the
dead, oblations, sacrifice of the mass and such like superstitions, stale away
the riches of the comminaltie, and made many good heirs beg a crust at
their religious monasteries. Of all these things not only stories and
experience, Polydor verg. hist. Angl. li. 7. Lex ad Manumortua.
but also the Lawyers can certify, by the statutes that have been made against
incest, buggerie, appeals, holy days and dead men's devotions. But the thing
that I will specially stand upon is this: that beside all these, which do
naturally in that religion afflickt and keep under, the comely and honorable
estate of the common wealth, there are other things in the lordlynesse and
spiritual pre-eminence, of the prelacie, and especially of the Pope, that make
the civil state as no state, except as a mere slave: and they tread under
foot all earthly kingdoms. First I observe the popish doctrine as it was
suffered by the Emperor, Popery overthrew the east Empire.
by his ouergrowing to have wayed down the imperial authority, namely by
granting to Boniface the third, the title of universal Bishop, he lost his
authority over the pope and clergy, as is before at large declared. And when
in the second Council of Nice, the Empire condescended to images, it was
presently so weak that it had no more power to hold out in Italy: And
lastly when the Greeks agreed more generally unto popery at the Council of
Basil: The Turk by and by overcame Constantinople; and so the Empire of the
East was utterly abolished. Secondly though Charles the great rose up about
that time Emperor in the West, and so from thencefoorth, the Pope has seemed
to allow and maintain an Empire in the west: yet all men know that the wars
raised against the Emperors by the Popes, for the Primacie, in their inuesting
of Prelates and such like, has made it a very poor thing, for that it was in
the days of the said Charles. For though popery use the civil sword for her
defense, yet it suffers not the glory and power of the civil magistrate, to
have any further strength, then as the Pope and his Prelates may well rule:
that they may always have them at their command. And this is done by
contention, avarice and her daughter extortion, Popery nurse of contention.
to keep them always weak and poor: and by falsehood and pride, whereby they
are spoiled and subdued, and their authority made captive, and as it were
slain and buried. For contention read Krantius Metropolis; and you shall
find, lib. 6. cap. 6.
that Bishoprics were governed by arms, lib. 2. cap. 20.
they strove for their bounds and limittes, lib. 1. cap. 40.
they joined in conspiracy with the son against the father, yea when no
cause was, Platina in vita Greg. 7.
Rodolphus takes arms to deprive his Lord of his Empire, and Krant. Saxon
lib. 5. cap. 7. and 18. etc.
Henry the fifth wageth war against his own father: of which came all manner
of evil, murders, rapins, burninges, spoiling of Town and country, Anno
1184. The Krant Saxon lib. 6. 2 ap. 46.
Emperor Freoderick making a marriage for his son: when in procession on
Pentecosts day, he had the archbishop of Mentes on his right hand, and the
Archbishop of Collen on his left. The Abbot of Fulda, striving to have one of
their places did so trouble the company: that if the Emperor had not wisely
ordered the matter there had been war and bloodshed upon the same. But what
miserable troubles, these contentions have been to the kings of England, he
that only reads the elections of the Bishop of Caunterbury shall see
sufficient: that I speak nothing of munkes against seculer priests, abbots
against their munkes, friars against friars and such like deadly fewds: which
has caused great ado in many places. Nay if I should speak of the Saxons
and Almains, of the Guelphes, and Gibellins, Florentines, Venetians and people
of Millaine; and I know not how many other cities and nations, which upon
popish iars have been brought, by factions and deuisions into a formal war and
continual steame of slaughter and butcherie one upon an other: I might make a
great volume. And it fills my soul with restles sorrow, to think: that the
unthankfulness of men, not believing the truth of God, but harkening to foolish
fables, should provoke the heavy wrath of GOD, to heap such infinite and
unspeakable miseries upon them. Now for their avarice and exactions how
naturally, Popish extortions and avarice.
they lie in their religion, and how they keep under the people and nations,
and preserve their diabolical supremacy; only let me rehearse the stories what
they say: First one says Kra^t. Metropol. lib. 10. cap. 34.
Multae and magnae concertationes doctorum etc. Many and great discentions were
there of learned and good men, and if they had bridled avarice, they might have
easily found a measure or end: and again. Cap. 47.
Exorbitabat eo tempore supra modum Romana curia in exhauriendo prouincias auro
etc. At that time the court of Rome went out of square above measure in robbing
the provinces of their gold, through the bestowing of indulgences not heard of,
and graces incredible. And the apostolical Courtiers or suitors which obtained,
were miserably tossed: they strove or sued before the Auditor or judge: two
judgments were given for one party. In the third instance the Judge is
commanded, that he put the one party to perpetual silence, Dato quod
sonaret and fulgeret. 1398.
neither needed letters to be dispatched by the Chauncerie: there was a
shorter way hy the chamber, by giving that which sounded and shined. A thing at
that time new, but in our age well waxen old, that, that age might be thought
to have found out that which this our age does now use. But we complain of
these things in vain. So complained Albertus Krantius being himself a papist,
whose story ends An. 1501. And in another place showing how a youth of 17.
years of age obtained a bishopric of the pope, he says: Lib. 12. ca. 29
The Apostolical sea shows it self liberal to suitors, changing lead for
gold: which being spoken in the old world, how much that liberality has
grown unto this day, they do easily understand who have doings in things. So
does an Matthew Patis hist. Hen. 1. An. 1103.
other papist tell us, that when Anselmus the Archbishop entreated the Lord
Pope, for certain Bishops and Abbots of England, who were degraded: That the
same most gracious sea, which never fails any man (so as some white or red
thing be mediator) restored the same bishops and Abbots to their dignities. And
an Polydor. Verg. de inue^tor. lib. 8. ca. 2.
other papist can tell you of their instruments and bulls, and of the college of
Catchpoles or Harpies (that is to say) scribes and notaries of the Apostolical
treasures, which could skill how to make an office, which at the first was sold
for 500. crowns, to be at a thousand or two or three thousand: and how the
annuates and yearly fruits, palles and appeals, have soaked up many
countries, and made the pontifical sea of great power. The effect of which
Apostaticall devises of these lordly Popes, may appear by the complaints of
all nations, which thing may clearly be seen unto all men, that shall read the
council of Basil, which made many provisions by decrees against the ravening
of the Popes court, by reseruations, appeals, instances, annates, collations,
and many such like: Read John Sleid. Com. lib. 22. page 819. 820. 821.
which decree the King of France Charles the 7. Anno 1438. did confirm, by an
edict commonly cailed Pragmatica Sanctio, Which when pope Pius the 2. labored
with Jews the 7. to undo: the Senate of Paris declare unto the king, what
great prosperity the Realm was in by that Edick, in the days of many his
forefathers, and what great affliction it was now fallen into by such
exactions, that thereby France would be bare of people and empty of money, and
unless he did hold fast the sanction of his father, every year there would
go out of France unto Rome, ten hundred thousand crowns, beside diverse ways
that they had to impouerish his kingdom. Math. paris hist. Angl. Hen. 3.
One John Rufus the popes legate at one time wrested out of the poor Irish
men's devotions 8000. marks. The Germains amongst other greeuances, require
three things to be amended. John Sleid. Com. lib. 4.
First, that they hindered the princes in their right; 2. That they pulled and
made Germany wast and without wealth and riches. 3. And bondmen with great
bondage. But speaking sparing of other countries: by the pattern of England
our own country, you shall guess very much, what spoil and hauock they made
of al lands. Math. Paris hist. Angl. Hen. 3. page 927. 928.
The greeuances of England have been these. First by complaint in a parliament
there are seven things mentioned, to weaken and empouirish the state of the
land. The Pope was not content with his subsidy of Peter pence but exacteth
most grievous contributions, more and more of the clergy, and that without
the kings consent and assent, the Patrons cannot give the benefices, but they
are wrested out of their hands and given to Romans, who know not our language
and by transporting of money greatly empouerish our land, by provisions in
pensions, by trial of causes they are drawn out of the kingdom by
apostolical authority, against the statutes and laws of the Realm, by
manifold coming of that infamous messenger, Non obstante, by whom the
reverence of an oath, the ancient customs the virtue of Scriptures, the
authority of graunts and the statutes, laws, and privileges are weakened and
made void etc. Page 932.
Also they caused the prelates to find them soldiers, some ten, some five,
some fifteen well furnished with horse and armor, and that one whole year.
Page 484. 485
They have had such extreme exactions of paiments, that they have been feign
to sell or to lay to pawn their chalices, and other holy vessels to feed the
popes desires. Page 303.
Also he exacted the fifth part of all the goods of the revenues of the clergy
of England. Page 1145.
The Bishop of Lincoln being astonished at the coueteousnes of the Romans,
caused the revenues of strangers to be counted, and found that they had 70000.
marks, when the mere revenues of the king was not esteemed to the third part.
And that which of all is most past shame and color of honesty: Page 1017.
the pope sent for his factors, certain friars dominickes and minorites, who
preaching among the people and proclaiming pardons: did sign with the cross
all sorts of people, men women, and children, old, young, sick and whole, and by
and by after for a piece of money did absolve the^ of the vow of their
peregrination. Thus you see that the church of Rome had many ways to draw out
the wealth of all the world into their coffers, and keep the kings and people
in low estate and great slavery. For which cause as other nations had their
sanctions which they called Pragmaticke, so Polnd. Verg. hist. Angl. lib. 14.
Edw. 3. Falsehood in Popery by dispensations.
England guarded themselves with the law of provision commonly called de
Praemuniri. Touching falsehood; this Romish religion is thereof naturally such a
nurse, that no common wealth can promise themselves safety, where that heresy
reigns, or where it can come near to have any meddling: for if they maintain
all traitors against magistrates, and by dispensations make men shameless in
forswearing and breaking promise: what think you is the damage of all
Christian kingdoms, or what is the privilege of the popish kingdoms? Let
Look the book called Execution of justice, printed 1583. and E. Meteranus
hist. Belg. lib. 3. page 83.
Pope Pius Quintus bull sent against our Queens most excellent Majesty, to
stir up all her subjects against her: and the manifold practices out of
Italy, and Spain, from time to time, against both Ireland and England,
testify: yea the Mercuri. Gallob. lib. 4. 8000. foot, 4000. horsemen.
supplies which he sent of soldiers to help the Duke du Meine, and the
traitors of France against their liege Lord and king; as also Id. lib. 2. with
mutabilitie of France, printed at London. 1597. cap. 25.
the murderous and bloody knife of James Clement of the order of the Dominicke
friars, being blessed for good speed by Pagorola the Popes legate, wherewith
the late French Henricus Valesius.
King being a Papiste, was traitorously killed, by the conspiracy and
instigation of many and great popish traitors: may be instead of a thousand
witnesses. Hist. Belg. E. Meteran. lib. 3. page 81.
Duke Alba 1569. by a public edict forbids traffic in the low countries
unto English men: that no man under pain of confiscation, bring in or out
merchandise: and that it might be the more sharply executed, he appointed
searchers and informers, who should have the one half of that which was
confiscated. Now all these were English fugitives papists, and amongst them
the chiefest one William Parkins had Doctor Story for his deputy: mark here
what witness this is that papists are naturally traitors, most sharp against
there native country of England, by the very nature of their religion. And
beside this Mercurius. Gallobelg. lib. 4. page 344.
their seminaries are erected at Rome and at Rhemes, and at Vallesoletum in
Spain, out of which the traitorous priests and Jesuits are sent by dosens in
diverse and disgised attire to seduce the Queens Majesty's subjects from their
obedience, and to disturb the peace of this Realm. Yet see a little further
how this natural popish falsehood in dispensations has hurt the very obedient
children. Albert Krant. Metropol. lib. 2 cap. 23.
Jews the third being Emperor, warred against one Aldalgisus, which was of the
remnant of the Lombards, and by ambush being taken was bound by oath never to
bear arms against him any more. From this oath John the 8. absolved Jews,
who being caught again in like manner, for the same cause lost his eyes, and
in his absence in Italy the Hungarians wasted Bauaria, Sueuia, Saxonia, and
carried a very great multitude of people captive especially out of Saxonia. An
other time the Aeneas Syluius hist. de Europ. cap. 5.
Hungarians being Christians, having a goodly victory against the Turks,
granted to a truce of ten years, upon the Turks suite and upon the
knowledge of their own strength, finding it better to get strength in peace,
then to waste all by continual war: and this truce was confirmed by oath on
both sides. But the Pope Eugenius taking it grievously, never left both by
entreaty and threatening, till he had caused the truce to be broken by his
dispensation and apostolical authority. But what came of this perjury. The
war was renewed, and God rewarded this papal Romish falsehood, with a most
lamentable effusion of Christian blood, by a shameful foil and overthrow by
the same Turk. Pride in popery by the supremacy.
Now let us go a little higher, and consider of their pride and Seraphicall
tyranny. What if herein we look but upon our own country of England? Into
what slavery and bondage think you, has the stately primacie of Rome brought
this realm unto. First let the reader be put in mind, that Henry Math.
Paris. hist. Angl. Hen. 2. pa. 127.
the second, reigning in England about Anno 1154. being desirous to annexe the
realm of Ireland unto the imperial crown of England, sent solemn embassage
to Rome to Pope Adrian, that by his license and favor he might enter that
Island in hostile manner, that he might subdue it and bring those beastly people
to the faith and obedience of truth. Unto which the Pope by a special bull
gave him license, provided that of every house be paid unto Peter the yearly
pension of a penny, and the foundation of this grant in the said bull is
builded upon this, that the Pope therein most arrogantly, without any
authority from God, challenges saying: Sane omnes insulas etc. Surely, all
Islands, upon whom the sun of righteousness shines, and have received the
doctrine of the Christian faith, without doubt does appertain to the right of
S. Peter and of the holy church of Rome. Behold a wonderful arrogancy, and a
marvelous awe of a king to a proud prelate. And not only was he thus in awe
of the pope (a thing abhorrent from a free kingdom) but also Page 134. and so
forward.
Thomas Archb. of Canterbury, being one of his own subjects, did very greatly
curb him. For beside many other cross dealing, whereas An. 1164. the
Archbish. Bishops, Abbots, priors, the clergy, Earls, Barons, and all the
nobility, did swear and firmly promise, in the word of truth, to keep and
observe to the king and his heirs in good sooth, without any ill meaning for
ever, sixteen points of customs or liberties, recognized and acknowledged to
be to him, and namely of the ancestors of the king, for the avoiding of
dissentions and discord often arising between the clergy and the Justices of
the Lord the king and the peers of the Realm which were as touching
aduowsons, and presentations of Churches, of Clearkes accused, or convicted, of
the going of Archbishops, Bishops, etc. out of the land without the kings
license, of excommunication and of lay men accused to be done by lawful and
honest accusers and witnesses: that such as held of the king should not be
excommunicated, or interdicted without the kings knowledge, that appeals
should not go further then the Archbishop, without the kings consent: that
Archbish. Bishops and all persons, holding lands of the king in Capite, should
have their possession as a baron and do service therein, as other Barons
accustomablie did and such like. This Thomas after his solemn oath, repenting
himself without the kings license or knowledge, trauelleth and makes suite to
the Pope of Rome, not only to be discharged of his oath, but to overthrow the
whole liberty of the realm, and that against both the king, nobles, prelates,
and the whole state of the land: and of them he excommunicateth many, and
causes very great disturbance to the king and all the realm. Thereof are
many appeals, diverse meetings, of clergy, states, sometime of Cardinals,
sometime of the French king, to compound or determine the cause. At length by
the means of the French king, the matter being taken up, and Thomas sent
peaceably home, was no sooner warm in his seat, but by bulls from the Pope
he fell to excommunicate and curse the other Bishops and others who had
offended him. Whereupon there was kindled such indignation and wrath in the
heart of certain resolute persons, that because he remained obstinate in his
former crossing of the king, as they took it, laid violent hands upon him, as
upon the kings enemy, and slew him. The king hearing thereof, being much
grieved, did humble himself in sackcloth and ashes, protesting by solemn
oath, his ignorance and innocence of the fact, sending Ambassadors to Rome of
his defense and submission to the order of the Church, which had such strange
entertainment, that neither the first nor second messengers could come into the
popes sight, and had much ado to keep the land from interdicting, but at the
length by swearing that the king would stand to the judgment of the Pope and
his Cardinals, that great curse was avoided. Howbeit the king although by oath
he swear earnestly that he was not privy nor acquainted with the fact, yet
because in his anger he had spoken some words unadvisedly, and had brought up
such wicked soldiers as would be revenged upon the kings traitor the
Archbishop, and so slew him: therefore the king for remission of his sins was
enjoined by the Pope, to give so much money as would maintain 200. soldiers a
year, and suffer appeals, and let go all his customs and liberties of his
ancestors, before spoken of, and recognized by oath of all his subjects. And
after this (a thing not be seeming any Christian, much less a king) returning
into England, and coming near to the city of Canterbury, he alighted from
his horse, and putting off all kingly majesty, barefoote like a pilgrim
penitent and supplyant with sighs, groans, and tears, he comes to the
tomb of this Thomas, and casting himself down in all his body, and
spreading his hands to heaven, remained in prayers, and after other popish
ceremonies, because of his unadvised words, he took upon him this penance: he
asked absolution of the Bishops then and there present, and laying open his
naked skin to the discipline of rods, he received of every religious man,
whereof there was a great multitude, three or five ierkes. Let any wise man
knowing the word of God, consider whether this were not a shameful slavery
both of body, soul, king and kingdom. Math. Paris. hist. Ang. page 254. The
king appealeth from his subject.
King Richard the first, going about to fortefie the out borders of his
country in Normandy, was maruellously confounded and ouerstreightned, by the
Archb. of Roan his subject: Who therefore interdicted all the country, so that
men's bodies being dead, lay unburied in the streets of the cities and
villages, very greatly annoying the living with their stinch: yet had the king
no way to relieve himself, but by appeal to the court of Rome (lo here the
king appealeth from his subject) by whom it was ordered, that by exchange of so
much for so much, as belonged to the Archb. and chapter of Roan the
interdiction was stayed, and the Archbishop appeased toward the king. And who
has not heard of the unspeakable thraldom that king John was wrapped in,
because he allowed not the choice of an Archbishop made by the pope without
his consent, but used his royal authority against them which agreed to such
choice, wherein his Majesty was excluded. First his land was accursed so that
no Churches opened to their manner of service. Secondly he was excommunicated
and lastly deposed of his kingdom, and his kingdom given to the French King
to win from him by force of arms. And by this he was driven to commit
himself to the Popes pleasure, and to resign his crown and kingdom into the
Popes hands, and received it again in fee, and under homage, paying a thousand
marks yearly, and swearing himself the Popes vassal for ever. What a
lamentable case was it in England, when Matthew Paris. histor. Ang. page 703.
king Henry the third, being humbly moved by his subjects, to stand upon his
privilege, that his people should not be made a pray to the Romish exactions:
did answer directly and say: Neither will I, neither dare I gainsay the Pope
in any thing. But most woeful is that which is Page 10.15.
reported of Frederick the Emperor, being so outragiously tossed, and
turmoiled by the Pope, that he did most comfortless lament, most plentifully
and bitterly weep and his eyes did run with tears, which was a miserable
sight in a man of so great authority and age: who bewailing and wringing his
hands he said: Woe be unto me, against whom mine own bowels do fight: Peter
whom I believed to be the rock and the half of my soul, has prepared for
me the snares of death. Behold the Lord Pope, whom the Empire under my noble
ancestors has created and enriched of nothing, goes about to pull down the
same, and deuiseth the destruction of me, who am ruler of the same Empire now
ready to fall. Whom shall I trust? where may I be safe, where joyful
hereafter? etc. And thus did that angelical pride, so batter and bring down
the civil power and dominion in all places, that it is a most manifest thing,
that in the time of Luther ( Read John Sleid. coment. lib. 14.
as he very wisely and truly notes) the doctrine of the magistrates office
and his authority, was as it were dead and buried: and all power and dominion
stole from them by this most horrible Apostaticall sea of Rome. And that no
marvel, for it is e said of Pope Boniface the eight, Albert. Krant. Metropol.
lib. 2. cap. 2.
that the round world was not big enough for his mind, who put on his head,
the pontificiall and imperial myter, testifying that both swords were in his
hands. What shall we say then? If that popery be naturally such a nurse and
mother of all kind of sin, fornication, whoredom and all filthiness,
treachery, rebellion, contention, war, murder, oppression, and all kind of
cruelty: if it weaken all common wealths, by exactions, extortions,
usurpation, and arrogancy, and open the gate to all villainy and falsehood, by
dispensations and sanctuaries, and make all authority of the civil magistrate
of most vile estimation, and without reputation, use and profit to Gods people:
leading all sorts of men into most vile slavery of filthy idolatry and
humane inconstancy, let their own mouth be judge against themselves. For thus
Pope pius the second says, Aeneas Syluius ex histor. Bohemica.
Vana est religio quae sceleri locum facit: Vain is that religion, which is a
maintainer of wickedness: which if all papists would consider, how it agrees
with popery (whereof I have given them here a little light) they would
quickly forsake that house of vanities and tower of confusion.

3 I would then demand of any honest man and wise Christian, who feared God and
believed in Jesus Christ, and did look for his appearing and the last
judgment, how that we of the true religion, now publicly taught and
professed in England, could be made to like of the popish service, to be
tolerated or winked at in our country, or that we could find a way to
reconcile both religions? whether it were not, as if one imagine, that life and
death, water and fire, light and darkness, hell, and heaven, might rejoice and
comfort each other. For it is not possible for a true Christian protestant to
have peace joy or comfort, in the fellowship of a true heretical papist: they
are in all things as is aforesaid so contrary. What mixture is there of the
feet that are partly Iron and partly earth: so is the everlasting, most ancient
and unchangeable faith of Gods elect professed in England, likely to agree with
the earthly newborn superstition of the Romish sinagogue. Set me the believer
and the infidel, the true Christian and the heretic in one fraternity, how
will they agree? Even as Cain was kind to Abell, and Ismael honored Isaac, and
Esau sought the safety of Jacob, and Saul loved Daued, so will the papists be
kind and faithful unto us. And let all men know, that when God has said, I
will put enmity between the seed of the woman, and the seed of the serpent.
There can be no peace nor reconciliation between us. It had need be a very
fine wit, (but certesse no wise man) who can show how these may agree: one
says thou art Antechrist, and the other answers, thou art an heretic: this
man says, thou art an idolater; the other says to him again, thou art a
schismaticke: the one abhors all images, pardons, purgatories, merits,
sacrifices, monkerie, latin service etc. The other has all his hearts delight
in them, and cares not what murder he commit, to maintain such trumperie. Can
these agree or be reconciled? The persecutions, prisons, burnings, war,
murders, massacries, villainies, and cruelties, which now have continued and
daily be practiced by that sea of Rome, in all ages and countries, do warrant a
miserable peace and reconciliation. They may lie, swear, and forswear, kill
and rebel, and do any thing for advantage, and yet by absolution, pardon or
dispensation be holy children. They may dissemble and pretend contentment and
obedience (as they are not ashamed to profess) until they be strong enough
to overcome, and for advantage, break promise and catch at all occasions: in
what case are we if we should trust them to assemble together? Think we that if
they might have but the least entrance or tolleration, that they would not
quickly frame some great mischief, which now continually labor with such
plots of treachery to undermine the state: notwithstanding that laws are in
some measure (God be thanked) pressed upon them: and the eyes of many wise
counselors watch over them and prevent them. Civil men and politicians know,
that it is dangerous to have a natural enemy near thee, and that leagues and
agreement amongst enemies and with the wicked, are but baits, snares and
nets to destroy thee: so much more is it impossible that a Christian common
wealth can have any good by tollerating of Antechristian observations or
doctrine, except to make them to be goads in their sides, and pricks in their
eyes, always ready to rise up against them unto mischief: as the Cananites
were unto Israel. As a Wolf will play with a lamb, and a Fox with a Goose,
and a Lion with a Kidde: so may all they which fear God, and believe to be
saved by only faith in Christ, abhorring idols and loving the right and just
authority of the magistrate, find favor and peace at the hands of papists,
if once they wincke at their religion. For (though I say nothing of Gods hand,
which is always heavy against his Church, when they are friends with idolaters)
we have too many hundred years experience, what this new religion of popery
has brought into this world, and how solitary it has made the tents of Gods
Saints. I verily think, that no Christian prince, knowing his own right from
God, and the uncertainty of his standing under that scarlet whore: that (if he
have any courage or power in his hands) will give any countenance to such as
he undoubtedly knows will never be faithful, but always undermine his
estate, and bring his life in hazard.

4 And sithence we have had now above forty years trial of the sound truth
of the Gospel, and of Gods notable hand in protecting and defending the state
of this land receiving and embracing the same all this while, against most
strong force, and very many marvelous cunning treasons: how wonderfully he
has blessed us with peace and prosperity, and made us so much the more
happy, by how much our enemies have labored most wisely and strongly against
us: he has made the winds and seas to fight for us: and the Popes curse has
he manifoldly turned upon his own head, and his abettors have never
prospered: and in all things the Lord declared himself to be our God, by
multiplying our peace and the days of our gracious prince, in all perils
standing by her as his dear handmaide: we may boldly say that the more we be
estranged from popery: the nearer we are and the dearer unto the Lord our God,
and the less agreement we have with the popish apostasy, the more his grace,
mercies, goodness, and shielding power does watch over us to feed, to foster, to
keep and deliver us. Therefore we Christians, who have bin begotten with the
pure seed of Gods holy word, and felt and found most sweet and sound
nourishment by that sincere milk, under the most gracious happy and
prosperous reign of the Lords blessed anointed servant Elizabeth our liege
Lady and Queen, and knowing what occasions to godliness, abundance of peace
and wealth, and joyful liberty of body and soul, we have had and enjoyed,
cannot cease night nor day to praise God for his blessing and mercy, which we
have had in and by her most constant faith and godly reign: continually
praying his divine goodness, to increase his blessings and graces upon her both
bodily and ghostly, to strengthen and enlarge her heart, in all Christian
virtues, princely wisdom and courage, to defend her against all her enemies:
and prolong her days more and more, in all joy, honor, wealth prosperity and
heavenly comfort in Christ: to his own glory and the daily good of his Church
and this realm of England: even for Jesus Christ's sake: To whom be praise and
glory for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the printing.
Page. Line. Faults. Corrections. Epistle. 2 19 Miss Miste Epistle. 4 24 is of
the is the Contents 2 last with with it Book. 2 8 word world 5 22 misery
mystery 7 23 which with 9 18 by being 12 2 repentance to repentance 15 27 low
law 16 7 Christ Christ's 67 10 her their 76 10 beway bewray Idem 19 ver. 9.
ver. 19. 83 2 over ever 114 22 accepted excepted 135 4 Esaie Esaw 136 18
Apostalical Apostatical 137 31 least beast 141 15 after suffer 153 23 petro
Catenus petre Catenas 155 15 in the Sacrament is in the Sacrament 160 27 is
called he is called 166 14 light weight 176 21 I so if 224 26 turst trust 229
38 wares wars 240 14 left least 251 2 Aristle Aristotle 256 9 tumpery
trumpery 258 11 dobts doubts 259 14 separated separated etc. 262 3 d^cret^ll
decretals 2^6 21 E^romenicus oecumenicus 276 14 collaions collations 278 5
unnecessary unnecessary matters 282 18 schools deuines schole divines 285 20
forbid and does forbid 287 5 a Florenc^ at Florence 302 13 Edick Edict.

What other Faults good Reader that the Corrector has let past, let me entreat
thee to mend with thy pen, as well as these.


