Here begins the treatys of Nycodemus gospel.

man on ladder handing the body of Jesus down from the cross into the arms of
another man; women standing by

The prolonge.
man standing under an arch

IT befell in the.xix. year of ye Synorye of Tybarye cesarye Emperor of Rome
And in ye synorye of herodis that was ye sone of herodys which was king of
Galyce / the.viii. kale^dys of Aprell / the which is the.xxv. day of march
the.iiii. year of the sone of velom / which was councelere of Rome. and
Olympus had been before.ii. C. year and.ii. This time Joseph and Annas were
lords above all Justices meyers and Jews Nycodemus that was a worthy prince
he did write this blyssed story in Ebrewe And Thodosinus the Emperor did it
translate out of Ebrewe in to latin And bishop Turpy^ did it translate fro
latin in to french And thus begins this blyssed story.

Thus endyth the prolonge And begins the gospel of Nycodemus.
ANnas / and Cayphas / Symeon / Datan / Gamalyell / Judas / Leuy / Neptalym /
Alyzaundyr / zaryus. And many other Jews / came to Pylate and accused our
lord Ihesu in many things And thus they said. We know him well that he is
the sone of Joseph ye wryght the which was borne of Marye. And thus he said /
that he is gods sone and king And not only that. but the Sabotte which is
yeuyn to us for ease and rest / he brekyth And so he will our law Pylate
answered thus and said. What is that. that he has do. And how may he break
our law The Jews answered thus and said We have by our law that no man
should do no work upon the Sabotte And this Ihesus with his false craftys
helyth meny maladyes. As blind / lame / crokyd / and mezyll. And thus he
breketh our Sabotte / with his false craftys Pylat said how may he do such
things by evil workynge. The Jews answered for he is an evil worker and by
the prince of deuylles that is Belsabubbe he puts out deuylles And thus by
deuyllys are all this werk is put to him Pylat answeryth thus that ye say that
Belsabubbe is prince of deuylles Is not he a devil / this was never hard
before this time that a man might do such works by the devil but by the virtue
of god. I suppose yt he does such workys And so for the helche of mankind he
helyth al seek And so I se for his well doing ye accuse him. Than the Jews
answered and said Sir we pray you to do him to come before you And than shall we
here what he will say. Than clepyth Pylat a sergaunt and said unto him Go he
said and bry^ge Ihesu hyder Tha^ went ye sergau^te to Ihesu and kneled before
hy^ And a cloth that he had i^ his hand he cast upon the grou^ and said to our
lord Ihesu Sir go upon this cloth for the Justice will speak with you. When
the Jews saw the sergau^te do such worship to our lord they ccyed to Pylate
and said Why co^yth not these sergau^te forth lightly with Ihesu we se well yt he
does worship to hy^ as though he were a king And kyst his cloth before him Than
clepyth pylate the servant to hy^ And said why dedyst thou such worship to
him. The servant answered and said for I saw Ihesu come in to Iherusalem upon
an ass and there I saw folks spredde clothes upon the ground before him and
did him reverence and he went there upon And than I saw another company of
chyldryn with braunchys and flouers in their handys singing (O sanna in
excelsys) That is for to say blessed be thou that comyst in the name of god
Than said the Jews to the servant / the children of ebrewe the sing ebrewe.
and thou that art borne of Greece how vndyrstandyst thou ebrewe The servant
answered here to and said I asked an Ebrewe And he told it me / Than said
Pylate to the Jews. What is O sanna for to say. The Jews answered it is to
say make me safe or else lord save me. Than said Pylate to the Jews Lo your
own self bear witness of ye wordys of your owyn children What has than the
servant mydone that ye blame him thus without a cause Tha^ said Pylate to the
servant bring ^hesu before I me And look thou bry^ge him as it plesyth the.

Tha^ the servant brought our lord Ihesu in to the parlore and did Reverence
to him and worship as he had done before And said to our lord Ihesu My lord
Pylat ye hye Justice will speak with you And as our lord Ihesu entered in to
the parelour were seruauntys that held masys i^ their handys And at the
coming in of our lord the masts bo wed down to our lord Ihesu upon which
masys were ymagis of gold after the Empowre. And when the Jews saw that the
masys with ymagys bowed down and did reverence to our lord god than they
cried upon them that held ye masys And when that Pylate saw that. also he
said to the Jews. Ne meruell not you that the images upon the masys that they
hold in their handys bow down it is semynge to me that with out reason ye
cry upon him Than said ye Jews to Pylat we se verily yt they bowed down to
hy^ and did reuererence to him. than clepyd Pylat these seriauntes to hy^ and
said to the^. Why let ye your malys bow down to Ihesu. And the seriauntys
answered and said Sir we be pay nymes and seriauntys of ye temple. But when
Ihesu came in they bowed against him vnwytty^ge and wylly^ge of us they did
reverence to him Than said Pylat to the mastyrs of the law These ye of the
most mighty men among you. and let them hold these mases And than shall we
se whyder they shall bow or not. when this was done. Pylat commanded them for
to hold the mases sekerly. and than he said and swore by holy Cezare if that
the images on the mases bowed down when yt Ihesu comyth in. that they should
sore for think it. Than said Pylat to ye seriau^t whose name was Akarya. let
out Ihesu and bring in him again as it lyketh ye to bring him Than went our
lord Ihesu out of ye parloure And pylat called the^ yt held the masys. And
swore by ye might and ye hight of holy Cezare yt if ye images bowed down when
yt Ihesu came in. he should smyt of there hedys Than commanded Pylat yt Ihesu
should be brought in And the seriaunt brought him in like as he had do before
When yt our lord Ihesu entered in to ye parloure. ye images bowed down And
did reverence to our lord like as they did ye other time before. And when
Pylat saw yt he was hugely abashed. and so he arose up of his sete. And as he
was rysy^ up came a messenger fro his wife whose name was Procula / and this
messanger delivered to Pylat a letter. and thus it said.

How Pylatys wife sent a messenger to deliver Ihesu
Woman and armed man with empty labels above their heads

Pylat be not agey^st these ryghtfull. man. for I have this night be hugely
dremyde for him And be that I wot well yt he is a ryghtfull man. And wha^ yt
Pylat had red this letter. he said to all the Iewz. Syrs ye know well that my
wife is a paynym. And ye wose well that she has edyfyed meny of your
Synagoges. she sendyth unto you yt she knows this man for a ryghtfull man.
For mykell trybulacyon and disease she has suffered this night for nym Than
said the Iewys to Pylat. have we not said unto the that he is a^ evil man And
werketh by deuylls craft For by deuylls has he thus tysed thy wife Than
clepyd Pylat our lord to hy^ and said thus. See thou not that all the Jews
bear; witness agey^st the: And thou gyuest no manner of answer. than said our
lord Ihesu unto Pylat. every man has power to speak with his mouth be it good
oryll and so shall ye well se. than the Jews said unto our lord Ihesu. what
shall we se. We all know well that thou were begoten in fornycacy on. And for
thy birth did herowde sle all the chyloren i^ bed leem and in the country
about that were within.ii. year and a half of age. And Iosepe and mary went
in to Egypt for dread of herowde And wha^ herowde was deed they came again
into the cite of Nazareth. And when Pylat herd this. he said unto the Jews.
Than is that Ihesu that herowde deed seek for to sle. And the Jews answered
and said that it was he. Than doubted Pylat much more than he did to fore And
so there were.xii. Jews that drew them by themself And thus they said to
Pylat. Sir we know well that this man is not borne in fornycacyon for we know
well that Iosepe wedyd marye his mother And so he is not borne in fornycacyon. it
semyth that your words be not true / for For Iosepe wedyd marye as they say
that be of your own folk Than said Annas and Cayphas and other Jews that had
said that Ihesu our lord was borne in fornycacyon and that he was an evil
werker. And that his dyscyplis were fled and proselyty. Than clepyde Pylat
Annas and Cayphas and asked them what was proselyty And they said yt proselyty
was paynemys children. and so be his dyscyples And for that they say that he is
not borne i^ fornycacyon tha^ answered these.xii. men whose names be these
Lazarus. Asstorius. Antonius. Jacob. Serius. Gamaliel. Isaak. Fynees. Azarius.
Agrippa. Amenus. and Judas. We say that wene are proselyty but we be Jews
children and we say trou the. that we were there that Iosepe wedyd marye Than
clepyd Pylat these.xii. men that said thus. And he coniured them by the hight
of holy Cezare. If that he were borne in fornycatyon that ye bear witness and
suerce And oath before all this people And these.xii. men answered to Pylat and
said we have by our law yt we ne ought to swear for yt is sy^ but we will
swear by holy Cezare if it be not as we say we will be culpable of death We se
well that these..xii. men that Ihesu is not borne in fornycacyon to be byleued
by her word And we say all that he is borne in fornycacyon and that he is an
evil werker And thus he says that he is goddis so^ and thereto a king And yet
thou will not believe us that have the law to keep.

Than commanded Pylat that all should go out of the pareloure save these xii
men that said that our lord was not borne in fornycacyon. And also he
commanded that our lord Ihesu should be led out unto that one side of the
pareloure. Than said pylat to these.xii. men. For what cause is that they will
bring Ihesu to death And they answered and said. that the masters of the law
had him i^ hate for that he helyd maladyes and sickness upon the Sabot Than
said Pylat. A I se well for his good works they will sle him Than wence Pylat
out of the pareloure full of heaviness and said unto all the Jews I have
witness that I can find in this man no point of death. The Jews answered if
hene had be an evil doer. wene had a delivered him to the Tha^ said Pylat to
ye Jews / what said god that there should no man be slain but of me. than
entered Pylat i^ to the pareloure again. and clepyd our lord Ihesu to him and
said. Thou art king of Jews. Our lord Ihesu answered again / thou say
that of thy self or else other have said that to ye of me. Than said Pylat
to our lord Ihesu. Thou wotest well that I am no Jew but of thine own
nacyon as Bysshoppys and princes have delivered the to me. but I never what
evil thou have do them. if thou be king Jews answer to me. Our lord
answered to him My kingdom is not in this world for if my kingdom were in
this world. my mynysters would not be against me that I should not have be
delivered to the but my kingdom is not now here. Than answered Pylat. than I
se well thou art a king. than answered our lord Ihesu thou say that I am
a king and to that I was borne and for to declare to the world that who so be
of crowth. will here my word. Tha^ said Pylat what is troth. be thy word
there is but little troth i^ earth Our lord said to Pylat. understand troth
how that it is Iugged in earth of them that dwell there in. And thus said Pylat
to the Jews. I have wytnes both in heaven and in earth son and moan. that I
can find no cause of death in these man.

Than answered the Jews. is not this a great cause that he says of our
Temple. That he might stroye it and reyse it again in.iii. days than said
Pylat what temple is that / yt ye speak of And the Jews answered that it was
ye Salamo^ temple which was in edyfye^ge.xlvii. year And this Ihesus said that
he should dystroye it and raise it again in.iii. days I am without gylte of
spyllynge of this mannys blood. And that shall ye well see. what will ye do
with him the Jews that were full of envy cried all with one voice. the
shedynge of his blood be upon us and upon our children.

How Pylate took of the most Ancient men of ye law as bysshoppes and other
masters to counsel.
Pylate took of the most Ancient men as bysshoppes and masters of ye law
Syrs do not ageynste this simple man for I do you to wit that he is not worthy
to be deed Is not he more worthy that has helyd maladyes. than he had broke
the saboth Than said the Jews A good Judge takes intent if any man has do a
forfet ageynste Cezare were he not worthy to be deed And Pylate said yes. Than
said the Jews much more is he worthy yt forfettyth agey^st god for he said
him self that he is goddys son For when we counioured hy^ yt he should tell us
if he were the sone of god. And he denied it not And yet he said we should se
the son of man sytty^ge upon ye right hand of ye godhede and coming out of
the skies of heuyn And when that Pylat herd this he led our lord Ihesu on
that other part of the pareloure and said to our lord. Man I ne wat what I
may do with the.

Than said our lord Ihesu to Pylate Moses and ye prophetys here before they
preached of my passion and of my resurreccyon When that Pylate herd this he
pronowced all the words of our lord to the Jews And anon the Jews said to
Pylat what would thou here more of his false sclau^der Than said Pylate take
him in to your synagoge. And deem there on him your law. the Jews answered /
our law commands that if any man syn or trespass against any man he shall
withdraw him.xlii. days out of the Temple. And he yt sy^ned or tresspassed
agey^st god by sclau^ders Our law byddeth yt he shall be stonyd to death And for
asmoche as Ihesus says yt he shall sit i^ heuy^ upon ye right side of ye
deuyne majesty And yt he shall come fro heuy^ i^ to ye skies. For this
sclau^der we will yt he be crucyfyed Tha^ said Pylat yt is not good yt ye cast
you for to do And than Pylat by held about hy^ and saw meny me^ and wyme^ yt
sore wepce And held there cou^tenau^ce upon hy^. tha^ said pylat to ye
bysshoppys and masters of ye law I se well ye mekyll of ye people they will not
yt these man dye. Tha^ said ye masters of ye law. Good Judge we se well yt he
must be deed And for dread of death worse he may not leave Than said Pylate /
what is the cause yt he should be deed for. tha^ said ye Jews. for yt he
says yt he is goddys sone and thereto a king.

How Nychodemus spoke to Pylate for Ihesu.
Pilate and another man (with an empty label above his head: Nicodemus?)
conversing Pylatte.


Nychodemus ye worthy Prince / was yt ty^e before Pylat and thus he said I have
often times. spoke to the masters of ye law and to al ye Jews. and thus I have
said unto the^ yt vngodely and untruely they do a mysse against Ihesu. For many
glorious signs and toky^s has he wrought among us / yt never none of our
forfaders wrought before us and therefore I counsel you let hy^ go and do hy^ no
more harm For if ye tokyns and ye miracles be of god yt he has wrought it
shall endlesly endure after his days and if it be not of god but by
e^chau^teme^te or by so^e charm yt shall not endure. For moses that was of
god he showed meny tokens in Egypt which that god bad him do before king
Pharao than were there two men James. and zambres which that were Gogolers and
wyches that deceived the people they made the same tokyns yt Moses made. And
the Egypcyons held the toky^s of god And for they were not of god they
perysshed And all that ever held withal And therefore I say let this man go
And do him no more harm for I say forsooth he is not worthy to be deed And
parauenture this Ihesus may be a prophet sent to us as Moses said to our
forfaders that our lord god should chese and send a prophet of our own
nacyon And that we should here and believe him as god his owneselfe And
parauenture these may be the same man yt god said thus of And this Ihesus be
the same man sent of god he is come to the salvation of them yt believe truly
And to the dampnacyon of them yt believe not right as our lord god said unto
Moses that if any man refuse the prophet And will not here what he shall say
in my name he shall be put out of my people All this have I said unto the
Princes and Bysshoppes of the law when yt ye Jews herd this that Nycodemus
said before Pylat they said thus we se well that thou art a dyscyple of Ihesu
and therefore thou spekyst for him Than said Nycodemus to ye Jews a than is not
this lord Pylat here a dyscyple of Ihesu that has spoke thus for him is not
he the high Justice under Cezare the Emperor wha^ the Jews herd this tha^
they said to Nycodemus. ye take thou the troth of Ihesu And more thou have thy
dwelling place with him Than lyfted up Nycodemus his handys to heaven and said
God grant yt I may have part of the truth of Ihesu. And a dwelling place
more I have with him god grant it as ye have said so more it be.

How certain Jews showed to Pylate the miracles yt Cyrste had done.
ANd anon there sterte forth a Jew before Pylate. And thus he said. My lord
Pylate. I lay bedredde in my bed.xxxviii. year And all the days for ye
most part in peril of death. And so it befell that my lord Ihesu came by me
and had pity on me. And than he had me take my bed and go home into my howes.
And anon with his words / I was made hole And anon after came another Jew
before Pylate and thus he said My lord Pylate I was pore bly^de And as my lord
Ihesu passed before me I cried unto hy^ And said Ihesu the son of Dauyd have
mercy on me. And he had mercy o^ me And he put his hand to mine eyes and than I
saw.

And tha^ another Jew that stood before Pylate said Sir I was a mezell and my
lord Ihesu made me hole with his word. After that came an agyd woman before
Pylate and thus she said. My lord Pylate I was desezed with the red flyx.iii.
year and more And I deed not but touchyd the hem of the vesture of my lord
Ihesu And anon I was made hole of my maladye and therefore my lord Pylate have
marcy on him and do him not to death And when that Pylate herd this / he feryd
/ And anon a great company of Jews which that our lord Ihesu had helyd
they cried al with on voice. A great Savior of the people is our lord Ihesu.
When Pylate herd this he said unto Cayphas and Amyas. And other masters of
the law I merueyl why that your form faders and princes and Bysshoppys of the
law helyd not men of their Infyrmytees as this man does And they answered no
word thereto And these men that our lord had helyd cried with one voice Our
blysshyd Lord Ihesu has wrought many deuyne miracles as he that raised Lazare
/ fro death to life. Which that had layne deed four days in ye earth And our
lord Ihesu by the virtue of his word he raised him out of the mo^ment and
brought him alive among us his sustres And did him sit with him at his table
/ And when yt Pylate herd this he was all abashed for fere and cried with an
high voice to the Jews and said. Me^ what is this that ye will do I see that
without gylte ye will shed the blood of him that has nothing mysse wrought
Than rose pylat up and took Nycodemus to him and these xii. men which yt said
that our lord was not borne in fornicacyon and thus he said to them.

Syrys I have great affection i^ you say to me what I shall do with him And
they said sir we can say for we will never assente to the will of the masters
of the law nor to their works and therefore let them se well to there sowl is
that they may be saved at the day of Judgment than turned Pylat to the
mastres of the law and to other Jews and said thus to them Syrs ye know well
that it is the custom among us to deliver a prisoner to the pepyll for the
love of our sabot the high day of sacrafyce And syrs ye know well that I
have a presoner in my preson a noble presoner a man slear which is worthy to
be deed. whose name is Barabas will ye that I deliver you him or else Ihesu
which is without gylt and not worthy to dye The princes and the bysshopps and
the old men they said all with one voice we will that thou deliver to us
Barabas Than said pylat what will ye than say that I do with Ihesu which is
cleped christ Than said the Jews with an high voice let him be crucyfed and
so. me said if thou let him go thus thou ne art Cezars friend syn that he said
this foul sclaunder that he is goddys sone And thereto a king for who so ever
says that he is a king he speaks against Cezare And when that Pylat herd
this he was wondre heavy and thus he said to the Jews all days fro the
beginning have ye be contraryous to them that has do well to you. And to him
ye have do mykyll harm and mekyll turmentrye Than said the Jews / what is he
that has do so mykyll good to us Than said pylat our god which has help you
and delivered you out of the ha^dys of Egypt which drowned your enmyes in
the depnesse of the read see And led you thorughe the water of the sea also
dry as upon ye earth And also in desert he reyned to you ma^na And made water
out of ye hard stone in deserte which yet ye drank of and all your bestys
And also to you he gave ye.x. commau^deme^tys of ye law. And i^ all these
co^mau^deme^tys yt he has charged you with. ye have be^ contraryous to your
god As wha^ ye made a Calfe to be your god which would have dysheryt you and
dystroyed you ne had moses be your master yt prayed to your god for you for
ye peril yt ye were in. and now ye say to me yt I hate my king And am not
his friend if I deliver not this man Ihesu yt has curyd mekylle of your people
of many Infyrmytees which is your king / yt never did evil but ever much
goodness and prophet wha^ the Jews herd this they were full of wroth and of
maletalente. And thus they cried all together and said Our king is Cezare
Emperor of Rome but we know well yt Ihesus is no king though ye kings
sought him in bedleem and said yt they sought ye king of Jews and offrede him
gifts but yet is he therefore no king we know well that wha^ herowde herd
say yt they sought ye king of Jews. herowde would have slain him therefore
And so he deed sle thosandys of children therefore in bedleem and in all the
contrye about as we have said here to you before. wha^ yt Pylat herd this he
commanded them to be still and to hold them in pease and thus he said to
them. A is it not he than yt herowde sought for to slay And the Jews answered
and said that it was he And anon Pylat did command water to be brought him.
before the^ all he washed his hands seeing thus I ne am gylty of spyllynge of
this ryghtfulle man's blood and yt may ye well se. but the blood of him be
upon you and on your children Than commanded Pylat that a great company of
knights should be brought before him to his pareloure And than Pylatte kest ye
se^te^s upon our lord Ihesu and thus he said to him.

How Pylat commanded the Jews yt no vylayns should put christ to his passion
but knights.
Jesus bound to a pillar, being scourged (?)

THine own people has dyspreuyd all that ever I have spoke for ye. and therefore
I command at ye begy^ny^ge yt no man leye hands o^ hy^ but if he be a knight
or ellis of gentle blood. for it is not sytty^ge yt a king should be slain
of vylaynes And therefore I command you at ye first begy^ny^ge yt he be scorged
to ye plesy^ge of ye first princes and tha^ lift hy^ upon ye cross. and with
hy^.ii. thefes which yt has be evil doers ye one by name Dysmas. and ye
other Gesmas. and let the^ be slain with vylaynes. and no ge^tylles to touch
the^. and tha^ was our lord Ihesu / led out of ye parelour and ye.ii. thefes
with hy^. and tha^ they led the^ i^ to another parelour wheri^ was a pylar of
white marble. and there they spoiled our lord out of his clothys and bound
hy^ naked unto ye peler and there they bette hy^ and scourged him with yerdes
and whyppys so hugely yt there was no skyn upon hy^ and yt was a sinful sight
for to se ye blyssed body sto^dy^ge al nakyd before all ye people scorny^ge and
saying thus to our lord god i^ his scourgynge Do gladly our king for this is
our first begy^ny^ge. and tha^ ye masters of ye law said to ye knights Do on
our king a soft garment. and let us crown hy^ for our king And tha^ ye
knights did upon him a cloth of sylke which for habu^dau^ce of blood was so
clu^ge to hy^ yt at ye pulling of it was. C. fold more pain to hy^ tha^ was
his scourgy^ge. and wha^ they had pulled of this garment they did o^ hy^ a
read ma^tell of sylke. and after yt they set a garlonde of thornys on his head.
and they pressyd so sore ye garlonde of thornys on his head yt ye thornys
percyd down i^ to his bravne and so at ye last they led hy^ to ye cross. and
there they crucyfyed hy^ between ii. thefys Dysmas on the right side and Gesmas
on ye left side And so they put to hes mouth a spone that was drypped full of
drink that they had made with Ayzell and gall And that they put to his mowthe
for to drink of And thus that blessed lord Ihesu suffered all that ever they
would do to hy^ And than our lord Ihesu looked up to the father. and thus he
said. My fader foryeue them this trespass for they newot what they do And
than the knights kyst lottys upon his vesture for to wit no should have it And
than the Princes of the law with bysshopps and meny other / they cried unto
our lord Ihesu and thus they said. Thou have helyd many other and thou ne
may hele thy self. if thou be goddys sone come down of the cross and we
shall believe on ye And than said the knights in skorne. if thou be king of
Jews deliver now thy self And than was commanded that a knight should be
brought forth whose name was longeus And him they made put a spear to Ihesus
side. This knight longyus was blind and so the princes of the law made him
for to perce our lords side And so there came out both blood and water And so
the blood came rynnynge down by the spear shafte unto longyus hand and he
awnterously wyped his eyes with his hand And anon he might se.

ANd tha^ Pylat did write a byl on which was written. Ihesus. Nazarenus. Rex.
Iudeorum That is for to say / Ihesus of Nazarreth / king of Jews and this
was wryt in Ebrewe greece and latin And this title they put above his head on ye
cross. Than Gesmas the thief which henge on the lift side of our lord said
thus to our lord Ihesu if thou be god deliver both the and us. Than Dysmas
that henge on the right side of our lord Ihesu he blamed him for his word
And thus he said to him It seems by thy word that thou dredyst not god nor
beleuest not in him. And therefore art thou endlesly dampened. For well thou
wotest that we have dyscerued that we suffer but he has right naught for
fettyd nor mysdoue and without dysceruynge he is brought herto And when Dysmas
had said this words he looked upon Ihesu and thus he said to him / lord Ihesu
have mercy upon me when thou comyst in to thy kyngedome And than answered
Ihesus to him / and said this day shalt thou be with me in paradyse. And that
time was about myddaye and fro that time in to none days was the son hyd and
lost his bryghtnes and the veil of the temple was smyten asondre fro the hight
down to the ground on.ii. parties and some men say that an angel did it
with a trace of fire And these angel said thus in men herynge I am wytnysse of
the passion of Ihesu christ After that our lord Ihesu cried with a^ high
voice and said Fader in to thine handys I betake my spyryt And than he yielded
up his soul to his fader And when Centuryo that was prince over the Jews and
constable and saw these tokens that were befall he gloryfyed god and said
forsooth this man was ryghtfull. and that is well seen by the tokens that are
befall and so all the people that were there as good folkys when they saw these
works of the virtue of our lord they smite their brestys with their handys.

How Centuryo told Pylate of the wonders at crystys passion and the same
Pylate told the Jews and of the precious cloth that our lord was buried in.
crowd of people (weeping over a body in a coffin?)

ANd Centuryo told to Pylate all that was befall And wha^ yt Pylate herd this
he was wonder heavy and sorry. And so for sorynesse and heaviness he ne ete nor
drank day Tha^ clepyd Pylate ye Jews and thus he said to the^. Meruellye not
of the tokyns yt be befall at the passion of Ihesu. yt ye son lost his sight
and also the day And the Jews said to Pylat Sir it was the Clyps of the son
as we have vndyrsto^dynge of wise men before us. than said Pylat how may it be
yt the veyle of the temple is smyt a sonder and many grauys undone and deed men
rise up fro death to life. Has the clepys of the son do all this. All these
tokens me^ tell me are befall and seen in the Cite of Iherusalem And if ye
believe not me ask Centuryo And they that were with him which kept Ihesu Than
were this men brought forth before the Jews which that bare witness and thus
they said forsooth we say yt in the dyenge of Ihesu. The earth groned and shoke
as water does when it is meuyd And we saw that meny bodies rose up fro death to
life. and by these tokens we believe yt this Ihesus is gods sone. Than the
Apostles and holy women yt had followed our lord Ihesu fro Galylee saw that
was befall and yt men had do to him they drew them by themself.

Than Joseph of Barmathye keste hy^ for to bye a precious cloth for to wind in
our lord Ihesu when he might get grant of Pylat for to have the body. And
on this wise came Joseph by these precious cloth as ye shall here.

There was a knight i^ Capharna^e whose name was Leuy This knight wedyd a young
lady and by procys of time they had together a daughter. Who^e they clepyd
Sy^donya and her they put to learning. and so be process of time she wexed a
curyous werker as of clothys of gold and clothes of sylke and of all other
women's works. And so at the last wha^ god would this Leuy dyed. and than his
wife for the great love that she louyd him she fill in a great. Maladye as in a
cold palzye. So ferforth that she might nether styre hand ne foot so for this
great sekenes she fylle in a great pouerte so forfoth that she ne had to leave
on. but by the workys of her daughters hand And so it befyll that upon the
same day yt our lord was deed this lady said to her daughter. Daughter
Syndonya thou know well that our great sabot day is nigh. Than must we ete
our paske lamb and on this day / is the great market at Barmathye. Therefore
good daughter go and array the and take some of thy work that thou haste
wrought. and bye us such things there as is needful to me and the at this
holy time Her daughter Syndonya answered to her mother. and said mother your will
shall be done. And mother I do you to understand that I have wroughte the
Curyouseste cloth that ever was made for it fill gracyously to wourke yt it is
more curyous than I can skylle of And than the lady said to her daughter. let
me se ye cloth / And Syndonya showed this cloth to her mother And when this lady
saw this cloth she said thus blessed be that lord that has made the to work
such a cloth And daughter upon my blessing that thou sell this cloth to no
man but if he tell the what he shall do wythall And so this maid Syndonya she
washed her and bawmyde and acayed her to market and in the market stood Joseph
of Barmathye with a great people speky^ge of our lords death And by a venture
this maid Syndonya came before him And Joseph of Barmathye aspyed the cloth
hangyuge on her arm. and asayd her if she would fell that cloth.

And she answered and said syrye.

And tha^ Joseph asked her the price And she said.xxx. besau^tys and anon
Joseph paid to her.xxx. besau^tes. and Sy^donia fill down to his fete
prayenge him / that he would tell her what he do with all should And than he
answered to her and said Daughter this day is deed an holy prophet that men
clepyd Ihesus of Nazareth and that holy prophet I purpose me to bery him and
wind him in this cloth Daughter now have I told the what I will do withalle
and therefore tell me who made this cloth that I have bought of the / and this
maid said that herself made it And Joseph asked her what her name was and she
said Syndonya than said Joseph now daughter after you I shall name this cloth
forth is cloth shall be named Syndonya And than this maid went home to her
mother and told her how she had spedde And her mother asked her what should be
done with the cloth And Syndonya told her that the holy prophet that was that
time deed should be veryed therein And who shall very hy^ there in said this
lady And Syndonya said that Joseph of Barmathye should berey him therein And
when this lady herd this she said thus. Would my lord god and that prophet yt
I had yeue^ that cloth to his berye^ge And anon with ye word she was holer
and more sown than ever she was before. And anon the lady and her daughter
fill down on there knes thanking our lord god of this glorious myrakyll And
so afterward our lord yaue them such grace that the mother was wedyd to a
worthy duke and her daughter Syndonya was Empress of Rome And so they leuyd
ever after in our lordys service. And when Joseph of Barmathye had bought this
precious cloth which was lord and Constable over all Pylatys meyne he was a
full good man and a right full he was not assentyd to ye accusacyons and wordys
of ye Jews he abode the kingdom of god and so he came to Pylat and asked him
the body of Ihesu And pylat granted him Than this Joseph and Nycodemus / took
down the body of Ihesu of ye cross and him he wonde in this Sondonya / that
he had bought And he beryed him in his mo^ment wherein that never man was
beryed and so the Jews would a slain Joseph and the.xii. men that had spoke
for our lord Ihesu before Pylat. And also they would have slain Nycodemus and
also tho that our lord made hole of meny great Infyrmyces And also they yt had
dyscouered before Pylat al his good workys that he had do in every place.

How the Jews conspyred against Nycodemus and Joseph and of many other
merueyles.
man with halo, right hand raised in blessing, carrying a cross

THa^ Nycodemus showed himself to the Jews. for yt he was there prince and
there gyde. And not long after there was gadered a great assemble of Jews into
the temple, and before Nycodemus and thus he said to them, How may these be yt
ye are thus entryd in to this holy Temple. which that your hands be blody of
ye death of Ihesu that ryghtfull man which that ye untruly crucyfyed. Than
answered to Nycodemus Annas / and Cayphas / Symeon / and Datan / Gamalyell
Judas / Leuy / Neptalym / and all the oder Jews / how art thou so hardy to
come among us that art consenting to Ihesu And therefore such part as he
has mutte thou have with the in this world Than answered Nycodemus and said.
Amen. the pease of of Ihesu be with me in this world and in ye other endlesly
And the Jews answered and said. Amen And as Nycodemus had answered thus. Came
Joseph of Barmathye among them ano said thus to the Jews why be ye heavy to me
with maletalent for I asked ye body of Ihesu of Pylat And I do you to wit yt I
have beryed him in my new Mommente and wound him in a precious clothe yt is
called Syndonya. And I say to you yt ye have wroughte evil and synfully yt ye
have untruly crucyfyed Ihesu without dyscerny^ge and also malycyously ye persed
his side with a spear. and when ye Jews herd these they took Joseph and
commanded hy^ to be kept well and thus they said to Joseph. we know well yt
thou art not worthy to have a beryenge place among us for we shall give thy
flesh and careyne to wild bestys and wild fowls and to be devoured with
hounds. Tha^ Joseph said to them these words be like to proud Golyas as the
prophet says to me longyth venyaunce. And I shall yield it says god And ye
when yt Pylat washed his hands and said I am unguilty of this mannys blood
shedynge ye answe again and said ye blood of him be on us and our children.
wit it well yt fro yt time forward shall the wroth of god come upon you and
on your children as your self said. And when ye Jews herd this answer they
were wonder angrye and there they put Joseph in prison on which prison was no
wyndow and no side so yt there might no light come in but at the door. That
door they shet myghtely and put thereto kepers. than Annas and Cayphas and other
bysshoppys and masters of ye law / kest them to assemble the next day after
ye sabot. and there they should sle Joseph / And when they were at there
assemble. they sent to ye preson and vndyde ye door. but they found not
Joseph therein as they had put him. and so they were hugely a meruayled.

How one of the knights that kept the Sepulcre of our lord came and told
the masters of the law how our lord was gone into Galylee.
"one of the princes" alongside an armed man with an empty label above his head

ANd as they were in these meruellynge they e^trede i^ to there synagoge and
among the^ ca^e one of ye knyghtys yt kept ye sepulcre and to the^ he told
sykerly yt Ihesu was not i^ ye mo^me^t and anon ye masters of ye law asked
hy^ where they had done hy^ and ye knight answered and said thus As we kept
the Grave the earth shoke and tha^ we saw verelly yt a^ au^gyll dyscended down
fro heuy^ and lift up ye stone fro ye momme^t and set hy^ there upon and his
face bright. And there was as it beleuyn and hes vesture as white as ever was
snow And for the great dread yt we had we were as we had been deed Than we
herd ye Angel say to ye women yt were come to ye sepulcre dysmaye ye not
nor dread you not I know well yt ye seek Ihesu yt was crucyfyed. I do you to
wete yt he is ryse^ and is not here for ye shall se hy^ i^ Galylee as he said to
you before And wha^ ye pry^ces of ye law herd this they said to ye knight Is
Ihesus tha^ on live we may not believe these yt ye say Tha^ answered ye knight
Ihesu has wrought meny miracles yt ye have well herd and se and ye leave it
not. how should ye tha^ believe us. but your own demand is good. wha^ ye
ask if Ihesu be on live. who^e Tha^ said ye Jews to ye knight. we shall yield
to you Joseph if ye will yield to us Ihesu we do you to wete yt Joseph is i^ ye
cite of Barmathye tha^ said ye knight if Joseph be i^ barmathie. we do you to
wete yt Ihesu is in Galylee and there seen risen fro death to life and yt they
should se him in Galylee. And when ye Jews herd these they had great dread and
thus they said among themself. if me^ here this words of these knights /
they shall al believe i^ Ihesu Tha^ they assembled the^ together and gave to ye
knights tresoure and thus they said to the^ Go ye and say to ye people as ye
lay and slepte his dyscyples came preuely be night and stole ye body of Ihesu.
and if Pylat know hereof. we shall excuse you Thus this knights took this
tresoure and proclaimed as they commanded the^. and so there words were sone
spread all about.

THa^ ca^e there.iii. me^ which yt hight Fynees. Abbas. and Leuy. these.iii.
me^ came fro Galylee in to Iherusale^ and thus they said to ye princes and to
the^ al yt were i^ ye Synagoge. syrs we have herd and seen Ihesu which that
ye crucyfyed sit and speak to his dyscyples upon the mount of Dlyuet and there
he sermoned unto them and said Go and preche my name and mine euangelye
thorughe out the world baptesynge in the name of the fader and ye son and the
holy ghost And what so ever he be yt will be baptized and believe in me he shall
be saved And he that byleueth not shall be dampened And when the princes herd
this they said to these three me^ Men give presynge and w^rshyp to our lord
Ihesu / and be a know if this be true that ye have herd and se And these men
said all to gyder with one voice by ye lord yt is god of Abraham / Isaac / and
Iacobe. we saw Ihesu sitting and prechynge to his dyscyples and if we cover
this that we have herd and se we should do great syn. And anon the princes
rose up and held the law in there handys and thus they said to the^ We
conioure you by ye laws of our lord that ye keep this counsel yt ye have
said to us of Ihesu. and so they gave to these three me^ great tresoure and so
they sent.iii. knights with them for to bry^ge them i^ to there own country
and yt they should no longer abide in Iherusalem.

"one of the princes" conversing with a robed man (a priest?) with an empty
label above his head

SO ca^e there a great ase^ble of comyns to ye princes. and thus they said with
a great co^playnt. what tokyns / are this yt are befall in Israel Tha^ Annas
and Cayphas co^fortyd the^ and said Owte we not for to believe ye knights. yt
kept ye Sepulcre wheri^ that Ihesu was put They said to us / yt they had seen
an aungelle lift up ye stone fro ye mommente and parauenture his dyscyples
said to the knights and we wot well that they gave to the knights great
tresoure for to say thus and so they stale away his hody thus men owght to
believe us rather tha^ ye dyscyples yt gafe to the knights great tresoure for
to bear falls witness Than rose Nycodemus up and thus he said to them ye have
herd what these.iii. men have said and sworn upon the law / that they they
saw Ihesusyt and speak to his dyscyples upon the mount of Olyuet and there he
styed up to heuyn and ye wot well yt ye scripture tellyth us that Ely the holy
prophet was rauys shed into paradyse and when men asked his dyscyple Elyzew
where yt his fader Ely was he answered rauyshed i^ to heuy^ And tha^ they
supposed well that he was rauyshed by the holy ghost And left him some where
on the Mountes of Iraell and therefore they said let us seche some men that
may go and seek him So they went and sought three days and.iii. nyghtes but
they could not find Ely. And therefore I counsel you to send some men that
may seek the mountys of Israel for parauenture the holy ghost has rauysshed
Ihesu. and parauenture he may be found let us than do penance for the
trespass yt we have done This counsel of Nychodemus was plesynge to all the
Jews and so they sent men for to seek our lord Ihesu but they might not find
him i^ no place. And when these men were repaired again they said to the
Jews. we have sought Ihesu on every hill of Israel and in every dale and in
every place. but we can no where find him but we have found Joseph in the
cite of Barmathye And when the princes herd this they were wonder Joyful and
merry and they gloryfyed god yt Joseph was found. And so ye Jews and masteres
of the law assembled the^ together and keste among them how they might speak
to Joseph. and so they ordained and made letters and sent to Joseph saying
thus. Peace be with ye and also with the^ yt be with the. we know well yt we
have sinned in god and in ye. and therefore fader Joseph. come to us sen yt we
have knowing yt we have grievously sinned and trespassed against ye And hugely
we merueyll of thy delyueraunce and taking aweye fro us. we know well yt we
ymagynde and ordained evil counsel against the. but god delivered the fro us.
But pease be with the fader Joseph worshypped and of all people.

How the Jews chose.viii. men that were Iosephes fre^des to desire him to
come to them.
Old man (Joseph) conversing with a robed man (a priest?) with an empty label
above his head

THan / they chose.viii. me^ which yt were fre^des to Joseph and to them they
said when ye come to Joseph heyleth him in please. and do to him gretynges on
out behalf and to him ye deliver these letters. these me^ went forth to the
Cite of Barmathye. and when they came before Joseph they heyled him and grette
hy^. and delivered him the letters. And when Joseph had red this letters tha^
said he thus Blessed be my lord god yt has kyuerde me under his wy^ges and
also blessed mut he be yt has saved me fro all myscheues tha^ Joseph ladde all
these men in to his place And the next day after he took his horse and rode
with the^ to Iherusalem And wha^ ye Ihewes with the masters of the law herd
say of his coming they yede worshypfully against him / and when they met
with him they said thus to him Pease be at thy co^my^ge fader Joseph And Joseph
answered. The peace of our lord be to all his true people And tha^ ye masters
of the law with all ye people they kyssed Joseph. And Nycodemus led Iososeph
in to his place Than ye next day after Annas / and Cayphas and Nycodemus they
lad Joseph i^ to ye temple and thus they said to hy^. fader Joseph give us
knowlechy^ge and to god i^ hes temple of yt we shall axe of you. fader Joseph
ye know well yt ye buried ye body of Ihesu. and fader ye know well yt we shet
you i^ preso^ and we could not fy^de you theri^ and yerfore tell us what befell
Than Joseph answered and said. when ye did shet me in the close preson upon the
Sabot day as I was in my Oryso^s and prayers that place was spread about me
with huge light as me thought fro the.iiii. parties of the eyer And so I
lyfted up my head and saw my lord Ihesu stand fast by me shynynge with great
clernesse And so for dread that I had I fill down ^^lat to the ground. Than
my blyssed lord Ihesu hente me by the hand and left me up fro the ground
and washed my face kissing me and thus he said to me Brother Joseph thou art
clean by water of the feyth for thy sins be relesed and foryeue And therefore
my friend have no dread but byholde me and know what I am. and so I did
behold him and said. my master Elye. And he answered again and said I am not
Elye but I am Ihesu christ whom yt thou worshypfully beryed than said I to
him. Lord show me thy momment there that I beryed the. And than my lord
Ihesu hente me by the hand and ladde me to the mommente And there he showed me
the precious Syndonya / yt I wonde him in Than knew I verelly that he was my
lord Ihesu And so I fill down and worshypped hy^ And said my lord Ihesu /
blessed mote thou be. that art come hyder for to vysyt me and thorughe thy
grace have delivered me. and so he held me by the hand and lad me to the cite
of barmathye. And than he ladde me in to my place and said to me Joseph brother
pease with the. And look thou go not out of thy place this.xl. days for the
Jews shall do many great dyszesys to many of my frendys And now shall I go to
my dyscyples and speak to them of the salvation of the world. And when he had
said that word. he vanyssheh fro me And when the princes of the law and other
Jews herd this that Joseph said. they were hugely abashed. And for the great
dread that they had they fell down to the ground and so they cried and said.
said what tokens are this that are befall in Israel The knights that kept
the Sepulcre they bear witness that they saw an Aungyll dyscende down fro
heuyn yt Ihesu was resyn fro death to life and yt he shall be seen in galylee
And we know well that Ihesu was a man and his fader and mother we knew both
Joseph and Mary. what may we say here ayenste tha^ said a Jew whose name was
Leuyus I know well ye beginning of Ihesu for I have much be with the^. for
upon a time as I was in the temple in my offrandys and my orysons. that same
time saint Symeon took hy^ in his arms and thus he said to him. My lord god
let now thy servant come to the in pease for my eyes have seen thy health yt
thou ordained or any people was Than said the Jews Let us se^de for these.iii.
men that said they saw Ihesu speaking to his dyscyples upon the Mount of
Olyuet And so they sent for these iii men and when they were come before them
they said treuly ye god of heuyn was on live And yt we saw verelly how that
Ihesu styed in to heuyn before all hes discyples.

THan answered Annas and Cayphas / Our law says yt by the words of.ii.
or.iii. is suffycent witness what may we say herto we know well yt Emoke
pleasyd god and was rauysshed in to heuy^ and the sepulcre of moses might
never be found Pylat delyuerde to us this Ihesu which we beat with scorgys
and crowned him with thornys and afterward was crucyfyed and smet him in the
side with a spear And Joseph buried his body in the Sepulcre. Which ye now
beryth witness that he is on live And these men say that they saw hy^ stye
up in to heuyn And than Joseph said another great merueyle that there rose up
meny deed bodies out of their grauys I wot well that some men of them have be
in the cite of Iherusale^ which yt ye mysbeleuers have not seen And we know
well that saint Symeon received Ihesu in his arms in the temple which that
was a full holy man. this Symeon had two sonys whose names were Garyus and
Leuycyus. and we were at there death and at there berynge Go now and seche there
grauys but I wot well they be not there but they be in the cite of Barmathye
they be in orysons and speak to no man. but they hold them stylle as though
they were deed. And therefore let us go to them with worship and bry^ge them to
the temple. And when we have conioured them paraduenture they shall tell us
somewhat of the resurreccyon of Ihesu And how that he rose fro death to life.

How the Jews went to seek.ii. deed men that were risen from death to life in
Barmathye and of other things that they showed.
ANd so all the masters of the law with the Jews went to the grauys of
these.ii. brethren and so they found them not there And anon they went to
the cite of Barmathye which was.xl. mile fro Iherusalem. and so they found
the^ laid. and so they kyssed them and lad them with hy^ to Iherusalem with
great worship And than they lad they into there Synagoge And when they had shyt
sykerly their doris they took the laws and them in there hands And so they
co^ioured them by god of Israel and by god adonay if that they leuyd and that
Ihesu was god of Israel that raised them. When Garyus and Leuycyus herd this
coniuracyon they lokyd up together in to heuyn. And than they made sygnys of the
holy cross on them and than they said and spoke give us perchemyne and Ink
that we may write things that we have herd and seen And so they yafe to them
both ynke and perchemyn And when they were set they wrote both together and
said thus.

Our lord Ihesu christ. is resurreccyon of the death and life that believe on
him. suffer us to say the secretys of thy deuyne may that thou dedyste in
hell by the death of thy holy cross. for we be coniured by the for to speak of
ye Thou have commanded to thy servant by Mychaell thy archaungyll that we
should tell the secretys of thy deuyne majesty what thou dedyst i^ hell after
thy holy resurreccyon / as we were with our form faders in the great preuy
depnes of derkenes there came a great bryghtnesse as it had be a beme of light
fro the son And that kest a light royal upon us And anon Adam that was our
forfader of all mankind and Patryarkes and prophets rose up lightly and said
This is the light of him that be hight us for to send to us endless light And
anon Isaake with a high voice began for to say.

This is the light of our fader son of god as I said here before when I was on
live in the land of zabulon and neptale^ over the flume iordayn The people that
sat in darkness saw great bryghtnesse of light and that light was sent to them
that sat in the shadow of death that was there as it had be a sterre shyny^ge
above upon us And as we were i^ this Joy and gladness of this light that
shoke upon us there came to us our fader Symeon and thus he said to us with
great Joy

Gloryfy our lord god Ihesu christ our savior which I received a child in
the temple and took him in my arms saying thus. let now thy servant pass
for mine eyes have seen thy health when all the great company of saints that
were in hell herd this they were wonder Joyful and merry. And after there came
another man to us. as it had been an Ermyte. and our forfader asked him what he
was And he answered aye^ and said I am a voice of a prophet of an hye company
for I have go before the face of his coming and also to make ready the way of
his coming and to give health and conning to his people in the remyssyon of
there sy^nes And when I saw him come to me / I was fulfilled with the holy
gooste. and thus I said see the lamb of godde and behold him that does away
sin of the world and him I have baptized in the flume Iorda^ and upon him I
saw the holy ghost descend in likeness of a dove And than I herd a voice
that fill fro heuyn saying thus. this is my son in whom great plesynge is to
me. And now I am come before him to you to show to you the son of god is
come fro hyghte for to deliver us that sit in derkenesse and in the shadow of
death abiding his mercy. when yt Adam our forfader was baptized anon he said
to seth his son. Tell to thy children and to patryarkes and prophets that ye
Angel said to the when I sent ye to ye gates of paradyse yt thou sholdest
pray our lord god that he would send to me by his angel of the fruit of
life. and also of the oil of mercy for to anoynte with all my members such
time that I was fulfilled full of malady with sekenes. Than Seth sterte up and
said with an high voice. As I was at the gatys of paradyse prayenge our lord
god of the oil of mercy Our lord sent Mychaell his archaungell to me
saying thus Our lord god has sent me to the. Travail not for to have the
oil of mercy to anoint with Adam thy fader I do ye to wete thou may not
have it unto the last day be complete of v. M. and. v. C. year than shall the
son of god Ihesu christ come upon earth to reyse the body of Adam thy fader And
the bodies of his holy saints And than shall he be baptized in flom Iordane.
And wha^ he comyth out of the water than he shall anoynte with the oil of mercy
all tho that shall believe i^ hy^ and than shall the son of god go down to hell
and led adam thy fader into paradyse to the tree of life and mercy when ye
patryarkes and prophets herd this that Seth said tha^ they made great Joy
and as they made great Joy Satan the prince of hell and master of death said to
the master of turme^try Make the ready for to receive Ihesu which that
gloryfyed him self to be the son of god And yet he is man that dredyth death
for he said my soul is heavy agey^st death This Ihesu has wrought meny heaviness
and euyllys against me for the^ that I made blind crokyd and lame and mezel he
has made hole by his word And also the deed that I brought to the he has
raised to life. Than the prince of turmentrye answered to Satan what is he
that is so mighty by his word And thou say that he is man that dredyth death
All that ever were mighty in earth thou have brought them to my bo^dome and be
bownde in my poust and if he be so mighty i^ ma^hode as thou say I say to
the he is so mighty in dyuynyte so ferforth that we may never do ageynste him.
And if yt he said that he drad death I say to the that he will dysceyue the and
overcome the at all times And than answered Satan to the master of turmentre
and said why dredyst thou for to receive mine adversary and thine. I have made
the Jews for to be against him And I have made ready that he shall be smyt with
and I have made ready the tree that he shall be crucyfyed on and.iii. nails for to
fast him thereto And I have made a drink with ezyll and gall yt he shall dry^ke
And I tell the that he shall be deed anon And I shall bring him bowde to ye
Than answered the prince of turmentrye this. that thou say that he by his
might has take fro me them that were deed what hopyst thou he may be that
does such masterys by his word. I dread me parauenture that this was he that
took a way Lazare fro me and raised him that was.iiii. days deed whom that I
held bownde in my preson and him he yielded to life by his word Than answered
Satan and said I do the to were that he is the same Ihesu And when the prince
of turmentrye herd this he said to Satan I conioure the by thy virtue and mine
that thou bring him not here to me for when I herd the commandment of his
word I trembled and shoke for dread and all my fell seriauntis with me so yt
we ne might keep lazare. but he flow fro us as swyfte as it had be an Egle
out of the bondys yt we had him in and the earth that he lay in deed vndyd and
yalde hy^ quyke fro him wenyste thou satan for to hold such a lord that
took his servant fro us manger of us by the virtue of his word wit thou well
this without dowte if thou bry^ge him hyder that is so mighty to save
almankynde. he will put us hence I say satan and all tho that be shet in our
preson and strayned be there syn in our bondis by him they shall be delivered and
brought to everlasting life. And as they spoke thus together there came a voice
as it had been douder of the holy ghost and thus he said.

Attollite portas principes vr^as). ye pry^ces of death vnclosyth your gatys for
the prince of glory shall enter therein And when the prince of hell herd this
voice they said to Satan Go hens fro us and if thou be mighty to fight. Go
fight with him that is king of glory. And so hell kest Satan fro him and than
he said to his fell seriauntes. shet myghtly your yatys with Iron barrys and
fight myghtely and withstonde him strongely that the king of blys come not
herin that our strength be not take fro us and we to be put to end les sorrow
And when the saints herd this. they said with an high voice to the devil
and to the prince of tormentri Wreches undo your gatys and let the king of
glory come in. Than said dauyd / Prophyced I not when I was lyuy^ge in earth
and said thus. (Quia hec est dies qua^ fecit dn^s exultemus et letemur in ea).
That is to say. this is the day that god made therein we may be blyth and
glad. and after him sadd I say. to all the saints. said I not when I was
leuynge that the deed should be lift up and the bodies that lie in grauys
shall be raised up fro death to life and that they that be in earth shall be full
of Joy. and yet I say now more. ye kaytyfes of death and hell where is now
your price. where is now your vyctory. when the saints herd I say say these
wordys. They said all at onys to the princes of hell. Undo your gatys wrechys
for ye be but take and bound. and may not help your self. Than came the
voice the second time saying thus. (Accollite portas vr^as). And when that
hell herd these uoyce come.ii. times he answered unadvisedly thus. (Quis est
iste rex glie). That is to say, what is the king of blys. and than answered
dauyd saying thus I know well that voice by his words of the holy ghost. for
I prophecyd it before and now I say to the hell. (Dn^s deus fortes et potens
dn^s potens in prelio / ip^e est rex glie). That is for to say. Our lord god
strong and mighty. and mighty i^ battle he is king of glory. (Et ip^e de
celo in terra^ aspexit ut audiret gemitus compeditoru^ vt solueret filios
interemptorum That is to say. that blyssyd lord byhelde fro heuyn to earth to
here the waymentynges of them that are in bondys and that he should vnhynde the
children that were brought to the death to be slain. And therefore thou velayne
stynkynge hole undo thy gatys that the king of bliss may come in.

ANd as Dauyd had said this to hell upon them came the glorious desired king
of glory i^ form of man and enlyghted all the derkenesse of hell with the
glorious bryghtnesse of his glorious face And all the gatys and shetynges with
Iron barrys and boltys all to breast in his holy coming and all the fell fyndes
made him space and way And when the saints saw Ihesu our savior come with
angels they were abashed of the great Joy that they ne durst speak but with
great and soft heart saying thus. Our lord god and our savior thou art
come to us king of glory to deliver us out of the bondys fro these falls
felons And blessed be thy name for now shall we be made hole. Than came our
lord Ihesu and braste all the bondys that we were bound with and commanded
that we should be delyuerd of all anguyshes from that time forward. and when
the pyrnce of hell with all his fell seriauntes saw the great bryghtnesse they
had than huge sorrow and dread. than.x. princes of hell rose up of their setys
with huge rorynge and cryenge and said thus with great weme^ty^ge O Ihesu how
we be ouerco^e by ye what man art thou yt reysyst thy request against god
unknowing us what art thou that brekyst all our pour what art thou that
art so great and apredyst so little in earth. What art thou that were so meke
and lowly in earth and now art thou a pry^celly fyghter in form of man And now
king of glory that were deed and now thou leuyst and now all creturs tremylle
and quake by thy cross and by thy death. and were buried i^ a Sepulcre and art
descended down to us all quyke creatures tremyll and quake by thy death and all
the four elementys / showed there tokyns And now have thou delivered all that
were deed and dystroblyd and put to myschefe all our foull fell mynysters.
What art thou that haste delivered them that were dystrayned here among us
for there sin and have clepyd the^ again to their first fraunchyse. what
art thou that yeuyst lystght to them that are blind by the bryghtenesse of
thy godhede. and than all that were in hell cried with one voice and said A
what art thou that art so mighty a man and so clear in may shyny^ge
without blame and clean of erthly sin what art thou yt entryst in to our
regyo^ and contreys without dread and dowteste no point of turmentynge but
have fro us all tho that were streyned in our bodies paraue^ture thou art that
Ihesu that our prince Satan said to our princes that thou sholdest take to the
all the powere of the world by thy death of the cross Than our lord Ihesu
christ took Satan and bond him and delyuerd him in to hell to the prince of
turmentrye and sorrow Than byhelde satan saying thus to him A thou pry^ce of
perdycyon Belsabub with thy three hedes liar upon the Angels of god why haste
thou do this falce deed A which a dyspoylynge thou behyghteste us when thou
let him fall to such a deed what harm to us thou deed when thou let the king
of glory be crucyfyed. A thou falls satan thou ne wotest never what thou have
do for this Ihesu has Illumyned all the darkness of death with the clernesse
of his deuynyte and has now broke all the gatys of our deep presons and
unbound all that were therein / and them that were in our turmentreys they
scorn us. And by there prayers we shall ever after be overcome that never before
durst say one word against us. And now shall never none of manky^de come
among us but ever shall led us where they will that never before durst do
against us And now are they filled full of meruellous joy by the preysy^ge of
there lord god. A thou prince of all shrewednesse and fader of all felonys why
have thou do thus / how durst thou do such a lord to be crucyfyed for now
be all tho that were in dyspeyer fro the beginning in to this time now in
health and in endless life And we shall never here of there crowchynge gronynge
nor weeping A thou fell satan all the riches that thou had conquered by thy
appyll in paradyse thou have now lost by the tree of thy cross. and all thy
Joy is perysshed while that thou haste crucyfyed him that was agey^st the and
were thou well that thou shalt suffer tormentry endlesly in my orryble preson.
A. O thou falls and cursyd Satan auctor of death and fader of pride thou sholdest
first inquired his cause and if he had be worthy death. And if thou hadest
found no cause of death in him thou sholdest have left hy^ on live but thou
fond no fawte nor cause to crucyfye hy^ and for thou were so hardy to crucyfy
him thou art the cause yt he is e^tred i^ to our regyon. And wot thou what
thou have do I say to ye thou have all forlorn and we wreches shall dwell in
turmentrye that ever shall last as hell. And as Satan spoke thus together came
the king of blys and thus he said to hell Thou prince Satan thy power shall be
endlesly to dwell here instead of Adam and his children and all my ryghtful
people And than our blessed lord spread forth his right hand and said come to
me my holy and all that have mine image and my likeness which were dampened to
the death by the fruit of the appyll and by the devil. and now may ye well se
that the devil is dampened by the tree and by the cross And anon all the
saints assembled them together under our lords hand Than our lord took Adam
by the right hand and said thus to him. my pease be with the and all my
ryghtfull children and all my holy saints. and than our form fader fill down
on his knees before our blessed lord wepy^ge for Joy. and thus he said.
(Exaltabo te dn^e quoniam suscepisti me non delecrasti inimicos meos super me.
Dn^e deus meus clamaui ad te and sanasti me. deduxisti ab inferis ai^am mea^.
sanasti me a descendentibus i^ lacu^). This is to say. My lord I shall
enhaunce the for that thou have take me. for thou ne have suffered mine enmyes
to be abone me. My lord god I have cried to the and thou have made me hole.
thou have brought my soul owte of hell and have saved me fro them yt are fall
in depnesse of ye lake and tha^ all the saints fylle down to our lords fete
saying all with one voice to our lor god. thou art come to us. Byer of the
world. blessed be thy name as thou shewdest to us by thy holy laws and by thy
holy prophets thou bought us again by thy holy cross and thou art come
down to us by thy holy virtue for to draw us fro death and fro the horrible
pains of hell And than our blessed lord lyfted up his hand and made the fygne
of the holy cross on Adam and on his holy saints And so he took Adam by the
ryghe hand and styed out of hell up in to the air and all the saints followed
him. Than king Dauyd said with an high voice. Cantate dn^o canticu^ nouu^
quia mirabilia fecit). That is to say Syngeth to our lord god a new song
for he has wrought merueyllys. (Et hec est gloria oi^bus icantis eius). That
is to say. blessed be god for this great Joy to all his sayntys Than after
dauyd said Mycheas.

Quis deus sicut tu dn^e auferens iniquitatem and transgrediens pcca^ and nu^c
continens in testi^o ira^ tuam. etc^.

That is to say. Who is such a lord as our lord god is putting away all
euyllys of sin. and after him said Abacuk the prophet. Thou comyst out with
health to thy people for to deliver all thy frendys fro all sorrows and
dyszezys. tha^ after him said all ye saints Blessed mot thou be yt comyste in
the name of god for thou art Joy and blyssyd to all thy people. ( Allia). And
than all the prophets pronowncyd all there prophyces that they had showed in
earth with great plesynge to to our lord god And than all the saints said.
this is our lord god. that shall govern us without end. Allia).

How our lord led all his holy saints in to ye Joys of paradyse and of the
three men yt they met.
ANd tha^ our blessed lord took Adam our form fader by the hand and led him
in to paradyce and al his holy saints with him and them he delivered to
Mychaell his archaungyl and he led them in to paradyce where is endless Joy /
And when they were entered in to paradise there came agey^ste them.ii. men of
great age. And the saints asked the^ what they were. and how it might be that
they were there so bodyly and had not be with them in hell. Than one of the^
answered and said I am Emoke that by the word of god I am translated heder.
and he that is with me here is Elyas tesbytes which was brought hyder in a
brennynge chare and yet suffered we no death but we are kept to the coming of
Antecryst to fight with him with words and tokyns of our lord god and of him
we snall be slain in the cite of Iherusalem And.ii. days and a half after we
shall rise fro death to life and betake up in the skies. and as Emoke told this
to the saints there came to them a man berynge on him ye sign of the holy
cross. And when all the saints saw him they said to him what man may thou be
that have here the lykenes of a thief And why beryst thou the sign of the holy
cross. And than this man answered to them and said forsooth ye say truly that
I was a thief and many cursyd ded is and falls did I in earth. And therefore the
Jews crucyfyed me with our lord Ihesu. And when I saw the stery^ges of ye
Eleme^tes i^ hes passyo^ I byleued yt he was savior of ye world and maker of
al creaturs and king al mighty tha^ said I to hy^ lord have mercy on me And
have me in mind when thou comyst in to thy kyngedome. And anon that blessed
lord took my prayer and said to me forsooth this day shalt thou be with me in
paradyce And than he took me the sign of ye holy cross and said to me Bear
this sign with the and go to paradyse and if the angel that is keeper of
paradyse will not suffer the to enter in. show him the sign of the cross and
say to him that Ihesu christ which that was now crucyfyed sent me to the And
when I had said this to the Au^gel anon he vndyd the gatys and led me in to
Paradyce. And set me on the right side saying thus to me Suffer and hold the
here a little while For Adam that is fader of all man kind with all his
children and all the frendys of god shall come hyder by the virtue of Ihesu
crystys passion And when the holy saints as patryarkys and prophetys herd
these words of this thief than they said al with one voice. Blessed be our
lord god almighty endless fader of mercy that such grace has youen to sinners
and brought us to the Joy of paradyse and in to the pasture of delight and to
endless Joy. Amen.

THese are the holy secretys of the deuynyte that we have seen. I Garyus and my
brod Leuycyus but our lord god will suffer us no longer to tell and show unto
you the secrettys of his deuynyte for saint Mychaell the archaungell said to
us Rise and go in to the cite of Iherusasem and be there in prayers / and
gloryfye the holy resurreccyon of our lord Ihesu christ with your brethren
that rose with hy^ and that ye speak to no person. But be you as the domme. in
to the time that our lord shall suffer you for to show the secretys of his
deuynyte And so the holy Angel saint Mychaell commanded us to go to flo^me
Iordane to a place there that many are risen with us in witness of the
resurreccyon of our lord Ihesu christ. Our lord god has granted us.iii.
days to be Iherusalem and hold there the holy paske of our lord god with our
frendys And also that we shall be baptized in the fla^me Jordan each of us at
that time taking white stolys. and thus saint Mychaell commanded us yt we
should be i^ orysons i^ the cite of Barmathye and yt we should show to you
these holy secretys And therefore give presynge to our lord god and be a know
your defaute and do penance yt he may have mercy upon you. Now pease be
with you of our lord Ihesu christ yt is savior of us all. Amen.

How Nycodemus and Joseph told to Pylat all yt these.ii. me^ had said and how
pylat treatyd wih the pry^ces of ye law.
ANd when this scripture was wreten this Garyus and Leuycyus rose up And so
Garyus delivered the byll yt he has wryte^ in to the handys of Annas and
Cayphas and to Gamalyel And leuycyus yaue that he had wryt in to the hands of
Nycodemus and Joseph of Barmathye. and anon they were transfygured and were no
more seen of them. for both byllys were all one hand as though one man had
wrette them both. And there was not one letter more i^ ye one than in that
other And when ye Jews and masters of the law had red these bylles and
understand them they were hugely abashed all and shamed And than they said
among them that forsooth Ihesu was very godys son blessed much be endlesly
for all thing beryth witness thereof And anon after they went out of the
Synagoge And than Nycodemus and Joseph of Barmathye told all this to pylat And
than Pylat did write all that was befall of Ihesu of yt the Jews had said of
hy^ And all these merueyles he did put in his bookys after that Pylat entered in
to the Jews and before him assembled al ye Masters of the law as princes and
Bysshoppes. And tha^ Pylat did command the gatys and dorys to be shyt. And
than pylat said to them Syrs it is do me wit that ye have among you a new
story of great scripture which scripture I covet for to se. And therefore I
charge you yt it be brought to my presence And wha^ it was brought to his
presence. tha^ said he to the^ all I co^ioure you all by ye virtue of our lord
which yt is fader and maker of all thing yt ye ne hyde no counsel but for to
say ye trewthe. Syrs ye know by the scryptures yt is wryt here that Ihesu
which that ye crucyfyed is very goddis son and so it behooved hy^ to come into
this world to ye health of mankind. And therefore I charge you yt ye tell me
what time yt christ should come by your scripture. Wha^ yt Annas and Cayphas
were thus coniured they charged and commanded yt all should go out of ye
temple save Pylat and they.ii. Tha^ they said to Pylat good Judge thou have so
co^iured us yt we must needs show to ye / ye troth of this yt thou have
inquired of us sir into ye time yt we had crucyfyed Ihesu. We knew not yt he
was goddys son. but we we^de yt ye virtues that he wrought had been done by some
charm. tha^ made we us to assemble in this temple And here we did reherce all
the virtues yt he had wrought And so there were many of our lynage yt said yt
they had seen Ihesu after his passyo^ and yt they had herd him speak to his
dyscyples. And also they said yt they saw him stye up i^ to heuyn And we wot
well yt we saw.ii. men which yt Ihesu raised fro death to life which told us
meny merueyllys yt Ihesu i^ his dyenge did and after. and yt may ye wit by
there scrypturs yt we hold i^ our ha^dis But our custom is such yt we do
worship to stories yt have be here before i^ our Sinagogys / and so we find by
wytnes of god i^ ye first book as it says yt Mychaell ye Archau^gyll said
to Seth yt was ye third son of Adam. Wha^.v. M. and.v.C. year were complette
tha^ should ye so^ of god. Ihesu christ come fro heuyn and yet we abide his
coming. And paradue^ture this god of Israel yt said to moses yt he should
make an hutche of wydnes in the length of.ii. kebettys and an half. i^ ye
length of a kepet and a^ half. And these.v. kebettys we understand by ye old
testament yt wha^.v. M. and. v C. year is come tha^ shall Ihesu christ ye son of
god come in to the hutche. yt is the womb of ye mayde^ Mary thus our scryptur
berith witness of hy^ yt shall be ye so^ of god and king of ye people of Israel
But after ye passyo^ of Ihesu we and our princes merueylled of ye tokens and
works yt were do by him And so we lokyd our stories and counted all ye lynage
down to Iosephes lynage. And ye lynage of Marye yt was mother of Ihesu. and so
we have acounted yt fro ye time yt god made the world and Ada^ ye first man
unto Noyes flode is.ii. M. and.viii C. year And fro ye flode to Abraham.
is.iii. M. and v.C. year. And fro Moses to Dauyd ye king is.v.C. year And fro
ye transmygracyon of Babyloyne unto ye i^carnacyo^ of Ihesu christ is.iiii.C.
year. And thus is ye accou^te in all.v. M. and.v. C. year All these things and
merueylles did Pylat write and put in his office in fayer velommys so yt it
might be red and known of all me^ yt should come after him and after yt
Pylatte wrote a letter to the Cite of Rome and to Clawdyo the Emperor. Amen.

Here endyth the treatys of Nychodemus gospel.
Enprynted at London without Tempell Bar / in Saint Clementys parysshe / By
me Iulyan Notary dwelling at the syne of the three kings. In ye year of our
lord a. M.CCCCC.vii.


