AA



THE BLACK year.

Seria iocis. printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by E. Allde, for William Timme, dwelling in Pater noster-rowe,
at the sign of the Flower de Luce and Crown near Cheapside. 1606.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, and worthy Lover of learning, and virtue, Master
Francis Coppinger, Esquire. A. N. wishes all health and happiness.
Having (Right Worshipful) resolved with my self, to publish this little
Treatise, and knowing it subject to much prejudice, except it were graced with
some worthy Patron, (I mean not by the learned, for they are too courteous,
to be Carping; nor by the well minded, for they cherrish Science: but by
Detractors, who having no learning to judge, want no liberty to reprove) I
have followed the example of Metabo. King of the Volschi, who desirous to
deliver his only Daughter from al peril, and danger, consecrated and dedicated
her to the Sister of the Surne. So I no less careful of my labors, then the
King of his Camilla, with deliberate, and advised judgment, wholly deuote, and
offer my Book to your favor and protection; who being the true Maecenas of
the Muses, and judicial in their exercises, are of power to relieve my weakness
by your worthiness, and to privilege me from envy, though she were pressed to
devour me. If midst your general favor to all desert, your worship vouchsafe
this particular benefit to my industry; no day or time (as Tully counsaileth)
shall define the memory of your benefits: But as a true remembrance of your
favors, my future study and labor, shall be employed to do you all ready and
willing service.

By him that desires to be a more deseruer of your love. Antho: Nixon.

To the Reader.
GEntlemen, I here presume to present you with this little Treatise, occasioned
chiefly by the late treacherous proceedings, although it be mixed with various
matter to please conceit, because that has already been sufficiently handled
by others. I know some will look at it narrowly, and say the shape is but bad,
though the operation may be good. Zoylus with his squint eyes will find fault
both with matter and Method: But I care not though they be crabbed, if I
find you courteous. Let an Ass strike me, I will never lift my heel. And if
Diogenes be cynicall I will shake off his frumpes with Aristippus. Some odd
scoffing companion that has a commonwealth of Self-love in his head, may
perhaps say, the Subject of this Pamphlet is more common then commendable: I
answer him with a common principle of Philosophy.

Bonum quo communis, co melius. If that will not serve, let him either amend it
or sit down and blow his fingers, or else go learn to knit Nets of
couentry-blew for Woodcockes. I know (Gentlemen) fools will have Bolts, and
they will shoot them as well at a bush, as at a Bird: and some will have
frumpes, if it be but to call their Father whoresonne: But howsoever, I know,
facilius est cauillare quam corrigere, and a Dog will have a barking Tooth,
though he be warned. To such I write not, let them be still vain: but to
those whom education and learning has endued with courtesy and generous
spirits. If I find them respective of me, I have the full desired end of my
labors. Resting in hope, whereof I commit my self and my Book to your
favorable censures.

Yours Antho: Nixon.

The Black year.
BY this years Revolution, which is the Suns entrance into the sign of the
martial Ram, there shall many black enormities, and dis commodities happen
to the world: Men forgette those good virtues, which are naturally graffed in
the^; whose effects bec, to do good to others: and wherein the Image of God is
resembled in man, and sensually cherrish their bodies with a moment of
pleasure, to be after punished with an eternity of pain. And shall follow the
conditions of the world, dissembling still with the same, holding themselves
happy that can fly from the seeing eye not from the sin, that can applaud
in public and defraude in private. Such as be rich, shall be sure of
friends, But they that are poor, may spend money when they can get it. Those
that have no Mittens in Winter, may blow their nails by authority, for no man
will pity the^ that are needy: Such as carry empty purses, may dine by wit,
if it will prevail, or walk in Paul's by Duke Humphry for Charity is fled
that should feed the hungry. Old familiarity shall be forgotten, and
friendship draw back, if ability grow bare, according to that of the Poet.
Quem noui tacitus me praeterit: Os mihi claudit paupertas, cum etc.


Many men for lack of wit, shall follow Bacchus, not Ceres, and esteem
better of malt, then wheat: and many for lack of honesty shall swell by
Venus, and make more reckoning of a Chamber then a Church. The greatest
holiness shall not be in the granest show; nor the longest bearded prove the
wisest. Many by superfluities, and inordinate repastes shall win under the
froath of Lust, and by Gluttony, not only sin in Letchery, but sincke in
blockishnes and folly. For Pinguis venture non generat subtilem sensum. Many
shall be so new-fangle in their forms of apparel, that a new fashion shall
scarcelye appear in the French Kings Kitchen, but it shall be presently
translated over into the Court of England. But that shall cause Mercers to have
many bad debtors, and make Catchpoles to be Gentlemen, for like bug-beares they
shall cause such as fear them to fly from them: for they are as terrible to
the sight of a poor debtor, as a Butchers knife to an Essex Calfe, or a cup of
small Beer to an Ale-knight in a frosty morning. Such as keep not day shall
fail to borrowe when they need. Crackt-credit shall have less commodity,
and pennuty shall be bought with Repentance by such Gentlemen as sell land in
reuertion, while their fathers are living. Diverse shall this year be so
co^uersant with Venus, that by pleasing her they shall displease themselves,
and surfeit with such a heat after their labor, yt the very hairs shall be
banished from their heads, and poor Barbers be made beggars for want of work.
Such as climb above their reach shall be sure of a counterchecke, and such as
plot treachery shall have a halter for their labor, and Derick shall make th^^
shorter not by the hair, but by the head.

Traitors shall covet to fly like Swallows,
Fearing their secrets to be revealed:
And Pope-sworne Tretchers shall kiss the gallows,
Their cunning plots shall not be concealed,
In their best hopes they have ever failed,
Then what befell to Catesby and that crew,
Befall to them that are not subjects true.
This year shall be bad to such as buy suits in Birchinlane upon credit, for
either they shall be badly sowed, Or if the outside deceive them not, yet
shall the inside be all old stuff, and no sooner on but a seame out. Some
Bookesellers this year shall not have cause to boast of their winnings, for
that many write, that flow with phrases, and yet are barrein in substance, and
such are neither wise, nor wittye: others are so concise, that you need a
comentarie to understand them, others have good wits, but so critical, that
they arraigne other men's works at the Tribunal seat of every censurious
Aristarchs understanding, when their own are sacrificed in Paul's Churchyard
for bringing in the Dutch Curtezan to corrupt English conditions, and sent away
Westward for carping both at Court, City and country. For they are so
sudden witted, that a Flea can no sooner friske forth, but they must needs
comment on her. Others shall be so subject to affection, that when they have don
any thing worthy of praise, they either like Hens that go cackling, in
regard of their new laid Egg, and blaze their own works abroad, or endeavor
by secret insinuation to be commended by others, as the Italian Poet did, who
having made an Epigram which much pleased himself, showed it to some of his
friends, praising it above the skies:

They presently demanding who was the Author? He for very shame of pride would
not tell them it was his, but with a fleeting countenance gave them to
understand, that the verses and the laughter were Cosi^-germaines, and issued
both from the same proud heart, Therein discovering both his own self-love and
vanity.

Doctor Aloander with a myraculous insight, espied that by reason of some
retrograde influence it should happen, that this year, many Countries shall
be highly troubled with wars, Commotions, sicknesses, and Plagues. The
Spirit (says he) among the Godlyc shall war with the flesh, and honest
plain dealing shall be at deadly fewde with Peter Pick-thanks secret
insinuation. A dreadful debate shall be betwixt the Wife and the Husband, who
shall bear most sway and authority: insomuch as the wife shall sit playing
in the Chamber above, when the Husband shall stand working in the shop belowc.
There shall be also as much strife among Players, who shall have the greatest
Auditory, as is war among the four knaves at Cards, for superioritic.
Brokers and Usurers shall so pinch the poor this year, that for ever after,
they shall be no better then Knaves by estimation. Landlords and Lease-mongers
shall peele their Tennants, raising rents, and taking houses over men's heads,
to the undoing of Man, wife and Children. Gentlemen that were wont to keep
good houses, and maintain Hospitality in the Country, shall this year
depart from thence, giving ouethouse keeping, and come to London, And either
keep a chamber there, or wait at the Court (uncalled) with a man, and a
Lackey after him, where he was wont to maintain half a score proper men to
attend on him, and thirtye or forty other persons besides, every day in the
week.

Tapsters shall this year in Summer, be indyted for mingling their bottle Ale
with small Beer, and Ale-wiues in winter for filling three pots to one toste,
and for selling flesh on Frydaies without license. Many black tempests shall be
in Taphouses, for Cannes shall fly about, (and light on men's heads) without
wings: and with the rich, poor men shall be accounted knaves without
occasion.

Some shall be so costiue in their stomachs, as they shall carry hollow hearts
under holy shapes, and wear brave hoodes, that have but bare learning. Those
that can flatter least, shall speed worst, Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit
vi^ere. And he that cannot verba dare ad voluntatem, and sooth up his
superiors in their follyes and imperfections, shall as hardly thrive this
year, as it is likely that men will be affraide of a good fire at Midsomer, if
it be possible to have a frost of three weeks continuance in July.

For tell but Quintus, that his breath does stincke,
And do not cogge and say it is sweet and clear,
Heel let thee pass, and never bid thee drink,
When as Auphidius shall have good cheer,
For now who loves to play a worldlings part,
Must teach his tongue refrain to tell his heart.
He is a ga^^ant, fit to serve a Lord,
And at the Court to have a special place,
Which can both claw, and sooth at every word,
And swear that is rare, which does deserve no grace,
And when his Lord an idle tale does tell,
Cries (by this hand) you have spoke passing well.
In this dangerous year shall happen many Combattes between the flesh and the
spirit, and our inordinate passions (will we nill we) shall not cease almost
hourly to rise up against Reason, and so molest us, perturbting our rest and
inward quietness. For example whereof I will recite unto you, what was related in
the life of S. Anselme: once Archbishop of Canterbury, that as he walked into
the fields, he saw a Shepherds little Boy, who had caught a Bird and In vita
Anselmi.
tied a stone to her leg with a third, and ever as the Bird mounted up to
soar aloft, the stone drew her down again. The reverend old man much moved
at this sight, fell presently a weeping; lamenting thereby the miserable
conditions of men, who no sooner endeavor to ascend to heaven by
contemplation, but the flesh hales the heart back again, and draws to earth,
enforcing the soul to lie there like a Beast, which should have soared in the
heavens like an Angel.

Some shall have so much wit, that they shall surfeit on it and strive so long
against the stream, as their bodies shall fail to carry their heads any
longer. Some shall have such large consciences, as they shall build fair
houses by briberie, gather much wealth by contention and cruelty, and ere they
are aware, heap up riches for an other, and wretchedness for themselves. For
Vna opibus poterit nox quoque obesse tuis.


Water shall this year be so weak an Element in the world, that men and
women shall scarce have tears sufficient to bewail their sins: and there
shall be such a dearth of Onyons, that Widows shall want moisture to follow
their Husbands to their Funeralles. Few shall wax beggars by giving of Alms,
for in our time the world is so far from giving, as a Nigards purse will scarce
bequeath his master a good dinner. Many shall be so seduced by blind
opinions, that digging a pit for others, they shall fall into it themselves,
and cry peccaui when the Popes pardon shall not prevail against their
Treachery. Coin shall ^uaile more then conscience, for they that have the one,
and are not much troubled with the other, study nothing less then to do good,
nothing more then to do hurt, and spitte their worst, least they should die in
the Devils debt. Few that are poor shall have more money then they need, and
many that are wealthy, not so much wit as they want.

The hearts of the wicked shall be so hardened, as they shall say, ^ush we can
never be cast down, for there shall no harm happen unto us. yet the fattest
Ox we s^e is readyest for slaughter, and the felicity of fools is their own
destruction.

It is hard (says Aristotle) to find a man, which in prosperity Arist. Li.
Li. 2. Rhetor. ad Theodectten. cap. 10
is not proud, disdainful, and arroga^t, such are many, whom strength, whom
riches, whom Clyents, whom authority, whom favor has exalted: for if
dignity and honor (which seldom make men better) be oftentimes lincked to
this devilish behavior, what can be looked for else, but many prodigious
monsters, hurtful to men, and execrable before God: according to that Asperius
misero nilest, dum surgit in altum.


Yet how suddenly they have consumed and come to fearful ends, there need
not be called to mind any long fore-passed remembrance to testify.

Many shall this year have their eyes so dazeled, as they shall not know
themselves, many so pust with pride as striving beyond their compass, they
shall cry peccaui in the Poultrye, for their borrowed bravery. Many shall
be troubled with that fault, which Tully calls Defectum naturae, (cowardice,
or weakness of spirrit) that their finger shall no sooner ache, but they must
strait to the Physician, and so enrich him, impouerish themselves, and yet
never be without diseases.

This year shall be Cares, and grief of mind,
And alteration of weather some where:
It shall be hard judging for men that are blind,
As by wandering the wrong way may appear.
Of all things true friendship, shall be most dear,
Mercury and Saturn in combust declare,
That Pick-thankes this year, shall utter much ware.
Great trouble by the heavens impressions,
Great mischief done by wicked people:
Some worthy death by their own confessions,
Take good heed of Guato and his Disciple:
Rents shall be raised double, and triple,
Land lords this year, some good, some bad,
Young women and Widows, both wise and mad.
The poor shall be vexed with such pain in the purse,
As he that lackes money, may also lack meat:
The Usurer shall have the beggars curse,
Ambition shall strive for honors seat:
Malt shall cause many to sell their wheat,
The Cuckowe in Summer shall temper his throat,
To pipe mine Hostess a merry note.
Diverse shall be troubled with a defect, and imperfection that proceeds from
the corruption of nature, namelye with Curiosity or a diligent inquisition of
other men's faults, and an extreme negligence in their own. Moalehilles in
other men shall seem mountains, and craggye Rocks in themselves, smooth
rushes: Other men's faults shall be before their eyes, but their own behind
their backs. The reason why men judge more quickly other men's follies then
their own, partly proceeds from Self-love, which blinds them in their own
actions, partly because they see other men's defects directly, and their own by
a certain reflection, For as no man knows his own face, because he never see
it, but by reflection from a glass, and other men's countenances, he conceaueth
most perfectly, because he viewes them dyrectly, and in themselves, So by a
certain circle we wind about our selves, whereas by a right live we pass
into the corners of other men's souls at least by rash judgments and sinister
suspicions. Galen to this purpose relates Aesop, who said, every man Galen. de
cog. amin. Morb. C. 2.
had a wallet hanged upon his shoulders, the one half upon our breast, the
other half upon our backs: the former was full of other men's faults, which we
continually beheld, the part behind laden with our own offenses, which we
never regarded.

Some shall have too much familiarity with scoffing, and gibing, the which
proceeds from pride and envy, and is hardly continued without dissension, for
men are not at all times apt to receive iestes. Many that in conuersing are
(for a time) able to discourse well, shall after that time their oil is spent,
thrust out all they have on a sudden, and after become very barren. Such are
they that at a Table will have all talk, when others in place shall be silent,
that are better able then themselves to use effectual speech in any matter
propounded. But these men are commonly neither witty, nor humble, for witty
men are seldom drawn dry in their conceits, and humble men will distill
their knowledge according to their talents, and not above their reach.

Some shall have such nimblenes in their choppes, as they shall devour more at
a meal, then they are able to pay for in a month. Some such a buzzing in their
brain, as they shall not admit good counsel or admonition, but shall
esteem better of their own unstayed, and headstrong resolution, then the grave
advice of Time-bought experience. To such is assigned a whip of nettles to
scourge their Sic volo with Noli poenitentiam tanti emere. If that will not
serve the turn: A pound of Hemp, three Standers, and three flattes,
Are very fit to make such mates new hattes.


Some shall be stopped in their hearts with such an Aconiton of obediencie, as
they shall be utterly obstinate to receive the Antidote of grace, and so be
given over to a reprobate sense, that they shall perseuet in vanity, without
any touch or feeling of their folly. Such without mature Repentance and
amendment shall never attain that caelestiall land, nor enjoy that heavenly
repast, which Nemo nouit nisi qui accipit.


Many that are wicked and unlearned, impudent in face, and egregious Parasites
in behavior, shall be exalted to glory, when men famous, as well for learning
as religion, shall be either condemned, or of Sycophantes defaced, or for some
small occasion unworthily disgraded. As happened to Beliserius, who lost his eyes
by Justinian.

Darkness shall not abide the light, nor ignorance (through her Impudency)
refrain to set herself against learning and knowledge, For as Quintilian does
witness, Quo quisque minus valet, hoc se magis attollere, et dilatare conatur.
Quintil. l. 2. Cap. 3.
The least of power, the more vaineglorious, And again. Quo minus sapuit,
minus habe^t pudoris. The more fool the more impudent.

Some shall be blind in their own and politic in other men's matters, some
love a bowling-alley better then a Sermon, and suspect their wives at home,
because themselves play false abroad.

Amongst all other evils (by my speculation, and knowledge of this black)
there shall be none more ri^e, then the Mumpsimus, which shall so swell some
women's lips, as they shall have a longing desire to kiss others besides
their Husbands. Many shall have their cheeks so monstrously swollen, as
(although they be tempted with large fees) yet they shall not have power to
speak in a just cause.

This year shall breed diverse Monsters in our Nation, whereof some shall have
such long tongues, as they can keep no counsel. But whatsoever they hear,
they shall presently blab forth, and often times make a matter worse in
telling. Some others shall have such lightness in their brains, that albeit
they know little, yet they shall meddle much, and thrust themselves so far
into others affairs, that for lack oflooking into their own, they shall
either dance a Beggars Galliard, or feel the price of such follies as follow
Hadiwistes. There shall be also such various wonders, such strange inundations,
such miraculous comotions, as such as want legs shall be glad to go on
crutches and such as lost their horses and carres at the last Lotterie, and
pawnd their^ apparel to venture for a blancke paper, shall ever hereafter
wear a fools Cap for their labor, and if they run not mad at their folly,
yet shall they be glad to drudge with a basket at their backs for hazarding
that was their own into other men's hands, by such slye and secret cousnage.

So the poor Car men shall curse Aristotle that said Corruption vnius est
generatio alterius, for their old Carts being gone, they have no stock to buy
others.

Many shall drive whole A^^-tubbes into consumptions and so drown their
stomachs in liquor, as if in a short time they piss not out their wealth, and
cause the ^ot to infect their purses, and eat out the bottom, yet shall they
consume their bodies, and make themselves sicklye, or ten to one, not possibly
escape the dropsic.

Gentlemen, shall this year be much wronged by their Tailors, for their
consciences are now larger then ever they were: for where they were wont to
steal but halte a yard of broad cloth in making up a pair of breeches, now
they do largely nicke their Customers also in the lace, and take more then
enough for the new fashion sake, besides their old fees.

There shall be a mighty conspiracy amongst Bakers, Butchers and Brewers,
insomuch as they that lack monye, or have not good credit, shall neither have
bread, meat, nor drink, when they are dry or hungry. Poor men are much
threatened that Lawyers shall plead none of their causes without coin, for if
they should, Westminster Hall would be little troubled with rich men, and so
Pettie-loggers, Lifters, and Cut-purses would be greatly hindered, and
impouerished.

Scholars shall be preferred, when such as sing Bases, leave to love good
drink, Or when such dye of surfettes, that keep a temperate diet. But
flatterers shall have great gifts, when the good and godly labors of
Scholars shall be scarce worth Gramercies.

Sextons shall this year complain of their hard fortunes, for that their
gettinges shall decrease, and what they purchased in the plague time, they shall
now have leisure to consume, (...) wring the marrow of the malte, and so
sucking in, a cup of Spanish Sack, that when their two or three years gaynes
has been but one years spending, they shall at last be served with a fieri
facias and pray for the employment of Coffin-mongers, and that there may not
grow such rust upon Spades and Pick-axes. But amongst all these black and
disaster accydents: this year promises good fortune to Saylors, and
Soldiers, for what they get by the sword, they may spend at their
pleasures, and if beyond count and reckoning they have any thing paid them by
the Treasurer, if they build not Hospitalles with it, they may employ it on
apparel, or to the maintenance of the honest knot of friendship. Players shall
have liberty to be as famous in pride and idleness, as they are dissolute in
living, and as best in their marriages for community, as unhappy in their
choyces for honesty.

Women are like to be endued with such masculine courage, as if they once have
their wills, they will ever after strive for the maisterie, therefore married
me^ of weakest wit, and worst courage had best to be provided of good weapons,
to defend themselves from assaults, for such husbands as are not able to resist
them valiantly, are awarded to pay a Sheepes-head to their next neighbor in
penance of their pusillanimitie. Seeing then that the oil of Holly is a
present remedy for a shrewd huswife, he is a flat fool, that suffers his wife
to crown him with a Pispotte.

The French disease in this westerly parts is like to prove very dangerous,
especially to such as are not provided to undergo the charge of three weeks
diet, without which they shall never be without Ache in their bones, until the
Usurers of London swear to bestow a new Steeple upon Paul's Church. This
shall be a black year for Thieves, and seditious persons, for all kind of
(...) shall so prosper both in Vpland grounds and in highways, as the very
stalks thereof shall almost touch the top of Tyborne.

Those that are thin clad and want fuel may not strain courtesy to go cold
to bed, unless better order to provided for the price of Sea-coales, that
private gain may not enhance the rate thereof to public grief, and
discommoditie. It is to be much doubted that this year there shall be such
store of Caterpillars, as they shall not only devour blossoms, but consume the
best of our possessions, and such plenty of thankles Trencher-flyes, as will
hang on the fullness of prosperity, and fly from declyning estate, and
adversity according to that of the Poet. Non deerunt socij rebus (mihi creed)
secundis,
aduersis, nullus te putat esse bonum.


Never was such a curious generation clasped under the cope of heaven, as is in
these our miserable days. For what vain studyes exercise (for most part) our
judiciary Astronomers, by calculating Natiuities, foretelling events,
prescribing the limits of men's lives, fore-shewing their perrils, and dangers
but mere cousnage, and idle curiosity? who many times shutting a knave in a
circle, and looking about for the devil, find him lurk in their bosoms.

Such shall be the corruptions of men's minds, that Ingratitude shall forgette
her best benafactors, and raised by insinuation to sublime condition) shall be
unmindful of the happiness, that follows content, and is enemy to
ambitions aspiring.

For seldom can Presumption be enthronde,
To live esteemed, or dye to be bemoaned,
An humble coat entapissed with moss,
A lowly life that fears no sudden loss,
A mind that dreades no fall, nor craves no Crown,
But makes his true-content, his best renown.
These are the choice contents, the goods, the gain,
which rightly can be ours; The rest are vain,
If then thou see a troop of guarded Knaves,
wait at Aagastoe's heels, like servile slaves,
Be not aghast, admire not at his state,
"For now the world is bent to serve, and hate,
It Is true: that slave whom Pompey did promoate,
was he that first assaid to cut his throat.
Judas shall this year walk about the world, and sell his Neighbor for
commodity to any man: But the Jews shall be of an other disposition, for
having taken out a pe^nie in the shilling these many years, they shall now
with good conscience venture upon three pence with the advantage. From the
superfluity of men's brains shall be hatched that hideous monster (self
conceit) and like a Tyrant so reign in peoples hearts, that many men shall
think their opinion is their God and many women imagine that none are so fair
as themselves. Many shall apparantlye prove themselves knauish, yet ^in their
own opinions will be accounted honest. The Cobbler shall say the Shoemaker is a
botcher, and Cherillus shall swear he is more learned the^ Homer. Crafts in
occupations, and sects in Religions shall abound this year, and Rebels are
promised to fare no worse, then Hens do among Foxes.

Such as are penitent in this world, shall have comfort in a better, but they
that depend on destiny, and not on God, may perchance look through such
narrow latyces as the world shall laugh to see impyetie sequestered from
impunitie.

There shall be this year many rare devises, for some shall so long devise
for other men, that they shall be barrayne them selves. Some shall devise
snares for others and intrappe themselves. Vulcan shall make a net to catch
Venus, and Jealousy shall lay a bayte to entangle Vulcan.

To be verbis tenus, factis procul, to promise much, and to perform little,
shall be as usual this year, as it is ordinary with boys in Lent time to
love Figs on Thursday, better then twigs on Friday, or with Maids about
midnight to fall a dreaming, and see visions, to the heartgriefe oftentimes of
their Parents.

It shall be hard for to prosper, if they wash not their hands clean, for by
soyling their work they are in great danger to lose their workmaisters. Many
strange conflicts shall be in cups and Cannes, for good liquor shall make
some so ventrous, as they will destroy the Turk and all his power at one
draught.

This year is like to prove fatal to such as follow the Garden Alleyes, for
as some have gone before, so the rest are like to follow, and mar their
drinking with an hempen twist unless they leave Harlotte-hunting, with more
good will then Millers have mind to morning prayer if the wind serve them in
any corner on Sundaies. Dawes shall leave to build in Steeples, and begin to
dwell in Cities. And if dissimulation do this year forsake Court and Country,
I will give him that first finds the same, full leave and license to call me
liar.

For with the world the world dissembles still,
And to their own confusions follow ill,
Holding it true felicity to fly,
Not from the sin, but from the seeing eye,
Truth is pursude by hate: He is deemed wise
That to the world, his worldly wit applies,
And in this age who winkes at each estate,
Has found the means to make him fortunate.
Favors and Offices (to persons of desert) shall not be granted without
suite, and supplycatio^, for many so gape for preferment; as they aim rather
at the gain, then the pain. Goodness and true-loue (principally discovered
in the bountiful giving, and bestowing of benefits (shall not this year win
to many eternal same, as it did to diverse, (whereof Histories make mention)
and for which experience this old and true verse was penned. Si quis in hoc
mundo vult cunctis gratus haberi
det capiat, quarat, plurima pauca, nihil. He that to all will here be
grateful thought,
must give, accept, demaaud much, little, naught.




For instead of this, men only level at private profit, and commodity, and
be so far from doing good deeds, that no man shall find in his heart to
teach Grantham steeple to hold up his head manly again by the assistance of
learned Masons.

Gamesters, and such as consecrate themselves to play at Dice, Cards, and such
other games, shall have bad fortune this year, for in a minute they shall lose
more then they can gather again in a month. These are unprofitable Members,
and deserve to be cut from the body of a commonwealth, for they are as unfit
to live in the same, as a Candle is to burn in a straw-bed.

Tides shall this year mount beyond their bounds, insomuch as many striving
to stretch beyond compass shall so heat themselves on New-market-heath, that
they shall be constrained to cool their heels in Newgate, where they are no
sooner arrived, but four knaves in the cards shall suddenly leap from out the
bunch, and desperately be ready (as partners) to entertain them. This black
year threatens diverse and sundty sorts of Takers, for some one shall be
desirous to be taken for wise, who is indeed Sapientum octauus. Some will be
glad to take bad Silver of poor debtors, and a Bottle of Ale, when they cannot
get a pottle of wine. Some shall take their neighbors bed for their own: some
the Maid for the Mistress, especially in houses, where Virgo is so
predominant with the Master, and wants a Mistress to look, narrowly unto her.

This year is unlikely to be favorable to Maisterlesse men, and pennyles
companions, for he that has but one shirt to shift him, may not think scorn
to wear a foul on Sundaie. Tripe-wines should be exquisite Physicians, for
in one of^al (as Ned Beck says) they shall find more simples then ever Gallen
gathered since he knew what physic meant.

Old Fowlers, and young Farmers may not think much if their success be but
bad this year: for the one shall Catch Lobcockes insteede of Larkes, and the
other sell their free-holde for Pease-pottage. But now Seria iocis.


There are besides these, many other accidents that may serve to show the many
enormities, wherewith human conditions make their souls black, and
putrified, for we see all men grow A malo ad peius, and all things we
perceive to wax daily worse, and worse, and to decrease in their virtue. The
air is oftentimes corrupt, sometimes with untimely showers, sometimes with
unprofitable dryness: now with two much cold, now with extreme heat. The
fruitfulness of the field is not such as it has been before time. Riches,
and substance we see consumed, the progeny of Noble men we perceive not to be
multiplied, but decreased either by discord or disloyalty. Lords and great men
bend their cogitations to the oppressing of their poor Tennants, and by often
fines, and exactions, bring honest men to beggary, and by the example of Pharo
make Slaves of their Servants and Subjects.

Another great argument of this years, (or rather of the worlds corruption)
is, that all good arts and learning are so contemned and little rewarded, or
respected. The Universities, Schools and Scelestiall Discipline, (which are
the causes and fountains of knowledge) now pilipended, and not regarded.
Although God in this last age, has showed his good will, and marvelous love
toward us, especially (in that so great barbarousnesse of our Predecessors,
when all arts and liberal learning, was hid, and known to few, the Latin
tongue polluted: the faculties not apprehended) by raising up so many learned
men, which with great study and pains, have brought all the Scyences to their
purity, and delivered unto us a more easy way, to the attaining the perfect
knowledge of them all.

Yet experience teaches that these guestes that have of long time been at the
full, do now decrease, and grow to be lessend. For not that advised judgment,
not that industry, not those exercises in studies, are now which have been.
Every man has his particular manner of parley, strives to speak in print,
hunts after Metaphors, coins Phrases, and labors extremely that his words
may smell of subtilty, elegancie, and neat delivery, in such affected sort,
hat for the most he leaves nothing behind him, but a sent of verbal pride
and foolish affection.

This is that time wherein abounds marvelous security. By which arises not
only in^ffable wickedness against God, but also a lamentable disorder and
confusion in commonweals. For if we compare the time present with that which
is past, we shall perceive vice to have come to his ripeness, and to reign
(almost) without controlement. ^or (notwithstanding God has given us
discipline whereby we are taught to frame our affections to his will, and to
dwell in unity according to his word) what desire of good life, or zeal in
religion is there to be found? Many a man thinks himself sufficiently
religious, if he can seemingly fashion himself to the frequenting of Sermons,
and repayring to ordinary service and ceremonies, when -- Front politus.
austutam vopido seruat sub pectore vulpem.


Many think well of themselves in making the Doctrine of love, peace, and
unity, the occasion of strife, contention and heresy. Many suppose they serve
God well, (if knowing some of contrary opinion, though not in the chiefest
point of Religion) they doc condemn them with words, and commit them with
curses to the Devils punnishment: when they themselves in the mean time, in a
certain spiritual pride, and pust up through a vain opynion of learning, do
take heart of grace. Their adversaries oftentimes defending the better part,
and more agreeable to the will of the highest, And yet forsooth this must not
be called the spirit of sin, but of Religion, and godly zeal. Oh black time!
Oh dangerous days! Oh deuillish behavior* what need many words? we may now
plainelye perceive greatest vice to be accounted chiefest virtue. And those
men to be most extolled, that with a superficial show of dissembled sanctity
can shadow their (...)rses, when of all others for impiety they are most
worthily to be thrown down and dejected.

Crafty and deceitefull, are esteemed wise. Covetous, good Husbands;
Spend-thriftes, liberal: and rich men, are deemed the best men: they have
promotions, and although by wicked means they attain them: yet Dives clarus
erit, fortis iustas, Horat. Lib. Sermon. 2.

sapiens, etiam and Rex, and quicquid volet.


As Horace said, The rich man shall be Noble, valiant, upright wise, yea and a
King and what he will.

And in another place.

Aurea nunc vire sunt saecula, plurim(...) auro; Horat. L. 1. Epist.

venit honos, Auro conciliatur amor,
Auro pulsa fides, Aura venalia iura
Auram lex sequitur mox sine lege pudor,
Scilicet vxorem cum dote fidemque and amicos
and genus and formam Regina pecunia donat.
Now are the brave and Golden days,
now fame with gold we gain:
And Gold can show us many means,
men's favors to attain.
By gold we hear the Mussicke sweet,
and laws we buy with gold,
Law seeks for Gold and strait (unmeet)
our name by it is sold.
Yea wife with wealth, and faith and friends,
and kin with comely hue,
Does madame Money, Prince, and Queen,
most mortal men endue.
And Boethius lib. 1. ante prosam.
Vnde habeant cura est paucis, sed oportet habere
per scelus, atque nefas, Pauper vbique iacet.
How they do get few men respect but riches have they must: By hook, or
crook, we daily see, the weak to wall are thrust.

These and the like vices both Poets, and Philosophers reprehended in their
days, when wickedness did but spring, as they themselves have testified. Then
how earnestlye is God to be desired, that the times may now be bettered and
these evils redressed. For albeit all manner of wickedness has in this age
ascended very high, yet are they not so come to the top, but that more
horrid, and mischeuous confusions then ever were, may be seen in Commonweales
through evil government. We may continuallye perceive that such as are
Parasites, and Flatterers, that can temporize, and sort their humors to be
pleasing, beat all then brains, (though without desert, learning or honesty)
and bend al their studies to be gracious in the eyes of the that are placed in
the highest seat and authority, by which it falls out many times, that (for
a season) they are well accepted, even of the best, but good Magistrates can
smell them out, and will banish their company knowing that friendship not to
be of countenance that is not grounded on the respect of virtue.

It is therefore to be wished, that all Christian Princes would carefullye
commit these words to contynuall remembrance? you shall know them by their
fruit. Men do not gather grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles. And again,
A naughty tree cannot bring forth good fruit. What (...)odnes then may be
looked for at their hands, whose delight has been ever in the execution of
evil? How can they then be profitable to their Princes, faithful to their
country, or careful of keeping Justice, and Laws, which in all their life
have been faithless to the King of Kings, and so far from keeping of
Justice, that they never had any sure knowledge of the same? what agreement, or
good mixture can fire have with water? heat with cold, equity with
unrighteousness? How can it be, that men should have a care of that countries
prosperity, from which their hearts are alienated, as if it were not their
native soil? Again: can men drowned in volumptuousnes (whose study is,
Quaerere Ovid. lib. (...). fast.
vt absumant, and absumptarequ^ere certant: to seek, that they may spend, and
strive to find that is naughtily spent: ambitious, and lovers of themselves)
with honesty prefer the Princes prosperity, before tbeir private profitte?
and the Commonweals good, before their own gain? So that to place such in
authority (if histories all times were noted) is to betray the Prince,
overthrow the Kingdom, and to yield the simple sheep to the cruelty of
ravening ^olues.

But because (in respect of this title to this small discourse,) it may perhaps
be expected that somewhat be spoken of the late insolent and traiterous
practice of Pearcy and his conspiracy, which I confess there has aready been
much learnedly written, and for that among other colored and shadowed courses
for their Rebellion, this principally was one: namely to reform religion, and
for his, and their conscience sake: whose Religion (if they had any) whereof
they made outward show and profession, was according to the Romish Church,
taught and brought heather from the Shambles, and Slaughterhouse of souls, (I
mean the Church of Rome) and continued here by Jesuits, and
Seminarie-Priestes, who closely, and in disguised manner steal into this Land,
and seduce and draw many souls of men from the true love, and worship of God
and his will, and from their native loyalty and obedience to their King and
Country. I have in regard thereof set down these special points ensuing: by
which the church of Rome is made so glorious, and which are stiffly taught, and
maintained by it, that it may be judged and censured whether it be the true
Spouse of Christ: or on the contrary, whether it be not the false Church, and
the apparent sinck and Synagogue of Satan.

1. First, whereas the Church of Rome will be known to be the true church, by
the Visibilitie, Antiquity and multitude thereof, and so be seen and pointed
at with the outward eye, and finger: you shall find that Visibilitie,
Antiquity, and multitude, are not the marks of the true Church but a little
flock, few in number and yet of greatest Antiquity: as by these places may
appear. For tell me I pray Act. 8. 1.
you where the Church was visible, when being assembled at Jerusalem, there
arose agreat persecution against it, insomuch as they were all dispersed and
^ca^^red: And where or (...) the church visible, when Christ was smitten, Mat.
12. 17
and all the rest was scattered, and hid, and concealed themselves. Does not S.
John in his Revelation expressly witness, Revel. 12. 6. 7.
that the church of Christ (signified there by a woman) fled into a desert or
wildetnesse, where she had a place prepared for her of God, and where she
could not for a certain season be found of the persecutors? Where was the
Church in the time of Elias the prophet? when he said, They have forsaken 1.
Kings. 19^ etc.
thy (...) they have destroyed thine Altar, and sla^ne thy Prophets with the
sword, and I am left alone. Agai(...) That under the reign of Achas there was
taken pattern of a the Altar 2. King. 16
of the Idol^ters of D(...)sens, and Vrias the high priest removed the Altar of
the Lord. It appears thereby that the Priesthood was corrupted, the Altar
removed and consequentlye the sacrifice ceased. I trust then there is no
Papist so impudent to ^ay, that either the true Church ^as in the Scribes and
Pharisees, or in the time of Achas, M^^asses, and many other Kings of Israel,
so visible and populous, as they would have it: But that the Church of Christ,
were in that small number where so^uer dispearsed.

2. Secondly, the Church of Rome holds, that Ignorance is the mother of
de^^tion. But Christ says, Ignorance is the mother of ^rr^r, saying you ^rre,
not knowing the Scriptures: And Christ Ma. 22. 29. Ioh. 5. 39. Coloss. 3. 16.
Act. 17.
^iddeth the people to search the Scripture. Paul commanded that word of God
should dwell p(...)sly in the people, whereby they might themselves: and the
Bereans examined the Scriptures.

3. Thirdly, the Church of Rome teaches, that the Scriptures (...) to ^^read,
and prayers to be used in a strange tangue. Saint Paul faith, He that speaks
in a strange tongue, speaks not 1. Cor. 1^
(...) but unto God, for no man hears him, howbeit, in the spirit he
speaks secret things. He that speaks in a strange language edifieth
himself. I would that you al spoke strange languages, but rather that you
prophesied. For greater is he that prophecieth, then he that speaks diverse
tongues, except he expound it, that the church may receive edification.

And now brethren, if I come unto you speaking diverse tongues, what shall it
profit you? etc. Morcouer things without life which give a sound, whether it
be Harp or Pipe, except they have a distinction in the sound, how shall it
be known what is piped, or harped? So likewise by the tongue except you utter
words which have signification, how shall it be understood what is spoken, for
you shall speak in the air.

4. Fourthly, The Church of Rome does teach there is a Purgatory, Christ in
the Gospel, shows only two places, namely heaven and hell. Christ said to
the good Thief, this day shall thou be with me in Paradlce, Christ says,
verily, Luke. 16. Lu. 23. 43. Ioh. 5. 25. Phil. 1. 2. 3 2. Cor. 5, 1. Reu. 14.
13
verily I say unto you, he that hears my words, and believes him that sent
me, has eternal life, and comes not into condemnation, but passes from
death to life. Saint Paul says, I co^et to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ, Again for we know that when this earthly Tabernacle of ours is
dissolved, we have a building of God, not made with hands, but eternal in the
heavens.

Again, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord; from hence forth they
rest from their labors, and their works follow them. And Saint Peter,
tells the Sa^^tes and Children of God, and assures them of it, That the end
of their faith is the Salvation of their souls. 1. Pet. 1. 9.


5. Fifthly. The Church of Ro^e teaches, that since the fall of Adam, man has
free will, whereas God says, After that time, Genesis 6.
that the imaginations of men's hearts are only, evil e^er^e day. Christ
says, No man c^n come unto me, except the Father draw Ierem, 7. Romans 3. 10.
him. Again, Convert thou me, and I shall be co^^erted. Also There is not one
that does good (...) not one. Again, without Heb. 11. (...). To, 14. 23. Ioh.
15. 1. (...)
faith it is impossible to please God. And again, whatsoever is not of faith,
is sin. Also except men be ingrafted into him they can bring forth no
fruits etc.

6. Sixthly, the Church of Rome delivers the Sacrament, (...) in one kind,
namely bread. Christ says, Drink ye all of this Cup. Mat. 26. 27 1. Cor. 11.
23. 28.
Paul says, Let a man examine himself, and so let him ^ate of this bread, and
drink of this Cup.

7. Seauenthly, The Church of Rome holds Transubstantiation in the Sacrament,
and this they would seem to ground upon these words. This is my body* which
they will have to be expounded liberally. But why then do they not expound the
words of Christ literally also concerning the cupp? For the Text says, in the
27. and 28. verses, that he took the Cup and said, this is my blood: I am sure
they will not say that the Cup was the blood of Christ, (as the words be) but
they will grant a sign in those words, namely, that by the Cup is meant, the
wine in it.

If then they will admit a figure in this, why may there not be a figure in
the other? namely, this is my body, should be understood thus: This bread is a
figure of my body, (which was broken for you,) circumcision was called the
Lords covenant, when indeed it was not the covenant. So likewise the Pascall
Lamb is called the Passover, when indeed it was but a sign of the Passover.

Christ says, Do this in remembrance of me. And Saint Paul says plainelye,
and expressly, that the communicants 1. Cor. 1^. 26. 28.
do eat bread, and therefore it remains bread after the words of
consecration. For if it were transubstantiated into the body of Christ, then
were there no Bread to eat, but the body of Christ is the thing that should
be eaten: But none do eat the very body of Christ, For if every
Communicant did eat the very body of Christ nturally, c^rnally, and really,
(as they ^^ossely suppo^^, Christ should have a number of bodies. ^esides, if
C(...) gave his body to be eaten really by his Disciples, at the tim^ of the
institution of this Sacrament, what was it that did hang upon the Cross on the
morrow^? moreuer it is said as touching the body of Christ. The heanens mus^
contai^^ (...) to the end of the world.

Eighthly, The Church of Rom^ hol^^^^ the Pope h^th ^oritie to depose King^^ and
Pri(...)s. God deposes the mighty from the^r seats, and ex^lteth them of the
low degree. It is Luke. 1. Dan. 2. 20. and 4. 14. and ^1. 2. Cor. 10. 4. To.
13. 1. 2 3. 4. 1. Pet. 2. 13 Tit. 3. 1. Ioh. 18. 36. John. 6. 15. Ma. 22. 21.
God that testifies of himself, by me Kings reign, and Pri(...) ha^^
domini^n. Paul confesses plain^ly, that the weapons of their war-fare are not
carnal, but mighty through God th^^ is spiritual. And it manifest by the
practice of the Apostles, and all their precepts, (commanding all Christians
to obey their rulers, their Kings, and Princes, yea though they were
persecutors) and the Apostles n^^er had any such authority committed to them.
Christ himself says, this Kingdom was not of this world: and refused to be
made a King: Christ himself paid tribute unto C^sar, and co(...)nded others to
give the (...) and all other d^etie of subiecti^^, and obedience to Caesar.

9. Ninthly, The Pope of Rome holds that he h^^h absol^t^ power to forgive
sinners. But the Scribes in the Gospel could say, none can f^rgiue sins but
God. Job says, who can bring a clea^e thing out of filthiness, there is not
one. And Esaias says, speaking Mark. 2. 7 Job. 14. 4. Esa. 45. 11.
in the person of God, I, e^^n I, (...) he that p^tteth away thine iniqui^ies
for mine own sake, and will not remember thy si^^es. And Paul confidently
affirms when he says Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen,
it is God that instifieth, who shall condemn? it is Christ which is dead, yea,
or rather, Romans 8. 33 34.
which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God and makes request
for us. Again the Lord i^ ^^^w to anger and of great mercy, and forgiving
iniquity. And in another place God Numb. 14. ^8.
speaking in ^i^ (...) person said, T^^^s ^e (...)th (...) f^^ Exo. 34. 7.
(...)ds (...), and transgr(...) (...). etc. 10. T^nthly, the Church of Rome
does teach, that the Script^^es c(...) no^ all tho^^gs n^cessarie ^^sal^ati^n;
but their v^written traditions must (as they say ^e all recei^ed with ^q^^ll,
and like authority, for so ^ath the Coun^^ll of Trent determi^^d. But S, I^^h
says that, these things are written that ye may bele(...), and that in
b^l^^^ing ye may have life eternal. And Saint Paul says that, the Scriptures
are profitable t^ repr^^^^ to 2. Tim. 3. 15. Deuteronomy. 4.
teach, and correct, to instr^ct and p^^fect the man of God: and f^^ther that
the Script^^es are able to ^ake men wise unto salnati^^, and God himself does
say, ye shall p^^ no^^^ng to the word* which I co^man^d you, neith^r take
^^ght there from. Again Deuteronomy. 1^
whatsoe^er I comma^nd you, that ta^e h^^d y^^ do put nothing thereto, n^^
take oug^t th^re from. And S. John in his Revelation Revel. 22.
says, that If any man shall add to t^is thing, God shall (...) unto him, the
plagues which are written in this book, and sha^^ ta^^ aw^y l^s part out of
the book of life. I might yet add further touching the Offices of Christ, for
that the Church of Rome will yield that the Office of Christ consists in
these three poin^es, namely that he i^ both a Proph^s, a Priest and a ^^^g:
which in words only, not in deeds and verity they w^ll acknowledge. For how
miserably the Church of Rome, has mangled and defaced the revealed will of
this sacred Prophet, their, unwritten traditions, their popish Canons, and
their own devises makes too apparan^. Touch^ng his Priesthood (which
consists in two things, namely the offering up of himself for once a full,
perfect, and sufficient sacrifice: and his intercession to his father, which
remains to the worlds end it is so pitifully defrauded, abused, and
dshonoured by them, as no pen with any modesty can set down. As by their
purgatory picck-pu^sc, their propitiatory Masses for the quick and the dead,
the blasphemous titles attribute to the Virgin Mary. For he call^th her the
Qu^^n of (...), the gate of Paradise, their life and sweetness, ^he ^easure of
^race, the re^^ge of sinners, and the Mediatrix of ^^n. And not only to her,
but to Saints departed they entreat wi^h like in^ercession, and hold them
the^r mediators.

Touching how they deal with Christ in hi^ rule and government, the Pope he
will reign in men's consciences, and will be tituled with Holy universal
Mother Church, which cannot err: holy father the Pope, Bishop vniuersal^
Prince of Priests, supreme head of the Ch^r^h, Vicar of Christ: and the
admiration of the world. and^. Touching his jurisdiction, he challenges to
himself both the swords; that is, the keys of the spiritual, and the Scepter
of the Laity, Not only subduing all Bishops under him, adua^^cing himself
above Kings, and Emperors, causing some of them to lie under his fee^e, some
to hold the stirrope: Kings to lead his horse by the Bridle, Some to kiss
his fee^e: placing and displacing al degrees of people: pretending power and
authority to inuest Bishops, to give benefices, to spoil Churches, to give
authority to bind and lose, to call general councelles, to set up
religions, to cannonize Saints, to take appeals, to bind consciences, to
make laws, to dispense with the law and word of God, to deliver from
purgatory, and to command Angels etc. By which it appears, that as he
presumes to go beyond Christ in this world, so would he (if he knew how)
expulse him also from heaven.

Now in equal balance, single eye, and honest heart, it may easily be
censured, whether the church of Rome be the spouse of christ, and whether Gods
word allow, and warrant his doings. I have but in brief past over the
particulars, for to discourse of these points would ask large volumes. Yet I
doubt not but all indifferent men, may behold by this, upon what rock these
Treasons have been builded if the cause (as is pretended) has been in regard
of Religion, and their conscience: and such (of what condition soever) (...)
been, and are still led on to dance after the Pipe of Priests, Jesuits,
and Seminaries, may see what ground and warrant they find to approve and
allow their actions and lives, in desending, and setting forth the Kingdom
of their Master (the Pope) whose creeping in corners, whose outward holiness,
whose Hypocrisy, Masses, Dirges, Beads, Crucifixes Prayers, Vows, whippings,
crosses, and Agnus deies, have heatherto brought forth naught b^^ rebellion,
and disobedience to Prince, and breach of Lawer and government.

Sybil Erithra^ speaking of Rome, tells that her name Libro. 8.
does comprehend many woeful destinies, and that in these verses translated
out of Greek into Latin by Castalion. Porro quater decies complebis terque
trecentes
Annos, atque octo, cum te pertingere metam
Tristia fata, tuo completo nomine cogent.


Now after what sort that Prophecye is fulfilled, Castilion shows in his
Annotations upon the same place, namely that Antychrist should be overthrown
and strangled with linen, that is, with interpretations of holy Scripture,
imprinted in paper made of linen.

That Rome elsewhere has a name according to her nature, it is apparent by a
certain answer of Pasquill.

Roma quid est? qualis doc^^^ (...) ordo.
Quid docuit? iung^^ (...)s.
(...) amor est, Amor est? qualis praeposterus* vnde hoc.
Roma, Noli dicere plura (...).
Hereof also in respect of her outward falsehood, which is lincked oftentimes
w^^h the spiritual ^ornication, she is worthyly called in holy scripture, an
Harlot etc.

Let us ^^en abandon all good respects of her and her popish instruments, let
us tu^ne from these seducers, their curssed Doctrine. and superstitious
ceremonies, and embrace the pure word of God, and willingly and thankefully
come to hear the same taught and preached. And if this year (the premises
remembered, and their treacheries from time to time duly considered) prove not
black, and fatal to them, that was intended to be balefull to us: If (I say)
their pride ^w not now suppressed, to the rooting out of their Hypocrisy, and
the setting forth of Gods glory, (for which every faithful Christian prays)
we may then expect their conspiracies to be still secretly continued, t^ei^
(...)tes to be encouraged and his Kingdom (so happy made by the late
discovery) not to be yet from imminent dangers thoroughly freed, or secured.

FINIS.

