The copy of a letter sent to one master Chrispyne chanon of Exceter for
that he denied ye scripture to be the touch stone or trial of al other
doctrines whereunto is added an appologie and a bulworke, in defense of the same
letter.

To the right worshipful and his syngular good Master sir Peter Carewe:
Philip Nicolles wysheth the continual favor of God.
Great comfort is it to Christ's pore floceke (right worshipful sir) among so
many hudge Rocks and wild seas, as our weste parts are compassed with all:
to have some port or haue^ where Christ's ships might cast ancre, and for a
space have succoure, till ye storms be paste. This fatherly provision makes
the al myghtie and most merciful Lord al ways to help the^ that be his. And
though Jonas sincke yet is ye whale ready to keep him from perishing and to
bring him to land, as among so many great storms, no marvel though some
have been pluged under the water but of such, gloriouse shall the resurrection
be. But in my country (my right dear sir) where most daynger appears to be:
scantly has there any wette their feet, praised may the name of God be
therefore, yt so provides for young suckelinges which else should be over
whelmed before they were weaned from their milk. Your pure and yernest zeal
toward gods truth and paynefull labors infendeynge innocents is not unknown
to a great menye. But would to God it were farther known, even tho row out.
Not that you should have the praises of men for your labor, for they belong
to God and it is wickedness to seek them from him, but that it might provoke
other me^ of worship, and honor also in all places, to so fervent and godly
desire of Christ's doctrine, to be publisshed among us, Namely the whole bible,
the scriptures of God, the new and old testament. Which only doctrine is a
lone sufficient to teach us the true worship of God, fayeth in his promises,
and in all good works, to walk the way to everlasting life. To the defense
of this heavenly doctrine (I say) would I provoke all me^ of honor and
worshipe, by your ensample, if wit and learneing failed not. Your gentleness
and liberalitye, toward me and al those that long for that heavenly
doctrine: I pass over with silence, to cut away occasions from iuell tongues,
although the example be greatly to be desired, in all men of worship, yea in
all them that profess Christ according to their power.

Al these things now considered, beside the manyfolde labors and daily
travail that you take diverse ways to have the veritye known, to bannyshe
lieinge and cloked holiness, to have the Lord truly worshipped, and to rote
cut Idolatry. Consideringe also your yerneste desire to this my small labor
in writing to master Chrispyne a simple letter, for as much as I perceived that
you were determinatly minded to put it in print I thought I could not bestow
my labor better, then to set it furthe in your name chiefly to purg me from
that euel suspicion that is like to ensue the printinge of it. For saying they
begin to byte me priuilye all redye, for exhibitynge certain Articles preached
of our learned men, and would persuade men that I did it of a prete^ced
malice, sekeinge their destruction: I know well they shall say much rather,
that it was my suite to have this my letter spread a broad, and that I did it
to seek praise, as they always seek most preise to them self, ye least
deserve it, or that I stand in mine own co^ceite as to think yt I have done
agreat act, whereas I acknoweledge it in deed to be but counterfaite, in
comparison of a great nu^bre that be well leraned. Which if they had the matter
in handlyng: these men might have been a shamed to show their faces in a
pulpit, to declare any such matter again Now to preuente these biteinge
serpents of this poisone the lord knows whether it be my fault or no to have
it printed, and you partly can testify. Notwithstanding* it shall not grieve me
to have it prynted, but rathere I shall be glad of it though it were but for
this cause only. To declare unto all other contreis, that deuensher lacks
not some well wyllers (at the least) as well among the pore creatures, as the
rich and worshipful, ye desire the glory of God and furdraunce of his word.
As touching the articles offerred to the visitours, which they say to be done
of malice, hatered, and many other good morowes, let such me^ know that I
hate their doctrine in deed. As for any malice that I owe to the men: I axe no
more grace and favor of the Lord, to be given to my self, then I wysh to the
vilest of them all, if it might so come to pass and please God. For I know
there can no such ranckor and malice dwell in any christen heart, as they
judge other men by them selves.

And this I say more over, that I am assured of these ministers and of the
kings counsel also: that they be no such blood thurstye tirantes, as have
pleasur in shedynge of blood. For if they were but as cruel in punisheinge
the blind wicked and sediciouse. I naught say, preachers, as the popes
ministers have been in tormentyng innocents: I take God to witness, I would
never have declared so much as I have unto them, though I should have smarted
for it. This much have I said, to declare unto all honest hertes mine
innocence in such things as they begin to lay to my charge: and to stope
the mouths of them, that can do naught else but sla^der, flatter, and
disse^ble, even with their frindes, that they might hold their tongues lest
if they pass their bounds. I open them to their shame let them take this for
a warning. Neithere let them think this spoken of malice, for I spoke it for
their honesty and quietness, as well as mine own commodity.

Now, to conclude in few words I have added to this my letter, a little
appologie or defense, the better to wythstande their cruel and subtyle deceit.
And because, they lie always lurckynge in bulworkes and will not come forth
into the open field, I have in the end made a little bulworke, out of the
which I have shot a few of their own pellettes. Not that I think them
necessary to confou^d them with all: but even to shame them when they shall se
them selves stricken with their own weapons

Esai. xxix.
Behold, now appear those meruailouse things that Esaye speaks of so
earnestly, in so much that he repeteth it again. Yea even meruailouse things
and a wonder, says he, and what is it? It follows. For the wisdom of the
wise shall perish, and the vnderstandeinge of the wyttye, shall hide it self.
But wherefore happens this? Look you a little before and you shall easelye
perceive the cause No man can open it more plain, then the prophet does him
self. Read the place.

After this will I pour out my spirit (says Joel) upon all flesh, Joel. ii.
and your sons and daughters shall prophecy your old m^n shall dream
dreams, and, your young men shall se visions. Yea in those days I will pour
out my spirit upon maidens and servants. and ct

Now therefore, i. Pet. ^.
seeing that S Peter affirms after the Prophet Esaias, that al flesh is
grass, Esaie. xi.
and al ye glory of man is as ye flower of grass, the grass withers and
the flower falls a way, but the word of our God abides for ever: I would
exhort in you (right worshippefull sir) all men from the hygheste to the
loweste, to cleave fast to the word of god. For it will come to pass, that who
soeu^r calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. Who eeuer defend you
Amen

Your humble and fayethful at your commandment Phillip Nicolles.

Here follows the copy of a letter writtyn to master Chrispyn chanone of
Excester concerning three questians put forth in his sermon, whereby he intended
to declare all them heretics, that would Gods word to be the touch stone:
IT chanced me, worshipful master Chrispen, to be at your sermon preached at
Marledon, the.xxiiii. Day of march last paste, at the months mind of
master Otes Gylberd. In which sermon, among other things, I remember you
envied Luther very sore, only because he would have the scripture to be the
touch stone, or trial of al other doctrines. And calling Luther, as it were,
into disputacions with al his disciples, you put forth three questians which
be these.

First, if there rose any heresies or dissentions before the Gospel was written
(as there did in deed, between Simo^ Magus and Simo^ Peter, and over the
circumsicion) ask Luther and his disciples, who now shall discuss the
matter, and who should be the touch stone to try the mattier. The Gospel,
can not, for it was not then written.

The second questian is. If one should deny Mathewes Gospel or say Mathewe
wrote it not: how can it be proved by scripture? It can not you say, for
scripture speaks not of it,

The third questia^ did deceive the ignorante people, which have little or no
knowledge, which is. If there be dissension or strife about the vnderstandeynge
of the scriptures, and both allege scripture, as the Areans did, who brought
to places of scripture for ye defense of their error, in such case you ask
who shall be judge: or by who^ shall this be determined. Or rather to use your
very words: where is Luthers touch ston? The scripture can not be touch stone
you say, for boeth bring forth scripture. Wherefore there must needs be an
other touch stone. Where is Luthers now? quoth you.. What answer can be made to
these questians? For Luthers touch ston will not serve. Your answer was there
fore, that Luther must give place and say with you, that it is the holy ghost
that must be touchston.

Thus you triumphed upon Luther and his disciples, meaneinge by Luthers
disciples, such, (I suppose) as hold this, opinion as though you had over
come the^ that they could answer nothing

This is easy to do, when a man has all the talk him self. But for as much
as you wyshed Luther there at your sermon or some of his disciples, to answer
to your questians? I think verelye you wylbe contented to hear a poor man
answer, though yet but simplye. But I do you to wit, that I am none of Luthers
disciples, for I know not Luther. But that I think him to be a man as you be
and therefore of him self a liar. But if Luther spoke the truth, I would
believe him as soon as you or any other that speak the truth For the truth, by
the which I mean gods word, can not be spoken with out holy gooste, if it
be spoken to the glory of God. But in deed, you or any other may wyckedlye
allege the scripture of your self without the spirit, to the defaceinge of
the glory of god and hinderaunce of his word, as the devil did to Christ
Mathe. iiii. But I will resort to the questians* with this protestacion, that
if I have by any means mysse reported your words, or other wise understood
them, then you meant: I hertelye desire you that you will charitably infourme me
what were your questians, what ye meant in them, and how you like this my rude
answer. In so doing* I will be confirmable to your counsel, or else I will
show you my mind why I ought not.

Now to your first questian, which is this. If there arose any dissension of
heresy before the gospel was written, as it happened in deed between Simo^
Magus and Simon Peter. Also over the circumsicion, where had been then the
touch stone?

To this questia^. by your leave master Chripyne, I will in this manner answer,
with Luther, and say the scripture must be the touch stone. If you say it was
not written: I answer. The word was in the begyninge. You will say that
Christ came according to the scripture, to finishe a new testament, which
he confirmed and sealed with his blood and when the new was come, the old
vanished away as Saint Paul affirms to the Hebrews. And you will say
peradventure, that Luther also means the new testa: mente, which was not
written, when the questian of circumsicion was moved, wherefore it could not
be the touch stone. To make many words about this questian in my co^ceyt, were
but loss of time. But I ask you, Master Chrispine, what difference is
between scripture written and scripture spoken, if boeth be scripture? You will
grant I am sure, that Peter, Paul and James words were scripture, when they
preached or taught the Gospel.

Then if any man had asked for scripture it might have been answered. Go to
Peter, Paul, and John with the other Apostles. For their preaching and counsel
was scripture. So lacked not at that time Luthers tuchestone, for the Apostles
wryttinges and preachinges agreed, and all was scripture. Wherefore this
questian is sufficientlye answered to the worthynesse of it

To your second questian which is. It any man should deny Mathwes Gospel, you
ask how it could be proved by scripture, that Matthew wrote it. To this I
answer, that if it be agreinge to the other scriptures, and dissent in
nothing from it: what daynger is it to call it Mathewes Gospel, who so ever
wrote it? And though you could deny Mathewes Gospel to be Scripture: yet
there is Scripture. For Mark, Luke and John's Gospel, Peter, Paul and John's
Epistles, be scripture But I doubt not you will grant Mathewes Gospel to be
scripture. But you will ask me how I know it. I answer, by the report of the
elders, holy fathers, mother holy church. How say you now? Have I
answered you well? Does not this answer please you? I think yes. But if I
should are the turks how they know that Mahomete was an holy prophet who
devised and caused to be devised, the Alcaron, what answer suppose you they
could make? I think none other but as I have made you before. That is we
know it by our elders or holy prophets and fathers before us. Now I will
ask you a questian which shall not be impossible, nor very unlike. If it
pleased God to move the heart of a Jew which were neither christian nor turk,
to seek in the world here, the most perfect religion. He goes to the Turks
and comes to the christians. Wherwyth would you perswad him to this perfect
religion? Would you preach to him constitutions, cou^selles and customs of
the elders? He might then as well believe the turks as you. For they have many
things in their law, that seem to be very godly. And their authority,
without authority of scripture, is even as good as yours. But I know you will
say, what so ever you think, that you would preach the Gospel unto him.
Then must you needs grant, that the scripture is of greater efficacy and
strength, them our fathers elleders and counsayles. If you will yet with your
questians affirm, that the fathers which descended from time to time from
the Apostles hither to: have greater authority then the scripture: I will axe
you an other questian.

The Apostles of Christ, forsook the ceremonies, customs and constitutions of
their elders, forefathers, and of as holy mother holy church in the
judgment of the world at that time, as yours is with the world at this hour,
and of as long continuance of time. Yet followed they Christ's doctrine, who
was named of those holy fathers, a sediciouse fellow, a new tidinges bringer
and an heretic. Answer me now, what touchstone had they to try Christ's
doctrine with that they so ernestlye followed him, and refused their
forefathers, old holy doctors, proceadynge from Moses to Christ? There were
at that time ancient fathers which had great learneing, both byshopes and
priests. The tradions, ordinances and ceremonies which they used, received
they of their elders, like as you would have us to receive the constitucions
of our elders. Tell me now, how can you excuse the Apostles? They were but
pore fisher men and net makers, they were not brought up in the schools, they
had not the leisure toturne and toss those great volumes to be made
doctors of deuinitie nor law.

And yet within a while, they took upon them to teach the great doctors, and
what might those holy fathers have said to these fishers? Take heed to your
fysheynge. What have you to do with the scripture? It is not mete for every
coblarde to be talkeynge of scripture. How were these men so lyghtlye
persuaded?

What touchestone I say had they? But seeing you would so feign have the name
of the holy fathers and holy church. I axe you this questian.

Those Apostles and Disciples of Christ which were in his time with him
present, which preached and wrote the scripture: were holy fathers and of the
perfect true church.

If the fathers syeth their time have dissented from them in doctrine, manners,
custom, laws, or in any thing partayneynge to Christ's relygion: which
fathers would you follow? If you deny that the fathers have dessented, as is
a fore said, I refer the prove of it till a time of more leisure. Partly
because I think you will not deny it, but chiefelye because my letter would
be to long.

Wherefore I will come to your third question, which in deed includes the
matter of all the rest which is this.

If there arise any contention in vnderstandeynge the Scriptures wherein, boeth
the parties bring scripture for them: who shall now discuss the matter?
Where is now the toucheston? The scriptures can not. For boeth bring
scripture. And the scripture you mean causes ye co^trouersye. But I ask you
whether the scriptures be divided or no? If they be divided: then according to
Christ's word, they must be confounded. But that is an inconvenience and I
know well you will not grant that If the scriptures be not divided, but agree
in one, as they do in deed, for one place cannot be repugnaunte to an other,
though it so seem: then have not boeth parties scripture for them, but ye one
party must needs falsely allege scripture.

But you will ask me who shall give sentence, or by whom the co^trouersye
shall be appeased, and where is Luthers touchstone? In deed at your sermon, no
man made answer. Wherefore you made answer and said, the holy gooste must be
tuchstone. As who should say, Luthers answer were not the very same. When he
says gods word must be the touchston as you report of him. And I pray you
master Chrispyn, what difference is between gods word and gods spirit? Is
not gods word the breath of gods mouth? And call you not that the holy
ghost? How be it, it is easilye perceived what ye mean. Ye put in the holy
ghost for a cloak to deceive us with albeit ye mean nothing less then the
holy gooste If you ask me how I prove it: I answer thus I prove it. Without
fayeth it is not possible to please God, but fayeth comes by the word of god
Ergo, without the word of God nothing can please God. But you exclude the word
of God from the spirit of God, and in stead of that join unto it, fathers,
counsayles, and our mother holy church for you say the word of God can not
be touchston* but only bear witness, but the holy gooste is the touch
stone, who was and is in the holy fathers, that have always gathered
counsayles by which all things must be judged and dermined. To prove this ye
allege these words.

Where so ever two or three be gathered together etc. These holy fathers, you
affirm to be the byshopes and prelates. But thus to include the holy gooste
into byshopes, you exclude ye word of god.

If this be not to be disceiued, sure I am deceived. But it were necessary for
you to prove the chur, that you speak of to be the true-holye, and catholyke
church, before you persuade men so ernestye to belyeue and stycke unto it. But
I say, the church that takes away the authority of gods word, or
diminishes it by any means, is not of Christ.

But you master Chrispyne, grant your self to be of this church, Ergo
etc. And in mine opinion, you do naught to say that all holy fathers from
Christ to this time, were of the same opinion that you be of concerning gods
word. For I dare say Augustine (whom you admytte to be of the very holy
church will not hold with you in this matter.

But if he would, the authority of Christ is greater. Who is it that will
not suspecte your church, seeing you set it so high in Lucifers place above
Christ, and separate the hollye ghost from Christ, where as Christ says, I
am that I say unto you? What is yt he spoke unto us? Is it not his word? He
says moreover, the words yt I speak, are spirit and life. I pray you,
master Chrispine, what spirit meant Christ here? What life speaks he of? Can
there any man bring out of his breast, either by writting, preachinge or
otherwise teacheinge, or speakeinge, the sentence of the holy spirit without
gods word? Is not the sentence or word of the holy gooste the word of
God? Is it not to be vnsterstand of the lyueynge faith that the holy ghost
works in the soul of man in believing the word Is not the scriptur called the
two edged sword? Is it not also called the sword of the spirit? May ye
separate the spirit from the words, seeing he calls them spirit and life? I
think not* No more than heat can be separated from fire. Why then in the name
of the holy gooste, do you undermine Christ? The church, you say, must be
judge, and the scripture must be witness only. So must Christ be inferioure
to me^. For I am sure you will not deny but these holy fathers, which you call
the church, were and be men. And those you say must be the judges. And Christ
to be the word and promise of the father, he himself witnesses sayeinge. I
am that I say unto you, and him you make but a witness or judge. Therefore I
say your church is to be suspected. As toucheynge the true spose and
catholyke, church of Christ, which are very members of his body, and he the
head: this church has so much authority as the scripture gives them, and
take upon them no more for the scripture and they are one, and for the
scripture they ieoparde their lives, as many have done, whom you and your
forfathers, bishopes and prelates have always put to dath. Who persecuted ye
prophets and put them to death. Who procured Christ to the cross? Who the
Apostles with many othere holy men? Were they not bishops and prelates of the
church? How many godly preachers with other good souls, has the bishop of
Rome put to death by the help of prelates in diverse contries sith he came to
the supremitye, and beareynge a rule over kings and emperors? Has there not
ben some put to death here in England within these.xx. years, for speakeynge
against the Pops pardons and pylgrymages, with such like abuses? Was not the
Pope chief of these holy fathers, whom you call holy church, and would have
them judges? But I know what you mean. You would perswad the multitude, that
you and your church, be the very true church, and have the holy gooste and
that what so ever you do is well. But whereby do ye perswad the^? By old
custom (for you have nothing else) and long continuance of time, the which
if you could beat in to the heads of the communaltye: your reformacion of
things that are amysse, should be as you lust. But master Chrispyne, if you
were not in darckenesse you could not refuse the light. Christ says, if you
continue in my word: then are you mi very Disciples, and ye may know the
truth, and the truth shall make you fre.

But he that refuses me, and receives not my words has one alredye that
judges him the word that I have spoken, shall judge him in the last day.
Behold, Christ says his word shall be judge. All that be of Christ, hear
Christ's words.

Master Chrispyne, my lettere is longer then I though it should have been,
how it shall like you I can not tell, but hertily desire you, if you love the
truth and desire the glory of God: answer with the truth and defend the
truth, and do not wyllfully resist the truth. But defend it not with the
authority of men, but with the power of God, and that with charity, For if I
have by any means spoken any thing in this letter more rigorously then
charity requires whereby you might be offended at me iustlye: I am ready in
such case with all mine heart to be reformed. Wherefore I eftsoon desire you to
answer me, as it becomes a true preacher, for quietynge of my conscience. And
so doing I comitte you to Christ and his word. Amen.

Yours lokinge for an answer. Philip Nicolles.
Written, xxiii. of Aprile. MDxlvii.
HEre haste thou my letter (gentle reader) even word for word as it was
delivered to master Chrispyne. And truth it is, I wrote it inmediately after
my retoune from his sermon, even while it was hot. For it grieved me that it
had not been lawful for me to have answered him even incontinente before all
the audience.

For he persuaded them al, for the most part, that nothing could be said
to the contrary. Which grieved me to hear. Not wythstandynge, when I had
written my letter: I did not se^de it forth with, but paused a while, partelye,
seeinge there was such a great audience, to se whether any man of woship, or
some better learned then I would take the mattier in hand. But after I had
rested upon this a month or.vi. weakes and perceived that no man busied him
self in it (al though there were present men of worship prete^ding to have
knowledge) I sent forth my letter, the last day of Apriel or nere there
about. And because the mesenger did not in all things fulfill my request, I
wrote again to master Chrispyne, desireinge him to send me an answer by the
sayede bearer of my letter, to who^ he gave this answer. That he would not
writ, but common with me him self. I left him not thus, but wtin a while
after he came to a benefice yt he has called Herberto^, besyd Totnes, and
preached there ye su^day after corpus Christi day, as they call it, and ye
mu^daie in the morning: I went to him and communed with him, and spent well most
ye whole day. In which co^municacio^, we swarued not from these.iii. questia^s.
I I resorted unto him again, not long after ye, and had much talk with him, al
which co^municacio^, I have not: nor will babble out, al thought it be reported
yt I came to him for non other purpose, but to have matter to talk of, and to
accuse him. But yet they be to blame so to report of me. For if Master
Chrispine, or other yt be more busy peradventure in talking then he him self,
can say* yt I have accused him of any such private co^municatio^: let the^ lay
it to my charge, else let the^ for shame hold their peace, and say ye thing
they know. As for the words that he or any other shall speak in a pulpyt or
any such like audience. I am sure they will be co^te^ted to hear of the^
again. If not let the^ hence forth desire their audience to keep counsel or
else truly, if I be present, and hear any thing spoken against god or my
prince especially against the doctrine of Christ: I must needs disclose it.
If they will blame me for this: I am contented to bear it, how be it un
worthy in my own conceyte, let other judge.

But if he were able to defend it that he had preached, why should he fear
to write to the defense of the same? Wherefore, saying he has received my
letter, keeps it, and will not write again, and yet blames and fyndeth diverse
fautes in it: why should he be grieved with me, for spreadeynge a brood mine
own doings, to utter mine own secrets. And where as he was offended with me
(although I have not, nor will lay any such private communicacion to any
man's charge, specially of mine own seekynge) yet I say I must declare my
meaneinge more plainly, in those things which he is so much offended
wythall, to thentente that no stublynge stock be purposely laid in my
brothers way, that he should not understand the truth and praise God. For
although I found master Chrispyne very gentle and charitable to talk wythal
(for yt which thing I have and will give him praise yet disputes he
subtlelye, and especially when he thinks to have young scholars in
handelynge, as he did with me. For in this he put me to my trumpe, because I
asked him in my letter what difference was between scripture written, and
scripture spoken. Now truth it is, that according to the Etimologie of the
word, which comes of Scribo, and so to Scriptura: it can not be called
Scripture, unless it be written. And so every thing written, may be called
scripture. And in that sentence, we shall find no difference between the bible
and Robyn hod, by this name scripture, for both may be called scripture I
say, after the very nature of ye word Lo hear have you an example of
sophistri. Let young scholars take heed by me, how they meddell with the^. For
whereas I mente symply after the commone usage and phrase of ourespeache,
meaneinge by Scripture written and spoken: the prophecy of ye old and new
testament the doctrine of Christ even the very word of God, as well being
opened by the mouth of the Apostles unto the hears in those days, as written
with their own hands, and read unto us now in our time: he now takeinge
his advantage at ye nature of ye latin word Scriptura, out of which this
english word scripture is diriued: denies that it may be called scripture,
unless it be written What other thing is this then a mere sophistical
cauillacion? The scribes and pharisees in Christ's time (by like) had not
learned their sophistry or else they were not so curiouse as our me^ be. For if
they had, they might have asked Christ, when he bad the^ search the scriptures,
what scripture he me^t. ii. Tim. iii.
But Paul therefore preue^ting such subtle disputi^g calls it holy scriptur
given by inspiracion. Thus you se, a man had need (as the proverb goes) to
have a long spone yt shall eat with ye devil. It is no marvel, though master.
Chrispin in his lesson not long se^ce, did so much co^me^d distinctions, and
proved the^ so necessary yt we could not be without the^. For he that shall have
to do with such sophisters had need to make diffinicio^s, and premeditat his
words before (...) pretacion. For the prophecy was never brought in by the
will of man, but ye holy me^ of god spoke as they were moved of the holy ghost.
Now if I should ask. S. Peter what he means by scripture here, I think he
would say the word of god. But it is the word of god writtine would you say,
yet does. s. Peter say it of the same written word ye the holy men of God
spoke, as they were moved by ye holy ghost. But truly I think it but a vain
thing and even a loss of time to trifle in such questians which can no way
edifye, especially, seeing S. Paul does so often diswade Timoth from such
foleishe questians: i. Ti. vt.
and exhorts him to cleave fast to the word of God If any man says he,
teach other wise and agrees not to the wholesome words of our lord Jesus
Christ and to the doctrine of godliness: he is puffed up, and knows
nonothing, but wastes his brains about questians and striueing of words,
whereof spri^geth envy etc.

After a like manner also he took me up (how be it more ernestlye for that I
said, John. i. John. viii.
the word was in the beginning and for alleging, Christ's words, I am that I
say unto you. Or even ye same thing that I speak unto you As though I went
about to prove yt Christ was but a voice only, or a written letter in paper.
Thus he dalyed with me and was in with his disti^ctio^s, whether I me^t by ye word
ye voice, ye breath, or the written word, with many double doubts. For mi
words (he said) as they stood in my letter, were heresy. But I told him yt I
me^t it by ye same word yt the lord Jesus christ taught, as Christ him self
wittnesseth. I am even the very same thing yt I speak unto you. He said that
the words were not as I alleged them them. For the latyne has (said he) Ego
sum qui loquor vobis. Now as for the alledgeinge of those words? I follow the
English translatours, whose lerneynge I can not correct. If he can amend
their doings: he shall have good leave for me. Notwythstanding saying that, he
makes my words to dayngerouse: I cannot but say more in it, although they can
not be spoken (in my co^ceyt) more plain to be understand, the^ they be alredi
written. For. s* John says. The word was in ye beginning and the word was with
god and God was the word. Now, to deny that Christ is the word of God, by
which all things were made: I say is anheresie in dead. Therefore it must
needs be granted that Christ was and is the word of God.

Psalm. Cxviii
Thy word Lord (says the prophet) is a lantern to my fet and a light to my
paths. Again he says. Idem. Cxiii.
When thy word goes forth, it gives light and vnderstandeynge even to babes.
Now what means he by this word that gives this light? Christ says, I am
come a light into ye world, that who so ever be leueth in me should not abyd in
darkness By these and many other it will appear, Christ to be the true word
of God. But now will they grant that Christ is the word that came from the
father, the light of the world the life of the world, Deute. xxxii.
as Moses says: set your hertes on ye words that I testify, says he, for
it is no vain word but your life. I am sure I say, they will grant Christ to
be the word, but not the word wryttyn which we read in the book. In deed,
to say that Christ may be written in paper, or that the letters which be
made of incke and paper should be Christ: were a fond opinion and such as I
never hard of. But the words written in the book, which we call the scripture.
As the prophets from Moses to Christ, and the doctrine of the apostles, which
is written we call it the Gospel, we call it the scriptures we call it ye new
testament and the old these words written in a book, being read unto the
people, to enstruction and edifying of ye congregation is the word of god, yea
Christ ye bread of life which came from heaven so ye whosoever eats thereof, Io.
vi.
shall live ever. The words that Moses did testify unto the children of
Israel, and said unto them it is no vain word but your life: be they not
written? And be they not our life as well as theyrs? But what life ca^ they be
unto us, if they be kept from us so that we know the^ not? Did Moses hyde them
away, and say they would make me^ heretykes? But all such as do evil hate the
light, John. iii.
and come not to it that their deeds should not be reproved but he that does
the truth comes to the light, that his works may be known, for they be
done in God.

Again, I am the light of the world says Christ. Why should these men
refuse gods word to be their light, if they were of god: why should they
fear to say ye Christ's word is Christ the word of the father, Esai. viii.
the light that lyghneth al men that come unto him? Esaye says. If any man
want light, let him look upon the law and testimonies. What means he by the
law and testimonies? means he not the scripture or written word of God,
shall we not there find the light? I would ask these disputers of the
world. Whether the Gospel be written or no? I thyncke they will grant that
it is written. Romans i
Well Saynct Paulle says, he is not a shamed of ye Gospel of Christ, for it
is the power of God, which saves all that believe. Now is this gospel written
for our learneing, and saves as many as believe. Mark well the beleuers are not
saved because it is written but they be saved, because they believe ye which is
written. I ask these philosophers, whether ye words that Christ speak be
written or no? I trow the Evangelists have written the most necessary
things, yea the very secrets and hyd things. If Christ's words which he
spoke be written, then the word yt is written shall judge these vnbeleauers in
the last day. For thus says Christ. John. xii
He yt refuses me and receives not my words: has one alredye yt judges
him. The word (says he) that I have spoken, shall judge him in the last day.
Understand now gentle reader, yt these fathers, would under colors pluck a
way the great authority of the scriptures, and diminishe (through subtyle
disputinge) ye efficatie and strength of the gospel. Whether they do of hatred
to gods word, or blindness and ignorance in the same, or else for lucers sake,
I can not tell But to far wander they out of the way. But I exhort the though
they be to far on the left hand, rune not you to far on ye rigt hand. Enter in
at the strayte gate, for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leads to
destruction, and many there be ye, Math. vii.
go in there at. But strayte is ye gate and narrow is the way that leads
unto life and few therbe ye find it. This is therefore the sum of this
disputacio^ yt Christ is the word and wisdom of the father, in whom who so
believes has euerlasteinge life. Ioh. viii.
This same word did he him self preach and says. John. xv.
If you abide in me any my words abide in you: ye shall axe what you will, and
it shall be done unto you. Behold whereas he said before. If you continue in my
words: now he says. If you bid in me and my words abid in you. By this it
is evident, that Christ is the word, even that word which was preached from
the beginning is preached now, and shall be to the end. And although Christ be
not, as is said, incke and paper, or a word closed in a book as thought we
might say, looe, here in this book is Christ, or in that book is Christ:
yet was it the will of God that this heavenly doctrine should be written, and
that it should remain with us, and also that these words written being
read unto us, should be unto us, eue^ that same word that Christ spoke when
he said. He that is of god hears gods word. And even the very same (to
them that believe) that he speaks of sayeing If any man keep my word, he
shall never se death. And to them that believe not: the same that he says shall
judge the unbelievers in the last day.

Now mark well, John. x^
I beseech the and consider with thy self, the mischief of these subtyle
sophisters. They make it wounderfull dayngerouse, to call the scriptur Christ.
They be very careful to have the true worship of god preserved and kept. And
they feeare least we will fall to worshipynge of the very book wherein the
testimonies of Christ be written. And therefore do they withdraw all men from
readeinge and heareing it as much as they can. But alas, why be they not so
ware and dayngerous in their lay men's books (as they call them) which all the
scripturs cry out upon, even from the begininge of the old testament to the
later end of the new. By the which books (or rather abominable Idols) it is
open and manifest, that much Idolatry has been committed, yea and will be still,
so long as there is one left standing in the temples.

The word of god, the doctrine of Christ, which he and his Aposteles so
ernestlye taught, exhorted and commanded to harken unto, to beleaue and follow
(almost all the bible is nothing else) this I say, they cannot suffer any man to
have to do with all. They have burned it from time to time they burned the
readars of it, as all the world can testify. It is manifest, that they bear
little good will to it unto this day. But these mahomets puppetes and very
Idolles, which have not one word in all scriptur for them, but contrary, to the
utter abolishinge of them, these they can suffer to be called Christ saint
savior, saint Sundaye, the holy trinity, our lady of Pitye our lady of
grace, our lady I can not tell whereof. Alhallowes with a thousand like names.
Yea they can abide that the people should worship those still, for they never
preach against them, but rather defend them, to keep the unlearned in their
blindness still. Alas, to open is your doing now (O you catholyke fathers)
every child may perceive your blind doctrine.

Yet will not you cease to exalt this false church and co^gregacio^ of
deceyceyuers, eue^ above god him self For God was the word, ii. (...). ii.
and above the rule of this word, sete ye your own tradicions, in the name of
Christ's church. Thus did Christ prophecy that you should come, Math. xxiiii.
and that you should do miracles and wonders. In so much that even the
very elect (if it were possible) should be brought into errowre. And saint
Paul says you shall come with lieinge signs and wonders, ii. These. ii. i.
Timoth. iiii.
and with al deceyueablenesse of unrighteousness. And to Timoth he says, you
shall forbyde marriage and meats.

So plain is it in all the scripture, that they that read it must neades
understand it. Most evident and plain it is, that ye be even of the same
sinful sinagoge For truly the spouse of Christ is obedient to her bridgrome.
The disciples of Christ, harken to their Master. And doubtless we can not be
Christ's very disciples, unless we continue in his doctrine. He yt is of God
hears gods word. and he that kepeeth this word, shall never se death.

Moses says. Deuteronomy. iiii.
You shall put nothing to the word which I command you, neither take ought
there from etc. Again. Iosue. i.
You shall turn neither to the right hand, neither to the left but in the
way which your lord god commands, shall ye walk. What more plain
commandment can there before the establishment of the authority of ye word of
god? Moises had, Deuteronomy. vi.xxxii.
the children of Israel should write them upon the posts of there doors, and
bind them upon their hands to teach their children. He says they be our
life. John. vi.
And Christ says his words be spirit and life. Saint Peter says we have a
sure word of prophecy, and ye do well to take heed there unto, as unto the
light that shines in a darcke place etc

If this word were not written, that we might know whyther to resort for all
this: what should it avail al these words? What were we the nere for all
these testimonies, if the sum of Christ's doctrine were not written, and the
certaynetie vnkowe^? Who should be certain of his fayeth, if we had not a
prescripte and certain doctrine whereunto we moughte resort to have this in
fallible veritye. Math. vii.
How should we know these false prophets to come in shipes clothing
outwardly, and inwardly be rauenynge woulfes: if we had not a sure touch stone
to try their doctrine with all? Galath. 1.
If any man preach unto you (says Paul) other then ye which is preached
alredye, although it were an angel from heaven: let it be accurssed. What be
we ye nere of these words: if we be in doubt where to find this Gospel?
Apoc. xxii.
But I testify unto every man (says saint John) that hears the words of
prophecy of this book If any man shall add unto these things: God shall ad
unto him the plages that are written in this book. And if any man shall mynishe
of ye words of the book of this prophecy: God shall take a way his part out
of the book of life. etc. To conclude therefore I say playnelye, that to deny
the scripture, the Prophets and Apostles, whose prophesies are written in the
Bible, to be a sufficient doctrine and enstruction necessary for our
salvation, or to say that it ought not to be the touch stonne and trial of
al other doctrines above all other doctrines of any other men, above their
laws, decres and customs or ceremonies (beside this book) whether it be of
men or angels: it is not only heresy, but also a diuellishe and damnable
doctrine. Now to our bulwarcke.

The bulwark for defense.
THis is chiefly to be noted, yt gods word is never spread abroad, without
contencion, strife, and much troble, as Christ himself affirms sayeynge.
Think you not that I come to send peace, Math. x.
but a sword. For I am come to set variance between the father and the son,
the mothere and the daughter etc. For what agreement can there be between a
beleuinge son and vnbeleueinge father and so contrary. Now says Christ.
He that loves father and mother more then me: is not mete for me etc. He yt
finds his life shall lose it. And he yt loses his life for my sake shall
find it. Marcke this also, yt by no thing do these false deceivers, be gilde ye
simplicite of ye multitude so much as by the name of our fathers, by custom
and long continuance of time, by which things they confirm their church.
For look what has been done of our elders and forfathers that is their
gospel. To break these tradicions and customs: is to break their whole
religion. The scribes and phariseis, axed Christ why walk not thy disciples
after the tradicions of the elders, Math. vii.
but eat bread with unwashed hands? etc. Likewise these Hypocrites, when
they se any man break an old custom, though it be but eateyng of an egg
upon a frydaye, how greouslye take they the mattier? But even as Christ
answered the phariseis and scribes: so may I right well answer these fathers
saying. Esai. xxix.
Full well has Esai prophesied of you Hypocrites as it is written (mark here,
that Christ goes to the scripture) This people draw nere me with their
lips: Colos. ii.
but their heart is fare from me. But in vain do they serve me whylse they
teach such doctrines as are nothing but the commandments of men. Ye leave
the commandment of god: and keep the traditions of men. In the stead of
washing of cups and cruses: what a sort of ceremonies have we? what is holy
bread? what is holy water? What be holy candeles? What are holy bows?
Touch not the water in the font, handle not the chalise nor the corporace.
Good lord what a sort of such commandments have we of our fore fatheres?
Oh, how goodlye have you cast aside the commandments of God to maynetayne
your own tradicions? I beseech the (good christian reader) mark how vehemente
the Lord Jesus is him self against the beggarly tradicions of men to bring
us to the will and commandment of God. What can the grateste doctor of the^
all, say unto this? Is it not open and manifest to all the world that for
breakeing of these triflinge and foleishe tradicions, they have punished men
greuouselye, even with death? And have we not seen the breakars of goods
commandments unpunished at all? As swerars drunckardes, whoredom, and
auoutrie with all the rest? Behold, all christendom knows, that this is no
lie. My trust is therefore, that the magistrates will now look upon this gear.
For these fellows never go about any such thing. But because they blind the
ignorant souls with holy doctors, holy fathers, and holy church from
Christ's time hitherto: you shall se what the holy doctors say, eue^ such as
be most ancient and best learned, as they them selves will grant.

Augustine in an epistle to Fortunatus, has these words. Epist. clxxxxviii.
We ought not to regard and esteem the disputacions of any, though they be
never so catholyke and well praised, as cannonicall scripture, but that we may
saueing the reverence that ought to be given unto such men, reprove and spue
out again, any thing in their wryttynges, if perchance we find that they
understand ought in their writings, otherwise then the truth has, which is
perceived by the help of God, nether by our selves or other. etc.

Such a one am I in other men's writtinges: as I would other men should be in
mine.

If we had no more sayeinges of the doctors, but this one, consideringe the
estimacion Augustine is in: it were inoughe to overthrow all the confidence
that they would teach us to have in men's writings, beside gods word. But
hear an other He writes unto Hierome and says. Libr. iii. Fol. clxi.
I have learned to give this fear and honor only, unto the writters which
be called canonical: yt I steadfastly believe that none of them have erred in
writtinge. For if I find any thing in those letters yt seems contrary to
the truth: either I think the book not to be true, or the translater has not
truly followed his copy, or else I think verilye I do not understand it. But
I read al other writers, says he, after this manner, that I think, be they
never so holy and well learned, that it which they have written is not strayte
way true because they have thought so: but because they could make me believe
it either by those canonical authoures, or else by some probable and sure
reasone, which dissenteth not from the truth. Libro. ii. Cap. xxiii.
He writes against one Cresonius the gra^maria^ saying. I am not bound by
the authority of this Epistle, because I do not co^pt and esteem Ciprians
letters as canonical and of like authority with the scripturs, but I way the^
and po^der the^ by the scripture. If I find any thing in the^ agreinge with the
authority of holy scripture: I receive it with his praise. But if it agree not
by his leave and favor I refuse and for sake it. Again in his treatise of
shepherdes. Tractatu postorum.
He has ordained ye hills of Israel (says he) ye authors of holy scripturs
There feade ye, that you may feade salfelye. What so ever ye hear of that:
let it sauoure well with you, whatsoever is besides that, spite it out again,
lest ye err in the cloud. Addict your selves to the meaneynge of the
scripture.

There is the deyntie of ye heart there is no poysen, no straynge thing, there
only is the most wholesome feadeyng. Behold the mind of this great doctor,
named to be one of the greateste clerks that wrote sense the aposteles time. He
would have no man's doctrine, what soever he be, to be compared to the holy
scriptures. Augustinus in prologo tertu. lib. De Trinitate.
In his own wryttynges he warns us, that we should not give over much
credence, in the things, says he, that you think yourselfe suer, unless ye
surely understand it: believe it not so stidfastely. And writing to Vincentius,
he grau^teth that he has written some things worthy to be blamed, Idem ad
Vincentium.
and therefore says that he has made a book of retractacions, reuoking and
casting again that which he had made before, that the readers thereby may
learn that al his writings in all points did not please him. This diffidence
had Augustine in his writings, that in no case he would compare them with the
scripture. And look what opinion he had of his own writings: even the same
had he in all other men's besides the canonical scriptures For he says in his
book of retractacio^s, I ca^ not nor ought to deny says he, but, like as in
mine elders so are many things in so many several works yt I have made,
which may be blamed without rayshnes, and with good judgment.

If Austen will have no credence given to men's writings, whether they be
bishops, Epist. xlviii.
or what so ever they be unless they bring the authorite of scripture with the^
as he writteth to Vincentius. We must make a difference (says he) between men's
wryttinges He names Hilarie, Ciprian, and Agrippie, which be like were
byshopes, and the canonical scriptures. For they ought not so to be read
(says he) as though we might geuefurth such testimonies of them that it
should not be lawefull to think other wise then they affirm. For
peradventure, they understand it otherwise the^ ye truth requires. He yt
lusts to search Auste^s works shall find many things contrary to their
proud doctrine and kycking against ye scriptures, yea contrary almost, to al
their blind erroures In so much that I have meruayled, that they have had him
so long in such estimacion, and had not rather condemned him for an heretic.
As for the authority of men's doctrine beside the scripture, he can not abyd.
But in all things he wylleth us to have respect to the scripture eue^ in
prayseing god (says he) let it be done as he has appointed, lest in
steppinge a side, we offend him that we would praise. Austinus super Ssal.
cxlxii. Libr. vi. Cap xiiii.
And against fanstus, be writes eue^ the same we must not turn, either to
the right hand, neither to ye lift, no not in ye praise that we give to god.
But even the same praises, says he, must we frame according to ye will of ye
scriptur. And in ye xvi, Cha. he says, that they which would teach ye people
any other thing the^ ye canonical scriptures are not only false prophets but
theaues and robbars eue^ of our savior. How ca^ our old catholic fathers
abide this fellow? He calls the^ false prophets, theaues and robbars. It is
time the popes excommunication were out for him. He writes against the
Maniches and says. Despise you the scriptures, which are commanded and
established with so great authority? You do no miracles, which if you did,
yet we would be ware of them in you, because the Lord teaches us to beware of
such saying. There shall arise many false Christ's etc. Many mo places may
there be found in this man's works, which they may be a shamed to hear, if
it were nedfull. But because they shall not conceive al there malise against
Austen, and paraue^ture have him in examinacion, for slanderinge these holy
fathers ye shall hear what Hierome says. He declares. yt Christ speaks in
Peter, in Paul, and that of the people and princes, ye scripture is to be
understood of the doctrine of the Apostls. Of those says he, which were in
it, and not of those which we behold now.

And mark what he says Those that were, and not those that be, that ye
moughte understand that what so ever shall be said after the Apostles time: let
it be cut a way says he, for it has none authority afterward. Therefore, if
there be any S. after the Apostles time he has none authorite, for they come to
late to be allowed, quia no^ fueru^t in ea, says he. If ye saints must give
place to the holy scripture, and have none authority besides that: than what
are they that make articles of our faith? or at least condemn the^ for
heretics that will not receive that doctrine that has none authority of ye
scripture, but rather against the scripture. The same Jerome upon Jeremy
says. And they have gone after straing gods, as their fathers taught them.
etc. Therefore (says he) neither of our forefathers nor of our elders is the
error to be followed, but the authority of the scripture and the
commandment of God which teaches us. The same Jerome upon Ezechiel, says
also yt we may sin as much when we think in our own opinion yt we do well:
as when we willinglye do naught. He writes upon ye prophet Nahum, and says,
yt against the co^ing of Christ: ye people shall fle to the scripture, and
their study shall be allowed, because they shall not find any to teach them, and
the slothfulness of their teachchars shall be rebuked. Marcke well this
propheci, for suerelye it byteth. He writes upon Math. and says. Any thing
that has not authority of ye scriptur may as sone be rejected and despiced,
as approved and allowed. Tomo. v.
Again to Ctesipho^ he says. What soever we affirm we must do it by the
testimonies of holy scripture. What soever is done without these books, is in
nowyse to be received. Do these doctors set so little by the authority of
gods word, Capit. xlv.
as our men would persuade us?

Do they not rather attribute al together to the scripture? Ambrose also in the
book of paradise upon this that Eve added to the words of the Lord (Neythere
shall ye touch the try) We do learn by this present lessone, Tomo. xi. Ca.
pite. iii.
says he, that we ought to ad nothing to the word of God, Capit. xxiii.
no though we do of it good intent or warines.

For if thou either ad any thing or take ought from it: thou semeste to be a
trangressour of the commandment. Hear have you Ambrose also, which can not
in any wise suffer the wisdom of man to be equale with ye scripture, but that
in all things we should lean to that.

For though our meaneing be never so good: yet must we not trust our own
wits. Thus he writes upon these words of the Epistle to the Romans, be ye
all of one mind, this may be by God, Capt. i.
says he, but by man's wisdom can it never be. And upon the beginnynge of the
first Epistle to the Corhinthyans he says that the philosophers, when they
first began to preach Christ they preached him by the wisdom of the world,
and rejected the law and prophets. And again writing to Gratianus Augustus,
he says, that ye Arrians gate all the color of their wickedness out of
philosopheie. De fide. ca. v.
Yet would our divines persuade us, that they got it by readyng of
scripture, and expoundeinge it after their own sense. And therefore there was
no remedy to over come them, but with some other learneinge for they were
perfect in the scriptures. Notwithstanding. Gregory, wryttynge upon Job
says This canonical scripture passes all science, all doctrine without
comparisone. This only preaches the truth, calls to the heaven lie
country, it entiseth the heart of ye reader from earthly desires to heavenly
things. Behold, gentle reader, they boast them selves of the old holy
doctors from Christ's time hythereto and yet the doctoures the^ selves make
clean against them. Originne wryttinge upon the prophet Jeremy says It is
nedfull and necessary for us to call ye holy scriptures to witness. For our
se^ses and our expositions (says he) without these witnesses, are not to
believed. After this sort also he expounds this saying, under.ii. or iii.
witnesses under.ii yt is the new and old testament, under three yt is, ye
gospel, the prophets and apostles. Again upon ye To. he says. Paul gave the
doctors an ensample to speak no thing but they could prove it by the
scripture. For if he being so great and such an apostle, did not believe his
sayings sufficiently except he taught it to be written in the law and
prophets yt he speak how much more ought we which be far inferiors to him to
obseue these things yt we do not bring forth our own doctrine when we
preach, says he, but ye sentence of ye holy ghost. Here have you also the mind
of Origin, agreat clark who^ they allege very often. Cypria^ writes to one
Cecilius noting upon these words of Christ. Libr. iii. Epist. iii.
If ye do yt I co^mau^d you the^ are ye my fre^des. And ye Christ only ought
to be hard: ye father witnesses from heaven saying. This is my well-beloved
son, in who^ I am well pleased, hear him. Wherefore if only Christ must be heard
we ought not take head what any man has thought good to be done before us, but
what christ has first done which was before al me^. Neither ought we to follow
ye custom of man: but ye truth of god. Seeing god spaketh by his prophet Esa,
and says. They worship me in vain teaching ye commandments and precepts
of me^. And again in the gospel. Ye cast away ye commandments of god, yt ye
might establishe your own traditions. And therefore, dear brother If any of
our fathers, other by ignorance or simplicity, have not observed this and
kept yt ye lord has taught us to do by his example and governance: pardone
and forgiveness through the goodness of the Lord may be granted to their
simplisitie. But unto us it can not be so granted, which be admonished and
enstructed of the Lord etc. He that lusts to se more of this, let him look
the place and read farther, and he shall find like words in his third
treatise of the simplicity of prelates. And whereas men be so much addycte to
their customs, ye same Ciprian says. Nether ye custom which has crept in
among some, ought to be a let whereby the truth should not prevail and
overcome. For the custom without the truth is an old error. Therefore, let us
leave the error and follow the truth All the doctors agree wholelye in this,
that the scripture is the touchstone, a recoursse for all christen men to seek
unto, to be sure of their fayeth, and to have quietness of conscience. And what
exhortacions Chrisostom gives to all men for the study of holy scriptures:
appears in his thread sermon De Lazaro. And upon John the.xvi. Homelye, in the
end. Also upon John the.iii. Homely and.iiii. Chapi, and in diverse other
places. Nothing does he so ernestlye beat into our heads as the study of
scripture. And I think there is no doctoure that writes upon the scripture:
that does not likewise and gives it even such a rowme and pre-eminence, that
all other doctrines must give place. Ireneus says. Libr. i. Cap. l vi.
To go about with ye divine scriptures, which is the undoubted truth is to
build an house upon a strong rock: but all other doctrine what so ever it be:
is to build a weak house upon an uncertain place of quick sand, which will be
lightli over throwe^. Now if these authorities be not sufficient to stope their
mouths: I think they will never be answered. For where as the scripture is so
hard to be understand and therefore look upon the doctors (say they) and
believe the catholyke church which has continued from Christ's time
hitherto, we can show (say they by ancient writers from time to time sense
Christ's ascension. But what can these men show? Be not these writters which I
have rehearsed, of the chieffest of the^? And al these agree that their wrytinges
must be tried by the scripture, and if that allow the^ not they would not in
any wise that we should believe them.

This is a wonderful thing yt they would have us give such credit to the
doctors which thing the docters them selves forbid But they have always
this sayeinge of Augustine in their mouths. I would not believe the gospel,
except the authority of the church did move me. Now as soon as they have
caught this in their sermons: they triumph. Lo (say they) what authorite did
this great doctor attribute to ye church in so much that ye gospel is and must
be judged by ye church. For without the church, he would not believe christ's
gospel many words have they which I ca^ not remember. But me think, these me^
might be answered out of Augustines own words before rehearsed. For he will
give no such credit to any man's writtinges what so ever he be as he does to the
scripture neither would he yt any man would he that any man should so esteem
his writtynges. For all his wryttynges do not please him. Therefore if they
will have me believe Augustines words: they must prove them true bye the
scripture or else by some other probable and sure reasone that dissenteth not
from the truethe, else may not I believe Austens words. For this he
counsels him self. But admytte Austens words to be true without any
contradicion. What moughte then be said to it? These be Augustines words, I
should not believe the Gospel, unless the authority of the church moved me.
Now I ask you what the authority of the church is. What call you ye authorite
of ye church? Is it long continuance of time? The^ was christ's doctrine
doubtful. For the scribes and phariseis had that on their side. Or is it the
greater number? With like reasone we may refuse Christ's Gospel.

For many be called, says he, and few elected. Or else was it the consent of
learned wise men? All this had the great byshopes and high pristes in christ's
time. For they were great learned and wise men. Corh. i.
But saint Paul axeth, where be the wise? Where are the scribes? where are the
disputers of the world? Has not god made the wisdom of the world
foleishenesse? Therefore let them declare unto me the very true authority of
the church. And I make hear distinction of churches. For Christ and the
Apostles have prophicied that their shall come false prophets in Christ's name,
and shall rise even from among our selves and shall speak perverse doctrine.
These men come in Christ's name and say they be christ's chruch. But I am
assured, they be not Christ's true spouse. Math. xix.
For Lira writing upon Mathe says. The church stands not in men, by the
reason of spiritual power or secular dignity. For many princes and many popes
and other inferior persons, have swarued from the faith. Wherefore the church
does stand in those persons, in whom is ye true knowledge and confession of
faith and verity. Therefore it must needs by Lira his words consiste in the
scriptures. For the gift of fayeth and vnderstandeynge the veritye, is the
worckeynge of the holy spirit, that confortour which the Lord promised to
those that believe his word. But because they allege me Austens words I will
answer the^ with Austen him self, wrytinge upon the.lvii. Psalm. We speak
true things (says he) which have heard true things that the lord says, not
that man says. It may be that man may lie, it can not be that god should lie.
By the word of truth do I know Christ the same very truth. By the word
of truth do I know the church to be partaker of the truth.

Now let them scan these words and tell me where the true touchestonne is.
Then allege they these words of Christ. Math. xx.


I have yet much to say unto you, but you can not now bear it a way. Now
be it, when the spirit of the truth comes: he shall lead you into all
truth. and etc.

And again. Many other tokens did Jesus before his his disciples. Which are
not written, John. xx.
in this book. Here stay they and go no farther, for it follows. But these are
written, that you should believe. etc. But seeing we have begone with Saint
Augustine, we will end with him. He writes upon this same place of John and
says. Tractatu. xlix Capit. ix.
They were chosen and pycked out, as many as were thought necessary and
sufficient for the salvation of the faithful. Sup^r John Capit. xii.
Cirillus also affirms the same, and says more over, that althynges that
the wrytters thought sufficient, boeth for the fayeth and believe, and also for
ye co^uersacio^ of men that we might shine with a right and perfect fayeth,
and with true works and virtues, and so come to the Kingdom of heaven through
our Lord Christ be written says he, and therefore it is a newelye, invented
in ye diuilles shop, to say that all the articles of our christian fayeth can
not be proved by scripture, and men's tradicions bysyde the scripture be good
works and please God These be Cyrillus works. And therefore says Saint
Ambros, in his fourth book of virgins. All new things that Christ has not
tought we lawfully condemn. For unto faithful men says he Christ is the
way. If Christ therefore have not taught that we teach (says he) we judge
it to be detestable. Now let these holy fathers turn and toss these old
holy doctors, and let them find me out a touchston some other where For these
doctors say plainly the word of God the holy scripture, the word of truth is
ye rule whereby Christ's true church is ordered, governed and enstructed. For
whosoever sercheth finds The holy ghost fails not such as seek him there but
to seek him in any other, place: is no promise made. As for their general
counsayles that they stick so much unto: is but a weak foundation For saint
Austine writtynge against the donatistes says. Capi. iii.
Who is it that knows not the holy canonical scriptures, boeth of the old
and new testamente to be contained within certain limettes and bounds? And
that they be so put before all the wrytinges of bishopes yt shall come afterward,
that it can not be doubted at all neither can we be, deceived of the whether it
be true or whether it be right and good or not what soever is known to be
written in them. But al other wrytynges of byshopes or else, which either have
written or shall write, after the confirmacion of the cananicall wrytynges, may
be reprehended, both by the words or wise sentence of some more knoweynge man
in that matter as well as by the sage authorite of their bishopes, and by the
prudence and learneinge of learned teachers, and by counsayles, if by chance
any thing be strayed from the truth. And those counselles, says he, that
be done in every province or region, ought to give place without any doubts,
to the authority of the full counsayles, which are done of the whole company
of Christian men. And those general counsayles that go before, may often
times be amended by those that follow after, when soever any thing shall
appear by any experience, which was before shet up, when so ever any thing,
is known that before was hyde without any color of false holy pride,
without anye^ puffed up spice of Arrogancy, without any* condemnacion of
envy or malice with pure humilitye, with universal peace and quietness, and
with Christian charity. These be Augustines word, which being charitably
understand are surely good and profitable. For the first he sets gods
word, even the canonical scriptures, to be the very perfect and undoubted
touchstone. As it were an everlasting truth, against the which no man may
repyne or stand. Then of men's writtinges he declares, what the nature is, and
how they ought to be used. After that, of general counsayles to which
though he attribute much: yet lays he there no suer foundation, but they may
conclude upon matters, that may be afterward reformed. But aalas, when was
there any such general counsel, as Saint Augustine here speaks of? But
what should we doubt of such perilouse times spoken of in so many places of
the scripture to be even now, wherein that aduersarye is opened? Which has
so long time sat in the stead of God, above all that is called God or gods
service. The abhominacion of desolacion, stood in the holy place. That galla^t
whore trimmed with purpel has been drunk with the blood of the Saints, but the
Lord has shortened those days for his electedes sake, and has destroyed this
wicked with the bryghtnesse of his comeing, with the spirit of his mouth. For
the Gospel is preached. Blessed are they, which are called to the lambs
supper.

Among so many fine and captiouse wits, among so many swifte and diverse
judgments of men as are now regninge in the world: hard shall it be for a
right well learned man, to please the multitude of them that be learned.
Wherefore I may not nor will not, look for it. But unto you, dearly beloved
brethern, which only desire the glory of God and the lord Jesus, and in the
same lord, the must charitable reformacion and return of his elect from
blindness and error unto the perfect knoweledge of ye lords heavenly doctrine:
to you brethren I say, I make this declaraion concerning this my simple
labor, in this wise. As touching my letter, I did it, God is my wytnes, even
of a feruente zeal, knowing for a suretye, that thought Master Chripyne be
learned, and a great sort more which have and do hold the same opinion that
he does yet am I certain that none of them is able to defend it, either by
scripture or doctors. As co^cerneing ye authority of the doctors: I take
them even as they yt selves desire. That is If they expou^de any place of
scripture, declareynge to be so with the help of other manyfeste places of
scripture, or with a sure and probable reasone, which is not contrary to any
places of the scripture: then I accept it and praise God for his gifts in
them.

If not: I let them pass as I find them. For I have not alleged them here to
thentente that any man should think that the scripture is the more
established through their learnenyge (For all men are vain and cursed is he
that puts his trust in them) But because these me^ stick so much to them
that in this point are their enemies If they think I have been to quick with
them in any thing: let them know that the Lord has opened his wisdom even
unto babes And in those things, we may not nor will give place to such wise
and prudente, from whom they be hyd. If they can find in their hertes to give
place to the infallible veritye of Christ's doctrine. If they can be contented
to cast away the hye estimacio^ that they have in their much reading and
long continuance of time with the titles of honor give them by men. If they
can through pure charity and desire of unity, cast them selves into such an
humility, as to think that God has opened that unto simple men, which
through their hante mind is kept from them: If they would I say, have their
whole respect to the last will and testamente of the lord Jesus Christ in
so much that if it were an ass that speak unto them any of those words they
would yet here her and regard the words for his sake, who so they be if they
were thus minded: I would wyshe to spend a great part of my life with them, I
would reverence their learneinge, and give them as much honor as
appartayneth unto such men. But being other wise puffed up contrary to right
charity and in a wrong estimacion of them selves, and despyceing Christ's
simplicity: the Lord cut there combs And therefore I hertely exhort al
faithful brethren, to lift up their hertes with me unto the lyueinge God, in
pure fayeth, geueing him most ernest, hertie, and humble thanks, for that he
of his tender mercy, has given us so towardelie a young king so graciouse a
governor, so virtuous a counsel, by whose means all cruel tirannye and
murderinge of innocents is banished, pure christian charity put in ure and
practice, the lords doctrine brought in again into the seat a poynted,
strange learneinge banished and put away, the true worship and service of God
found out, the Idol service and false worshippynge driven out of the church
of God. This way shall the filthy and unclean conversation of men be
purified, and ye uncharitable and vnfayethfull dealing of neighbors shall be
reduced into unity fayethfulnes, and immutable love which always shall
continue in the lyueynge God through Jesus Christ. Whose name be magnified,
praised and exalted for ever. Amen.

Written the.vii. of Nouembre Anno Domini. M.D.xlvii. P. N

Imprinted at London by John Day and Wyllyam Seres, dwelling in Sepulchers
Parish at the sign of the Resurrection a little above Holbourne Conduite.

Cum gratia and priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.
