A LOAD-STARRE To Spiritual Life.

OR, A CHRISTIAN FAmiliar motive to the most sweet and heavenly exercise of
Divine PRAYER.

With Prayers for Morning and Evening.

Written to stir up all men to watchfulness and reformation of their carnal
and corrupt lives.

By I. NORDEN.

LVKE. 21. 36. Watch therefore and pray, that ye may be accounted worthy to
escape all these things th^^ shall come to pass, and that ye may stand (...)
fore the Son of Man.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby. 1614.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR JULIUS CAESAR Knight, Chancellor of his Majesty's
Exchequer, and of his Majesty's most honorable Pri^^e Counsel.
Right Honorable;
I Am bold to present unto you, and under your Honorable countenance, these
untimely and green fruits of my idle (...), which I gained in (and without
(...) of) his Majesty's service, wherein I have been employed* fearing yet lest
my forwardness in attempting, and especially in publishing a matter so far
above the course of my ordinary calling, should deservedly purchase unto my
self condign reproof. For that it may be right well objected, That it had
better besitted me to have retained my self within the (...) of, and to have
(with more diligence) employed myself unto, the purport of my ordinary
Commission. And so I do acknowledge, had I been negligent in performing the
last. And I acknowledge it commendable, and a sufficient discharge for a man of
whatsoever profession, sincerely to perform the same, without thrusting his
sickle into another man's harvest* But no man is ignorant that there is a
twofold calling in every Christian; a corporal and a spiritual: and they
differ in themselves as darkness and light: the effects of the first are
visible, of the second hidden, as touching the internal and mental working;
the outward actions common to both. But our Savior faith, Man lives not by
bread, that is, by corporal means only, but by a kind of spiritual
norishment. For the life that depends upon the creatures, is alike common to
men and beasts: The spiritual life only proper to the children of God; who
yet partake of the corporal bread in no other outward manner then do they
that know not God. Christ had meat to eat that his Disciples knew not of; so
have Gods children a nourishment that carnal men know not of, and some other
labors and endeavors whereof the world takes little or no knowledge. The outward
mystery, function, or calling, does neither discover, nor can they hinder this
heavenly food, be their calling never so super-eminent: neither pleasure, nor
profit, nor weariness of body, can hinder or prevent the holy meditations of
well affected spirit. Carnal men feed only upon the seeming good they enjoy
in this life: Pleasure and Profit; al their endeavors tend to these, or to one
of them. They know no better, and therefore seek these as best and principall^
(...). And what every man affects most is his summum borum. But they only
are happy, of what rank soever, who have learned to observe, and do truly
follow the counsel of the Apostle, Not to repose too much confidence in
worldly means: for, Bodily exercise (which includes all carnal appetite)
profits little, but Godliness is profitable to all things, having the
promise of this life, and of that which is to come. God^inesse consists of
spiritual exercise, not altogether in outward labor: though the second be
sanctified by the first; and without the first there is no blessing promised to
the second No vocation, function, office, place, exercise, or endeavor in
Church or Commonweal can truly prosper in the mere carnal man: (...) may
seem to be^^^ with glory, and continue a while in seeming grace, it never
ends but with grief. The consideration whereof moved me to a more serious
meditation, how much it concerned my self and other men to intermix with my
corporal, some spiritual ^^ercise. At length ment^^ meditation brake into
actual invocation on God, to sanctify my labors, to moderate my desires of
carnal things, to order my will, to season mine affections, and to bless mine
endeavors: and to this end I was bold to borrow some oportunities of my other
employments; which I recompensed with the more serious diligence, when occasion
required my retire unto mine enjoined services. And having thus rudely heaped
together stubble and straw for the building up of mine own meditatio^s,
touching the sweetness and necessity of prayer, for mine own private comfort:
I imparted the same to some of my learned and religious friends, by whom I was
encouraged to recommend it to the public; which I have done under the title
of (...) Load-starre to spiritual life, importing an effectual motive to
prayer, and adventured it under your Honorable favor to the view of all that
love that spiritual exercise, humbly entreating pardon for my boldness; which
if I obtain, I hold me richly rewarded.

At my house at Hen^en this 24. of June 1614. At your Honors command ever, IO.
NORDEN.

TO THE CHRIstian Reader.
IF thou consider (good Reader) the worth and in estimable value of the grace
to pray truly and faithfully to God: thou ^^^st not but embrace the meanest
work of the weakest in Gods Church, tending to move thee thereunto: for such
is the force of (...), that what^^euer a man loves, it inclines the ear to
hear, the eye to behold. the hand to handle, the mind to consider, and the
will to embrace; yea, every small appearance and resemblance of the thing it
affects. When thou therefore look upon the Title of this weak Treatise,
and find it to tend to a Motive to holy prayer, thou can not cast it by if
thou be truly affected to that most divine exercise, but covet to look
farther into the body of the matter for thy better satisfaction and
censolation, how weak soever thou find it. I have entitled it A Load-starre to
spiritual (...), because no act or exercise of the mind can (...) effectually
lead the soul to a spiritual communication with God, the highest grace and
glory that men can enjoy in (...) life, then faithful prayer. Let slip
therefore no opportunities wherein thou may pray: the occasions are
infinite, the time ever, the benefit great. At thy leisure peruse, endeavor to
practice, and never omit so heavenly an exercise. Fare thou well in the Lord.

Thine in Christian good will, IO. NORDEN.

THE SVMME OF THIS WHOLE Treatise is contained in the Chapters following.
Chap. I. THe neglect of prayer condem^^^ the sweetness of prayer: prayer to
an (...) prayer. Chap. II. To (...) prayer (...). To press into (...) presence
without premeditation, is arrogancy, A definition of prayer. Chap. III. How
we ought to approach before God in prayer: to depend on God, not on carnal
means, though some depend more on the last then on the first. Chap. IV. The
faithful man's God is the only living God, and in him is his chief good: the
carnal men have many gods: the ends of both. Chap. V. The world is
inconstant: the difference between divine and carnal wisdom, between the
seeming devotion of the irreligious rich, and the religious poor man. Chap.
VI. The force of lively faith: and how hard a thing it is, truly to apprehend
the mystery of Christ: and how easy historically to discourse thereof. Chap.
VII. Natural Fathers, cannot beget children good or evil of their own wills.
But they that are begotten a new of God, are only good and like unto God,
before whom the unregenerate, howsoever seeming holy, are hipocrites. Chap.
VIII. Carnal wisdom has not chief place of counsel, in the regenerate
man: he depends on God, and not on the means in any enterprise. Chap. IX. It
is a dangerous thing to pray unto God unprepared: but most safe and sweet upon
divine premeditation arising of grace, not of nature. Chap. X. Whence al our
transgressions do proceed, and the reason why we cannot pray aright: and the
means to reform it. Chap. XI. The neglect of the communicating with God in
Prayer, is the cause that many run headlong to their own ruin, seeking what
they need in a wrong course, not feeling their own spiritual wants. Chap.
XII. Murtherous hearts, hautines and pride, may lurk under the habit of
outward humbleness. Chap. XIII. Every faithful Christian finds comfort in
prayer, the neglect whereof admits many evils. Chap. XIIII. The most happiest
men in the World are they that most often communicate with God in Prayer: and
not the most glorious worldly man; whose misery is to come: and what
consolation remains for the godly. Chap. XV. True contentment not gotten by
nature but by grace, which produces prayer the only mean to obtain all good.
Chap. XVI. God being wisdom it self, knows how to deal with us for our
best advantage and his own glory, which ahoue all things we must respect in
all our prayers. Chap. XVII. Three principal motives to stir up men to pray:
whereof the chiefest is necessity. Chap. XVIII. The force of faith what it is,
and the effects of it: and how dangerous a thing it is to faint. Chap. XIX.
Some among many prevail by their faithful prayers for the rest. And how God
turns the prayers of his to the best, though he grant not what they desire:
And how foolishly carnal men reason against Gods providence. Chap. XX. The
natural man misconceiueth of true happiness, whereby he runs into many
absurdities by the suggestion of Satan. Chap. XXI. Englands many blessings
and deliueries, are not so duly considered nor so thankfully embraced as they
ought, being too much ascribed to humane and carnal means which breeds
ingratitude and security. Chap. XXII. The Church of Christ militant and
Satan's Church malignant, seek the overthrow one of the other, but by
contrary means. And that all Christians are to pray for the defense of the
first: without which it is to be feared it may suffer violence. Chap. XXIII.
The death of the late Prince is not lightly to be forgotten. Nor our general
prayers for his Majesty and Royal issue, to be neglected, publicly and in
private. For prayer avails much being fervent. Chap. XXIV. Devotion lately
^ote is now become more cold: which may presage some consequent danger. But the
practice of the word and prayer, prevails with God. The neglect whereof
makes men senseless of sin. Chap. XXV. Beasts foreseeing, fly danger more
then some reasonable men, besetted with securit^e and the pleasures of this
life. Chap. XXVI. If Gods word cannot awake us, he will send his rod to correct
us, and nothing can appease him, but our humiliation and prayer, and not the
glory of our vain glorious pride. Chap. XXVII. The bringing in of true
religion was of great difficulty, effected by God, by his instruments. We
must be wary lest we neglect it, and so loose it again. Chap. XXVIII. God
loves us not more then the Turks and Pagans, if we live like Turks and
Pagans. Our manifold Idoll-Gods. The Carnal man's Sophistry. The long use of
the word has made us much weary of the word. Nothing can prevent danger but
repentance and prayer. Chap. XXIX. We ought to pray as well for our neighbors as
for our selves: the use of prayer is twofold, public and private. Meditation
inkindleth prayer. Chap. XXX. How, when, and where private prayers are to be
made. An erroneous conceit of private prayer. What sweetness private prayer
brings to the soul. Chap. XXXI. The helps and hindrances of prayer: how
Satan strives to hinder prayer. For nothing wounds him as faithful prayer
in the name of Christ. We must be watchful and strong to resist him. Chap.
XXXII. The presence of God himself is promised in public prayer: how he is
present, which the carnal man apprehends not: the discontinuance of prayer,
public or private, dangerous. Chap. XXXIII. Private prayer in some respects and
at some times more comfortable to a private man then public. The neglect of
public prayer in private families condemned: for where God is not, there
Satan is served. Chap. XXXIIII. The true use of the Lords Prayer, about which
frivolous questions have risen. It is the rule of all other prayers, and every
petition full of high matter of instruction. Chap. XXXV. The sum of the lords
prayer briefly explained. Chap. XXXVI. Prayer much increases divine knowledge,
whereby men of mean carnal learning exceed many literate Doctors. Chap.
XXXVII. Although no man by nature knows how to pray, none is to despair: for
the word heard, and prayer used, teaches it, and increases the knowledge of
it.
A LOADSTAR TO SPIRITVAL LIFE.
CHAP. I.
The neglect of prayer. Prayer in an unknown language. Prayer without cordial
devotion condemned with a comparison between spiritual, and bare verbal prayer.
OF all the neglects of men's spiritual duties under the Sun. The neglect of
true prayer, much to be condemned.
none is more to be condemmed then the little regard of, and the small delight
men have in, divine prayer: And yet an exercise of that comfort to the
conscience, and so profitable to soul and body, as it passes in sweetness
all other exercises, pleasures and delights of the mind, as far as Gold
excels dirt, and the most valuable precious Jewel the dung of the field. The
Sun excels not in brightness the blackest and darkest night, as does
true, faithful, and cordial prayer, truly performed, exceed the best
contentments, that proceed from earthly and carnal delights. Faithful prayer,
truly performed, is al things to the faithfully-praying. It is the sweetest and
most valuable Jewel that the most godly heart can possess. It works
assurance to obtain every good thing and to prevent every evil. It gives
peace to the conscience, and undergoes all crosses with sweetest alacrity. It
is as a preuayling watchman, that does not only discover, but preuenteth, or
causes a man patiently to undergo all afflictions incident to the faithful
man. And yet an exercise as far unknown to many, even to such as pretend to
be very devout, as is one man's thought unknown to another. Many boast of their
quotidian set devotions, as the Pharisie did, and yet pray neither in the
spirit, nor with understanding: but of a kind of prepensed custom, 1. Cor.
14. 15. Prayer in an unknown tongue, not only not auayl-able but sinful.
Mat. 6. 7.
using only the Lords Prayer, the Belief, and the Salutation of the blessed
Virgin, and otherset prayers, in an unknown language, with so many superfluous
iterations and needless repetitions, Needless humbleness.
as the heart (busied with retayning the number of the prayers) seldom or
never apprehends what the mouth utters; neither truly understand they what
they speak, praying in a language they know not: And so turn their devotions
into sin, being made without understanding, and consequently, not of faith.
Moreover they use in their prayers, a kind of humbleness, which God requires
not, superstitiosly pretending, the avoiding of presumption, in going
immediately to God: and therefore they came to God in the name of strange
mediators; namely to the blessed Virgin, to Angels, and to Saints departed,
prying them by their merits to intercede for them to Christ that he may pray to
his father for them. What a needless circumstance is this? Has not Christ our
Savior lovingly willed us to come immediately and freely to him, who is the sole
and only mediator unto God our heavenly Father for all, that faithfully and
immediately come unto him? There is none, in and by whom we can be saved,
releiued or defended, but in and by the man Christ Jesus. He wills us not to
use that kind of humbleness, which should imply pride or any breach of promise
in himself: as it follows if we think it too much presumption to come
immediately to him, but first to go and to pray unto his blessed Mother Angel
or Saints, as if he himself were of the conceit and humor of earthly Princes.
It is far from him: his children may freely come to him: he disdayneth them not
for their baseness, and therefore desires not to be sued unto by more glorious
persons, whom they pretend he loves better. But this does argue that we
think, He will not be as good as his wrod where he says: Come unto me all
ye that are heavy laden and I will refresh you? Which is to make God a Iyer,
and Christ to have died in vain. He says not come to me by the means of my
blessed Mother, holy Saints or Angels. And therefore this is but a forged
humbleness and a falselie coined mean to come to Christ: but faith only is
the mean to assure us, that he is our only Advocate to the father, to whom
we come by Christ only and alone. That prayer, that men make to God, in the
name of any besides Christ, is not only no prayer, but a mere derogation of
the principal part of his office, of being our only Mediator. Moreover to go
to any besides Christ, argues a doubt that either he cannot, or will not be as
good as his promise, where he says, Zeal without knowledge.
Whatsoever ye ask my father in my name shall be given you. These kinds of
prayers are grounded upon a zeal without knowledge, and consequently without
faith, and so become sin unto them that thus superstitiously pray. And I can
not but confess also, that the most religious prayers that godliest men have
made; nay, the very prayer, that Christ himself has taught us, although most
hard in it self; may become unprofitable unto them by proceeding from an
unbelieving, unfeeling, or unreformed heart, or proceeding only from the
lips, passing from the mouth into the Air, and vanishing with the soud. Such
prayers; as they proceed from unbelieving hearts, are like unto Cayns
offering; howsoever foolishly accounted devotion: these are but the sacrifices
of fools: who would be seen to offer acceptable incensce: and behold
hypocrisy! they would seem to glorify God; and behold blasphemy!

There is a kind of prayer which God requires and accepts: The prayer which
God accepts.
and is only proper to the truly godly. And that is made sometimes in words,
sometimes by sighs, and groans; which cannot be expressed and sometimes in
silence without uttering any sound yet all very auailable with God, who seeing
and serching the heart knows what we inwardly desire, and sees whereof we
have need. And these secret and silent prayers, proceeding from a faithful
heart, are far more effectual, then the verbal prayers which the unbeliever
may use, with the like words, as the godly do* and to the same seeming ends.
And yet the same prayer is not to them both the self same prayer: the one
having but the shadow, the other the substance: the one praying but with the
lips, the heart estranged; the other with the spirit, and understanding.
Therefore is the one of no force, and the other truly effectual. These two
kinds of prayers, may be resembled unto two pieces of Ordnance: whereof the
one is charged with powder only; The other with powder and a bullet; Either of
them takes fire a like: and that which has no bullet, gives as great an
outward, and audible report, as the other; But the first batters not, as does
the second, although they seem to aim both at one mark. So he that has not
understanding and faith, may have the like fire of necessity, to enkindle the
powder of desire, but can never perse the clouds, the throne of grace, with
the bullet of lively faith: though the tongue thunder out as loud and clamorous
acclamations as the other: yet the other carries with it both powder and
bullet, both voice of the tongue, and devotion of the heart, powerfully to
work the intended effect with God. And the force of the other perishes with
the sound.

CHAP. II.
It is vain to use many words in Prayer without spiritual feeling, and great
arrogance to press into the presence of God without premeditation, with a
definition of prayer.
HE that duly, and with true vnder-standing, considers the force and effect
of faithful prayer, and how vain and unprofitable it is, to power forth a
multitude of words, without spiritual feeling of his own necessities; As the
causes moving him to pray, the matter wherefore he prays, the parties to
whom and in whom he prays, and with what zeal and affection he prays
without^ consideration of these he may fear to press into Gods presence,
presuming without premeditation, deliberation and holy preparation, to approach
the majesty of God. We shame to approach a King or great personage, without
recounting before hand how to behave our selves, as touching our gestures; and
how to place our speech to be seen formal in all the circumstances of our
behavior, fearing least we should be observed uncivil, rash, or defective in
our carriage. How dare we then thrust our selves abruptly into the presence of
the King of kings without divine preparation^ Our words and gestures must be
agreeable to a holy and sanctified affection; our hearts must be humble,
otherwise we cannot come as petitioners, but rather as insolent and proud
usurpers although our words seem never so mild. For if the heartfrom whence
ought to proceed our requests, be not truly humbled, and rightly qualified;
God will never have respect unto our prayers. And therefore if we duly
consider; The deffinition of prayer.
That, Prayer is an humble request made unto God, in Christ, with the lively
and feeling affection of the heart, faithfully believing to receive what we
religiously desire: we cannot but blush to come unto God as the Pharisie did,
arrogating unto our selves such perfection as if God were rather beholden to us
for our fasting, tything, alms, and prayer, then that we needed to bow our
hearts in humbleness before his majesty craving pardon for our sin: when we
pray therefore, we must leave behind us all presumption and conceit of
self-merit: And in all humility ask, believing to receive: otherwise our prayer
wll become unprofitable in not obtaining, and sinful in not believing. And
therefore the Prophet Esaias, forewarneth us to take heed that we come not
near unto God with our lips, namely to use many and good words, and yet our
hearts, wherein consists the force or frailty of faith and prayer, be far
from him.

CHAP. III.
How we ought to approach before God in prayer, depending on Gods promises, and
not on carnal means: which howsoever the unfaithful respect not, yet are the
godly moved thereby.
THat prayer is not true prayer, which is not grounded upon a lively faith, in
the promises of God in Christ. It is promised to all believers, that if they
ask, they shall receive, yet for the merits, and in the mediation of Christ;
in whom if we believe not, we may seem to send forth as many sighs, and
pour forth as many verbal prayers, and appear in our gestures outwardly as
devout and zealous as any man, and yet be as far from being heard, and come
as far short of obtaining what we desire, as he that prays not at all: the
very Publican will prevent us.

If we had not the promise of obtaining for our faithfully asking; what would
become of Faith and Prayer? If we rested as doubtful, and uncertain to receive
our requests at the hands of God, as many a poor beggar is that asks alms
of mortal men, in his Name; should we not pass by more hours in a day, more
days in a week, nay, many weeks in a year, and never remember our duties of
believing and prayer? For it seems (notwithstanding the promise) by our
general slacknesse in prayer, that we hardly believe Christ upon his promise,
nor God upon his oath. For as long as the carnal man has worldly means to
supply his wants, How the carnal man comes unto God, and how, and when he
prays.
or to free him from danger, he will hardly seek God by prayer for earthly
things, because he feels no present need of them; nor for spiritual,
because he is a stranger unto them. Many seem as miserable of offering prayers
to God, as they are of giving him of their goods in his members. But as they
keep their goods to the time of necessity: so their prayers they will spend
none, but upon mere extremity. Pharoh neuerentreated Moses to pray for him,
as long as he felt not some plague: but when the extreme hand of the powerful
God was upon him, then called he for Moses to pray to God for him. And yet that
zeal continues but as do his plagues: the one ceasing, the other are stayed.
Carnal men make their prayers as the water mooues the Mill-wheele; when the
water cease, the wheel staieth: so when troubles fail, faith and prayer
cease. Man by nature trusts rather his own present worldly means, then Gods
promises; his own wealth, then Gods word: as he that observes the rules of
carnal reason, cannot but collect how far the confidence men repose in worldly
means, The confidence of worldly men.
ouersway their trust in God, namely, as far as the earth is distant from the
heavens. For according to the portion of every earthly blessing, has every
carnal man trust in his means; 1. Sam. 17. 51.
Gol^ah in his strength, Exodus 14 11.
Pharoh in his greatness, 2. King. 19. 35.
Senacherib in his Army, 2. Sam. 17. 23.
Achitophel in his policy, Est 7. 9.
Haman in his favor with the King, Dan. 4. 29.
Nebuchadnezzar in his greatness, Dan. 5. 6.
Belteshatzer in his vain-glorie, and infinite others, trusting in their own
several means, long since gone to their places; but have not carried hence
with them this vain confidence from mortal men. For every carnal man in his
own nature, extends his confidence only so far as he has visible and
carnal means. Quantum habet nummi, tantum habet and fidei, We trust so far
as we see probable carnal means in natural reason, fit to be depended upon:
which failing, Faith fails. The covetous man is called an Idolater, because
he puts his trust in his riches: so may every man be truly called, that
trusts in carnal means, whether it be riches, strength, friends, or other
the like. And the reverence that men naturally yield unto these means,
differs not much from that they do unto God: only what they pretend toward
God is open, but what they do toward their earthly means is secret. They
seem not visibly to kneel, nor verbally to pray to the means: but they in
their hearts prefer that they see and enjoy, above that they have but heard
of; the promises of the invisible God. And therefore rather then they will
diminish their wealth, to do good unto Gods people, as God has commanded, as
touching their abundance, they will be bold to strain a point of Christian
obedience, and rather give over their following of Christ, and abandon his
presence with the Gergesites, then to lend unto God, though they shall be
assured not only ten of the hundred, but one hundredfold more then they
disburse. And therefore no marvel though they never or seldom pray unto the
invisible God. Their souls are not so dear unto them as their lives, and
their lives not so precious as their wealth: nay, lives and souls are of small
value with them, in comparison of their worldly riches, and carnal pleasures.
Tell a rich worldling, that he ought to make his prayers unto God: he will in
his heart ask you, for what he should pray; he has wealth at will, as the
rich man in the Gospel; he has health at his hearts desire; his cattle
prosper; his corn, oil, and wine abound: for what should he pray? It is a
strange exercise you would draw him unto, that concerns not his worldly
profit, or carnal delight. The like may be also said of every mere carnal
man, be he poor or rich, who rather then he will embrace the promises, and
faithfully depend upon the providence of God, he will adventure the most
unlawful and unjust attempts, against the laws both of God and men: whereas, if
they could or would incline their ears to hear, and their hearts to understand
the word of truth, they could not but abandon all unjust devises: the rich
would pray unto God for direction to dispose of their wealth to Gods glory and
their own souls health; and the poor for supply of all their corporal
necessities, and rely upon Gods promises and providence, bending al their
powers to serve the living God, in obedience and prayer. The spiritual man
has but one, the carnal many Gods.
The godly and faithful poor man, being p^nched with penury, visited with
sickness, in fear of enemies, and in whatsoever danger, flies unto one only
God for all: but the carnal man has many Gods, the Money in his Chest, his
Friends that his Mammon has got him, his Corn in his Barnes, his Cattle in
the Fields, his Plate and Jewels, his Wit and Policy are the Gods of worldly
men: in them they trust, and by some, or one of them, they hope to be relieved,
or steeded in whatsoever desperate occasion; and therefore seek they not the
help of the invisible God, by fruitless Prayer, as they deem it. But the
faithful man in deed knows these to be deceiving Gods, flattering Gods,
like unto Ionahs Gourd, The carnal man's gods wither like Ionahs Gourd.
that seemed fair for a day, and when it should most have sheltred him, it
withered by the worm at the root. So have all these vainglorious Gods their
worms, that work at their root, who wither when they that trust in them have
most need of their help: like the Manna that the Israelites gathered over
night, and kept till morning, which withered and stank when they thought to eat
it. Even so do Friends fail: Riches, Strength, and Policy deceive them that
trust to them, or in the^. And it is to be admired, that so many men, not
only instructed by the Word of God, but also by so many experiences, which
they every day see, that all the glory of the world, and vanities thereof are
but deceiving dreams, and yet that they should suffer themselves to be
bewitched with their flatteries and enchantments; like the followers of
Ulysses, transformed into beasts by the charms of Circes, who honor that
which is to be contemned, and contemn God, who above all friends, riches and
whatsoever means, is to be loved, embraced, believed, and prayed unto.

CHAP. IV.
The faithful man's God is the only living God, and in him is his chief good:
the carnal men have many Gods: the ends of both.
THE friends, the riches and whatsoever good the faithful man has or hops
for, is in heaven. The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, one All-sufficient
God, the Angels and heavenly society: these are, and will be for ever his, and
will never fail nor forsake him. He that created him he will keep him, he
that redeemed him he will justify him, he that sanctified him he will reach
him to pray to the Father in the Son: he will assist our spirits, who know
not how, or for what to pray: he will help our infirmities, and enkindle our
godly desires: he will make such a sacred union between himself and our
spirits, as we shall become one with him, and God the Father, and the Son,
being one with the Holy Ghost, shall in the consent of the sacred Trinity
beget us anew, give us new hearts, new affections, new love, lively faith, and
furnish us with all the graces of right regeneration; yea, we shall become
like unto our elder brother, and even here in earth partake of heavenly
consolation. The Angels shall administer unto us all holy aid, and support us
in all our ways and walkings, according to the good pleasure of GOD, who
gives them charge over his children. These are the goods of the godly. Sweet
is the operation of faith in God.
Oh the sweet operation of lively faith, begotten by the promise of God in
Christ, made in his word! it begets Prayer, and Prayer truly powered forth,
by lips undefiled, in the affection of a right qualified heart, unto God the
Father in his Son, does truly assure us of Gods presence, and present relief
in all our necessities, more fully and more truly then all the false Gods, and
vain goods of carnal men, and their means.

What worldly or carnal aid had the three children in the Furnace? God works
without humane means.
What arm of flesh delivered Daniel from the Lions? What earthly help had
that great God to overthrow the Army of Senacherib? Many in like dangers have
been saved, relieved, and delivered without humane aid. The examples are
infinite in Scriptures, whereof the miracles done in leading the children of
Israel out of Egypt through the Wilderness, their plantation in and upon the
borders of Canaan, and the life of Joseph, may serve to satisfy any believing
man. For neither were friends, nor wealth, nor strength, nor policy, aiding
this great God in his works of greatest wonder. Who then will prefer these
base earthly deceiving Gods, and flattering goods, before the good God of
Israel? Or who will trust any God but the God of Hoasts? Have any of the Gods
of the Nations delivered his land out of the hands of the King of Ashur? Where
is the God of Hamath, and of Arpad? Where is the God of Sepharnaim, Hena, and
Iuah? Which of the Gods of worldly and carnal men have delivered their most
humble suppliants, out of any their troubles, or rid them or prevented any of
their dangers? It is a most execrable blasphemy against the God of heaven, to
prefer worldly goods, and carnal means before the help, love and favor of
the God of Gods and of goodness, as many do (testified by their works) though
they would seem to show the contrary. How did wicked Rabshakeh rail upon the
living God from Senacherib his master? And did not the Angel of the Lord that
night destroy one hundred fourscore and five thousand men of the Host of
Ashur? Here was the force of flesh confounded, and Senacherib himself was slain
by Adramelech and Sharazer his own sons, as he was worshipping Nisroche his
God in the Temple of the Idol. Who then, seeing the success of man's carnal
confidence, and Idolatrous zeal, will not seek the God of heaven for succor
in danger, for relief in want, and for comfort in all distresses? what man of
common sense observes not many precedent examples, of the weakness and
uncertainty of carnal means? And yet how many are there to be found in these
times of common carnal security, that do seek their help at God, by humble
and faithful Prayer? do they not rather depend upon the broken Reed of their
own felt outward means? and therefore despise the service of God, and contemn
his weak children. The Glutton would not pity Lazarus, the false Judges did
accuse Susanna, the rich will strive to wrong the poor, and wrest Justice
unjustly, by the means of their corrupting Mamon, seldom or never
considering, that there is a God that cares for the poor, who is able to
raise up a Daniel to clear Susannaes innocence, a Solomon to decide the
doubts, arising by false pretenses. There is great difference between the
pretended happiness of the rich, and poor. Great difference between the
happiness of the godly poor, and wicked rich.
And so much differ the felicity of the one and other; the one is great and
fearful to the poor, and has his felicity in this life; the other is
despised of the rich, and has his misery here: but the first passes from his
mirth to mourning, from his wealth to want, from his glory to grief, from a
glorious life to an eternal death. But the second is taken from his baseness
to glory, from misery to comfort, from grief to grace, and from a kind of
worldly death to celestial and endless life. For it is not permitted in
divine justice, that the children of GOD should line here in carnal pomp, to
withdraw them from divine obedience; nor the wicked to partake here of inward
and heavenly consolation, setting their hearts and affections upon worldly
things. We cannot enjoy light and darkness together; we cannot feed and fill
our hearts with the pleasures of this life, and yet think we shall not taste
of the bitterness of the second death. To the end therefore that we deceive not
our selves in our judgments touching the spiritual and carnal men, we must
beware that we ground not our opinions upon outward appearance of men's
estates, Not to judge of men by their states, rich or poor.
high or low; for there are rich religious men, and irreligious poor men: but
we must judge all men, and all things by the word of God, the right rule^ and
infallible, to discern and distinguish the perfect from the counte^feit. And
therein we must lay aside natural reason and carnal understanding, which are
enmity to God, and commonly justifies what he condemns, and condemns what
he approves. Love not the world says Saint John, nor the things that are of
the world: for if any man love the world, the love of God is not in him. Yet
says carnal reason, Love the world, and the things of the world; for that
thou may do, and love God too. But how hang these together? For he that
loves God, loves righteousness, holiness, meekenes, patience, obedience and
prayer: but he that loves the world, loves the contrary, living in
unrighteousness, disobedient to God, ouercom with the desires of the flesh,
the desires of the eyes, and the pride of life.

CHAP. V.
The world is inconstant: the difference between divine and carnal wisdom,
between the seeming devotion of the irreligious rich, and the religious poor
man.
Solomon speaking of the World, says, that when he had well considered all
things that the world afforded, he could not but observe it very inconstant,
and men's minds very variable, and often distracted, staggering whereunto to
apply themselves: wherein yet he found by experience, that al men for the
most part, embraced that which they should shun, and shunned that which they
should embrace, changing their counsels as worldly occasions offered
mutabilitie in their affairs, extolling, dispraysing, loving, hating, hoping,
fearing, believing, distrusting, and finally following and forsaking all things
as they were led by carnal understanding, wherein they worshipped the creature
in steed of the creator; leaving the service of God, and praying unto God; and
inclining themselves to those courses whereunto their own appetites sway them,
and the Devil inforceth them: whereby it comes to pass, that some couetously
pursue to be rich among men, which often withholds them from serving God; as
appears by many of them, that content them rather to violate a good
conscience, forgetting not only piety, but mere humanity, to accomplish
their desires; mingling and confounding good intended, with evil acted;
estranging themselves from all religious affections and inward holy desires;
associating themselves with such as will applaude their vanities, and reject
the society of the good, of whom they might learn to serve the living God, by
obedience and prayer. How can you believe (says S. John) seeing ye receive
glory one of another, and seek not after, nor pray for the glory which comes
from God alone? Almost every man seeks to outstrip another in carnal, but
not in divine wisdom. And therefore can they not attribute the praise of
obtaining what they seem to enjoy, to the right cause: for they begin at their
own apprehension of what is good, and thereupon build their weak wisdom;
whereas they should begin in the world to be fools to the world, that they
might be wise to God: as the Apostle counsels; that, If any man seem to be
wise, let him be a fool, that he may be wise. 1. Cor. 4. 7. 8
For as Christ came not to call the righteous (such as reputed themselves pure)
to repentance, True and false wisdom.
but sinners (such as acknowledged their own imperfectio^s): so surely God
gives not wisdom to the wise (namely, to such as think the worldly wisdom
sufficient) but to such as think themselves fools wanting the true knowledge
of divine things. For, the wisdom of the world is foolisbnesse with God; and
he catches these kinds of wisemen in their own craftiness. 1. Cor. 3. 9.
Job 5. 13.
Although worldly policy may (as it does) circumuent the innocent, yet cannot
God be deceived: for such is his deep and just judgment, and high wisdom,
that he knows and judges, he discerns and condemns, or approves, far
above the reach of mortal man. Man may deceive man, not only by visible
actions of earthly and worldly devises, but even in spiritual exercises; for
they may seem to believe, because they so brag of themselves; and to pray,
because they may be seen to kneel at a pillar to lift up the eyes, to strike
the breast, and to move the hand and lips, as if they were very devout: And
yet may their hearts be full of gall and bitterness, and their affections be set
(like Demas) upon the world and worldly things, wherein God is not deceived. The
hypocrite only deceives himself.
But the hypocrite that seems to be, and is not religious, godly, faithful,
and truly zealous, deceives himself, thinking that God will content himself
with the chafe, that has no corn, with the leaves without fruit, and with
the show without the substance of faith, obedience, and prayer. And therefore
the rich man, and the worldly wiseman, as cosen germans may not look for any
applause at the hands of God, as they usurp it from men, but to receive
according to the inward disposition of their hearts and souls. God respects
not the person of the rich, nor wise according to the world, nor rejects he
the person of the poor; but according to the measure of grace in either he
approves or reproves the^; yet in the more dangerous estate is the rich man,
as appears by the words of Christ himself, who observed how riches wrought
with men in the world, how it choaketh the word of God in them; working to the
lust of all forbidden things, and against the desire of all divine wisdom,
which is the life of faith. And faith being the life of prayer is quenched
thereby, and consequently prayer, which is the life of our souls, waxes cold
and withers. Yet cannot this extend to euety rich man; for the Wiseman says,
What rich man deserves commendation and admiration.
that, That rich man is blessed, which is found without blemish, and has not
gone after gold, nor trusted in money and treasure: adding, Who is he, and we
will commend him? for wonderful things has he done among the people, having
been tried and found perfect: let him be an example of glory, who might
offend and has not offended, or do evil and has not done it. By which
words he intimates unto us, that rich men have many and more motives by their
means to offend, then the poorer sort have: and that it is a strange thing to
find a rich man so qualified by divine grace, as he will bestow his goods, and
perform the duty that God commands, to make heavenly friends with their
earthly Mammon. Wh^ it is hard for a rich man to be saved.
Therefore our Savior pronounces such impossibility for a rich man to enter
into the Kingdom of heaven, even because of his covetousness and oppression,
and because of his security, and seldom or never faithfully serving the
living God; and again denounces woes against them, for that they have their
consolation in this world: not for that they oppress the poor, and get their
goods by unlawful means; but because they have their consolation, namely
their carnal delights and pleasures, and not their spiritual joy, and inward
comfort of the holy Ghost here in this life. Therefore behooves it rich men to
beware, they place not their hearts consolation upon these worldly and fleeting
vanities, but according to divine counsel; If riches increase, not to set
their minds upon them, but to use them as they used them not. For it is not
merely riches that makes the vser, but the abuser of them unhappy. And
therefore, as there may be a poor man proud and covetous, even in his small
portion: so may there be a rich man poor in his own conceit, and so bestow
and distribute his goods, as not only not a woe, but a blessing shall be
pronounced unto him, as to the poor, believing in God: for our Savior, to
encourage all, as well poor as rich rightly affected, and to stir them up to
obedience and prayer, says; Rejoice and be glad, for I have provided for ^ou a
Kingdom.

CHAP. VI.
The force of lively faith: and how hard a thing it is truly to apprehend the
mystery of Christ; and how easy historically to discourse thereof.
THE promises of future happiness are able to stir up the dullest heart, to
wait, and work out his salvation with fear and trembling, with love and
obedience, in faith and prayer; and yet it seems, Not many wise, not many
mighty, not many rich believe this promise. They seem rather to be leave a bond,
a statute, a pawn or the promise of a rich man, then they will give credit unto
God upon his oath, who yet never was found to promise any thing but what he
performed, to the good of every one that (believing) asks any thing fit for
him to receive: he deceives no man that trusts his bare word. The force of
believing God upon his promise.
Abraham might have cast many doubts, being in a profane and Idolatrous
country, brought up without the written will of God, being called thence by an
invisible power, to repair into a remote country, unknown, and the conditions
of the people strange unto him. But he contrarily cast off all difficulties,
and confidently resolved, against his own natural reason, and will of all his
friends and familiars, and betook him to the journey, and ceased not till he
came to Canaan. Who would not have consulted with his kinsfolks and friends? Who
would not have looked for better assurance of good success, before he would
have adventured to forsake his country and friends, and betake himself to the
hazard of such an attempt? But he knew that he that called him was just, and
what he had promised he was able to perform, and would neither fail him nor
forsake him. He wauered not as the most of us do, touching heaven and heavenly
things promised; how can we affirm we believe it, and yet give our selves over
to the world? It is not indeed every man's case to know the mystery of Christ;
Every man believes not the mystery of Christ.
but in a kind of general apprehension, as he is delivered in the outward
word, according to the History. But to believe that he came in the flesh
without man, to contain two natures under one visible form; that he was God
equal with the father, and man like unto us; that he cancelled the
handwriting that was against us; that in him we are reconciled again to God
the father; that he sits at God's right hand a mediator for us, and that all
believers shall ascend and rest with him in glory; that our bodies that are
corrupt, shall either die and putrify, or be changed, and in fine, be
glorified in the heavens. And to apply all this to our own selves through
faith, cannot but go so far beyond the ordinary capacities of natural men,
as the God of heaven is above the God of the air. For as Christ said unto
Peter, flesh and blood reueiled not unto him what Christ was: neither can the
natural man apprehend this heavenly mystery, and therefore cannot believe the
promise of salvation to the comfort of his own soul, and consequently cannot
pray to God in Christ. He can speak of, and dispute, and believe the whole
History of Christ, both how he was promised and prophesied, how he was
crucified, and can relate every Article of Christian belief. And so far the
devils know, believe, and tremble. But this is the peculiar portion of Gods
children, truly to depend upon Christ, thorough faith grounded upon knowledge;
as believing that heaven is his portion, is the gift of God in Christ; who
being the lively image of God the father, teaches us to know God in the
Trinity, and the Trinity in unity: whom who so knows not, and by knowing
him loves him, and in loving him obeys him, and in o^beying him believes
him, and in believing him does not pray unto him. howsoever they seem to
uphold their knowledge, defend their obedience, and brag of their prayers,
they are all but counterfeit. For no truly spiritual exercise can be
performed, or divine grace obtained, but by a man spiritually qualified and
beloved of God, and who loves God: for unless we feel in our selves the love
of God toward us, we can never love God; for he loves us first, and by the
third person of the Trinity works love in us toward him: and love being the
band of obedience, and obedience the mark of our election, and consequently
the seal, which has the image of our Redeemer, Who is truly adopted in Christ
to be the child of God, and (...) not.
whereby our adoption to be the sons of God is confirmed to every one that
believes. Not to every one that pretends to love, obey, and serve him; but
to him only whose heart is right before the Lord, who hears the word,
believes the spirit that wrote it, and brings forth the fruits of it,
namely, to do what is therein commanded, and to avoid things forbidden
therein; he, even he is the undoubted adopted son of God, and whatsoever he
asks the father by the spirit in the son, he shall receive it: for he has
the promise of the blessings of this life and the life to come. Contrariwise,
such as neither yet have, nor des^re to have thi^ feeling, this faith, and this
dependence on God, howsoever they pretend that they are the sons of God, for
that they can only talk, like, and perform some outward duties as the true
sons of God do, yet let them not deceive themselves, they are not yet out of
the lees of their original, neither have they remission of their actual sins;
but the Bond is yet against them depending uncancelled, though they associate
the sons of God, and not only in humane affairs converse, but in divine
duties communicate with them, as in hearing the word preached, in the
sacraments, and in public prayer. They are yet but bastards, and no children;
they never truly tasted of the milk of Christ's spouse, nor ever drew the life
of grace out of her breasts: no more then did Cham in the Arc with Noah,
Ismael in the house with Abraham, Esau in the company of Jacob, who inwardly
did not partake of their fathers virtues, of obedience, faith, and continual
prayer unto God, the God of their fathers.

CHAP. VII.
Natural fathers cannot beget children good or evil of their own wills; but
they that are begotten anew of God, are only good and like unto God, before
whom the unregenerate, howsoever seeming holy, are hypocrites.
EArthly fathers commonly beget children of their own corporal likeness, but
the godliest father cannot propagate in his children the graces of the spirit,
neither can profane fathers by their sins make their children sinners. For it
is found by experience, that good fathers have often wicked, and wicked fathers
godly children. But the children of God, begotten anew by the holy Ghost, can
never fall from being like unto him that begat him. And therefore do they much
dishonor God, who in words profess they are his sons, and yet in their
actions they resemble the image of Satan. It were a great blemish unto a godly
man to be wrongfully supposed the father of a wicked son; much more is God
dishonored by such as would seem to be, but are not of his seed. For they
that are of God indeed, cannot but in some measure resemble him, in being
righteous as he is righteous: that is, By casting off the old man which is
corrupt, Ephesians. 4. 22.
through deceivable lust, and to put on the new man, which after God is
created in righteousness and true holiness. This casting off and putting on,
does teach us that there is in us something that befits us not to retain if we
will be the true sons of God, What we ought to put on, and cast off.
not by reputation among men, but by imputation in Christ. What is to be cast
off, and what to be put on, is plainly expressed in the Apostles words before
mentioned, namely, to cast off all deceivable lusts, (which includes all
things forbidden) and to put on righteousness, which implies a spiritual
indowment of al heavenly graces; among which, none is of that singular force,
virtue, and effect, as is zealous and hearty prayer in faith unfeigned, which
none can effectually make but such as have put on this new man: for the old
man knows not how to pray, being clothed with corruption, and blinded with
the mist of ignorance. The new man only, shaped in holiness, knows to whom,
when, in whom, for what, and how to pray; all which circumstances are duly to
be considered in prayer: and yet neither of these does the natural, that is,
the old man truly apprehend; and consequently the lip-labor that he pretends
to bestow in prayer, is not only not profitable, but sinful.

CHAP. VIII.
Carnal wisdom has not chief place of counsel in the regenerate man: he
depends on God, and not on the means in any enterprise.
FRiends (we observe) do most usually communicate together, not by way of
dissimulation, but by sincere affection: and one is aided and comforted of
another, according to the occasions each propounds to other. And shall we
think that that man that loves God, will estrange his occasions from the
counsel of God? Will he deliberate of any matter of importance, but will
first consult with the Oracle of Gods mouth? And will he not impart his
occasions by pouring them forth unto him in prayer? assuring himself that God
again will answer him by his holy spirit, and by him certify his spirit what
he shall do, and what course he shall take, both for the atchieuing of the
good he desires, and for the avoiding the danger he fears. No carnal
counsel whatsoever, not warranted by the word, shall be admitted to that
consultation or resolution: he will abandon all carnal respects, and only
hold himself to divine direction: he will not use humane wisdom, Carnal
wisdom a hand-maide to divine prudence.
but as it were a hand-maide to divine prudence. It may search and find out such
wants, and corporal necessities, as are fit in spiritual understanding to be
supplied, but leaves the execution to divine wisdom, which produces faith,
and faith prayer for the obtaining thereof at the hands of God. And as Abraham
left his servants and Asses behind him when he went to offer up his son; so
does this heavenly wisdom leave all carnal respects behind when it
approaches toward God, to offer the sacrifice of prayer or praise.
Contrariwise, it is too manifest, that the most carry their carnal vanities
with them eue^ to the Altar; making their petitions partly in the flesh and
partly in the spirit, in part believing and in part doubting, halting before
God, and yet seeming to walk uprightly before men, who justify or condemn the
outward action, not seeing the inward heart.

To pray unto God with the lips for any corporal benefit, To pray to God,
and to believe* in means is spiritual adulteri^.
and yet to have the eye of the heart fixed in confidence upon natural means,
is a kind of spiritual adultery. For, what man is he that having a wife,
outwardly affable, using words of love unto him, and yet her he^rt set upon
another man, will not think her a faithles and unchaste wise? And is God less
jealous think we, who craves our hearts when we shall worship him in words and
outward show of works, when our consciences cannot but tell us that we ask
that of God which we inwardly believe more probable and possible to be obtained
by means without him? Is not this a falsifying of our faith and dissembling of
our prayers? Is not this a manifest breach of the law that says, we shall have
no other Gods but Jehovah; as also not to take his name in vain, as they do
that call upon him with the lips, their hearts far from him?

The Jews thinking to make themselves strong by the Egyptians and other
carnal means, Esa. 2. 21. A curse on them that leave God to depend on other
means.
left their dependancie on God; and therefore did God denounce his judgments
against them: Cursed is the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh (any
kind of carnal means) his arm, Ier. 17. 5.
and withdraws his heart from the Lord: he shall not see, when any good
comes. How can he then attribute praise or prayer unto God for whatsoever
success, when he groundeth his hope on earthly means, and not on God? Nay,
though he pray unto God, and yet depends more, and puts more hope on
secondarie means? if he find that come to pass that he desired, how can he
but yield part of the praise unto the mediate cause, wherein he in part
trusted? and so derogate the praise due unto God, who is either all or no part
of the cause of that wished success. For although God use natural instruments
to effect his will, not only in relieuing his children when they pray unto
him, but also in punishing the wicked when they offend; yet are these means
only of, and by God, working, not as man wills, but as God foreseeth fit for
the good of the one, and punishment of the other. God used clay to clear the
eyes of the blind man: if the blind man had yielded the thanks to the clay as
the cause of his sight, though he had likewise given praise unto God, he had
robbed God of his right. For to allow unto God a fellow-helper, were to argue
him of himself insufficient; as some most fearfully belch forth a most
superstitious prayer, saying, God and our Lady do this or that, or prevent this
or that; whereby they either make God no God, or a God not absolute in power,
nor without a cooperator complete, which cannot be but most horrible
blasphemy. I hereby yet infer not that it is unlawful to give reverence
unto the means which God uses for our good, as David did to Jonathan; yet no
further but as to the instruments, without which God might have effected his
work, either by other means, or without any means, nay, against means, as
not tied to any secondary means of necessity. Hezekiah being healed with a
cluster of figs, did not persuade himself that nothing else could have done
the cure, but that whatsoever God had made the mediate cause, howsoever
contrary to the opinion that man might have of the thing, it would have
wrought the same effect. For he is able by weakest means to perform the
greatest work; as it appeared by the overthrow of the walls of Jericho with the
sound of Rams horns. God works by means, without and against means.
And as he works by means, so sometimes without means, even by his word, as
in healing the Cananitish woman, and the Centurions servant: nay, such is his
absolute power as he works as familiarly and easily against means, as in
bringing water out of the hard and dry Rock, making the waters to divide as
the red Sea and Jordan, in making the Sun to stand still in G^beon, and the
Moon in the valley of Aialon at the prayer of Iosuah: and causing the Sun to
go back in his sphere contrary to, and against his natural motion, at the
prayer of Hezekiah. The holy Scriptures are full of such sweet examples of the
absolute power of God, who to effect them requires necessarily no other human
means but faithful praier^ not the prayer which passes only the lips, the
affections of the heart being extrauagant, but that prayer which proceeds
from the sanctified soul, How the soul must be qualified in time of prayer.
well and rightly tuned in all her faculties; the understanding thinking on
nothing but on God, the will only loving him, the memory coveting to retain
nothing but him, the desire aspiring to no other happiness but what he has
promised us in his word. In this manner were our holy fathers qualified, and in
this sweet consent of the affections poured they forth the concordant
harmonious prayers that wrought these former most admirable supernatural
effects, in altering the natural course of those creatures which he himself
set in the firmament, never to be moved to the end of the world.

CHAP. IX.
It is a dangerous thing to pray unto God unprepared; but most safe and sweet
upon divine premeditation arising of grace, not of nature.
HOw can this but move a kind of fear in men who presume to thrust themselves
into the presence of God, uttering prayers in words, their understandings
being carried from God through the vanities of this life, their wills being
besorted with the love of carnal things, and their desires thirsting after
worldly aduancements? Are these men's prayers of force to cast down holds? to
alter the natural course of things? or can they obtain any thing at the hands
of God but reproof? But men that are wise in Christ, enlightened with the
divine spirit, feel motives in themselves of another kind; not staying below,
their affections set upon the golden Calfe at the foot of mount Sinai: but they
a^cend up in their hearts to the holy mount of Grace, and there converse they
familiarly with the true God, leaving the flesh pots, the Onyons and Gourds of
Egypt, and feed on the heavenly Manna, Angels bread, the bread of life:
whereby they become so rapt up from earth and earthly things, as they have their
conuersations already in the heavens, by their heavenly communication with God
in their spirits. Their prayers and sweet conference with God for the time
ended; they then return to the performance of their lawful affairs, and
therein walk (as it were) with God, living so sincerely with, and among men,
in the fear and love of God, as if they were in the real presence of God.

Nature teaches us not to pray, but the spirit of God.
To this degree of perfection none can attain by his natural understanding or
will, but by the administration of the spirit of God only, who teaches us how
to pray. God commands all men to pray, and yet gives not all men the gift
of true prayer; and therefore every man is bound to ask of God power to ask:
although it may seem strange to a carnal man to ask power to perform the
selfsame thing that he performs in asking. But it is to be considered that
there is a verbal and lip-kind of asking, and there is a cordial and hearty
praying; and he that does it not from the heart, may utter it with the lips,
and in words may seem to pray, and yet the heart remain estranged and full of
rancor and evil affections. But such is the force of ^iuely faith, that it
cannot conceal it self: for if it be in the heart it will show it self in
the efficacy of prayer; which prayer only has the promise to obtain, being
made in the name of Christ to God, and has the promise to be granted for his
sake by God. For in Christ are the promises made unto us, both of spiritual
and corporal blessings, and in him, and by him sealed unto us and confirmed:
so as there is no cause of doubting left unto the faithfully asking; always
provided, that he ask not the thing, the granting whereof is not warranted in
the word of God, that has made us a general warrant of granting whatsoever
we ask; with restriction yet, that it be agreeable to his will, which also
includes all things that he sees best for us to receive. For such is the
wisdom, providence, and love of God toward us, that like a father he will
not give unto his children a Scorpion in stead of Fish: he will not give them
hurtful things instead of helpful. And therefore it behooves us to inform our
selves by his word what is consonant and what dissonant to his will, that we
may avoid to ask forbidden things, and with boldness ask things lawful. In
the prayer which Christ taught us, we pray, Thy will be done: we must not
therefore wilfully attempt to ask, much less to do any known thing to the
contrary. But such is our corruption, as howsoever we seem willing that the
will of God should be done, we yet retain a kind of inward desire that God
would do according to our wills: The will peruerts the mind.
for naturally the will of man is neither rightly affected toward his own
mind, nor toward the will and word of God. It is the rule of right reason that
the will should be directed by the mind; but contrarily and preposterously the
will ouerswayes the mind, and draws it as by co^straint to many inordinat
desires: and therefore when the mind begins to incline it self to the sacred
exercise of prayer, the will as an unequal yoke fellow peruerts the mind, and
distracts it into many noysom lusts, and wandering thoughts. This cannot the
most godly and most faithfully zealous man but find in his deuoutest prayers:
and therefore we ought in our prayers to restrain our cogitations from
earthly things; and the more we feel them to range here and there (as
sensibly we may) so much the more earnest and zealous we ought to be, and so
much the more watchful that they steal not away our spiritual affections,
which cause the mind to ascend evermore upward to the Throne of his grace, who
by his holy spirit is ready to assist our spirits, to suppress our erring
thoughts, and to rectify our minds according to his own will.

CHAP. X.
Whence all our transgressions do proceed, and the reason why we cannot pray
aright, and the means to reform it.
Our transgressions proceed all from this, that against the rule of divine
reason, we prefer our will and our desires before the most holy will of the
Lord our God. How then can we truly seek him whose will our wills (as much as
in us lies) seeks to resist? The Apostle shows the reason, saying, The
natural man has such a mind as cannot understand the things of God, and such
a will as is not subject to the law of God, nor indeed can be. How then can the
mind conceive how, or for what to pray? And how can the will frame the
faculties of utterance and other divine affections? How can it frame it self
to pray unto God according to the right rule prescribed unto us by God? seeing
that this exercise is sacred, holy and spiritual, and the mind and will
altogether carnal and profane. And therefore all the prayers which natural men
make in the habit of the old man, do not only not profit them, but turn
rather unto a curse then a blessing unto them. What man is he then knowing
this, will lie still in his natural corruption and ignorance, having the way
laid out before him, the means of direction offered him, the promise made
unto him, and the reward assured him? the way is Christ, the direction in that
way is the word, the promise is to receive what we ask, and the reward is
life eternal: the way is straight, the direction plain, the promise just, the
reward great. In earthly affairs there is a continual common emulation who
may grow greatest, wisest, and most glorious, whose best reward is but a
vanishing shadow. How foolish then are we to see and suffer all men to
outstrip us in spiritual things, and our selves to lagger behind, loath to go
forward in divine duties; as trewantlike scholars with il will, and by
compulsion prepare them to the School? He then that may and will not endeavor
to attain unto divine knowledge by the word, and thereupon, namely upon the
promises of God made therein, to build a lively assurance of Gods
neuer-fayling goodness toward him; and in that faith will not seek God in
all his occasions, by continuing prayer; is neither worthy to have the promises
performed unto him, of the good things of this life, nor of the life to come.
Let us therefore learn to deny our selves, and endeavor to subdue our own
wills, and wholly to subject them to the will of God: so shall we never
undertake, consult, determine, or conclude any action, until we have enquired
what the will of God is therein, by faithful prayer.

CHAP. XI.
The neglect of the cnmmunicating with God in prayer, is the cause that many
run headlong to their own ruin, seeking what they need in a wrong course, not
feeling their own spiritual wants.
THe want of holy search and desire to be enlightened in the divine duty of
prayer, and to be directed therein, is the cause that so many men run
headlong into their own ruin, in rashly enterprising that, without
communicating with God, which they in natural reason conceive will prove to
their high contentment; as in making choice of religion, the highest point of
divine wisdom* in choosing a wise, and the like. The Shechemites without
consulting with God took upon them the seal of the covenant, which was a true
note, truly taken of the true children of God; but because they took it to a
carnal end, what reward they had, appears Genesis 34. So did Simon the Magician
covet spiritual gifts, to use them to carnal ends: and the like do they that
to obtain corporal maintenance, and to be free from some calamity, rashly
and without consulting with God (by learning his word and by prayer) thrust
themselves into the Roman Catholic, or into any other false Religion. Nay, to
intrude into the profession of the true Religion, for the respects abouesaid,
and not in a feeling of divine love to the spiritual effects it works, to
Gods glory and their own comfort; is not only not to be truly religious, but
under the cloak of true religion to be indeed a profane Atheist. God commands
us not to contract marriage but upon due deliberation and consideration, and
forbids to contract with any of a false Religion. Isack and Jacob fearing and
obeying the living God, sought their wives, not by worldly ad^uice, but therein
to be directed by God. And to that end did Abraham's servant pray unto the GOD
of his Master Abraham, that he might be guided by some divine instinct how to
choose a wife for his Masters son, and all things succeeded unto him beyond
natural reason. But Esau contrari^y, without consulting with God, or
communicating with his parents* took him wives of the Gentiles, a profane and
irreligious people, such as (for the Jews to contract matrimony withal) was
an abomination. Prayer or consultatio^ with God is the best, but the last
work; of chiefest, but of least regard in this age in most capital causes,
and of greatest consequence. And therefore the most of them succeed to the
perpetual trouble and grief of the parties. And that which has been said of
the former two, namely of the choice of Religion and a wife, may hold for, and
in all other matters belonging to the life and government of man in this life,
especially in the election of some function or calling in Church or
Commonweal; wherein experience makes manifest that little or no conscience
is made to crave direction from God: but according as the profession or
mystery seems likely to prove profitable or discommodious, is the desire
made the more hot or cold. But to consider how it may stand with Gods greatest
glory, and our most comfort and spiritual contentment, it is the last matter
thought upon: they begin at the wrong end, they first seek the world and
worldly things, and then as leisure will serve, they will seek heaven and holy
things, where we should seek heaven and the kingdom thereof first, and then by
divine promise, all things else should be administered unto us. But the reason why
some men are so backward in seeking God, to be guided by him in these high
occasions, may seem to grow from a conceit, that if they should unfold their
desires to God, who sees all their hidden and polliticke equivocations; he
would find that their outward prayers to him, and their inward hearts toward
him, would appear so far unlike, as he would have no respect unto their
offerings: and therefore covet rather to conceal their counsels from God,
and climb up to the obtaining of their high purposes, by the scale of their
own devises, saying in their hearts, How does he know it? Thou fool; if thy
heart condemn thee is not God greater then thy heart, 1. Ioh. 3. 20.
and knows al things? But if thy heart con^demne thee not, thou have then
boldness toward God. If then thou have boldness, thou may freely repair
to the Throne of his grace; and as he has communicated unto us all his
counsel, shall we be scrupulous to let him know ours? Act. 20. 27.
What is it that the poorest and basest seeming child of God, We ought to
unfold our imperfections to God, yea, and to men upon occasion.
may not freely speak unto him? Who of the ancient godly fathers did not
discover their own imperfectio^^? Peter blushed not to acknowledge the denial
of his Master with bitter tears: David was not ashamed not only to confess,
but to inroll the acknowledging of his sins with his own hand, to the end that
all his godly posterity might learn, not to hide their faults from God, but
to make them known to men. S. Paul likewise thought it not any disparagement
to his credit being an Apostle, that He was a man sold under sin, that he
was buffeted of Satan, that he did what he would not, and could not do what
he would. None divinely enlightened by ta^^ing of and believing the good word of
God, that ever coueted to conceal their imperfections from God, knowing and
assuring themselves that he is merciful, and forgiueth the sins of the
truly penitent. Against thee, against thee only (says David) I have sinned,
and done evil in thy sight. He was a great King, chosen after Gods own
heart; yet not ashamed to acknowledge a greater King, whom he as much feared
to offend as the most dutiful child the most stern and severe father, and
therefore was bold, with the confession of his sins to join prayer for the
remission thereof, and obtained it. I am but dust and ashes, says Abraham: I
am not worthy the least of Gods mercies, says Jacob: my fathers house (says
Gideon) is the least of all Israel: I am not worthy (says S. Paul) to be
called an Apostle, yea, he confessed himself the chiefest of all sinners.
These examples of humility may be preuayling motives to move us to imitate
them, and to beware how we follow their contraries, in pride, as
Nabuchadnezzer, The basest may be as proud as the most arrogant.
Senacherib, Pharaoh, and such like imps of insolency; who although they were
Kings of greatest greatness, and we the meanest of men, yet if we embrace not
humility we may be found as hautie as the hautiest of them. For they had
their pride but according to the measure of their greatness, and so may the
meanest exceed in pride beyond the measure of his best means. They thought
themselves not only not inferior, but equal, nay above God in power, and
therefore had none above them to obey, and consequently, none to whom they were
bound to pray. And whosoever exalts himself above that which he is, be he
the highest or the basest among men, he equalizeth the proudest of the former
in their unlimited desires. For, as the former rebellious Potentates banded
themselves against God, in their impious blasphemies; and as Nimrod threatened
to scale the heavens by his haughty Babel: so no doubt but the meanest proud
man, that ambitiously aduanceth his heart above that which indeed he is, and to
attain unto heaven without obedience and prayer unto God; he is as high a
rebel in his heart as either Nabuchadnezzar, Senacherib, or Pharaoh, and his
reward in the wrath of God shall be as great as was theirs or Nimrods.

CHAP. XII.
Murtherous hearts, hautines, and pride may lurk under the habit of outward
humbleness.
MAny such rank and rebellious spirits walk in the habit of outward
humbleness, as that Dominus Dominantium, that calls himself Seruus seruorum
Dei: he that says he is the servant of the servants of God, and yet
Antichristianlike endeavors to set up and supplant Princes. And his Votaries of
poverty and voluntary beggerie; are not many of them fit and inclinable to
any impious and most treasonable actions? how have their hands (in show lifted
up toward heaven) bin imbrued in the blood of Princes in the earth? If their
covert and concealed works of darkness were discovered, if their infernal
stratagems were revealed, Murderers of Kings have a show of humbleness and
devotion.
and their desires known to mortal men as they are found out, and seen by
God; they could not appear but mere monsters, such as was Balthazer, the
murderer of the Prince of Orange, the Friar, and that miscreant Reualiack,
that foiled their fists in the blood of the two last Kings of France: and yet
had every of them his pretense of great devotion, in attempting and
perpetrating these capital villainies* They pray, they receive their sacrifice,
and have promise of, and they believe to be registered and canonized among the
Saints in heaven, and yet fellow-murtherers with Judas, with whom they shall
partake their everlasting reward, without more serious sorrow, and truer
repentance for their villainies, then any of them seemed at their deaths to
profess. Are these the instruments that are used by the Pope, the pretended
Vicar of Christ, to support his humble ambition, and ambitious humblenes? Must
these be the Axes and Hammers to cut and break down Princes, and to confound
Kings and Kingdoms, not concurring with his usurped Antichristian insolency?
Where is then the effect of their great penance, much fasting, many prayers,
and infinite sectaries, and their devotions? Are these their meritorious works?
Cannot they defend their Antichristian superstitions without the murdering of
Gods own anointed? without treasons, rebellions, massacres, and sheddings of
blood? Who does not then abhor their impieties? And who observes the least
of these committed by any true member of that Church, which this maligna^t
Church holds heretical? And yet all men see how it has been defended from
all their devilish complotments, by no other means but by faith in God, and
prayer to God. Have not their most hellish attempts many pretenses of a holy
beginning? A set co^uocation of preaching and prayer, imposition of hands,
vowing of helps, conioyning of forces, and whatsoever else may serve to the
perpetration of any bloody action. If these most impious consorts enterprise
not their wicked acts, but in the show of calling mutually on God, were it not
a shame to professed Christians to attempt any matter lawful, of greatest
moment, without touch of any consideration of the necessity or utility of
faithful prayer? If the children of darkness can point out their more then
heathenish attempts by the outward tokens and terms of devotion to their
assured condemnation; what will become of cold Christians that so little regard
the holy duty of prayer in all their actions, to their souls salvation?

CHAP. XIII.
Every faithful Christian finds comfort in prayer: the neglect whereof
admits many evils.
WHo is that faithful Christian that has practiced this holy exercise, and
has not found comfort to his conscience, and help in his occasions? Whosoever
finds the continuance of inward vexation of the mind, let the cause arise
from spiritual or corporal occasions, he may ass^re himself it proceeds,
most ordinarily at least, from his seldom or never praying unto God. Grief
oftentimes procures tears, which seem something to assuage the sorrow: but it
is (as it were) the slacking of the band that gripes the wound too hard: but
tears passing from the heart through lively prayer, do not only ease the
grief for a while, but heal it altogether; and keep the wounded parts sound,
so long as the plaster of true prayer is applied, with faith thereunto. The
tears that we spend must be spent before God, who has promised to receive
them as they fall from a lively feeling heart, and to put them in the bottle of
his remembrance, reserving them as witnesses of our true repentance; that the
sins, in sorrow whereof we shed them, may be washed away by the blood of
Christ, and not to rise up in judgment against us. And these tears are of
themselves as so many petitions unto God, who has bound himself by promise to
register them, as so many preuayling requests; whereby he gives oftentimes what
inwardly we desire, as soon as the first tear falls from a broken and
contrite heart. Psalm. 32.
David affirms that God pardoned his sin as soon as he had any motion to
crave it. God requires not our prayers because he has need of them, as a
service beneficial or profitable unto him; but because we having need of his
graces and blessings, and that he loves us in his beloved son he wills us
to pray unto him for every spiritual and corporal blessing. And although it
be true, that he knows whereof we have need, yet in common reason, he that
wants and disdaines to ask, he is not worthy to receive that whereof he has
need.

CHAP. XIV.
The most happiest men in the world are they that most often communicate with
God in prayer; and not the most glorious worldly men, whose misery is to come;
and what consolation remains for the godly.
THe men that have greatest shows of happiness in this life, are not the
blessedst men; but the poor in spirit, that have their continual recourse unto
God, they that communicate often with, and truly pray unto him, although their
estates be never so unpleasant to flesh and blood, yet theirs is the promise
of this life and the life to come.

The Church of Corinth in the b^ginning consisted, 1. Cor. 1. 26.
as appears for the most part, The most glorious in the world are not always
the most godly.
of the poorest and meanest of the people, and such as appeared to the world
fools and Idiots; and they that seemed more wise, more mighty and more noble,
were left out of the number of them that were called. Yet God preferred not the
base in the world before the noble, to make them proud of their calling, but
that they might be constrained, as it were, to rejoice in the Lord, by whose
mercy they had obtained in Christ wisdom and all things necessary to
salvation, before the more glorious in the world, although they were the most
base and abject of all others: and to move them so much the more readily and
willingly to serve God in thankfulness and prayer, to testify their love to
him for his mercies toward them. And heavily it will befall them, who having
received so many blessings at Gods hands, are no whit the more moved to love
him: and so many threats for their unbelief and ingratitude, and yet not moved
to fear him. Will they not be drawn then from their deceiving vanities? will
they rather then for less then an apple or a mess of pottage, disclaim their
birthrights, and loose that Kingdom and Crown so dearly p^rchased for the
faithful? Nay, were the loss of it all, it were not so horrible. If a man
missing of the good promised, could avoid the dangers threatened, it would
something mitigate the despayring conscience, and ease the troubled mind. If
after death there were neither life nor death, if a man might have no b^eing,
nor feel or endure torment, though he had no comfort; it were a kind of ease to
the carnal mind, that knows no other heaven then the profits and pleasures
of this life nor fears other hell then the misery, penury, and afflictions
of the same. But the case is otherwise; they that miss the kingdom of heaven
by not believing the promise of God, by not praying unto God for direction in
the course of their lives, may assure themselves, though they seem not yet to
believe it, that there remains for them and attends them, the God of
darkness, and the Angels of horror and torment. And therefore they that are
wise in Christ, enlightened with the sanctifying spirit of God, observe the
difference between sin and sanctity, between the carnal and the spiritual,
between the old and the new man, and find that the pleasing vanities of this
life, and the rejoicing of the worldly minded have no solid or sound assurance
of continuance, no not for a day; and after comes the severity of judgment.
But the spiritual man, undergoing with patience the bitter miseries incident
to a religious and godly life; considers that the continuance of it is but a
spanne long: and there attends him mercy and consolation perpetual. The
true comfort of a Christian.
And therefore bears he the yoke without grudging, spending his time, not in
wantonness and chambering, not in vanities and carnal pleasures; but in all
temperance and humbleness of mind: never so cheered, never so full of
consolation and alacrity as when he is hearing God speak unto him by his
word, as by preaching or hearing of the same; and finding himself truly and
aptly prepared, and zealously exercised in the most holy duty of prayer and
heavenly meditations, wherein he speaks unto God. This is his comfort,
herein are his joys, and nothing is so sweet unto him as heavenly continual
contemplation; whereby he passes by both the pleasures and penury of this
life, as things of that weakness to move love to the one, or fear of the
other; as he respects them not, but places all his affections on God, with
whom he knows that his prayers do at all times so far prevail, as at what
time soever he asks, he receives; whenever he seeks he finds; and
when soever he knocks he is admitted into the presence of God. And whatsoever
misery befalls him in this life, he feels it not so unsavory to himself
as other men conceive it, that behold and observe it in him. As our Savior
told his Disciples that he had meat to eat which they knew not of; so has
every sanctified and regenerate man comfort that carnal men know not of;
which gives him such sweet feeling of present happiness, through the
assurance of his future promised glory, that he seems through the abundance
of his consolations, rapt as it were already out of this earthly Tabernacle,
into the heaven of heavens, where he has his conversation in the spirit
with-God, though he corporally remain in this inferior world.

CHAP. XV.
True contentment, not gotten by nature but by grace, which produces prayer,
the only mean to obtain all good.
SPiritual co^tentme^t none can attain unto by his own natural powers: and
therefore there is a spiritual mean to be used for the obtaining thereof,
which the Apostle reaches, Phil. 4. 6.
saying; Let your requests be showed unto God in prayer. Iam. 1. 5.
And, Who so lacks wisdom, let him ask of God, which gives to al men
liberally, and reprocheth no man, and it shall be given him. This wisdom is
not the wisdom of the world, but the knowledge how, when, and what to ask, to
conform us to the likeness of him that has begotten us anew, who has left us
an example, that we should follow as dear children. If then we be the
children of God, 1. Pet. 2. 21. Ephesians. 5. 1.
and Coheirs with him of that heavenly Kingdom; shall we not with him walk as
becomes children of such a father? Shall our head weep and lament for our
sins? Shall be suffer for our transgressions? and shall we laugh and rejoice
in the vanities of this life, and yet think to partake with Christ of his
purchased Kingdom? Has he so far purchased for us, as we need neither
suffering nor patience, faith nor prayer? Shall we think our selves like that
unspotted Lamb of God, and yet defile our bodies and souls by committing
sin upon sin? How can we then come unto our father which is in heaven, where
no profane thing can have any being? If God hears not sinners, where shall
the sinful man's prayers appear? And how can he have his conversation in
heaven, as S. Paul had, or walk with God, as Henoch did, whose soul and
spiritual part, which ought to ascend by the wings of faith toward heaven, is
pressed down by a most ugly and filthy dunghill the body, clogged with the
mass of sin? Cast off therefore all carnal and unclean affections, purify
and cleanse your hearts by lively repentance, that the saving blood of the Lamb
being sprinkled upon the door posts of our believing hearts, the holy spirit of
God may enter, and teach our spirits rightly to cry Abba father. So shall we
apprehend that sacred renewing grace, that shall breed this most sweet and
heavenly change, namely, to make us of the children of wrath the children of
love, of the children of disgrace the children of glory; which change is not,
nor can be where faith fails: which faith is not obtained in respect of our
prayers, or any desert of our selves, but only and altogether of the free favor
and good will of God in Christ, in who^, for whom, and by whom we have promise
to obtain the fullness of spiritual contentment.

CHAP. XVI.
God being wisdom it self, knows how to deal with us for our best advantage
and his own glory, which above all things we must respect in all our prayers.
GOd being wisdom it self, knows better then we what is fi^test for us to
receive, and for him to give; in both which his glory must go with our
desires, as it will of necessity in his giving. And if we seek not his glory
in all our demands, we break the order prescribed, namely, to do all to the
glory of God: much more then should our prayers, which are the highest service
we can do unto God, tend to the honor of his Majesty, beyond the desire of
supply in our own necessities; and that is in making our prayers unto him, to
be confident that he is just, and will according to his promise satisfy our
just desires, so far as may be most for our benefit. For we cannot truly
judge what is most expedient for us: we may ask for, and think that best for
us, which God in his wisdom knows most inconvenient; and that to be
hurtful and evil for us, which he sees to be most for our good. It is
therefore agreeable to the right rule of true faith, to subject our wills to
the will of God, and to frame all our petitions according to the rule of his
word, which teaches us to ask corporal things, with condition that he be
pleased therewith, and spiritual and heavenly things as the graces of the
spirit, with a full assurance to receive. And the more constant and earnest we
be, and the more we press God to give them, God is best pleased with f^ithfull
and r^ligious importunity.
so much the more it pleases him: as to importune him to give us power to
mortify our corrupt affections to kill sin, both in our hearts and members,
to beg the increase of faith, obedience, love toward God and our neighbors,
peace in our selves and with all men, patience in suffering Gods corrections,
gentleness, meekness, temperance. To ask these absolutely and constantly,
is pleasing unto God, is acceptable unto him: wherein yet we are to beware that
we ask not spiritual gifts to carnal ends, as did Simon the Magician; but to
Gods glory, as Solomon asked wisdom. For the holy Scriptures teach us, that
God suffers many profane men to usurp spiritual functions, as preaching,
prophesying, and casting out Devils, to whom yet God w^^l say, Depart from me,
I know you not. The like may be said of praying, namely, of mere babbling with
the tongue without the consent of a feeling and faith full heart. And in all
these to show more outward sincerity then to have inward sanctity, is mere
hypocrisy.

CHAP. XVII.
Three principal motives to stir up men to pray, whereof the chiefest is
necessity.
THere be three principal motives to stir up Christians to prayer; first,
Gods commandment, Pray continually, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. secondly, the promise,
And ye shall receive, Matthew. 7. 7. The third and last motive is our own
necessities; and they are infinite. Daniel prayed ^o be preserved among the
Lions; the three children from the fire; Hezekiah from death; Jonah to be
delivered from the bowels of the Whale: Susanna to be freed from the unjust
accusation of the lascivious and false Judges; David to be delivered from the
malice of Saul.

Necessity has so many branches, Necessity has many branches, and man has
no power to help himself in any.
as men are subject to several dangers, which are infinite: and therefore a
motive of great force; and yet without Gods assistance they can obtain no ease.
For the more a man strugleth to free himself from any danger by his own
power, he entangleth himself so much the more, as the Fly in the Spiders
web, and the Bird in the net: for of his own natural inclination he has no
more means to free himself, be he rich, befriended or strong, then has the
beast that perishes. And therefore God, to help his infirmity, has lovingly
willed him to come unto him, with a promise to help him: which if God had not
promised, man could never have conceived by his carnal understanding, that
there had been any help in any invisible power. If God, with the precept of
praying continually, had not made a covenant to hear and grant our requests,
we should have held it a needless and an unprofitable work to pray. And did
we not believe Gods promises to be Yea and Amen, what necessity could move us
to repair unto him? for without believing the promises we could have no hope to
obtain, and consequently no desire to pray. He then that obeyes not the
precept, to pray, breaks the law of obedience: he that belieues not the
promise can not ask in faith; and consequently the unbeliever obtains not,
because he asks amiss.

CHAP. XVIII.
The force of faith what it is, and the effects of it; and how dangerous a
thing it is to faint.
SVch is the force and effect of faith, as without it nothing can be obtained
at the hands of God by prayer. It is therefore necessary for men to know what
faith is; which they may learn by S. Paul's exhortation to the Hebrews, who
declares that Faith is the ground of things which are hoped for, and the
evidence of things which are not seen. By which definition it appears, that
the office of faith (if I may so say) is to represent things unto our
apprehensio^ which are not seen; and yet in confidence to appear as if they
already were for such: and so piercing are the believers eyes, as they behold
the things which they hope for through the clouds and mists of all
difficulties. This did most lively appear in the faith of the Centurion, who
desired Christ to heal his servant; requiring nothing of Christ toward the
cure but to speak the word only and his servant should be whole: and it came
instantly to pass as he believed. Such, and greater was the faith of Abraham
in leaving his Country of Chaldae, to come to Canaan at the commandment of
God: as also in offering his son, in who^ the promise was made. Many examples
are in holy Scriptures, written by the holy Ghost, and left unto posterities,
to encourage Christians so to depend on Gods promises, as not to doubt of good
success in most desperate cases; but to rest so fully assured that the event
shall fall out to the best, as if he already felt and enjoyed the same.

Wonderful things have been done by the hands of God, The wonderful effects
of faith, and how it fares with them that faint.
through the firm faith and faithful prayer of his children. As long as Moses
held up his hands and prayed, the Israelites for whom he prayed, prevailed:
but when he fainted, the Philistims, against whom he prayed, had the better. As
long as Peter believed steadfastly, he walked steadily upon the waters: but when
through a small gale of wind he began to waver in his faith, to stagger
between confidence and fear, he sunk. Wherein we may note the force and
frailty of the faith of the dearest children of God, who believe constantly as
long as all things go well with them: but when a little tempest of crosses and
afflictions arise, they begin to faint. Jacob although he had the immediate
promise, as at the mouth of God himself after his wrestling, that he should
prevail with men: when he heard that Esau was coming to meet him with a
band of men, he was stricken with an extraordinary fear, lest he should have
been utterly ouerthrown, his wives and children. They therefore that stand, be
they never so confident in prosperity, ought to take heed they be not foiled
in the time of adversity through fear: for the best are subject to distrust
God when a little trouble assaileth them. And yet we find by many examples of
godly men, that upon deliberat meditation they wade through the most hard
assaults of whatsoever kind: for contrary to their natural opinions of
doubtful success, faith works a most wished issue. The children of Israel
were in a most desperate case, flying before furious Pharoh and his irresistable
Host, having on either hand inaccessible hills, and before the man imp^ssable
Sea: so as if they looked before them, there was no hope in carnal reason to
escape; if behind them, the sword was at their backs; if on either hand, they
saw no evasion. Yet behold the force and effect of faith, wherein Moses the
servant of the Lord encouraged them, saying, Stand still fear not, but behold
the salvation of the Lord this day. And so far prevailed he with GOD through
faith and prayer, as he foresaw the destruction of Pharoh and all his Host:
insomuch as he was bold to affirm before it came to pass, that this mighty
Monarch, and the multitude of his armed men, his ho^ses and chariots that they
then law and feared, they should see all confounded before their eyes; which
came to pass. The Lord (says he) shall fight for you, therefore hold ye your
peace, Exodus 14.

Faithful prayer is the strongest mean by weakest instruments, Prayer
performs greater things by weakest means, and incredulity preuenteth most
easy things.
to perform things of greatest difficulty. The walls of Iherico a strong City,
were thrown down by no other sensible instruments then the sound of Trumpets
made of Rams horns, and the City and people surprised with a small number of
men. And there is nothing more opposite to the bringing of the greatest and
weightiest things to pass then incredulity, which commonly proceeds from
natural reason; which many times argues impossibility in possible, and
possibility in impossible things: As that incredulous Samaritan governor, who
did so little believe the Lords Prophet, foretelling plenty unto distressed
Samaria, saw with his eyes the same thing com to pass which he thought
impossible; and for his vnbeleefes sake was not only prevented of tasting of
the blessing, but was trodden to death by the press of the people.

CHAP. XIX.
Some among many prevail by their faithful prayers for the rest: and how God
turns the prayers of his to the best, though he grant not what they desire:
and how foolishly carnal men reason against Gods providence.
IN causes public, as in the time of Wars, of Famine, of Plague, or other
common calamity; shall we think that among a multitude there are not some, yea
many that are faithful? howsoever many also be either key-cold or lukewarm,
who^ God respects not; yet the faith and obedience of the lesser number by
their prayers often appease God, and (if I may so say) constrain him to hold
his hands from punishing, and even enforce him to extend his hand to relieve
the whole for a part: which we may observe, if we conside^ the conference
between God and Abraham touching Sodom; how God in justice is ready to show
mer^ie. L^^an his household and cattle prospered for Jacobs. sake: and
Potiphers for Joseph's. And therefore we cannot say but that the prayers of the
faithful, be they of many, few, or one, aua^le much with God. And impiety it
were to think the contrary. And as God blesses, God blesses and punishes
many for one.
so he punishes many for one: as the whole Host of Israel for the trespass
of Achan: yet we cannot but confess, that God in his wisdom oftentimes
concealeth his purposes of showing mercy, or sending judgments, to make his
dearest children the more watchful, and more earnest in prayer; and in more and
more hardening unbelievers hearts to their deeper condemnation: God denies
what we ask, and gives us better in fleed.
and often delayeth the granting of the requests of his children, and gives
them in stead some other thing more fit, which they asked not. He retayneth
sometimes things necessary in our opinions, lest we should presume too much upon
his bounty in giving corporal things; crossing our desires lest we should by
the ready success build too much upon our vain understandings, as if we knew
rightly what were good and what were ill, and that we needed but to ask and
have at the hands of God, what we would:

It is enough for the most faithful Christian to lay down his request before
God, It is enough for a Christian to refer the issue of his petitions^ unto
God.
to continue his oblation, and to wait and attend the leisure of God, and rest
content with his holy dispensation, assuring himself that not one thing only,
but all things whatsoever shall work to the best to them that fear God. Romans
8.


The faithful man, The faithful man exercised in prayer, finds things
succeed better then he expected.
often exercised in this divine duty of prayer, cannot but acknowledge that
things oftentimes fall out better, and succeed more to his comfort and true
consolation then he required: not by chance (as many most foolishly conceive)
but by the mere mercy and providence of God; who as he granted unto Solomon
more then he asked, so does he even in these days to his obedient children.
And yet they cannot truly observe by any outward or visible working how it
should so come to pass: no device of their own, nor instrument of their own
procuring, working it to their hands. God raised Jonathan to love David, and
moved the Raven to feed Eliah. 1. Kin. 17. 4
I do my self acknowledge Gods unsearchable goodness and providence to have
the chief place in the working of infinite my deliueries from many dangers, and
his relieuing me in many and infinite wants. And who so denies that GOD has
his working now, both in mercy and in justice, beyond the natural course or
operation of his creatures, for the good of his children and punishment of the
wicked; has neither spiritual understanding nor true faith. Such yet there
are, The gross opinion of some, who acknowledge no difference between the godly
and the wicked.
whom I have heard to maintain that they can observe no difference between the
reputed religious, and the supposed Atheist: for they cannot see but either of
these have their fortunes alike: he that prays has no better, nor he that
prays not the worse share in this life; whereby they raise an argument, that
all things succeed to all men at all adventure. Let a religious man (willing to
move a carnal man to serve God) tell him what happy and wished success he
has had by his prayers to God, and what continual comforts he finds
thereby; how he has been delivered from apparent and iminent perils; how he
has bin provided for in his greatest wants; how he has escaped the things
he feared, and how all things work to his good contentment: will not the
carnal man say, Tush, this befalls all men without respect of the ones virtues
or the others vices? Will he not affirm that the Cattle, Corn, and all
earthly blessings fall as well upon the Drunkard, Whoremonger, Blasphemer, and
whatsoever irreligious, as upon the most zealously religious, and devout
person? And do they not hereby show that in their hearts they say, that either
there is no God, or that he is a God that makes no difference between the
good and the evil, between the religious and profane, between the faithful
and the infidel? Yet indeed it cannot be denied but God in mercy keeps
under his children whom he will save, exercising them with fatherly crosses,
and gentle corrections, and in justice permits the Reprobate to have their
portions in the fullness of pleasures and delights of this life. But who so
observes the ends of both, cannot but see the carnal man leave this life with
horror, and his goods with grief: and the other in peace; who expiring his
last breath, recommends his soul into the hands of God, aspiring in a lively
faith unto the Kingdom promised, with most holy and heavenly alacrity.

CHAP. XX.
The natural man misconceiueth of true happiness, whereby he runs into
many absurdities by the suggestion of Satan.
THe sottishnes of man's nature, and man's misconceiuing of good and evil things,
is such, as it thinks nothing heavenly but pleasure and profit, nothing to
befall by a divine providence but by chance, and therefore they that pray or pray
not are equally rich, strong, witty, healthful, and alike happy. Oh more
then blind ignorance, palpable Atheism, perverting the hearts of men,
supplanting Religion, and quenching faith, condemning prayer the prop of all
men's happiness, which without faith is yet of none effect.

Infinite are the absurdities whereinto such as know not God plunge themselves:
Men not fearing God run into many absurdities, by the suggestion of Satan.
for being once led out of the way, which is Christ, they cannot but follow
Satan. For there are but two principal spiritual powers that have dominion
over al men, and they have their several Kingdoms, opposite as light and
darkness, truth and falsehood, heaven and hell. And as their Dominions are
spiritual, so lead they their subjects spiritually; the one by grace, to the
performance of all spiritual duties in heavenly obedience; the other by all
possible illusions, deceits, and spiritual wickedness in this corporal life.
This latter gains more me^ by his plausible suggestions, then Christ by his
true and infallible word: the reason is, for that he first prevailed to betray
man, even the father of men, by whom and in whom all men by nature are subject
to the same falling from God who made him, to the devil that seduced him. And
no marvel though he lay baits to betray us now, having so long practiced his
treacheries, and prevailed so much, leading men into a thousand by-ways: he
cares not how menwalk so they follow not Christ: he cannot bear with
patience, that men should believe the promises of God in Christ, nor his
threats for disobedience, and for not believing the Gospel of Christ. And
therefore casts he a mist before the eyes of men's understandings, that they
may not apprehend Gods mercies toward them that do well, nor his judgments
toward them that do evil. But as GOD cast Adam in a slumber when he took
out his ribbe to make a woman; so does he covet to lull men asleep when he
purposes to steal their hearts from GOD to make them reprobates. And as he
turns himself into an Angel of light; so he turns all his plausible
allurements to the confusion of them that consent, by suggesting them good: he
deludeth men by the counterfeit imitation of Christ himself, as by fained
fastings, voluntary penury, wilful idleness, and causes men to reclude
themselves thereby to merit salvation; leaving the world before the time, and
to become unprofitable members of Church or Commonwealth: he preuenteth true,
faithful and cordial prayer, by prayers in a strange language, and uttered
without understanding or feeling: he makes men to misconceiue of all Gods
threats, and tokens of his indignation; as when God sends tokens of his anger
for sin, either in or by the air by supernatural exhalations and
extraordinary apparitio^s, as of late he has done by fiery inflammations and
bloody euaporations; by the extraordinary rage of the winds, causing the Seas
to surmount the bounds, making fearful inundations upon the land, to the
destruction of men and multitudes of beasts, and most lately to the confusion
of many ships and men, cast away upon diverse coasts: when he sends these
unusual distemperatures of seasons, scarcity of food, famine, plague, or war;
when he fireth the Towns and Cities round about us: this deceiuer says unto
the hearts of carnal men, and suggesteth unto them that all these things are
natural, coming of causes ordinary; and idle it is, and savoring of a
needless fear, to think they are forerunners of greater danger: whereby he
holds men in continual security, and a weening that al is well, and that God
is not displeased with our coldness in religion, with our rebellions,
transgressions, and intolerable sins: which is the cause that men live so
carelessly and so backwardly in serving of God, holding preaching unprofitable
and prayer fruitless, never giving GOD thanks for his mercies, nor fearing
his judgments.

CHAP. XXI.
Englands many blessings and deliueries are not so duly considered, nor so
thankefully embraced as they ought, being too much ascribed to humane and
carnal means, which breeds ingratitude and security.
IT cannot but seem strange (I think) to all that have but common (but
especially to such as have divine) understanding, that England having received
at the hands of God so many and most wished blessings, both in giving us good
things, and preventing us of evil; and that far beyond the apprehension of
the wisest worldly man, should so generally forget themselves, as if they were
so familiar and ordinary as were worthy of no admiration: the reason is, as
before is said, we cannot persuade our selves they be the wonderful works of
God.

Queen Elizabeth's many and strange deliueries and ours in her; the more then
admirable overthrow of the Spanish inuincible-reputed Navy; the discovery of
so many plots and complotments of treasons and conspiracies; were they by
chance, or was God the Author of them? Indeed some have endeavored to ascribe
the praise to carnal means, and to rob God of the honor thereof, by
attributing the discoueries unto humane wisdom, and the overthrow of the
Spanish Navy to our own arm, neither of them due to either; for it was God
that gave the means, and blessed them for our safety: and as working
instruments under God, they are to be embraced. But to say that if such a man
had not taken such a course, such a plot had not been discovered: if such an
accide^t had not fallen out, or such a stratagem been invented, and put in
practice, the success had not been so good; is to attribute the power of
doing the miracles in Egypt to Moses rod and not to God. Woe to him that
excludes Gods providence of the issue of these things, as Esaias says, Esa. 31.
Woe unto them that go down into Egypt for help, and stay upon Horses, and
trust in Chariots because they are many, and in Horsemen because they are very
strong; but they look not to the holy One of Israel, nor seek unto the Lord
who is wisest. If, is a word of condition, If, a word of condition.
and only implies doubt of future events; but to use it in matters already
com to pass, is most idle and vain. Stultu^ est dicere non put^ram. A man
were better to hold his peace when things are done not to be redeemed, be they
done with or against his will, then to apply this doubtful word If. For it
has only force to condemn his ignorance and to commend Gods providence, in
whose dispensation are mercy and judgment; the first obtained, the second
avoided by faithful prayer. And the most that can be spoken of humane wisdom
and providence in such cases of eminent consequence, is, that God vouchsafed
unto such a man the reason to apprehe^d such or such dangers, and to use such
and such means to prevent them; as in Joseph in foreseeing the plenty, and
providing for the dearth: but to say it came immediately from the natural
apprehension of any mortal creature, to work the good or to prevent the evil
of a Nation, Province, City, Family, or private man; were to affirm that God
is not universally omnipotent, and absolutely provident, and consequently that
to pray unto him were both needless and fruitless, which were the highest
degree of impiety, and is only found in them that know not God. And therefore
it behooves Christians to be truly watchful, and duly conversant in prayer; so
shall nothing succeed unto them, but either to their approved good or tolerable
evil, wherein he shall be thankful for the first, and patient in the second;
knowing that nothing comes to pass by chance, or at adventure, but by God,
who works all in all. I am the Lord, and there is none other; I form the
light, Esa. 45.
and create darkness; I make peace and create evil, says the Lord.
Ingratitude will rise in judgment against us.


Nothing therefore will rise up in judgment against us in a higher degree then
ingratitude, receiving so many continuing blessings at Gods hands, and yet to
show not only no thankfulness, but in stead to become the more rebellious,
stubborn, and stiff-necked, adding sin to sin, and heaping up transgression
upon transgression, as it were with greediness; never regarding the manifold
dangers that do palpably houer over our heads, but as men drunken with new
wine, we lie secure every man in his particular sensuality, seldom or never
repayring unto God in prayer. But let us awake and consider in what drowsinesse
we pass our peace, making it the feast of our bewitching delights, giving God
neither thanks for good received, nor stand^ng in fear of his judgments
threatened. And let us ruminate a little upon our duties, and then can we not
but find that our neglect of hearing God speaking to us, and our seldom and
cold speaking unto him in thankfulness and prayer, will tell us that we are
fallen into a fearful and mortal Lethargy.

Are the mercies of God rightly considered, We forget Gods goodness in giving
us worthiest King James
and duly weighed in giving us our good Josiah, worthiest King James, for
establishing him in the steed of our deceased Deborah, and with and in him the
use and continuance of true religion, and that without blood? Do not all the
Kingdoms of Europe admire and stand amassed at our happiness in our blessed
Sovereign? And can his Majesty's delivery from Gowries conspiracy in
Scotland be thought ordinary, circumstances considered? How much less the
powder Treason, The powder treason.
that so long lay couerd with so many difficulties, the arrow being drawn as it
were to the head before the string was broken, aiming not only to hit the Lords
anointed, and royal family, the Nobles, Counselors of state, the Bishops and
worthiest of all parts of the land; but at an instant, in a moment, the utter
ruin, subversion and confusion of all estates, degrees, qualities, and people
of all conditions: howsoever suggested an infranchisement to pretended
Catholics; even many of them also had tasted the same cup of extirpatio^ with
the more loyally affected, and more religiously disposed. The plot was laid by
the policy of Satan, practiced by his members, discovered by God himself,
who reueiled the same unto his anointed without humane intimation of the thing
what, the place where, the persons by whom it was to be performed. This for the
present was wonderful in every man's eyes: men for a time lifted up their hands
as it were to God, tokening thankfulness: but it seemed to be but like a
splending sun, that shined for a while with glorious acknowledgeing that it
was the very hand of God: but now eclipsed with the cloud of forgetfulness:
sometimes it falls over the Pulpit into the ears, but seldom into the hearts,
nor considered according to the worth of so worthy a deliverance. Moses erected
stones in memorial of the Israelites delivery from Pharoh, to show to
posterities what God had done for them, and to testify their thankfulness to
God: but it seems that we have turned our fleshly hearts into stones, to
testify our ingratitude, and to witness against us how little we fear future
dangers. For were these former favors of God written in our hearts, could our
tongues cease so long from praising God? should we not be still mindful of it,
and be stirred up to mix with our thankfulness prayer; that as he has
vouchsafed to discover and prevent so horrible treasons, so it might please him
to work for us against all Antichristian future complotments, and Sathanicall
stratagems?

CHAP. XXII.
The Church of Christ milita^t, and Satan's Church malignant, seek the
overthrow one of the other, but by contrary means: and that all Christians are
to pray for the defense of the first, without which it is to be feared it may
suffer violence.
AS long as God has in this kingdom a church militant, it will not be avoided,
but here will Satan have his Church malignant: and these cannot but be so
opposite the one to the other, as the one wishes not the other to stand. The
first seeks the conversion of the second by gentle and Christian endeavors,
by persuading according to the rule of Christ, praying for them in love,
lifting up no hand, no sword, no weapon of offense; only the sword of justice
for Treasons, Treacheries, and Conspiracies against the King and Kingdom:
wherein if there should be no justice inflicted, it could not but embolden and
propagate more and more insolency and boldness to execrable attempts; so
should the sword of the Magistrate be censured a party of selfe-danger and
confusion. But the last seeks the confusion of the first by treasons,
treacheries, conspiracies, massacres, blood, nay by killing of Kings, and by
whatsoever inhumane, unnatural and hellish attempt. Judge ye therefore, judge
ye that give aim to either, ye that gaze upon the controversy, and are
indifferent; whether of these is likest Christ and his Church; the first that
never foiled hand in blood under the pretense of Religion; or that which has
no other means to support it, but the blood of Princes, and confusion of
people? Is there any so blear eyed that distinguishes not the difference? let
him pray that God will open his eyes; for flesh and blood teaches it not. As
the cause of the Church is general, so should our prayers be general.


Now therefore as the cause of the Church militant is general, and her danger
universal; so are, or ought to be the prayers of every member both in public
and private general, as well for the whole as for part: these prayers have the
promise of defense, of protection, and freedom, that whatsoever succeeds
shall be for the best. By means of which prayers, though the success
suddenly at all times appears not, God is moved to have a watchful eye, and
to extend a protecting hand over his people: and that was it that defended
Queen Elizabeth, and that suffered not King James to be surprised by the
conspiracy of Gowrie, nor the treasonable plot of powder to take effect: for
many saithfull hearts among infinite, are doubtless daily lifted up to God for
his protection. And although they foresee not the dangers, God preuenteth them
through the prayers of his little flock, made unto him in general in the name
of his Christ. And impious it were to affirm that these dangers have been
prevented, and our deliueries wrought by chance, without Gods providence and
working.

Where God then is not continually solicited, where prayer is neglected, there
cannot but follow punishment.
as well in private by his Saints, as in public by visible assemblies; there
cannot but follow some correction, and that upon Gods own peculiar people, for
the neglect of calling upon God; and his judgments upon the contemners of this
holy duty, Prayer: and it is to be feared that GOD has been enforced to
come down to see whether the coldenesse of prayer and the cry of our sins
be according to the unpleasing savor, which is ascended from us into his
presence, be so or not. Let us repent, let us turn unto God and humble our
selves in sack cloth and ashes, in a true and religious conversion, in faith
and prayer unfeigned.

CHAP. XXIII.
The death of the late Prince is not lightly to be forgotten, nor our general
prayers for his Majesty and royal issue to be neglected publicly and in
private: for prayer avails much being fervent.
Do we lightly pass over, or little consider that God has deprived us of
the Anchor of our hope, a corner stone of his spiritual building in earth? the
second pillar of his Church? May we not think that God foresaw him likely to
prove too good to go in and out before so unthankful a people? Although he
preserve unto us, and for us, our most worthy of Kings. Let us not think it is
for our deserts, but for his loves sake to his Anointed and our Sovereign,
for his mercies sake unto his Church. Therefore let us abandon sin, let us
retire our selves to him that calls us, let us lift up our voices in praises
and prayer, that The holy one of Israel will be pleased to bless the K. and the
Kings son of his English Israel, in whose prosperity he has (as it were)
included our safety. There are a multitude of Sinners, let a multitude of
sighs be speedily sent forth before the decree of his judgments be sealed
against us; let us send forth the Dove of true contrition out of the Arc of
our repenting hearts: it may bring us the Olive branch of reconciliation and
peace with God.

Prayer preuenteth perils: and howsoever some misconceiue, that there are but
few truly religious and faithfully zealous; yet no doubt God has his seven,
yea seventy thousand that cease not to solicit him, not only in public, but
in their private clossets; not for themselves alone, but for the king,
kingdom, and people, whose prayers have promise to prevail. And therefore it
cannot be said that the prayers of the faithful are either none, or few, or
little, or not available, as some men think, because (as they affirm) they
respectively precede not every unknown or undiscovered danger. As if God knew
not whereof Nations, Kingdoms, and people have need, either of things wanting
to be supplied, or things dangerous to be prevented. If he be truly called upon
in one danger, he delivers from many* as if in Famine a people be relieved
by their faithful prayers unto God, he in regard of their humiliation and
repentance, does free them from the plague, which he purposed should have
followed the Famine; and of Wars that should have followed the Famine and
Plague. As he did with the people of Samaria, whom he did not only relieve with
plenty after their famine; but from their enemies also. And this holds not
in general multitudes only, but with private men fearing and faithfully
serving GOD in constant perseverance.

CHAP. XXIV.
Devotion lately hot is now become more cold, which may presage some
consequent danger: but the practice of the word and prayer prevails with God;
the neglect whereof makes men senseless of sin.
IT is to be lamented to observe how the coldness of Christian devotion
increases, especially considering how zeal flourished within these few
years, and how fruitfully it wrought in the hearts of many; insomuch as there
seemed a kind of religious emulation in young and old, who could be most
forward in hearing the word preached in the Churches, in reading the same, and
praying together, not only in the Church, but also in their Families: but now
many are slack in that Christian duty, and some hold it a sufficient service of
God to visit the Church once a week on the Sabbath day, to hear the word, to
conioyne in concluding the ordinary prayers, saying Amen; and sometimes to
receive the outward signs of the Sacraments, neglecting in the mean time to
meditate upon the word of God which they have heard, to confirm the believers
faith. And faith begets all other graces, and especially prayer, which
prevails with God above all other duties if it be fervent, and is as it were
the life of al other virtues, the life and moving of the soul. The neglect
whereof may be well compared to the foolishnes of a man voluntarily staruing
himself: for as the neglect of moderate receiving food does by degrees
macerate, and in fine consume the body, and it perishes; so the contempt of
prayer works in the soul a loathing of the word, whereon unless the soul
do feed, it cannot but wax feeble in faith, the want whereof is the absolute
confusion of the soul: which (as the Fish cannot live out of the water, the
Salamander out of the fire, nor the Camelion out of the air) cannot live out
of it own element the word of God, by which it was created; and the word
profits not without meditation and prayer, hearing, reading, and often
ruminating the same. For as the seed sown, though in a good soil, if it have
not the former and latter rain, it will not grow to perfection: so the word
unless it be watered as it were by continual practice and prayer,
fructifieth not, although the carnal man, growing from ill to worse, feels
it not, nor finds how he decays, but as one in a consumption dies
spiritually. The regenerate man by the Word, the Sacraments, and Prayer,
perceives in himself a daily increase of lively effects, working in his heart
more and more assurance that all things shall work together for the best in
this life, and after this life his endless glory. Moreover the spiritual man
apprehends in himself the lest motion of sin: he perceives when the
flesh or his corrupt thoughts begin to rebel in the least measure, and then
begins he to encounter them by abstinence and prayer. But the carnal man
sold under sin, The carnal man feels not sin to be sin.
is of another more obdurate temper; he feels nothing to be sin. But as a
man may make what corosiue or incision he will in a dead member without feeling
or pain, as in a gangrine, or the like; so when the soul of a man is dead in
sin, and his conscience seared up, nothing can be felt to be sin.
Contrarily, as the least prick of the point of a needle annoieth the lively
flesh: so the least prick of Satan's temptations is felt and avoided by the
regenerate man.

CHAP. XXV.
Beasts foreseeing, fly danger more then reasonable men besorted with
security and the pleasures of this life.
THere is no creature in the world so dull and insensible, but can foresee, and
by natures instinct end^uor to prevent and fly danger: and yet a carnal man,
endowed with reason, oftentimes runs wilfully into his own ruin. As while
he with the foolish fly soareth about the vain pleasures of this world,
scorcheth the wing^ of divine obedience, and falls into endless destruction:
He may be compared to Esops Heart, who while he beheld his beautiful head in
the water, forgetting the perrils which follow security, is suddenly surprised
by death, even while he is foolishly admiring his own vain pride and worldly
delights, in the glass of vulgar admiration. Such men therefore that thus
loose themselves in the wood of worldly contentments, seldom or never find
the Temple to pray in with profit, but for fashion, and depart not justified at
all but rather condemned.

When thieves assail, Man is enemy to himself, permitting the house of his
soul to be robbed.
or enemies approach to beleager a City, every man betakes him to his weapons;
and he that endeauours not to prevent the danger, cannot but be held an enemy.
How stands it then with us who have permitted the house of our souls to be
robbed? Are we not enemies to our own souls? The pleasures of the world and
the lusts of the slesh have stolen away our hearts from the living God: the
vanities of our mind the riches and pleasures of the world, and the pride of
life, have not only besieged, but entered and surprised our understandings and
captiuated our wills: they have deprived us of our defensive weapons, stripped us
of our spiritual ornaments: they have disarmed us of the sword of the Spirit,
taken from us the shield of faith, the buckler of patience, despoyled us of the
breast plate of righteousness, and the helmet of salvation have they defrauded
us of. Thus have our theeuish delights and our enemies (sins of all sorts)
dealt with us, and yet such is our sottish and senseless condition, as being
left naked of all goodness we feel not our own evils; and therefore few or
none thus fallen covet to rise: all, or the most are so ouer-mastered by the
old, as they covet not the new man, that is shaped in holiness and
righteousness. Who labors to become wise in the Lord? But contrarily it is
com to pass, that every sort of sinners presume to defend their vices. Men are
become defenders of their grossest sins.
A man cannot be a good fellow (says the Drunkard) and be merry (swinish)
with his friend, but he is censured a beast. A man cannot shape his apparel
(says the Peacock like proud man) and fashion his garments in cost and
colors as other proper men do, but he is held to be vain and proud. A man
cannot show his valorous spirit (says the swaggerer) in the brave terms of a
Soldier, but he is termed a Blasphemer. A man in the heat of his wantonness
(says the Whoremonger) cannot lie with a woman but he must be branded with
the mark of a lascivious person: and so lying, stealing, swearing, forswearing,
bribery, extortion, respect of persons, partial judgment, have their
colorable defenses, and impious pretexts with wicked men.

Is there none that will take up a lamentation over so many thus enchanted and
metamorphosed, The strange metamorphosis of some men of this age, to be
lamented.
some into Swine, some into Goats, some into Lions, some into Bears, Wolves,
Foxes, Camelions, Peacockes, Vultures, and the like? who living in the shapes
of men and women, do harbor the humors, affections, conditions, and
qualities of the most vile and abhorred creatures, and yet will be ready to
rail upon and revile him that shall reprove them, and endeavor to reform them.
They will affirm that they are as sure of salvation as the best of a thousand;
that according to the commandment of the Apostle^ they pray continually and
live religiously.

Can the tongues of men and Angels prophecy what will become of this obdurate
age? None can foretell what will become of this obdurate age.
or can they with all their spiritual eloquence and divine gifts, by
delivering Gods mercies, or denouncing his judgments, reclaim these bewitched
men? Can any cross, vexation, misery, or calamity work in them contrition
and returning unto God by repentance and prayer? The God of this world has
blinded them; they see not their own errors, nor foresee their dangers, nor
feel their own miseries. Neither can the promises of heavens glory, nor the
threats of hells torments assuage the heat of their rebellions against God.
Peace and plenty, health and security, shadows of true happiness, argue
against these men, that they say in their hearts by their deeds, that there is
no cause of fear. But when danger approaches, we will pray (say they) and
provide means to prevent the peril; why should curious Preachers seek to
torment us before the time? Who can deny, but all wicked men say thus in their
hearts by the fruits of their lives? denying God (as it were) to be God, his
promises to be true, or his threats of any force; faith to be but an idle
conceit, and prayer a fruitless labor.

CHAP. XXVI.
If Gods word cannot awake us, he will send his rod to correct us, and nothing
can appease him but our humiliation and prayer, and not the glory of our
vainglorious pride.
IT behooves us to be wary and watchful in prayer: and since the Trumpet of
Gods word cannot awake these deaf Snakes, the rod of his judgments cannot be
far off: for drunkenness is intolerable, pride abominable, blasphemy
horrible.

And God (it is to be feared) has entered a plaint against us, God has a
judgment against us for sins.
and summoned us by his Ministers to answer; and by default of our appearing
submissiuely before him, and appealing unto him, he has determined to punish
our offenses: albeit he has long forborne us, according to his nature of being
patient and long suffering. But let us know that he is just, and if we agree
not with him quickly, he being our adversary too mighty for us, we cannot
but look for the Sergeant, who will deliver us to the Judge, the Judge to the
Jailer, and he cast us into prison, there to remain without bail or
maine-prise, never to be released.

How shall we then make league with this offended God? God will not be appeased
by any carnal means.
Shall we flatter him as the Pharisie did? Shall we bribe him as Satan would
have done? Shall we threaten him as Senacherib presumed? The first was
reproved, the second repulsed, the third confounded. What can then appease his
displeasure? Only repentance. Not as Pharoh seemed; but as the Ninevites did.
David and Peter are patterns of true returning to God, and are examples for
offe^ding Christians to follow. God will not put his cause to be determined by
man.


God is not as man: he puts not the controversy which he has against man
to be tried by man. Although he recommended the quarrel which he had against
the rebellious Israelites to be considered, but not to be determined, by man,
he put the case to man by way of agrauation of their disobedience, but reserved
both the judgment and punishment to himself; affirming, that if Moses and
Elias, Abraham and Job should stand up and pray for such a rebellious people,
they should but save themselves. His wrath being enkindled, yea but a little,
none can abide or endure it: but being highly incensed against a people, or
peculiar person, it is most hard to appease him. For he will be avenged on him
on whom he will be avenged. There is no atonement to be made with him but by
serious and true repentance, no pardoning without faith and faithful prayer.
People, Nations, Tongues and Men offending him, must soon repent or perish.
The glory of Belteshasher, the fury of Pharoh, the pride of Nehu^hadnezzer, the
vainglory of Herod, the high mind of Haman, the policy of Achitophel
prevailed not against God: but the poor offending Publican falling on his face
praying pardon, obtaytained it. And this, and none other way (submission and
prayer) appeaseth our offended God. Kingdoms, Countries, Cities, Parishes,
Families, and private men must by true humiliation and faithful prayer obtain
remission. Sackcloth and ashes testified Niniuies repentance: and shall our
Silk^s and suits de^ised by Satan, the deformities of men and women, appease
God? The deformities of men's and women's attires.
The pride and insolency of these times so far exceed the pride and
insolency of old, as the greatest of the sons of Anaek exceeded the meanest
Pigmey in stature and strength. Our men and women are become robbers of all
Nations: never Camelion changed his color as we do our suits and fashions of
changing varieties. It is a high dignity to hold one fashion two months, or
to wear one weed two days. Surely howsoever they may please the eye of their
favorites, and delight their own foolish fantasies, God is not pleased with
their fashions or fancies. They study not the word, the saving truth; but the
word of every new and vpstart stuff: and their prayer is seldom or not at all
to God, but to the monster-maker, to fit their attire netely and of a new or
the newest cut, that came last out of the Devils shop. Husbands must dis-mannor
and dis-money themselves to make their wives to glitter in the world. Esdras
declares what the excess of these presageth, Many miseries and calamities
(says he) remain for them that shall live in the latter time, because they
shall walk in great pride. 2. Esd. 8. 50. Does not God by Esaias threaten the
people for the arrogancy and pride of the women? Because the daughters of Sion
(says he) are haughty and walk with stretched out necks, and with wandering
eyes, walking and minsing as they go, and making a tinckling with their feet;
therefore shall the Lord make the heads of the daughters of Sion balde. Look
into the third of this prophecy, and behold as in a glass the end of your
pride: change your glass of wantonness, and lay it by a while, and look into
the word of God, which shall better discover your beauty or deformity by far
then your material glasses. And if you find your sures to suit well with the
word, wear them; and where you have now an inch take an ell of excess, and
still the more happy shall ye be: but if you find them contrary unto the word
of God, cast them off from you, Many execrations has God denou^ced against
this sin of sins, Pride more to be abhorred then the Devil to be feared.
this mother-sinne, the original cause of our fall, and the cause of his fall
that caused our fall: and therefore more to be abhorred (if I may so say) then
the Devil himself; but more to be feared, I dare speak, the^ the Devil
himself, for that he may be resisted by faith. But Pride entertained, with it
is covertly entertained him that seeks to confound as many as entertain him:
Pride once possessing the heart, and the heart embracing this unholy habit,
loses all faculties that should express love or obedience to God or men: for
it is so fraught with idle and unholy affections, as faith in God, love toward
God, and prayer to God have no place in the understanding, neither agree they
with that will that Pride possesses. Light and darkness, sin and
sanctity, humility and pride of life never concur in one mind. Let then the
sword of civil justice vnsheath to cut down this and other gross sins and
common enormities. What an infinite mass of treasure is spent upon silks, and
vanishing ornaments? and the most of it within one year cast to the dunghill:
every man exceeds, and yet the laws inhibit it. If the law of right religion
bare rule in our hearts, as we would be seen to profess it with our lips, no
law of severity needed to curb our excess. But it seems the law of true
love to God is not written in, or is blotted out of our hearts, we regard the
law of man so little. And yet the Jews in their best love were not better
beloved of the Lord, then we have been; to whom according to the greatness of
his love, he freely gave his greatest blessings, opening (as it were) the door
of the Treasure-house of his goodness to us, which he shut against many other
Nations, As God has loved us, so must we love him again.
and gave us free liberty to take and use the most precious Jewels of his love
his Word and Sacraments. And as he gave unto Solomon with his wisdom, riches
and honor: so he gave unto us with Religion peace and plenty: and so dear
and precious was his word unto us for a time^ as men sought it with greater
peril then David's men fetched water for him with the danger of their lives; and
many sealed their love unto it with their dearest blood: which wo^d we still
enjoy as touching the freedom of the use, but the fruits we produce do rather
argue a careless neglect then a constant embracing thereof in very many. No
marvel therefore if we disobey man in breach of the civil institutions, since
we so little regard the laws of God. But shall we recompense God for his
blessings so manifold with such a high hand of unthankfulness?

CHAP. XXVII.
The bringing in of true Religion was of great difficulty, effected by God by
his instruments; we must beware lest we neglect it, and so loose it again.
THe rooting out of Idolatry in the time of K. Henry the eight, was an attempt
of highest difficulty; the state of the time then considered, wherein few or
none durst open their mouths against the grossest errors of the Synagogue of
Rome: but God stirred up the King, and gave him courage, and withal stroke the
strongest adversaries with such a fear, and enfeebled their powers so, as they
durst not lift up their tongues or hands against that which God had decreed to
bring to paste for our salvation. He opened the books of his own will unto
us, the old and new Testaments, which were before shut up under the lock of
an unknown language. The word was freely preached and read, the Sacraments
truly administered, and the divine service of God truly solemnized, until God
again, to try whether it were truly embraced or fainedly professed, shut up
the books again for a time, In the time of Q Marie.
that none could partake of the truth, nor publish his allowance thereof by
word or work but it cost him his life, yet continued the light to shine even in
darkness, albeit it was still sought to be quenched by the death of many most
worthy Martyrs, whose deaths gave life again to the light, and it resplended,
and faith and prayer began again in strength, to give glory to God that had
so wonderfully brought a mat^er of that difficulty to pass, even by his own
power: the devil roared, the enemies raged all in vain; God protected his
people, and led them by that gracious Queen, and by his godly Ministers, Q.
Eliz.
as by the hands of Moses and Aaron, and now by preuayling Ioshuah, under whom,
and by whose wisdom, piety, and divine virtues, if we resume, retain, and
practice our first love, if we bring forth the effectual fruits of that true
religion we seem to profess, we shall yet live and possess the word, maugre
the Devil and his instruments. But if we wax cold in our profession, if the
Word become loathsome and harsh unto us, if we think the sacred sacraments
needless, and holy prayer fruitless; then will God assuredly deprive us of
our glory, he will remove the Arc of the covenant as from a graceless and
most unworthy people, and place it with a Nation that never heard of it. And we
that have been so long and wonderfully admired for our Religion, more
generally and more freely and truly professed then in any Kingdom of the
world, have been more plentifully blessed, and more powerfully defended by God
against so many and strong enemies, shall become a byword to al
neibour-Nations.

CHAP. XXVIII.
God loves us no more then the Turks and Pagans, if we live like Turks and
Pagans: our manifold Idoll-gods: the carnal man's sophistry: the long use of
the word, has made us weary of the word: nothing can prevent danger but
repentance and prayer.
We may not think that God is more in love with us then with the Turk, nor
respects us more then the Pagan, if we having the Gospel, live like the
Turk, and professing Religion live like the Pagan. It is a sweet contentment
to be in the protection of the living God; but most fear full to fall into
his hands. We have been long in the first, let us beware lest we fall into
the second: these differ as much as do mercy and judgment, life and death,
heaven and hell, Christ and Mahomet: in the first we obey in the second we
rebel: in the first we trust, in the second we despair: in the first we
p^ay, in the second we blaspheme. Let us consider therefore how far we are
fallen from the first, and how far we are from falling into the second: and
nothing more discovers the same then to behold our conuersations in the
glass of the word, wherein every man in particular may see his own; and by
observation the blemishes of the general multitude; and none that has
religious eyes but may behold a general deformity. We ought to have no other
Gods but one, but we make us as many as we have worldly dependancies, namely,
reposing our confidences on any besides the living God (as is said before) We
should not take the holy name of GOD into our polluted mout^es in vain; yet
what is more common then the idle speaking of, and the heedles praying unto
God? We should love our neighbors as our selves, and perform the rest of our
duties required, and avoid things forbidden by the laws of the two tables;
but if we shall be examined by the letter, and judged by our obedience, we would
seek to hide us from the judgment to com. But none can fulfill the law,
Carnal sophistry.
and therefore not I: if any be saved, then so shall I. This is the carnal man's
sophistry, whereby he frames to himself syllogismes against his own
salvation, proving it needless to hear the word preached, nay dangerous. Some
will not stick to say, that they may hear too much, and consequenly know too
much: for according to their knowledge is their obedience and practice
required; and therefore if they know good and do it not, their condemnation is
the more just: if they know little they may sin the more, and yet are they
the more excusable. And though they seldom or never pray, they offend not so
much as if they pray and forgive not their brother who^ they hate; and
therefore the less they pray the less shall their hatred of their brother be
laid to their charge. Here is the doctrine of the Devil, professed by some
kind of people, and held as sound religion as they need to build their faith
upon; as by such as refuse to partake of the holy communion because they are
not in charity. As the devil said to Heuah, Yea, has God said ye shall die if
ye eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil? No, no; ye shall not
only not die, but ye shall be like God himself: so he persuades these kind of
men, Has God commanded you to search the Scriptures, to seek knowledge, to
believe the word, and to pray and partake of the sacraments No, no; beware: the
more ye know the more ye have to answer; ye need take no such pains. Though
some, more curious the^ they need, make much ado, and spend their time in
hearing the Word preached, in reading the same, believing in God, and praying
unto him; they have much to answer, for, He to whom much is given, of him much
shall be required: and therefore take heed ye covet not to know much; and yet
ye shall prosper, fare as well, and have all things at will as well as they that
are most religious. This doctrine of the Devil is pleasing to the carnally
minded, and more follow the rules of the power of darkness, then there follow
Christ, the guide unto grace, and giver of all goodness; which causes sin so
infinitely to abound, and every man to run a race according to his own hearts
lust, seldom or never reprehended or condignly punished. Repentance the
^^eanes to please God being angry for sin.
But howsoever man neglects the punishment, God no doubt will punish us,
unless we meet him by repentance as Abigaile met David* we must fall be^fore
him on the knees of relenting hearts, and appease him with the presents of
faith, obedience, and prayer; we may else fear that God will come upon us, as
David intended upon Nabal, and take from us that unspeakable pearl, the use
of the Gospel which he has so long lent us, and continued amongst us,
notwithstanding so many millions of impediments. Let not our sins increase as
they seem to begin. All places are too full of them, who little regard the
Gospel, such as despise government, whose hearts are ouergorged with sin.
We have been so long fed with this spiritual Manna, that many seem to be
glutted therewith, whose souls yet famish, and they feel it not. Other
Nations have been denied to taste of that whereof many of us are weary. Will
we needs put out our Lamps now the Bridegroom is so near? Will we needs
cast wilfully off our wedding-garments, the Master of the feast being ready to
survey his guests? Are we willing to be taken from the blessed banquet of
salvation, and to be cast into utter darkness? Shall such as pass by shake
their heads at us, 1. King. 9. 8. 9.
seeing us naked that erst were so decked with the knowledge of Christ, and
beautified with the sacred ornaments of obedience and love? Shall we now
begin to crucify Christ anew? God forbid. How we ought to appease God.
What remains then? Only let us become more wary and watchful: let us not
follow the multitude to do evil: let every man rather retire himself into
the secret closet of his heart, and let him bewray unto God his own sins,
and confess them to be part of the cause that God is angry with his people:
let every man pray as well in private as in public, beating our breasts (wherein
do lodge our corrupted hearts) with the fists of true repentance, and new
obedience: let us pray earnestly for pardon and remission of our former
transgressions: let us cast of^ the rags of the old man, and seek by humble
and unfeigned submission and prayer to be clothed with the more glorious
garments of piety, and the rich and right robe of innocence: let us redeem
our furniture of true Ch^istianitie that our sins have stolen from us, and
arm us again with the shield of faith, the breast plate of righteousness, and
the helmet of salvation let us be fervent in faith, constaint in hope, frequent
in prayer: let us not be ashamed to lay open, and vnlap our sores before the
Physician of our souls: let us take unto us the sword of the spirit, and
constantly encounter Satan and sin, who have wounded us even to the death:
let us repair unto that heavenly Samaritan; he will pour the oil of mercy
into our wounds, and heal us. Our disease of sinning is common; let there be a
common consent in seeking remedy, and let us all with one heart and one mind
humble our selves before God, 2. Chro. 20. 3
in fasting and prayer. Thus must we seek the Physitia^, who being thus sought
is ever ready at hand, and expects no reward but our new obedience: and to
observe the diet he prescribes, namely, to sin no more, with a caveat, lest
a worse thing happen unto us. We must not only not do evil, but we must do
good: we must not only fly vice, but follow virtue; which rules implie all the
duties that a Christian man ought to perform toward God and his neighbor,
among which prayer being the cheifest, is chiefly required; which if it be
enkindled by the fire of Gods spirit, produces such a spiritual zeal in our
affections as begets that love whence proceeds our true obedience to God,
and the desire to do good to our neighbors, which are divine virtues
inseparable. For he that loves God, cannot bu^ love his neighbor also.

CHAP. XXIX.
We ought to pray as well for our neighbors as for our selves. The use of
prayer is twofold, public and private. Meditation enkindleth prayer.
AS prayer to God, and love to our neighbor go necessarily together, how can a
Christian man then pray to God for himself, and therein forget h^s brother
whom God commands him to love as himself? wherein is included not only his
natural brother, and private friend; but all men in general, but especially
the Church of Christ and the members of the same. And therefore it is to be
considered that the use and exercise of prayer is twofold, private and
public. The private prayer Private prayer.
is the exercise of a faithful man, sequestered from the society of men,
pouring forth his faithful ^upplications unto God in secret: and that not of
set custom, but in affections sanctified unto the Lord only; and that
especially in such times as when he feels the spirit of God, enkindling in
him a kind of inward and spiritual desire thereunto, which to a man exercised
in this divine work, is as sensibly felt and perceived as the beating of his
pulse. When he feels this heavenly fire begin to wax hot within him, let
him not delay to feed it with its proper fuel, Meditation the bellows to
enkindle prayer.
Meditation and Prayer: for by experience the godly man cannot but find, that
Meditation is as the spiritual bellows that increases the feruencie of
prayer. Even as one spark of fire being connexed to the fuel capable or
combustible, with gentle blowing makes a flame; so the least portion of
spiritual zeal, beginning but to move in the heart of the believer, being by
little and little cherished by silent (but heavenly) eleuatio^ of the mind to
God, breeds in the end such a powerful operation, as the tongue that was
before dumb, and could not move zealously to utter; and the heart that was
before dull and could not conceive what to speak, shall so sweetly concur,
that without all difficulty and harshnes such a sweet sacrifice shall ascend
from the heart to the lips, and from the heart and lips to the heavens, as the
tongue it self cannot express the sweetness it brings unto the soul. For
that spirit that first kindled the desire administreth the matter for the heart
to conceive, and frames the words that the lips do utter, in far more
divine manner then the wisest carnal man could ever devise or speak: and it
brings with it more joy and true consolation then gold, or the most precious
earthly thing: And more solid, and sound peace to the conscience, then the
tongue of man is able to utter. It is the most truly approved remedy against
all the griefs, and troubles of the mind: It eases the afflictions, crosses,
torments, and persecutions of the body. And were it possible, that this sacred
gift could be obtained by carnal means: and the carnal man knew the virtue
and sweetness of it, he would sell all his earthly possessions to buy it.

CHAP. XXX.
How, when, and where private prayers are to be made. An erroneous conceit of
private prayer. What sweetness private prayer brings to the soul.
THE private prayer before mentioned, is not always made in a Closset, or
Chamber: Although, Christ wills us, when we pray, to enter into our chamber
and there to pray to him in secret. The mening whereof is, that we should not
be seen Pharisaically, to make our private prayers in a public manner, as to
be seen of men. The open fields is as a private Closset to him that
sequestreth himself from the society of men for that holy purpose: as it is
supposed Isack did, when he met Rebecca his wife. Sometimes this prayer is
made, even in the midst of ill-disposed company, and in the very act of most
serious business: though not ceremoniously; as upon the knee, bare headed,
striking the breast, or lifting up the eyes or hands, which are external
gestures, most meet to be used in prayer. But places, times* and persons, are
to be considered, for the outward gesture: but the inward heart and the
sanctified affection, without any outward appearance of prayer, may secretly
send up unto God inward sighs, and desires which may prevail with God as did
Anna, Moses, Nehem. 2. 4.
and Nehemiah. He that made the heart knows it, and how it is prepared
within, and looks not to the lips, how they move, as Helie did to Annaes;
Luc. 19. 2.
but to the heart, as Christ did to Zacheus. The place where, and the time when
touching our private, prayer, are not much material so the occasion be rightly
considered. A preposterous kind of prayer.
For in the time of unseasonable wet, to pray for rain; in time of
sufficiency to pray for increase were absurd. But as the occasion does offer
it self, in whatsoever place, at whatsoever time, in whatsoever manner, divine
reverence to God considered, it is accepted with God, Daniel prayed among the
Lions in the den: Jeremy in the dungeon: the three children in the Oven: David
in the Wilderness: Gedion at his threshing: Elisha at the plough. Wheresoever
we are, and whatsoever we do in our vocations, we are in the presence of God
and may there and then send forth our silent and prevailing prayers: and Christ
the mediator will present them, as sweet odors before our God in Heaven.
Joseph, Paul, Peeter, Silas, John Baptist, found the Lord in their prisons. It
is a fond conceit of some men, that think there is no place fit, no not for
private prayer but the Temple, nor God any where else to be found, or prayed
unto, but in, and toward the East: as if he were not as well in the west, and
upon all the points and degrees of the Compass: In the Zenith over our heads,
and with the Antipodes directly under us: Before us, behind us, on our right
hand, and on our left: In the Sea with Peter: In the Whales belly with Jonah:
In shipwreck with Paul. And therefore we may conclude, that there is no place,
where God is not. So we may pray every where. And if our prayer be faithful he
hears us, walking, working riding, sitting yea, and in our familiar talking,
the mind may have her affections in Heaven, the soul may cast forth certain
inward holy desires, and yet the body may be occupied in whatsoever lawful
function. But when we are for that purpose retired, and are free both from
bodily exercise, and from the view of men: we must then conform our gestures
in a m^r^ reverend, and more humble outward manner; as kneeling upon our knees,
and lifting up our hands, and the like, giving our holy desires best
satisfaction in so sacred an exercise. O happy is that soul, that sends forth
continual holy sighs and desires: at all times and in all places: which are
as loud cries unto the Lord, which God hears, understands, and answers;
and allows this kind of holy devotion, as a forsaking of earthly things for
a moment, to aspire unto Heavenly contemplation and conversation for ever. And
this cannot proceed, but from a heart full of the love of heavenly things, of
God especially: who has (as we may thereby truly feel) the superior power in
us, and over us; and in his love draws our affections from earthly to
heavenly cogitations, altogether and alone, for our salvation. And happy is he
that with David delights therein.

CHAP. XXXI.
The helps and hindrances of prayer: how Satan strives to hinder prayer:
for nothing wounds him as faithful prayer in the name of Christ. We must
be watchful and strong to resist him.
PRayer, both private and publik, have their helps and hindrances, their
motives, and mortifications. To stir up the heart thereunto nothing more
avails, then the often hearing and reading of the word of God, which
begets faith, that begets prayer; sundry selected Psalms of Dau^d, and
diverse of the writings of S. Paul, besides many other Scriptures consideratly
read and duly meditated, are forceable motives to this divine duty. The
consideration of our sins, and of the promises of the forgiving them in
Christ: The feeling of our spiritual wants: The consideration of Gods
continual favor, providence, and protection, in releiuing, defending, and
helping others, through faithful prayer. Examples, whereof are infinite in the
Scriptures, do much further this divine and heavenly exercise, by applying our
faith, and prayer to God, in our like occasions.

On the contrary, prayer is much hindered, Hindrances to prayer.
and our zeal mortified, by the neglect of practice: by seldom, or careless
hearing of the Word of God, or reading the Divine Scriptures, or some godly
works, of good and religious men: Not to believe, that God hears or
respects our prayers: That he is not able to give what we ask, or to do
what we desire, if it be for his own glory and our good: To think that
which he does is not for our best: To waver in our prayers, or to have our
minds carried away with by-thoughts, that are not answerable, and concurring
with that we pray for: To pray for fashion, and without feeling of any
necessity to pray: To presume, that God will hear our prayers for our own
sakes* without the merits and mediation of Christ: To faint and give over our
prayers, when we cannot receive, what we would, when we would: To pray openly*
and to be seen of men: To think that we are not bound to pray for our
brethren: These and many other like hindrances of prayer, are often thrust
into our hearts, by the policy of Satan, who comes to hinder all good and
godly actions. 1. These. 2. 18 and 3. 5. Ephesians. 4. 27.
But we ought not to give place to his inticements, nor yield to his
temptations. The most faithful men, have not only continual war with flesh,
and blood, namely with their own corrupt affections to keep them under: Ephesians.
6. 11.
but with Satan himself, with spiritual wickedness. When Iehoshua was doing
the Office of the High Priest, Zech. 3. 1.
standing before the Angel making his prayers unto God, The Devil stood at his
right hand to hinder him. And shall we think that he will be less ready to
hinder and resist us in our Divine excercises? Mat. 4.
He tempted Christ the Lord, and will he forbear his servants? He desired to
winnow the very Apostles of Christ: Luc. 22. 31.
how much more will he seek to distract us, in our deuotest prayers which he
thinks will be most auailable with God? Nothing more wou^deth Satan then
faithful prayer and therefore he coueteth to hinder it.
There is nothing under the Sun, that gives him a more deadly wou^d, then our
faithful prayers to God. And therefore in his impious policy, he endeavors
to hinder this heavenly exercise in the dearest children of God lest that the
righteous soul should so far prevail with God, as to procure his favor and
grace by prayer, and consequently his aid and holy assistance to encounter
this most malicious adversary. It is written that the Lion is afraid at the
crowing of a Cock; but nothing makes Satan so much afraid as faithful
prayer to Christ, whose very name is terrible unto him, having tried his force
and skill against him in the Wlldernesse, upon the pinnacle, but especially upon
the Cross, where Christ so far triumphed over him, as that now, howsoever
malignant he seems to be toward Gods children, he dares not to encounter
them face to face, that use the sword of the spirit and the shield of faith
against him. Although through the abundance of his malice to Christ and his
elect, he leaves not to tempt them, yet it is but by starts and snatches, as
he finds them cold in their spiritual exercises, as he found David idle:
or thorough weakness, apt to be drawn into some backsliding, as he did
Peter. But what got he by betraying those innocents? It was not long ere they
renewed their spiritual strength, and then they gave him such an overthrow, as
afterward he could never prevail against the force of their faith. It
therefore behooves every Christian to be very watchful, that he admit none of
these suggestions of Satan, to take away, prevent, or resist this sacred and
divine duty of faithful prayer, and to stand fast in the faith, to quit them
in all his encounters like men. Put on the whole armor of God, 1. Cor. 16. 13.
that ye may be able to stand against the assaults of the devil: for we
wrestle not against slesh and blood (against weak men that have, as we have,
their breath in their nostrils) but against Principalities, against powers, and
against the Princes of the darkness of this world, against spiritual
wickedness, which are in the high places. These are the enemies of our peace
with God, and therefore endeavor they to steal away our hearts from the living
God: these are they that seek to resist our prayers, to pervert our hearts in
prayer, to estrange our affections from heavenly things; and by no means can
we repel them, but with spiritual weapons, as they are spiritual enemies.
And therefore we must use the counsel of the Apostle, that is, to take unto
us the armor of God; not a part, but the whole furniture: namely, an upright
conscience, a godly and holy life, knowledge of the Gospel, faith unfeigned, and
continual prayer: not for our selves only, but for the Church of Christ, and
for every member of the same. For the particular weapons of this complete
munition, wherewith every Christian ought to be armed against these spiritual
enemies, read Ephesians. 6. 16. 17, 18.

CHAP. XXXII.
The presence of God himself is promised in public prayer: how he is present,
which the carnal man apprehends not: the discontinuance of prayer, public
or private, dangerous.
AS touching public prayer, our Savior gives us such an encouragement to
move us thereunto, both of his own presence, and of the assurance of obtaining
what we ask; as it is more then wonderful that me^ should show themselves so
ba^kward, as not to desire to meet Christ in such holy Assemblies, as are
graced with his own presence. Where two or three are gathered together in my
name (says Christ) I will be there in the midst of them. And whatsoever
they shall ask with one accord in my name, it shall be granted unto them. No
man is so impious as to bring in question, whether this can or will prove true
or not, that Christ should come down and be in the society of men. For we may
assure us, that God the father, God the son, and God the holy Ghost being all
one, the Father is where the son is, the holy Ghost where the father and the
son are. And Christ promising to send the Comforter the holy Ghost after his
departure, performed it in cloven tongues: and he is with us, namely with his
Church to the end of the world, and consequently, the father and the son, the
Trinity in Unity. I will pray the Father (says Christ) and he shall give you
another comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, even the spirit of
truth; so called, because he inspireth the truth into us, and teaches us to
cry Abba father, whether in private or public assemblies gath^red together in
the name of Christ. He then being the spirit of Christ, and being all one with
Christ, being with us, and dwelling in us; it can not be denied but Christ is
with us according to his promise, namely with the faithful assembled in his
name, who^ the world, namely carnal men of the world, know not. But ye (says
Christ to the faithful) know hum, for he dwells in you: and I will not leave
you comfortless, but I will come to you. Again he says, Ioh. 14.
I am in my father, and I in you, and you in me. Seeing then that all holy
assemblies gathered together to hear God speak unto them; and again that
they together may speak unto God; are not left without the glorious presence
of God himself: how are they to be condemned that frame unto themselves, or
rather ^orge by the suggestion of Satan, cases as it were of conscience, to
abjure the company even of Christ himself? Satan beleeu^th that he would
have other men to doubt of.
Satan believes the word of God to be true, and yet labors the contrary
in men inclinable to doubt, and causes many to misconceiue of the sense which
he himself knows to be otherwise then he would have them to believe. And as he
can make no use of any part of the word of God to his own: neither would he
that any should either hear the word truly expounded, or assemblies to
concur rightly in prayer to their salvation. And therefore whosoever finds
in himself the lest motion of doubting of Gods performance of his promises made
unto the faithfully praying, or an unaptness and unwillingness, rather then a
zealous inclination to pray, either in private to himself, in public with the
Congregation, or with his family privately assembled, may justly fear that
Satan has wou^d himself into his affections, and if he prevent him not
speedily, and resist him faithfully by prayer, he will not leave until he
have gotten command of the whole house of his soul, and will expulse all godly
cogitations, holy affections, and sanctified desires, and will suffer none to
be entertained but infidelity, sin, and fearful apostacy. It is a
dangerous thing to abandon the assemblies of Gods people


Will not these dangers move men to repair unto the house of God with
diligence and zeal, there faithfully to join in prayer with Gods children,
and attentively to hear the word preached, which begets faith, the
fountain whence do flow all holy and spiritual exercises of the godly soul?
There is no other way to seek salvation but in and by the word of God; nor any
other in and by whom we can be saved, but in and by Christ; who having so
lovingly called us, and by promise of his own presence entreated us to
communicate in holy exercises, with him and his elect, who will or can rest so
careless of his own salvation, as wilfully or negligently to estrange
himself, from this holy communication with God himself in prayer? public or
private.

Public prayers are so called because they are pronounced distinctly with an
audible voice, Public prayer why so called.
in the hearing and to the understanding of a whole Congregation assembled. And
these prayers commonly tend to public and common ends: as, for the obtaining
of some general good to the whole Church, preventing of some general danger,
or removing of some general evil. And this, although it be properly meant of
parochial Congregatio^s, who assemble themselves by course on the Sabbath and
other set days, making their supplications publicly, for themselves and
others, according to general occasions after a common manner; yet are household
assemblies said to pray publicly, wherein the Master of the Family is to
convent such as are under his charge, and publicly together with them to pray
unto God, as well for the universal good of the Church, whereof they are
members, and for the Commonweal, wherein they live as subjects; as for
themselves. And the promise of Christ's presence holds true, as well in this
latter, wherein two or three only gather together in his name; as where
infinite numbers are assembled.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Private prayer in some respects and at some times more comfortable to a private
man then public. The neglect of public prayer in private families condemned:
for where God is not, there Satan is served.
THe same that has been formerly said of private prayer, may be affirmed of
public; although the first be more ordinary then the second not being
limited to times certain, but attends all occasions, and yields more
comfort to the troubled spirit of some private man, that dares to unfold that
unto GOD in secret, which he would blush to reveal unto man, were he never
so near and dear unto him; much less would he publish it in a public
assembly willingly. And this kind of prayer also is of that condition, that
where it is enkindled, and cannot have free utterance by the lips by reason of
company, but is pent up in the breast, it laboreth with such spiritual
violence in the sanctified soul, as it makes the very heart within a man (as
it were) to ache and rent in sunder, thorough the ardent elevation of the spirit
unto God. And it is the surest trial of true religion. In public assemblies
sometimes hypocrisy bears a far greater sway then it can do in the private
man, who knows that the weight of spiritual joy it brings unto, and leaves
in his soul through prayers, inflamed by the holy spirit of Christ, and
powerfully uttered privately unto God in Christ, whether in silence, in sighs,
or words, cannot be expressed to the capacity of a carnal man: and therefore
it may seem that private prayers in private cases sometimes work more effectually
to the comfort of the soul then the publik. But in cases more general, when
the more faithful souls conioyne in effectual prayer, so much the more
available is their prayer with God.

Fathers of children and Masters of families, who content themselves only with
a bare seru^ng of God in show once in the week on the Sabbath day, Fathers and
Masters of Families reproved for their neglect of prayer with their families.
are to be reproved, who seem to hold it a needless and superfluous work to
trouble themselves and their families morning or evening in prayer, and
exhortation to the fear of God, and dehorting them from sin; which times they
have assigned in their opinions to more profitable uses, both for themselves
and their servants: forgetting, or not understanding, that in every Christian
family either God or Satan is served, Christ or Belial obeyed, sanctity or
sin embraced. For there is no private person, but is or holds of one of
these; consequently no society but partaketh of the fruits arising of good or
evil. If then either private man or public assembly, be it provincial,
parochial or domestical, do forget this most high duty of serving the living
God: it follows of necessity that a contrary power has there the command;
and nothing more discovers to which any of the former lend their obedience,
Not to serve God but on the Sabbath day is wilful ignorance and negligence.
then the fruits that either of them produces: if carnal effects, as loving
the world, the pleasures of the flesh, and the vanities of this life, it
argues that private man, or that society to be profane. If it were sufficient
to serve God on the sabbath, what needed the Apostle to advise us to pray
continually and the commandment of Christ, 1. Cor. 15. 34
Watch and pray, Mat. 26. 41.
that ye enter not into temptation, to love righteousness and to sly sin.
How do they awake^or watch, that slumber from Saboth to Saboth? Are they not
all that time in darkness, not using the duties of the light? Christ is the
light in whom whosoever lives not, he is in darkness. And he that has but
one day of light in seven, How great is his darkness? It is true, this day,
the Saboth was set apart by God: that in it men should employ themselves, to
serve and to glorify him. And in that day they should not only not do but also
not think of any Worldly affairs. But are not some so far from celebrating
the name and service of God that day, The Saboth profaned more then other
days.
as they profane it above all other days? do they not turn the glory of
God into wantonness, to banqueting, dicing, dancing, drunkenness, gluttony,
and to what sin not? This commonly is the day, that many appoint for merry
company, to laugh, and to be jouiall, as they call it, without mean or
modesty: And yet, this day is sufficiently kept holy as they think, if they
spend an hour in the fore part of the day, and half an hour in the
afternoon, in the Church: though all the rest be consumed in most lascivious
vanities, and carnal occasions. How can this discharge the duty of a
Christian, that has no care to serve God any other day in the week? Do we
not credit the premonition of the Apostle Saint Peter, that the end of all
things is at hand? 1. Pet. 4. 8. We should especially serve God for that we
live in the last age of the world.
And how follow we his counsel, namely, to be sober, watching in prayer? To
whom speaks the Apostle this? to his Countrymen, the Jews only? no, even to
us: that are come, as it were, to the Worlds period. And therefore high time it
is for us to look up, to watch, and pray, to live religiously, and soberly,
least that the Master of this great family come suddenly, and find us buffeting
one another, blaspheming, swaggering drunken, faithless, insolent, covetous,
and few or none doing the service of our Master. It will be a dreadful sight,
to see him come with his iron rod in his hand to crush his enemies in pieces.
The salt of the earth, having lost it saltness, shall be cast to the
dunghill. The Tree that brings not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast in
the fire. The Magistrates saltness is profession of the Gospel, and the
execution of Justice. The saltness of the Minister is the true preaching of
the word, and example of godly life. The saltness of Fathers is their sincere
conversation before their children, and the educating them in the fear of God,
and holy life. The saltness of Masters of Families, is to live honestly,
religiously, and governing their charge in the fear of God. And under these
four estates of men, are all conditions comprehended: subjects under Kings;
children under fathers; and young men under tutors and governors. Every of
these, in their places of superiority and inferioritie, have their several
duties; and all under one God, whom they ought all to obey; Superiors in
rightly commanding; and inferiors in duly obeying. Neither of these duties can
be rightly performed without knowledge of the will of God by his word. This
knowledge is not perfect without practice: This practice is imperfect without
faith: And faith is known by the fruits; the chief whereof is love. And this
love most shines and shows it self in doing good to all, but especially to
them of the family of faith. The greatest good, that can be done to the Church
of God, is Prayer. And therefore Saint Paul wills to pray continually: not
for our selves only, but, for Kings and all the members of Christ's mystical
body. Kings and Magistrates ought to imitate David, to accompany the people
to the house of the Lord: Fathers, and Masters ought to pray with and for their
Children and Families; not on the Saboth day only, but with all perseverance.
Some refer the duty of prayer only to the Minister, and think it a kind of
usurpation of the Ministers office, to pray for or with any, but for himself,
contrary to the precept of Saint Paul; Who wills that all men make prayers,
in all places, heauing up pure hands, without strife or envying, unto the
Living God. Where it appears, that under the word all Men, Kings, Princes,
Nobles, and men of all degrees, faculties and functions, are comprehended: and
because they shall not think there is no place but the material temple, he
commands that duty to be performed in all places; even in every particular
house: with caution, that it be done without strife and envying, and free from
vain ostentation and desire of popular glory.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
The true use of the Lords Prayer, about which frivolous questions have risen.
It is the rule of all other prayers, and every petition full of high matter of
instruction.
THE most absolute prayer, and the most ordinary, which not only the
Primitive, but the Modern Christian Churches and their members have in use, is
the Prayer that Christ taught his Disciples. But we must take heed we do not
take this Prayer into our mouths irreverently, inconsideratly and without faith
or feeling, and without due conceiving, and rightly understanding what every
Petition concerns and imports, as some do. But we must especially in
private or public Prayer unto God, and above all other, use this most heavenly
Prayer, with a sincere and truly sanctified zeal.

About the use of this prayer, Opinions about the use of the Lords Prayer.
there has been of late a frivolous and needless question raised, by men of
too precise an opinion: who affirm it not necessary, to use this prayer, in
the bare words as Christ set it down: A conceit, without reason or religion.
Others hold it very sufficient of it self, without either any other Prayer,
or enlarging the same, according to the measure of the spirit that the man that
prays has. Which last opinion although more tolerable then the first, The
Lords prayer the rule of all other prayers
I hold erroneous. For we know, that the Apostles themselves, and the
Disciples of Christ after they had learned this Prayer, prayed often in other
words, albeit the Lords Prayer be the rule and the sum of all other Prayers:
And so (no doubt) it is not only, not unlawful, but an especial fruit and
effect of faith, to pray according to our occasions, and to frame words, as the
Spirit of God shall give utterance, who (although we know not) teaches us how
to pray: but this must always be done according to the tenor of the Lords
Prayer. And, therefore howsoever weak and imperfect, our Prayers may seem^e to
be unto our carnal part in respect of the phrase: yet our spirits being
directed by Gods Holy Spirit, powers forth Prayers, truly understood of him
by whose spirit we are enabled to pray. And GOD grants our requests,
according as he sees fit for us.

The use of this Prayer of Prayers, is far more common, The Lords prayer is
to be rightly understood.
then commonly rightly understood. For every word therein implies matter of
great importance: yet passes the lips oftentimes, before it come at, much
less before it be truly digested in the heart; and therefore wit^ereth
without fruit; as plants without natural soil, and van sheth in the air even
with the sound. Others in like sort, like Parrots, patter forth Pater noster,
etc. and know no more what the words import the^ the senseless Parrot. And yet
they think it a work of great devotion to tumble out a set number of such
fruitless and faithless prayers, not understood; as were the time spent in
cordial and hearty prayers indeed, could not be but much profitable. Such are
to be pitied, and prayed for, if they would but yeilde their ears to hear,
their hearts to understand, and endeavor to practice.

CHAP. XXXV.
The sum of the lords prayer briefly explained.
HOW many do duly consider, What the Word Our imports.
the efficacy of the word, Our? And yet it carries in it, as it were, the
seal of our adoption in Christ: for, if God be our Father, then are we his
children (but by adoption) If his children, then are we to lo^^ and obey our
fa^^er. If we obey him, we acknowledge his Commandments just: who having
commanded us to love our brethren, how can we come unto our Heavenly father,
but be put in mind by this word Our, that our brethren have also an interest,
in o^r Prayers; whom if we forget, we cannot but acknowledge that we also
forget who is our Father. Again, how can children love their father, and not
hate what he loves not? If we love what he misliketh, as the works of the
flesh, the vanities of the World, and the pleasures which our Father has
forbidden: how, and with what face can we come and call him Our Father Or beg
any thing with hope to receive it at his hands: whom we cannot but confess
we rather flatter, then fear or love? The words, which art in heaven, Which
art in Heaven.
intimate unto us, that we call not upon any earthly Prince, or mortal
Monarch, but upon the invisible and immortal God whose dwelling is in the
Heavens: and at his hands only we seek whatsoever we need, both heavenly and
earthly things. And as he our Father is in Heaven whom we love: so should
^ur minds, and cogitations, m^unt up above the earth, unto the heavens, where
our beloved sits in glory. And although we be in body in the earth and
our souls in an earthly Tabernacle: yet should that our spiritual part be
evermore conversant (as it were) with him in the heavens, as children of our
heavenly Father. For, he that finds not here in himself such spiritual
motions, as may assure him, that he in some measure partaketh of a kind of
felt heavenly blessedness: shall never hereafter partake of our heavenly
Fathers glory. And therefore as we are bold, in Christ our elder brother, to
present our selves before his Majesty, rendering unto him his own, namely the
lesson that he himself taught us: let us not come to him as Trewants, nor able
to yield a reason unto our selves, of every branch of the lesson he gave us to
learn. But let us set it before the eyes of our understandings, either as a
gl^sse to see our ignorance, and deformities: or to make it a law unto our
selves, to shape all our prayers to him, and our conuersations thereby, to G^ds
glory and our own internal comfort.

What a lesson do these words, Hallowed be thy name.
Hallowed be thy name, teach us? what occasion may we hereby take to reprove
our selves? for many with the ^lipp^s pronounce, Hallowed be thy name; that
think or do nothing less; profaning the name of God by their sins, which
they should seek by all means to glorify, as by obedience to his laws, by
loving him for his own sake, by praying unto him, and believing in him. But
contrarily, we disobey his will, we love not his word, we believe not his
promises, we seem to pray unto him with the lips, our hearts far from him.
Also we pray that his Kingdom may come: Thy Kingdom come.
namely that his Word may work; and take effect in every man's heart, to the
saving of their souls. And yet most of us are as far from regarding it, as
we rather contemn it and resist it: seeming as it were unwilling, that the
Spirit of God should dwell and rule in our hearts; as may appear by our
common disobedience unto the Scepter of his Kingdom, the Gospel of Christ.
Thy will be done.
We pray likewise; Thy will be done. And yet we do nothing less then obey it.
Give us our daily bread.
We beg our daily bread at the hands of God And yet we trust him not, but
rather our own provisions, our wit and policies, our friends and carnal
mean^s, coveting to lay up in store, for many years, as the rich man did,
mentioned in the Gospel: Arguing thereby that we think in our hearts, that
if our own care in getting were no surer mean of provision of our daily
necessaries, then the promise and providence of God; we should want many
things, and not obtain sufficient means to maintain our estate and leave
unto our children: merely contrary to the counsel of Christ: who wills us:
not to be ouer-carefull for tomorrow. For it argues in us a great defect of
faith. And yet these words are not so to be expounded, as if we should be
altogether careless of future times, or for our children: but that we should
not be too solicitous and careful, and thereby argue an absolute distrust
that God either can, or will, give us, with our true obedience, all things
necessary in this life to enioy^; and to our faithful children. If riches
increase, set not your hearts upon them. If poverty oppress thee, cast thy
care upon God: for he cares for thee.

We pray that God will forgive us our sins, Forgive us our sins as we
forgive
as we forgive. And yet we seek to take advantage of every small injury,
done unto us by our neighbor or brother: and covet to revenge it, by the
extremest violence of force, or Law. Our hatred sometimes grows so deadly, as
we cease not to persecute and prosecute our enemies to death, even by our own
death: and yet we pray for equal measure at Gods hands. And this petition they
shall be sure to have granted above all other. For as they crave to be
forgiven as they forgive; they shall be sure as they forgive not, neither shall
they be forgiven. We desire also not to be led into temptation. Lead us not
into temptation.
And yet some leave not to seek all occasions to fall therinto: coveting idle,
evil, lewd and lascivious companies, hearing and reading profane and wanton
books, singing and hearing songs of ribaldrie and filthiness, delighting in
drunkenness, whoredom, pride, covetousness, envy, glutto^ie, scurrilitie,
and all kind of forbidden wickedness. Is this the holy use that they make of
this most sacred prayer? And yet do they think that it is devotion of such
acceptance with God as discharges Christian duty in prayer? Surely God
hears these, but regards them not but by way of condemnation. And therefore
let all men learn to know God aright in his word, and to believe him
faithfully in his promises, and to pray unto him conti^ually according to
knowledge: so as this holy prayer began with a desire that God might be
glorified: so shall we to his glory and our comfort conclude the same. As
many petitions as are in the Lords prayer, so many instructions w^ have by them
to live godly.
And let us know, that as many petitions as are in this most heavenly prayer,
so many holy and heavenly aduertisements and instructions they administer unto
us to live heavenly: for our Savior, by teaching us how to pray for so many
several blessings, does therein teach us also how to perform our duties
toward God and our neighbors, the sum of both the Tables; so as in praying
unto God with a faithful and an understanding heart, we cannot but inform our
selves in the course of a godly conversation also thereby.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Prayer much increases divine knowledge, whereby men of mean carnal learning
exceed many literat Doctors.
WHo then among the company of Christians is there that will not be advised? or
so backward that will not be stirred up? or so perverse and peevish that will
not be persuaded to practice this holy duty? considering that it is found by
holy experience that the continual use of faithful prayer much increases the
knowledge of all other duties, Prayer increases (...) knowl^dge.
tending to the obtaining of our salvation in Christ: nay, further it is found
by experience, that faithful and often use of prayer is a most effectual
mean to increase divine knowledge, such knowledge as some learned and great
Doctors, notwithstanding their deepest Schoole-learning, have not attained
unto. For there is not a little difference between humane learning and
spiritual knowledge, and so much difference between carnal devotion and holy
zeal: the first may be in a reprobate, the second in none but in the child of
God. The Scribes and Rabbis of the Jews were great Doctors: yet they
apprehended not the mystery of Christ as did the Apostles, who received not
the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God. 1. Cor. 2. 12.
The spirit which Gods children receive lifts up their spirits unto God, and
teaches them heavenly things, that we may know the things that are given us of
God. So that it is not the deepest carnal learning that can search the secret
things of God; but God reuealeth them unto the poor and humble, by his spirit
which searches the deep things of God. The natural man perceives not the
things of the spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he
know them because they are spiritually discerned. The^ is not the faculty of
understanding spiritual things given but by grace, not by humane
understanding, be it never so deep. Therefore says the Apostle, Not many
wisemen after the flesh, nor many mighty, nor many noble are called: but God
has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, The spirit of
God teaches al ^aithfull du^^es, the (...) whereof is (...) prayer.
and the weak things of the world to confound the most mighty. It follows
the^ tha^ he that has the spirit of God knows how to perform all spiritual
duties, among which none takes place above faithful prayer, which is of that
force as it obtains all things, especially knowledge of things tending to the
salvation of the soul: the sweetness of true prayer none knows, nor can
apprehend but he only that has it; the carnal man understands it not
being told it. Some will say they cannot pray, Some affirm they cannot pray
with comfort.
they find no aptness in themselves thereunto: only they can say the Lords
prayer; but to say they do it with that feeling of comfort, that they have
heard some men say they feel, they cannot, and how to amend it they know not*
yet are they content to be let alone, loath to be awaked out o^ their deadly
slumber, and to die in that most fearful trance. It is a grievous sickness
and a dangerous disease that such men are in: it cannot but argue that they
have no true knowledge of God so long as they live in this obscure, yet a kind
of voluntary darkness. For it cannot be that a man can hear the word
preached, Gods promises pronounced, and his threats denounced; but if there be
any feeling in him, he cannot but apprehend mercy, or fear judgment: if
neither of these can provoke him to pray with feeling, he is doubtless far
gone in a deadly Lethargy, and no carnal medicine can cure him, nor mortal
Physician heal him; he only must do it that cast out the seven Devils out of
Marie: he must cast out the devilish affections out of the man, and make him
wise unto salvation. But if he be like unto the deaf Adder, and stop his
ears wilfully, refusing the relieuing charm: there is no help or hope for
such a man.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Although no man by nature knows how to pray, none is to despair; for the
word heard, and prayer used teaches it, and increases the knowledge of it.
NO man by nature, I confess, knows how to ^ray as he ought: it is the
spirit of God that helps our infirmities, and makes request for us, with
sighs which cannot be expressed. And therefore let no man despair of being
enabled. There is a seed in all men, a holy and divine spark: and if a man
wilfully quench it not, this seed being watered by hearing and reading of the
word, by faith and prayer, may take root, bud, and bear fruit, howsoever
weakly in the beginning. As an infant at the first quickening in the womb of
the mother, which time brings to more maturity and perfection, and comes into
the world felt and s^en: so this divine seed by degrees comes to be lively in
operation: and the small spark becomes a flame, and in fine, enkindleth an
admirable weight of zeal. For to him that has, to him shall be more given, and
by continuance and practice he shall find himself a new man, more and more
every day furnished with divine gifts. Nothing is perfected the first day that
has growing and increase. All spiritual graces have their beginnings weak;
and among all the other fruits of the spirit of God none is more excellent, more
sweet, more auailable to salvation, then is continual faithful prayer, The
force of prayer increases by degrees.
which is not the first day in perfection; but by little and little it becomes
more and more fervent: and as it increases so draws it with it a wonderful
increase of the knowledge of all things necessary to salvation. So that I may
conclude to the comfort of all true Christians^ That he that can pray
faithfully has all things both in heaven and earth, lacking nothing
necessary; for he has God: and he that cannot, nor will endeavor to learn
how to pray, has nothing yet that he ought to have.

1. CHRON. 28. 9. The Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the
imaginations of thoughts: If thou seek him he will be found of thee, but if
thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.

FINIS.
A MORNING PRAYER TO BE USED IN PRIVATE FAMILIES.
O Lord who take evermore charge of thy people, giving them ever in due time
what in thy wisdom thou know necessary for them: we acknowledge thy great
goodness toward us O Lord, in delivering us this night from dangers, and in
giving us competent re^^. Thou have of thine abundant mercy raised us this
morning in safety. Look not we beseech thee upon our pollutions, the printes
whereof, through our corruptions, we have left behind us in our beds. Take from
us, and from every one of us, we beseech thee, the filthy garmens of sin^e,
shame and confusion, wherewith we were conceived and borne, and cloth us with
thy rightteousnesse and salvation in Jesus Christ. Bless us and we shall be
blessed, teach us wisdom to choose what is good, and to avoid evil, and all
the occasions of sinning, this day. Thou Lord have pleasure in righteousness.
And they are only blessed, in whose hearts are thy ways; take away from us
stony hearts, and give us hearts of flesh. Let our hearts cleave unto thee,
and never be estranged from thee: for Satan maliciously goes about to draw us
from thee, by his continual practices suggestions and temptations, and raises
his instruments to entrap us and snare us. But be unto us O Lord a strong
defense. And howsoever our Adversary indeuoureth to blemish us and to pollute
us with his enchantments, transform us we beseech thee into thy own Image,
from glory to glory by thy spirit. And as thou have banished the night and
darkness, and given us corporal light: So Lord give us the light of truth.
Thou give sight to the blind, banish our spiritual darkness; Thou make the
Lame to go, take from us all impediments, which this day may offer themselves
to hinder our found and holy walking before thee in sincere conuersations. Thou
turnest a barraine wilderness into a fruitful Land, and again thou make a
fruitful La^d barrain for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. Make
fruitful our barraine hearts in all goodness and spiritual graces: sow the
good seed of lively faith and true obedience in us: and water it by thy holy
Spirit that we may bring forth the fruits of a holy and sanct^fied life,
Turn the Wilderness of our profane conue^sations, into a Garden of godly
virtues. Thou have raised us from the deadness of our corporal sleep: this
morning breath now into our dull and drowsy souls thy sacred spirit, that we
may be so revived, and spiritually cheered, that we may with holy and heavenly
joy and comfort betake us to our corporal businesses: give us strength of
body, and the use of our limbs, and senses: give us understanding hearts to
perform our duties diligently, faithfully, and truly in our callings, And let
all things prosper unto us this day, that we shall take in hand: for we
acknowledge that it is thy goodness, that has kept us this night past for
which we yield thee all humble thanks, beseeching thee to be with us this
day: guard and keep us and whatsoever thou have given us, for we recommend our
selves, our sou^es, our bodies, and goods, into thy holy protection and keeping
this day. And remove from us Lord that curse, that in seeing we should not see,
and in hearing we should not understand: but quicken us according to thy
loving kindness that we may long for thy word: make it sweet unto us, by a
sanctified desire to hear, and a holy zeal to practice this day and ever the
testimonies of thy mouth. AMEN. Our Father, etc.

Lord increase our faith.
An Evening Prayer for private Families.
MOst gracious, merciful, everliving, and most loving Lord God; we are here
gathered together before thee, to yield thee thanks for thy goodness and
mercies this day past vouchsafed unto us, weak and unworthy of so great a
favor at thy hands, by reason of our manifold sins and offenses committed
against thee. For by nature Lord we can do nothing but displease thee. By the
transgression of the first man Adam we have all sinned: now by the merits of
the second man Christ let us be made righteous: let the perfection of his
obedience satisfy for the imperfection of ours. Our disobedience has been
intolerable, our rebellions horrible, and our serving of thee this day past
punishable. The thoughts of our hearts have been sinful, the words of our
mouths deceitful, the works of our hands hateful. Such, and so evil have
we ever been, that what we should have done, we have left undone, what we should
not have don we have don it with eagernes and greedines: and thus profanely
have we passed this day, now come to an end. O remember not Lord our offenses,
reward us not according to our evil imaginations: mark not what we have spoken
amiss, nor punish us according to our works this day. Create in us, we
beseech thee, clean hearts, renew right spirits within us; fill our heads with
fountains of tears, that we may night and day recount and bewail our sins
in the bitterness of our hearts. Let this be the last day, the last hour, the
last moment of our wilful offending thy Majesty; and let us not carry thine
indignation for our sins to our beddes^ but let us instantly cast off our
corrupt affections, and by truly and unfeignedly repe^ting obtain remission in
the merits and mediation o^ Jesus Christ the right^ous, who is a propitiation
for ou^ sins. Give us grace Lord to d^aw near unto thee: for thou have
promised to preserve the state of the righteous; and all that forsake thee shall
be confounded. Be thou therefore our strong rock, whereunto we may always
resort. Have mercy upon us, O L. have mercy upon us: give us help in
trouble; for ^ain is the help of man. Give us a holy fear of thy great and
glorious Name: for great, O Lord is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for
them that fear thee. Knit our hearts unto thee through faith in love, that we
may be of the number of them that shall partake of thy glory with Christ, that
where thou art there we may be to behold thy glory. Increase our faith: open
the eyes of our dim and dull understanding* that we may ^ee the wonderful
works of thy mercies toward us, even in the darkness of our corporal lives:
when our natural eyes shall be shut up with the feebleness of our bodies by
sleep, thou sleep not nor slumberest, but wa^chest over thine, and
suffer no man to do them violence, thou preseruest them in thy providence,
thou defendest them under the shadow of thy wings, not only in their corporal
employments and bodily labors, but when they are in their deepest
forgetfulness of their own dangers, and of weakest ability to help
themselves, in the deadness of sleep. Preserve us Lord, be watchful over us,
let thy holy Angels attend about our beds, let them be thy ministers of our
safety; let not our sleep be dangerous but comfortable unto us; let not our
delight be set on that sluggish ease, and slothful wallowing in our beds as
breeds diseases and corrupt humors. But as sleep is the fruit of our
corrupt nature, which without rest cannot continue: so let us use it as matter
of necessity, not of wantonness and carnal contentment. Save us from that
curse of the wicked, that we should wax worse and worse: and that though we
have lived long after the vanities of the flesh, let us not end in the same:
and though we have not, as we ought, brought forth the fruits of the spirit,
let us now begin to live in him, and our spirits be ruled, directed, salted and
seasoned by thy holy and sanctifying spirit: so though our mortal bodies
sleep, our sanctified spirits may watch for the coming of the bridegroom,
that we be not found like the foolish V^rgins, with empty and blind Lamps, but
prepared to meet the Lamb in the clouds with joy, among the rest of thy
Saints. In the mean time keep us: we recommend our selves, and all that we
have into thy gracious keeping, in that thy dearest Son, our Savior Christ
Jesus, to whom with thee and thy holy Spirit, be praise eternally. Amen. Our
Father, etc.

Lord increase our faith.


