CHRONOLOGIA SA^^^ By the high (...) Doctor PHIL. NICOLA (...) de regne Christi.

Shortly collected and augmented by Niels Michelsone.

C^^ Privilegio S. R. Maj.

Newly translated out of the German^ and Dence tongue into the English, By
DAVID FORBES.

Perused, and accompanied with a short treatise and exhortation tending to
repentance.

MATH. Chap. 3. verse. 2. Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.

Vitae finem perpende, de ^rastino haud vllus securus.

EDINBVRGH Printed by John Wreittoun, 1630.

TO THE RIGHT HONOV^ABLE, THE RIGHT REVE^END AND WORTHY, ^H^ LORD PROVEST,
BAILIFS MINISTERS, and remnant ^^^selers of EDINBVRGH: All ^^^^se of grace
here and glor^^ hereafter, etc.
RIght Honorable, right Worthy, renowned Senate, and Pastors:
I Finding my self somewhat bound unto your benevolent favors, therefore I in
mind did decree to give out the first fruits and proof of my labors, under
the tuition and defense of your Honorable wisdoms; and seeing I found this
brief and compendious German work to be fit for my purpose, especially in
those times when men are most secure, and sleeping in worldly vanities, I was
in a manner incited, through conscience for to lay on my Talent, unto the
benefit of mine own native Country, and being obliged, for to approve that
which I did publicly profess, before your worthy Senate, and within your
renowned City. Therefore I could see none more meet to dedicate the proof of
my labors, as unto the conspicuous and public censure of your Honorable
Senate: Right Honorable, the Author of this little work is a German Doctor in
divinity to Hanburgh, Doctor Philip. Nicolaj, now in the LORD, who appearantly
has been graced, and endued with a gift of prophecy, as experience and event
of time, has testified in his travels, and who is the right fundamental
ground of this work and prophecy, written by him 33. years since, namely in
the year of CHRIST 1596, which was found extant presently after him in Latin,
and thereafter translated in the Germane tongue by Mr. Gothard Artus to
Da^ssick, namely in the year of CHRIST 1598. whereout a Dence Professor called
Niels Michelsone has gathered this brief work, and translated again in
Dence and Printed lately Anno 1628. The substance is a brief analogy of times
conferred with Scripture, out of Ezekiell, Daniel, and Revelation of John,
containing a Prophecy and success of the Gospel to the worlds end, and
concluded with the Authors protestation, which I thought good to translate, and
accompany with an exhortation to repentance, and benefit mine own Nation
with the same. Heerewith persuading my self of acceptance, I do thrust this
poor myte of my travels into the treasury of your Christian and charitable
dispositions, recommending it unto the protection and tuition of your
Honorable wisdoms, and you and your doings unto the grace of GOD.

Yours in CHRIST JESUS David Forbes.

TO The Christian READER.
GEntle Reader I have thought good to benefit thee with this little work, de
regno CHRISTI; and to translate it in our own commoun language, that it may
come in publict view of all: which I have out of love and for thy spiritual
well perused: accompanied with a brief treatise, and exhortation to
repentance, requesting thee, as a spiritual friend, to cover my weakness and
imperfection therein with the veil of charitable censure: but as for the
translation it self, I shall approve it before all censurs whatsomever: my
Master may well pretend it not to be decored with the ornate phrase of
language, but yet I hope he must subscryue it to be the true translation,
according to the German and Dence phrase it self, which we ought receive in
good part, seeing the Histories and Prophecies both of Ezekiel, Daniel, and
Revelation of John have (as it were) hitherto been dark; but now in the end
daily more and more opned and cleared so well by faithful Preachers, as also
by daily experience, which the Prophets do testify clearly, that men shall
be enlightened in those mysteries at the end, as you can remark in the Authors
warrant for searching of the Scriptures, wherein we see plainly a special
illumination of the Spirit, prophesied unto some, for opening of all hid
prophecies, and parts of Scripture: yet albeit it is no ways the Authors
meaning absolutely to determine and appoint unto GOD the time and end of these
things, which secreete the Father has reserved for himself only, as he
protests here in the end, for the year, day, and hour we may not know:
but yet of all tokens which our LORD JESUS has revealed unto us, as likewayes
the experience of our times, conferred and compared with these Prophecies, we
can easily discern, that all these prophecies are most fulfilled; and that the
world will soon take an end, and therefore should admonish us to have the
lamps of our hearts prepared, that we may convoy our Brydgroome the LORD
JESUS into that blessed Heaven of all happiness: To whom with the Father, and
the holy Ghost be all praise and Dominion, AMEN.

Thine in the LORD DAVID FORBES.

THE AVTHORS WARRANT for searching of Scripture.
DANIEL. 12. verse 4. BUT thou, O Daniel, shut up the words and seal the book
till the end of the time: many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be
increased.

Verse 9. And he said, Go thy way, Daniel: for the words are closed up, and
sealed, till the end of the time.

Verse 10. Many shall be purified, made white and tried: but the wicked shall
do wickedly, and none of the wicked shall have understanding: but the wise
shall understand.

JEREMIAH. 23. Verse 20. In the latter days ye shall understand it plainly.

REVELATION. 10. verse 7. But in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel,
when he shall begin to blow the trumpet, even the mystery of GOD shall be
finished, as he has declared to his servants the Prophets.

Verse 11. And he said unto me, Thou must prophecy again amongst the people
and nations, and tongues, and to many Kings.

IWP

CHRONOLOGIA SACRA, THE CALLING TIME OF THE JEWS. 41 Years.
Year after the birth of CHRIST 29 John Baptist began to preach repentance,
and to baptize.

And in the said year began the time of the Jews merciful calling, which
contains in it self 41. years, Apoc. 14.15.

Anno Christi 30. Christ was baptized, and then discovered himself to the
people whom he was, and that by his preaching and miracles.

Anno Christi 31 John Baptist is cast in prison.

Anno Christi 32 he was beheaded.

Anno Christi 34 Christ was crucified, stood up, and ascended into Heaven.

The calling time of the Gentiles 1600 years.
ANno Christi 70 ends the calling time of the Jews, when their chief City,
and whole policies were destroyed to the ground: and in their place goes on
the calling time of the Gentiles, of the which Christ gathers now his Church,
which merciful calling of the Gentiles indureth 1600 years, as it is written
in the Revelation chap. 14. verse 20, and is understood by the 1600 furlongs:
add unto this 1600 this 70, so is the end of the Gentiles calling finished anno
Christi 1670.

Gogs, Magogs, or the Turks Kingdom began anno Christi 335, and indureth 1335
years.
ANno Christi 335, is that evil and damnable heretic Arrius, who for his
heretical learning was excommunicate by a general assembly; yet to Synodo
and Jerusalem was accepted, and made free again with his doctrine, which
Arianish doctrine was the first beginning unto the Gogs and Mahumets
absurdities, which were accepted and believed in the ruined city of Jerusalem:
and especially heerefra anno Christi 335, began the Goges 1335 years, and
ends anno Christi 1670, Daniel 12. verse 11.12: and here is the beginning on
that two times, and an half time, Daniel, 12. verse 7.

Anno Christi 366, Damasius and Vrsatius had great contention and diversity
about the seat of the Pope, heerefra began the time of the two witnesses
clothed in Sackcloth, who should prophecy 1260 days. Revel. 11 3.

THE POPES BEGINNING.
ANno Christi 410 Rome is taken and burnt by Alaricus King of the Goths, never
was the City of Rome vanquished any time before, neither given over unto any
stranger, and out landish, since the beginning of the fourth Monarchy, and at
that time Sozimus was Pope, who ardently stood after the Occumenick style, that
is, that he might be called the common and head Bishop above the whole
clergy, every where else through the whole world: This Sozimus gave such a law
that no doings in the Kirk should stand in full power without it was approved,
and consented by the Bishop of Rome, after as it was prophesied that the son
of perdition should then begin his governament when the Roman Kingdom began
to bow, for certainly that overthrow of the Romans, which was done by
Alaricus, has been a beginning hithertill: Therefore that the Papists time
which is 1260 years, or the 42 months, every month reckoned to 30 days, and
every day for a year, has here his beginning of this 410 years of Christ,
which 410 years added to 1260 the sum is 1670. when the Popedom with all
things will only take an end.

Anno Christi 452. The Hunners King Attila is come in Italy, who spoiled and
destroyed many Cities, and towns, from this 452 years falls in the Gogs
secreete days whereof Ezekiel 38.14.

Anno Christi 520, Anastasius Emperor began to banish and root out all
heriticques, with all their heretical doctrine, whereunto the Roman Pope
helped with all his uttermost power: and which attained unto a prosperous
success; whereby Satan the father of lies, and all heriticall doctrine, was
bound from this 520 years a thousand years. In the which the Dragon that old
serpent, which is the Devil and Satan, is said to be bound by the Angel with
a great chain, whereof Apoc. 20.2.

Anno Christi 597 is Gregorius Magnus made Pope, who would not let style him
with the Oecumenick title over the East land, yet nevertheless showed his
ambition and avaritiousnesse, in this he subdued under him the Kirks of Spain
and Britain, to his jurisdiction. In this year Mahumet was 26 years old; and
then doubtless gave him self to reaving and murder. Therefore begins the
hour, day, month, and year, whereof Apoc. 9.15.

Anno Christi 636, Heereto indureth the time of the Gogs, Now after follows
his time Daniel 12.7. and then is Jerusalem come under the Saracines power
right in the 300 years after the clergy consented unto that most absurd
learning of Arrius.

Anno Christi 1450, begins the new Testaments joyful years, and about that
time is Constantinople with the whole East-landish Kingdom, and Emperordome
subdued by the Turks and becomes the Gogiers stall and stinking den. Here
begins the 7 angelical months, which the Scripture gives unto Gogs
sprituall burials Ezekiel- 39.11.

Anno Christi 1522. Heereto endures the set times, now after follows the
half time Dan. 12.7.

This same year Doctor Martin Luther went to Worms, and answered his cause
before the Emperor. In the mean time Carolostadius made uproar, and stormed
to Wittenbergh, and the locusts came up, of the which Apocal. 9. verse. 3.4.5.

Anno Christi 1625. here ends the 1290 years, whereof Daniel speaks in
his 12 chap. verse 11. and the 45 years begins here.

Right so ends the same year the year of the two witnesses, which when they
are ended, then shall the Pope in-arme himself with his greatest power, and
that shall be his greatest tyranny, which shall stand three years and an
half, Apocal. 11.9. until anno Christi 1629, in the which year the
spiritual time begins, which shall continue 41 years and an half.

Anno Christi 1663, the 7 months have their end.

Anno Christi 1664, the last 7 years begin, of the which Ezekiel. 39.9.12.14.

But anno Christi 1670, then have all the years which the Prophets have spoken
of their only end, both the Heathen, Gogs, and Popes, as afterward the Author
himself clears, yet his protestation excepted, that he will not preceeslie
determine such things; but refers time, and hour into the Fathers own
hands.

A short interpretation, and clearing of the register of the new Testament.
THE whole age of the New Testament, according to the meaning of the Prophets,
are divided in 4 times.

The first is the calling time of the Jews.

The second is the Gentiles 1600 furlongs.

The third is Gogs, Mahumets, or Turks time.

The fourth is, the Popes time.

The first: Namely, the called time of the Jews.
WE read in the book of the Revelation 14. v. 15, is cried and said, THE
TIME IS COME TO REAP.

Now is a time or an hour, the four and twentieth part of a whole day: night
and day reckoned to 24 hours. An Heavenly day contains a thousand years, as
it is written 2 Pet. 3. v. 8. (a thousand years as a day) divide this 1000
with 24, so comes there about 41 years and an half.

Remarke now the groundless mercy of the Almighty GOD, how he did visit and
call his people the Jews, of the seed of Abraham, and offered them his grace
by John the Baptist, who began his calling with the preaching of repentance;
and Baptism, in the 29 year or thereby, after the birth of Jesus Christ, of
the Virgin Marie: which merciful calling of the Jews, Christ with his
Disciples continued after the beheading of John the Baptist unto one or two and
forty years, and did begin in Jerusalem, and gave them time eneugh of
repentance, in the space of this 41 years, but when they remained in their
hardness, and condemned Gods Son, the blessed seed, which particularly,
and especially was promised them in Abraham, and so wittingly proceeded in their
sin, against the holy Ghost. Then GOD took his scourge in hand, Titus
Vespasian, and therewith struck them so hard, in the end of this 41 years, or
41 and an half years after the beginning of John's preaching, which was Anno
Christi, 29. so that Jerusalem their head City is destroyed, and their whole
polices undergone, and never shall come up again. Lay now together 29 with 41,
so comes thereof 70. Namely, in the same year after the birth of CHRIST, in
the which year Titus destroyed Jerusalem, and the policies of the Jews, and
this is the time of the Jews calling Apocal. 14.15.

The other time of the New Testament: namely, the Gentiles, which should endure
1600 years. SACRA,
AFter as the Jews, GODS own people, had contemned his Fatherly offerings of
grace, in his Son JESUS CHRIST, and would not accept of grace, yet GOD would
have his glorious Kingdom after this life replenished, and therefore by his
Word, Sacraments, and powerful presence of his Spirit, ordains here in the
world a Kingdom of grace for poor Gentiles, that were not of Abraham's blessed
seed as the Jews, which Kingdom of grace should reach it self out 1600
furlongs, as it is written Apocal. 14 19.20, with which furlongs are understood
years, as hereafter shall be spoken of.

This 1600 furlongs, stadia, or years, which remains now again for the
Heathens to repent; and thereby to be in gathered in the Kingdom of grace,
that they thereafter should inherit his Kingdom of glory, and there see him
as he is.

In this 1600 years the third Angel rypeth the vyneyard, as John says, and
casts it in the great winepresse of GODS wrath: and the winepresse was trodden
without the city, and blood came out of the winepresse unto the horse brydels,
by the space of 1600 furlongs. Revel. 14.19.20.

The three Angels with the Son of man that sat on the white clowd, is, GOD
Father, Son, and holy Ghost: Revel. 14.14. GODS Son is called the Son of
man, for the humane nature he has taken unto the union and vnseparabilitie of
his person, the heavenly Temple, verse 15. the Heavenly Altar, verse 18: the
white clowd, v. 14. signifies all one; namely, the same man JESUS CHRIST, In
whom dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily. Coloss. 2.9.

The wine grapes in the 18 verse that are cast in the press of the wrath of
GOD, are the Jews, who were so pressed by Titus Vespasian, that there were
slain eleven hundredth thousand Jews, as Josephus writes, lib. 7.

These who were pressed without the city, verse 20, and without the towns
community, who were Burgesses and indwellers, Christ advertising them, they
listened, and gave ear to his advertisement, who departed in safety unto
Pella: in the mean time the other wine grapes were pressed by the army of
Titus.

The blood that ran from the press betokneth, that the wrath of GODS
vengeance should reach without Jerusalem, and streatch it self unto such
contemners of GOD, and hardened sinners, and that unto 1600 furlongs, that is,
1600 years.

The horse unto whose brydles the blood ran, betokens the furious and untamed
Heathen, and tyrants, that set them-selves up against CHRIST'S Kirk. Psalm. 2.
Which tyrants are like Horse and Mules, in whom are no knowledge of salvation.
Psalm. 32.9. who should be cast in the great press of the wrath of GOD, until
so long they let tame them by the bridle of the Evangel, and let them be
teached and shown by the servants of the Word, to serve the LORD, and kiss
the Son. Psalm. 2.10.11.12.

With 1600 Stadia, or furlongs is not understood, the length of place, but of
time whereunto is given three causes.

First: CHRIST says, ( Luke. 21.24) That Jerusalem shall be trodden under the
feet of the Gentiles, until the time of the Gentiles be fulfilled: Here
speaks JESUS of the Gentiles, that they should have a time, and that the
Gentiles time should begin when Jerusalem was destroyed, which time of the
Gentiles is not found written in no place of the holy Scripture, how long it
shall endure except only in this place. Secondly: This secret of 1600 stadia if
it should be understood according to the letter, and as the words are in
themselves: then this 1600 stadia or furlongs, makes no more than 50 miles:
but now the cup of GODS wrath has powered it self more at large than 50 miles
about Jerusalem: yea in all the corners of the whole earth: therefore this 1600
stadia, is not understood of the place, but of the time.

Thirdly: It is commonly the form of the holy Ghost, that he opneth appointed
times, (definita tempora) with some dark kind of speech. Daniel 4. he calls
the seven years, seven times. Ezekiel. 4. Dan. 9. he gives to understand years
with days. Ezekiel. 47.3.4.5. there is measured 4000 cubits, until the
Evangelicall fishing, where undoubtedly is understood with 4000 cubits 4000
years: namely, from the first promise of the woman's seed, until the
Evangelicall fishing began with the fishers of JESUS CHRIST: The holy
Apostles hereof can be understood in this place, with 1600 stadia, right so
many years.

So indureth the Heathings appointed time after this calculation until the
Son of man come in his white clowd, who with his Angels will reap and gather
the children of men, the good and fruitful grapes in his own city, but will
cut off the wyld grapes with his sharp sickle till the 1670 years.

The third time of the New Testament: Namely, Gogs, Magogs, or Mahumets, and
Turks Kingdom: and that for the space 1335. years, which is ended anno
Christi 1670. according to the prophecy of Daniel. 12. v. 12. and Dan. 7. ver.
8.
IN the foresaid chapters of Daniel is written, that this little horn of Gogs
or Mahumets, which came up with a little beginning, and stood up amongst the
ten horns, the ten Kingdoms of the Romish Monarchs who did pluck away three
of the first horns, and held wars against the Sanctuary, and was for them
too strong, verse. 11 This little horn came up Anno Christi 335: when that
Arianish heresy spread forth in denying of the Godhead of JESUS CHRIST, in
that public assembly of Bishops, and learned till Synodo, of all was
consented and approved, and that in the ruined City of Jerusalem, which false
doctrine of Arius was the first cause, and beginning, till Gogs and Mahumets
success in the world: so shall the end of this Gogs, Magogs, or Turks, and
Mahumets fall, after this calculation in the year 1670. for 1335 added until
335. makes in sum 1670.

Secondly: There is written in the Revelalion 9. verse 14. of the four Angels
that were bound in the river Euphrates: that they should be made lowse, which
were prepared at one hour, at one day, at one month, and at one year to
slaye the third part of men, which doublesse is under stood of the Mahumets
tyranny, which he executed on the poor Christians in the East Lands, and how
he changed laws, and times: for Euphrates flood is not far from Babylon. The
four Angels that are said to be bound in this flood, or the four Patriarchs
in the East land, the one to Constantin, the other to Antiochia, the third to
Jerusalem, the fourth to Alexandria, which four helped, and much assisted the
Kingdom of the son of perdition. These are said to be loused, and many
ways spread abroad, and that by the heresy of Arius and Nestorius, concerning
the absurd doctrine of CHRIST'S person, that when they had consented in the same
heresy, then are they forced to give themselves under Mahumet, and then were
prepared till the hour, day, month and year, to slay the third part of men.
Let now one hour be the 24 part of one heavenly day which continues almost
42 years, for one whole day is reckoned for a thousand years: the Heavenly
month 30 years space, this year being a common year: so extends the sum
1073. years.

Now when the end falls in Anno Christi 1670 then is the beginning anno
Christi 579, in the which time, as the Gothers that were in Spain turned from
that Arianish, and Mahumetish doctrine, which then long time was allowed and
approved of the four Patriarchs: and therewith took such an end, that Mahumet
troade himself, who till in this 597 years was in the bloome of his youth,
about 26 years of age: Moreover in this same year the Popes ambition show it
self, and avaritious flood Euphrates in the Pope Gregorius Magnus, who sent
his Ambassadors in England, and by power of an army forced them to embrace the
Romish religion: In like manner the Pope had the victory above the Churches of
Spain.

Thirdly: Ezekiel chap. 39. verse 11 does prophecy, that GOD shall give Gog a
burial place toward the East, which shall be called the valley of the
multitude of Gog, where Gog with his armies shall be buried, and cleanse the
land in seven months, and shall burn off their weapons, and put the shields
and bucklers upon bows, and upon arrows with fire seven years, verse 9. when
there is made of the seven Angelical months Angelical days, 30 days in
every month, and days to the year, so comes of it 210 years: add unto
this seven years, in the which the weapons were burnt in, Summa 217 years:
Let now the end of this 217 years fall in 1670, and then 217 subtracted from
this 1670, the beginning falls anno 1453. In the which time Mahumet 11 of the
name took in Constantinople, and made heerewith an end of the Romish
Emperourdome in the East land: so is then Constantinople Gogs burial place,
and the valley of the multitude of the Gogs, or that place Hamona, verse 16,
that lies toward the East unto the sea, verse 11, which Constantinople is not
longer the Christians head city in the Eastland, as before; but Gogs den,
and spiritual dead stinking grave of the Mahumets.

That these armor arrows should burn seven years, signifies that the
Mahumetish laws, statutes, ceremonies, Kirkes service, and deceate should be
burnt to nothing, by the fire of the true spiritual word of GOD.

This is now of Gogs, Mahumets, and Turks Kingdom, how long it will endure:
namely, as long as the time of the New Testament indureth.

The fourth time of the New Testament: namely, the Popes.
IN the book of the Revelation, 13 chap. there is written of the seven headed
beast, that it should continue 42 months, that is, the Popedom to Rome shall
endure 42 months. Rome is builded on seven heads, high tops, and mountains:
Make months to days 30 days in every month, and reckon every day for a
year, so proceeds 1260 years, when the end of this 1260 years falls in
anno Christi 1670. and then begins the same 1260 years, anno Christi 410:
from which time hitherto Rome has had the empire and victory almost over all
the borders of the Jews: then first subdued and taken in by Alaricus King of
the Goths, then began the first Romish Monarchy to be feeble, and begat
weak legs.

Now when such ways the policies and mighty government of Rome began to
diminish, then began the Romish Antichrist to increase in the government of the
Church, and the Pope took unto himself the power, and superiority above the
whole world, in all Churches, and clergy, even as the Apostle Paul had
prophesied before 2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 6 saying so. And now ye know what withholdeth
that he might be revealed in his time: namely, that man of sin, and son
of perdition, sets himself against: verse. 7. For the mystery of iniquity
does already work, only he which now withholdeth shall let, till he be
taken out of the way: which Paul's prophecy, Chrisostomus, and many others
understood this of the Romish Monarchy, and Emperourdome, which then hindered
the son of perdition, and man of sin his ambition, that he could not come
up as he would: and which could not be done, until the time, the same
Imperium and Emperourdome began to bow, which was accomplished by Alaricus King
of the Goths.

II. In the Revelation 18, John hears of proud Babylon, whose plagues, death,
and sorrows shall one day fall upon her. verse 8, and in an hour shall her
judgment be, verse 10, And in an hour shall the desolation of her riches
come. verse 17. And in an hour shall be made desolate. verse 19. So will GOD
then power his wrath on the seed of the Romans in one day, and 3 hours. Now
one day is 1000 years, one hour 41 and an half years, add together, so is
the sum 1124. and an half years, when this 1124. and a half years ends
An. Christi 1670. then falls their beginning in Anno Christi 546. in the
which time, that the Gothers King Totilias, that said himself to be the
scourge of GOD, set fire in Rome, and brunt the greatest part thereof. From
this 546 year of Christ, until Luther departed in the Lord, is likewise 1000
years one Heavenly day, for he died Anno Christi 1546. and is that day of the
which before: therefrom and till 1588, when as the Papists contracted
themselves against England, and there got a terrible defeat, went out the
first hour of the three, therefrom and till Anno Christi 1629. When as the
Papists tyranny shall be weakened, and must undergo, and the two witnesses
shall come on feet again, is the other hour from 1629. until 1670. is the
third hour, when all things will seem to take their only end.

III. In the Revelation 9. The Apostle sees, a star which had the key of the
bottomless pit, and was fallen down from Heaven on the earth, wherewith
nothing is understood, except only this son of perdition, who opned the
bottomless pit. v. 2. whereout there arose much heretical smoke damp and
reeke, which darkened the righteous beams of the Sun of JESUS CHRIST, and his
Evangelicall doctrine, and out of that smoke came Locustes on the earth, v. 3.
Wherewith is understood the pestilentious heretics and false teachers, who
do nothing else but bring in amongst the ground and seed of the Christian Kirk
the greatest mischief. These damnable locusts (faith John) shall vex the
people 5 months, that is, 150 Heavenly days or years: for five times thirty
is 150, when this 150 years takes their end, anno Christi 1670. then the
calculation concludes that they begin anno 1521. In the which time that
Carolostadius wakned up that great uproar, with storming of images, from whence
proceeded in the Churches diversities of opinions.

Fourthly: In the Revelation, chap. 11. we read of the two witnesses, clothed
in sackcloth, who prophesied 1260 days: and when 1260 days ends, then they
shall be killed by the beast, and three days and an half ly unburied, but
thereafter shall have life of the Spirit, and ascend to the clouds of Heaven,
and the enemies of the Evangell shall behold it; then shall there be a great
Earthquake, which shall continue an hour, in the which Earthquake the tenth
part of Babylon shall fall. By the two witnesses is understood the old and new
Testament, which bears witness of the truth in murning weed and sackcloth,
that is, under croces and persecution: If we will add and lay together with
this three and an half days, or three and an half commoun years, the
heavenly hour namely 41 an and half years, then is the sum 1305, then
follows it the beginning of this 1305, to be Anno Christi 365 on the which
time that Damasius and Vrsicinus did contend to Rome for the Popedom, which of
them should be Pope, who carried a bloody war in the holy house against
others. And then has this son of perdition gotten his kingdom, consecrated
and anointed unto him by murder, and shedding of much blood. When we begin
from the foresaid year Anno Christi 365, to reckon to the 1260, then end they
just Anno Christi 1625. Now how those two witness the Old and New Testament
with all true preachers, who has holden with those two witnesses, has been
killed and rent, it is eneugh known unto all men, for not only Papists, but
all other sects rent so on those two witness, and so kills them, every one
to turn and revert them unto his own heretical meaning, which is eneugh
known unto every true Christian, but now most of all those two witnesses are
now killed with their confederats in this 3 and an half years: Namely, from
Anno 1625 until Anno Christi. 1629. whereof the well learned man Master
Meynelaus Poulsone Preacher to the Castle of Copemanhaven, has set out on our
Dens tongue the foresaid Philippi Nicolai his words which likewise I will
rehearse following in this manner.

Comment. de regno CHRISTI, lib. 2. capit. 2. fol. 6. 196. sequent.
Seeing now the holy BIBLE is translated in English, French, Dutch, Dence; and
other tongues and languages: and is used and read with all diligence, both of
learned and unlearned: So understands the Pope, that Scottish English,
Fleames, Dence, Norwish, Swedens, Poles, Bohemish, and Vngarish; with no
deceate or subtilitie can be brought again under his power, so long as the
books of the old and new Testament have the upper hand: and therefore he shall
strive after also to take from these two witnesses all their prerogative, and
bring so to pass, that they may have no place in the Roman Church; but to
loss their shine altogether, and by the permission of GOD, seeing Godliness is
very rare besides us, so can it lightly event, that the Romish Antichrist
shall have once success.

This proud and divelish victory will continue three years and an half, which
is from the year 1625. until 1629, so long shall the Christian Kirk endure
this persecution, and shed her blood in great quantity, for confessing of the
truth: and together in these times men shall see the books of the old and new
Testament to be whole contemned, and to ly as dead bodies in the streets, and
they shall be troade with feet, yet some godly compassioners, and the
Evangelish true confessors shall not suffer them to be whole buried. But
thereafter from anno 1629 until anno 1670, the whole heavenly hour, or
forty one years and a half, so shall kyth it self, that the holy
Scripture, and holy minister calling, with the two witnesses, which is the old
and new Testament, shall powerfully come before again, and with great
jubileren, and especial joyful crying, compass about the godly, and ascend
up into the clouds of Heaven. Apoc. 11. ver. 12. this shall be a great honor
and glory, and can not be hindered. This the Papists shall see, and over all
measure therethrough be terrified, seeing they can not troade more the holy
Bible under their feet; neither turn the people with their anathemata, or
curse and cruel persecution, from the diligent reading, and godly meditation:
yea, there shall be such a great Earthquake, so that the tenth part of the
great city, Apocal. 11. ver. 13 that is, the ten Kingdoms of the Papisticall
dominions shall condescend together: namely, the Germanians, Hungarians,
Bohemians, Polonians, Swedens, Dence, Norwish, English, Scottish, and French,
who shall be moved, and shall knit themselves together, and wholly denunce
themselves off from the Papists: yea, they shall hold together with such a
special zeal, and that for the cruel persecution of the Christians, as
likewise for the cause of the intolerable pride of the Roman Antichrist: And
shall fall in Italy or Welshland with mighty power, and burn up with fire
that great City Rome, great Babylon, Revel. 18. verse 8. That Babylons whore
can be paid, and get her right reward, who tyrannouslie has persecuted the
spiritual members of Christ's body, Revel. 17. verse. 6. and drunk her self
drunk with the blood of Saints, and blood of the Martyrs of JESUS. And that
there can come such a reward upon her, as on Jerusalem, who slew CHRIST JESUS
himself, and is come since the beginning on all persecuters of CHRIST'S Church.

After this time is the heavenly hour 41 and an half years, whose end are
fulfilled anno Christi 1670.

Heerewith it aggreeth with that which our foresaid author sets in his
exposition, of the 12. chapter of Daniel, lib. 2. de regno Christi. page 121.
saying, It may be that Anno Christi 1625. will come up some new Motus, and
tumult, that the Christistian Church will suffer cruel sorrowful tempests
again, but how it shall be Daniel clears not, except that which he hears
of the Angel, blessed are they that waits thereafter: that is, who are
patient as yet, until the 45 year are past.

Now every one knows that patience is no ways without crosses and sorrows,
whereby may be judged that Anno 1625, there will burst out a hole on a
divelish and pestilentious byle, which now Anno Christi 1596, when Philip
Nicolai wrote this book, the enemies of the true Christians, are making ripe,
in their secret counsels and concealed pratickes, that the Elect may be weary
of those troublous times.

Wherefore of this ineluctabilis and future time of sorrows shall come on that
time: until the which we have as yet from this year 1579 28 year, then
should the souls of true Christians, after the counsel of Daniel, prepare
themselves to patience: and heerewith remember this cruel persecution, shall
not for ever endure, but shall undergo, within a short space, and come to an
end within few years, And therefore especially should we pray GOD, that he
from Heaven will send us the strength of his spirit, that we could grow in
true faith, and stand constant in the revelation of the truth.

V. And moreover this undoubtedly agrieth well, namely, this last time of the
new Testament, with the times that proceeded before the flood came, seeing that
CHRIST prophecieth hereof himself. Math. 24. and Luk 17. That right as it was
in the world before the flood, the people gave themselves to drunkenness,
filthiness and lusts of the flesh, and that until the same day that Noah
entered into the Arc: So likewise the people should give themselves secure unto
such vices against the last times.

Seeing there is now reckoned from the worlds beginning unto the flood 1657
years: substract 1657 from 1670 so have thou again 13 years, when CHRIST was
12 years, and in his 13 when he disputed with the learned in the Temple of
Jerusalem.

Lay now together the first Adam with the second, and then the earthly with the
Heavenly.

1. The first had earthly Paradise, the other the Temple of Jerusalem, and
that after the commandment of his Heavenly Father: Shall I not be about my
Fathers business, Luke 2. ver. 49.

2. As Adam show obedience unto GOD in Paradise, so did the other in the Temple.

3. Adam was counseled of the woman, that he should eat of the tree of the
forbidden fruit: CHRIST could not be counseled of his mother to desist from
that which was his Fathers.

4. As from Adams fall until the flood proceeded 1657 years, likewayes from
Christ's active obedience (obedientiae activae specimine) example which he show
in the Temple, when he was 12 years full, and in his 13, until the only end
and revelation of time will proceed 1657 years: add hereunto the 13 years
of his age, so falls in the end anno Christi 1670.

V. And for the last, it is neither to dis-allow between the agreement of the
years of Christ's age, that he lived and conversed visibly in this world with
so many of the New Testaments jubilee, every commoun jubilee year reckoned to
49, Levit. 25. ver. 8. for 7 times 7, makes 49. the next following 50 year
was both a jubilee year, and the first year to begin in: in the next following
jubilee years reckning. Now is Christ dead, risen, and ascended in the 34
years of his age: begin now to tell these jubilee years, from the 29 year of
CHRIST'S age, for then began John the Baptist to sound with the trumpet of the
new Testament, so falls in this 34. this new Testaments jubilee years,
beginning Anno Christi 1646 from this, to 1670, is about 25 year, an half
jubilee year, because CHRIST lived not out his 34 years.

Now to a conclusion of this little book, I will bring in two prophecies of
our Authors.

I. Of the diminishing of CHRIST'S Church against the worlds end. Page 223.
THIS may well be, that as Christ did not show himself after his resurrection
to the unthankful Jews priests, and Scribes in Jerusalem, but removed North
unto Galile, and there revealed himself before his disciples: so in like
manner, that the clear learning of the Evangel, which once is driven from some
parts in Dutchland, and Romish dominions, shall not come their again: in the
same places, but make his dwelling away, North in Germany, and in other
Northlandish places, in Scotland, Norway, Sweden, Iseland, etc.

And as CHRIST after his resurrection preached not, and learned publictly in
Jerusalem where he was crucified, but secreetly revealed himself to his
disciples, who were gathered within locked doors for fear of the Jews: so
that in like manner before the ^ast day, the Heavenly sinceere doctrine ^n
Churchs and schools from whence she is banished, not more there to have such
success, but shall sound quietly within some poor folks doors, who shall
read the holy BIBLE in their ^ouses, with Luthers Catechism and E^istles, and
other writings of true ^earned teachers, and with their house^old profit
themselves in the exercise of true religion.

What success Spain has to exspect here in the Sownd. page 99. lib. 1.
circa finem. cap. 2.
IF Spain out of ambition, for augmenting of his kingdom come in our seas,
and will stay or hinder the handling and merchandise of the English, Dence,
Swedens and Muscoviters, unto the damnage of the Norwish dominions, then it
shall not prosper with him, he may try much, but carry nothing home, but shame
and discommoditie with him.

This is now briefly set forth and extracted by the honorable and enlightened
Doctor Philip Nicolaus, which is taken out of his second book of the Kingdom
of JESUS CHRIST, concerning a prophecy of the worlds end.

If any hereby will conclude, that the last day precisly should fall in this
1670, and think hereby that I should presume more than the holy Scripture
gives place. Thereunto I answer (says the Author) in this manner, Of that
day and hour no man knows; yea, not the Angels in Heaven, says CHRIST,
Math. 24.42. Mark. 13.32. For this cause I protest here, and do witness,
that I Philip Nicolaus will know nothing of the mysteriall things, which GOD
has preserved only for himself in secreete, and will have no man to know it,
neither decree this nor deny this: it may well be that the last day give
himself to know in the same 1670 years, it may likewayes be thereafter, as
the people least think of, and living in their fleshly lusts and appetites,
that the same day steals suddenly over them, it may well be that the last
day comes sooner for the cause of the elect, who fervently and heartfully
think long thereafter, that they could once atteine an happy end of all sin,
and of all their sorrow, which both the world, and the Devil afflicts them
with: for that which GOD has preserved in secreete for himself, it becomes
us not to search therein: and therefore I abide alone by the revealed word, and
the holy prophetical and Apostolical writings, what the events are on the
last day is found written after GODS own commandment, Revel. 11. ver. 11. and
ver. 19. and chap. 10. ver. 11. which I in the fear of GOD red with great
diligence, and deep meditation, heerewith praying the Almighty GOD, who has
spoken by his holy Prophets, and Apostles mouth, that he for his godly
goodness, mercifully will assist some of his true Christians, to reveile and
clear the secret mystery of times, that are written in Ezekiel, Daniel and
Revelation. Therefore when I see narrowly unto the Heavenly Evangelicall
harvest, the Heavenly hour, and heavenly Stadia, or furlongs: then I can not
otherwise as precislie consider and meditate of the revealed times, if we
will reckone over the involued things which are infolded in the holy BIBLE: yet
nowayes concluded hereby, what shall follow hereafter. Where fore this that I
write here, I set them not as Articles of belief, but only as the thing that
a Christian should desire and seek after, recommending this unto the event of
time: seeing there is no surer interpretation, and clearing of Prophecies as
when they are fulfilled.

O everlasting good GOD, the spring of all wisdom and grace, inlighten our
spirits and dark understanding, with the light and clearness of thy godly
wisdom, with the spring and fire of fervent charity, that in us all worldly
vanities, lusts of the flesh and spring of pride, may be extinguished and
quenched by the holy lamp of thy light, and that we may rejoice in our only
and most excellent Jewel that thou has given us, namely, our only Savior
and Redeemer and be true obeyers all the days of our life, yea in the midst
of death: to whom with thee, and the holy Ghost be praise and Glory for ever
Amen.

FINIS.
Qui paenitentiae dulcedinem libat,
Sacrificium pro peccatis libat.

A BRIEF TREATISE AND EXHORTATION TO REPENTANCE.
MATH. Chap. 3. verse. 2. Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.


IN this book we may see the long patience and suffering of GOD, toward his
own people the Jews, who in the last times of their visitation, did send his
own Son, the Savior of mankind, and that of the seed of Abraham, to
stretch forth his hands and arms, to save and embrace the remnant of the lost
sheep of the house of Israel: but when they did contemn Gods Fatherly
visitation, and were offended with CHRIST JESUS, and had crucified the King of
Glory, as lykewayes thereafter did persecute in the same manner all his
disciples, Apostles, and servants of GOD: then GOD left them, and gave them
over unto themselves, and did begin his merciful calling with the Gentiles,
who were strangers and aliants from the house of Israel. By whose visitation
likewise, we may learn of the mercy and justice of God: for those Gentiles
of Asia, and Eastlandish Dominions, have had their own times of GODS merciful
visitation, but after many sins committed, together with the persecution of
saints, and contempt of the word, GOD has removed his Candlestickes from
them, and has given them over unto vanities, and lies, and is gone from them,
and now in this last hour and time of the world, it has pleased him to erect
his Church, and candlestick within this Nation: And there fore, O happy, and
thryse happy are we, if we will acknowledge the times of our merciful
visitation, and day of our calling, for the LORD of glory is standing at the
door of our souls: and within this Nation we have had our own times, where
GOD has knocked long with the hammers of his Word: and appearantly seeing the
word is contemned, and bears no fruit in men's consciences and conversations,
that GOD is departing from us unto another people, and yet streatching forth
his arms, and calling unto him all true Christians, who will turn unto him
and repent them of their sins, for certainly there is no sin which has
abounded in those foreign Churches, but those and more does abound besides us,
and give the Church and Saints of GOD within this Nation be not persecuted
with publict Tyrants, yet let the wise Christian see how she is persecuted,
rent, and divided within her self, which does prognosticate a fearful
departure of our kind GOD, and a terrible judgment to hang over our heads, and
would to God I say that our judgment be not worse of all, if we take not
heed in time: Therefore let us be wise, and learn of the fig tree, and of
these tokens, to prepare our selves for our Bridegroom the LORD JESUS second
coming in the clouds.

John the Baptist a forerunner of the Messiah, the first trumpet of the
Gospel, is here crying out, according to the Prophecy of Isaiah, Prepare
the ways of the LORD, make his paths straight, against the first coming of
the Messiah. Amend your lives for the Kingdom of grace is at hand, and is to
be offered in the LORD JESUS to every true penitent, and belieuer of the
Gospel. Now in those days our only high Priest and Prophet, is crying unto
us, and learning us by the Parable of the fig tree in the Gospel, that the
Kingdom of glory is at hand. Mat. 24.32. And that we should lift up our
heads, working our salvation in fear and trembling, waitting for the day of
the LORD, for he being the first trumpet of the Gospel in those days, his
only matter and aim was, in respect of the great defection, and diversity of
religion amongst the Jews: as likewise their true worship of God, was turned
into a Pharisaicall and self love of themselves; therefore he was busy
preparing the first way and coming of the LORD, and importing unto them a
Kingdom of grace to be at hand, and therefore did exhort them unto
repentance, that they might enter and go in into that Church militant here on
earth by this Kingdom of grace, now to be offered, and reveiled unto them in
the Messiah, that thereafter they might be found worthy against the second
coming of the Lord, to enter into the Church triumphant, and Kingdom of
glory..

Our John the Baptists, and preachers in our times, have greater occasion, yea
all preaching stools whatsoever, being now the last trumpets of the Gospel,
have matter enough to cry out in those words: Repent for the Kingdom of Heaven
is at hand: even that Kingdom of glory, where the Messiah is not in his first
coming, in the likeness of a servant, and in the baseness of his flesh, to
offer more the Kingdom of grace and mercy, in errecting a Church militant
here on earth, as in the days of John the Baptist: But now certainly coming
in his second coming in the clouds, convoyed of all the Angels, and trowpes of
HEAVEN, as a powerful judge, in full majesticall glory, to rander every man
according to his works, where grace and mercy shall cease to be more
offered, and where all happy Saints and blessed Elect, who were partakers of
that Kingdom of grace, in the Church militant here on earth, shall be
gathred in that triumphant, and glorious Church in the Heavens for ever. O
blessed and thryse blessed is that soul, who finds and approves himself by
the touchstone of repentance, to be a member in this Kingdom of grace, and
Church militant here on earth: he shall be preferred and linked so fast unto
this blessed happiness and endless joy of all Saints: also that no creature
in Heaven nor in earth, no, the gates of hell can separate him from it.
Therefore how diligent should we be to embrace this Kingdom of grace, in
these latter times: seeing the world is suncken into mere sin and vanity,
and all abominations have taken upper hand, yea all signs and tokens
prophesied in Scriptures are fulfilled, so that there rests nothing, except
only the sign of the Son of man coming in the clouds to judge the world,
and take acompt of our actions, and which we may as sure expect daily to
come, as we are certain of things past: For Heaven and earth will perish, but
one jote or one word of the LORD shall not perish. This spiritual echo
resembles well in our ears, as John the Baptist would say, I exhort you to
repent, because of those miserable times, in that godliness amongst you is
thin, and Pharisaicall decisions, and other diversities is in your Church, as
likewise all sin, and wickedness abounds amongst you, and the Kingdom of
grace is at hand, now to be offered in the Messiah, and Son of GOD CHRIST
JESUS, and which Kingdom of grace, who so receaveth by faith and repentance,
now in this last time of your calling, shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven,
and Kingdom of glory, and which Kingdom of Heaven, no man can attain unto,
without this true repentance, and amendment of life, and which notable trumpet
of repentance, may very well be applied unto this age: Therefore thou who
read this, and thou who bear this, repent, amend thy life, in regard of
those evil and latter days, in that true godliness is thin amongst us, and
true religion, is rent and covered with all sort of schisms, and diversities
in the Church of GOD, and the whole earth is overladen with wickedness, and
senseless security: Let us now lift up our heads, and light up the lamps of
our hearts, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, where once grace shall rest
to be offered, at which time all true penitents shall be gathered, and
inherit that blessed glorious, and everlasting Kingdom of Heaven. The
spiritual meaning of this text, imports a circumstance and necessity of
this repentance, as if he would say, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand:
and therefore it is necessare that ye repent, and amend, for who so desires
to be partakers of this Kingdom of Heaven, he can not come without this
repentance: Also that this repentance is such a necessare thing, that thou
can not attain unto salvation without it; yea, thou can not be more saved
in the day of the LORD without repentance, then Noah was saved without the Arc
from the Flood. O happy is he and thryse happy, who attaineth unto this
sanctified repentance, it is the prick of conscience, it is the very
sacrifice and faith of Abraham: it is the sacrificing knyfe to mortify the
outward man. It is the fiery and fervent burning zeal of the soul,
accompanied and endued with the spirit of prayer, and godly sorrow, quenched
with the tears of true repentance, and with a comfortable joy, and feeling of
the mercies of GOD, yea, it brings us unto the very sacrifice it self, unto
the which Isaac was a type: namely, unto true faith in the Blood of JESUS. It
is the budding rod of Aaron, which shall bring forth such blossoms of a
godly life, and joy in the holy spirit here in this earthly tabernacle, and in
the morning in the Tabernacle of the testimony: that is, when the evening of
thy time is past, and thou art brought unto the morning of thy endless rest,
either by death, or the day of the LORD: then shall it budde and blossom unto
thee such fruits of endless and unspeakable happiness, as no tongue can be
able to express, nor heart to think of.

It is the strong hand of Jacob, who by faith will wrestle, and take such hold
on CHRIST, that it will never leave him, until the time he be blessed.
Therefore good Christian let us consider, what excellent times, and occasion,
we have as yet to day to repent, while that the gates of grace are open, let
us run to this throne of grace, so long as it is offered in the Gospel, and
not delay the time of our repentance.

Now is the Kingdom of Heaven at hand, even that glorious Kingdom of JESUS,
when the gates of grace shall be shut, and never offered no more, when no
repentance, tears or prayers will prevail.

Now I say, in this last evening and hour of the world, so long as CHRIST is
standing knocking with the hammer of his Gospel at the door of thy soul,
refuse not to open, least the time of his standing be now out, and thou then
be left and locked without the doors of his mercy, as a wretchfull and
woeful reprobate for ever: then unhappy man that ever thou was borne, thou
shall then repent, but too late, and all thy repentance is then but aggravating
of thy sorrows, and never dying torments in hell for ever.

The rich Glutton and reprobate, already there, would give the whole earth if
they did possess it, to have the time, place, and means of grace offered unto
them, as now we have: but they can not redeem this time with thousands of
worlds, and mountains of gold; not so much therefore be eased as for a minute
of an hour out of their never dying torments.

Therefore I would request the reasonable man, who in some sense has gotten a
sight and taste of the mercies of GOD, and of thy effectual calling in JESUS
CHRIST, to consider, meditate, and ponder with thy self of the fearful
event, and end of the world now at hand: and therefore to preasse with all
diligence to frame thy life and conversation according to the prescript word of
GOD, and let our minds be so occupied about heavenly things daily and hourly,
attending the coming of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, who assuredly finding the lamp
of thine heart prepared, with the oil of grace, and tears of sanctified
repentance, will at that day transform, and metamorphose thine earthie
tabernacle into an immortal body, where both soul and body shall enjoy that
joy of all joys, which is to behold the most comfortable sight of GOD
himself: yea, that blessed contemplation of the holy Trinity, wherewith thy
glorified soul shall be filled so with such an inexpressible and unspeakable
blessed joy coming from this maine Ocean, and fountain of all happiness,
that it shall overflow with joy, that it can not be able to conteane more joy
of it self, than the presence alone, and contemplation of GOD, which he
himself shall fill it with: yea, ever enjoying and rejoicing, and never
wearying; but ever praising and gloriefying GOD in all eternity, which
blessedness is the joy of all Saints, and Elect, and will be motion eneugh
unto them, to rouse and waken Gods children, for attending the LORD JESUS
second coming in the clouds, and not to delay the time of their repentance:
but as for the secure man, who have not atteined unto a sense of this joy,
neither know thou what this means, it shall be little help unto him,
because he is sleeping in senseless security, he may well dream of these
joys, but he has no benefit of them, because he accounts more of worldly
things, and has a benumbed conscience, that he has eyes and sees not, ears
and hears not, a heart and yet can not understand.

He is like Adam new made, lying before GOD, created with his whole members,
and yet has no use of them, until the LORD breath in a living soul and
spirit in him, then shall he be brought to conceive of spiritual things, and
so consequently to this repentance.

Yet I hope there is none so void of knowledge, albeit unregenerate, but he
shall be driven to learn and consider with himself, either by the law and
order of nature, or by the law of conscience: this one object especially, the
end of his being or creation, which I think there is no man, albeit he would
forget GOD, and not once dream of him, yet he will have a regard of him
self, and seeing he finds himself to have a being and life, for if it had
pleased God thou had not been at all, therefore seeing thy being and life is
not with the beasts, unreasonable; but such a reasonable life and soul, as
that thou considerest that all other things, whatsoever in the world created,
Sun, Moon, stars, elements, tree, herb, beasts, and every living
creature, are all subject, and made for thy service, therefore thou can not
but conclude, albeit thou had no other teachers, as the light of nature or
the light of conscience, but that the end of thine own creation must be to
serve GOD, the only Maker, moover, and governor of all things: and so having
considered that thou have a GOD and Master to serve, thou can not have such a
base estimation, but that thou must give account of thy service, and the good
servant will often meditate the day and time of account in his Masters absence,
and will calculate and prease with all diligence to have his count clear
against his Masters coming, especially not knowing the time of his coming:
which consideration, albeit thou werst an Athiest, thou shall be driven unto
it, either by the light of nature, or light of conscience: but dear Brother
we are more abundantly taught, as by these especially in this our age, who are
borne under the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST, which great mercy of GOD toward us
is inexpressible.

Art thou therefore a man into whose heart this mercy is not as yet impressed?
and that thou have not regarded nor considered, what GOD has learned thee out
of his Word, nor do not mark how GOD this long time bygone has stand
knocking with the hammers and trumpets of his Evangell, at the door of thy
soul, so that thou resemblest no more a Christian, yet I pray thee resemble
the Heathen herein, and let either thy own conscience tell thee, or the law
of nature teach thee, that all things serves for thy use and service; and so
consequently thou for the use of GOD, and to his service: that is, either for a
vessel of his glory in the Heavens for ever, or for a spectacle of his justice
in the pains and torments of hell for ever; and that thou must make account of
thy actions at the great day of account. Will thou neither imitate Christian
nor Heathen herein? not letting teach thee by the Word of GOD, law of nature,
or light of conscience, yet reject not fear with the unreasonable beast, for
all beasts whatsomever have a kind of fear, and will avoid (if they can) any
pain or torment, therefore have some fear of thy self, else what shall become
of thee hereafter at death: and if thou reject not this fear, yet thou shall
be brought so far as to consider the end of thy being and creation, which is
to serve GOD, and which service thou must make account of one day, that is, at
the day of judgment, which albeit it should be prolonged some hundredth
years, yet we see by daily experience, how death without exception, and
exspectation of many, does violently compel all estates, young and old unto
this account, so that no man is certain of the end of his life.

But what shall I say, this death is so commoun, little feared, and nothing
regarded; also that worldly men promise unto them selves length of days, and
time of repentance before death come. The young man in respect of his youth and
ability will dream of a long life, and yet often cut off before he expect.
The old man going in the brinck of his grave, does promise himself no
sudden death, and the time of his repentance to come soon eneugh, in respect
GOD is merciful, and yet, before that ever he exspect, he is so choked, and
cruelly beset, and environed lykewayes with the pangues of death, that in no
manner of way once is he able to meditate upon repentance, in respect of the
sudden sorrows, and of the cruel passions of death, which mightily
ever-whelmeth the whole body of him in an eye blink: yea, in a very moment of
time, and dryveth the soul by violence out of the body, unto the Maker
thereof, and there for to render account of its doings, whether it has been
good or evil: and therefore O Christian, seeing that repentance is such a
precious jewel, study by all means to work out thy salvation in fear and
in trembling.

And yet the worldly man: I say not only the worldly man, but when I look and
consider the doings of men, that the whole world for the greatest part are
sleeping in such senseless security, that they are rather dreaming with the
Athiest of no death, and if death, yet no resurrection, no judgment no pain,
no torment, no bless, nor endless joy unto themselves, and leading such a
negligent and careless life; that I am assured they do not once think of the
last day, much less of any accoumpt to make of their doings at the day of
judgment: But I will assure thee that the day of the LORD is coming, to rander
every man according to his works: Well, thou may sleep secure in the bosom
of worldly vanities, such a short space as thou can, but the day is at hand,
when thou shall be fearfully wakned with the trumpet of Angels, and troops
of Heaven, when thou shall be in a moment metamorphosed from a mortal
creature, into an never and ever dying vessel, and spectacle of GODS wrath,
where thou shall stand naked in the sight of all creatures, when as thy doings
neglegence and secure life, with all thy sins that thou small accoumptest of
before, shall be raised as mountains in the view and presence of thy
conscience, and shall bear witness against thee: yea, shall overwhelme thee
with endless sorrows in the bottomless pit of despare, and gulf of Hell,
where they shall torment thee for ever: thou being forsaken, and put out of the
presence of GOD, as a woeful reprobat, subject unto devilish torments: For if
nothing move thee, yet let fear move thee, and have thou so much as fear of
thy self, with the unreasonable beasts? then fear GOD, fear his Majesty,
fear his infinite power and justice, and repent and amend thy life, without
the which thou can not be fred from hellish torments.

Will thou not fear GOD! yet fear because of the Devil, in that he is
appointed for a tormenter of all vnpenitents, fear Hell, fear never dying
pain and torment, fear the devils malice, and thou shall be brought at last
to some practice of repentance: Art thou so far come that thou art affraied
of thy self, it is something, I pray thee then, let this fear move thee so
far, as to hear diligently GODS Word, partake the sacraments, use the means
of grace, pray to GOD albeit thy prayer be imperfite, and but lip labor, lie
and wait at the poole of Bethesda: which will, and obedience of thy self,
this fear may work in thee, and yet thou being a unregenerate man, it can
help nothing in the inward work of this repentance, but yet art thou thus
well exercised: Now in the time of grace, and lying at the poole of Bethesda,
and gates of grace. Have thou attained so much as a desire of this repentance;
then I am assured the LORD shall pity thy hard case, and the Angel shall come
down and move the watter, and thou shall be washen from thy sin and
leprosy.

Will thou thus thrust thy self in where CHRIST is, and thirst after this
repentance, then assuredly some time there shall go one virtue or other from
him, which shall alter and change thy hard heart into an heart of wax, so that
it shall melt with the sorrowful tears of repentance, and CHRIST shall give
them of the Well of the water of life freely, who thirsts after it, which
when thou have a teined unto a kind of repentance, then mark well it be this,
which briefly has these infallible tokens, and method in it self, true and
sanctified repentance indeed, that is, (I say) after a sensible sight and
confession of thy sin, thou art accompanied with the tears of true
repentance, out of a contrite and broken heart, where thou do reap faith in
the mercies of GOD the Father, through JESUS CHRIST, and joy in the holy GHOST,
budding forth in the fruits of a godly life, and holy conversation, these
are infallible tokens of the true children of GOD, and are so fast linked
together, that they can not be separated from others.

Art thou therefore unregenerate, yet sleeping in dead security? Have thou not
gotten a sight and sense of thy sin? Thy case is fearful, for the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand, when the devil shall lay all thy sins before thee, where
thou shall be wakned with a fearful and terrible sight of thy misery.

Have thou not as yet confessed thy sins in private before thy GOD, and
accused thy self of thy transgressions? thy estate is to be pitied, the day
of the LORD is at hand, when thou must confess them publicly against thy
will, where the Devil shall accuse thee: yea, thy own conscience shall tell
thee that thou art justly condemned and cast away for ever.

Have thou not sorrowed with the tears of true repentance? The time is at
hand, when thou shall with a desperate sorrow so lament and bewail thy
miserable estate, that thou shall never be comforted out of thy endless
misery, and never dying pain.

Have not thine heart as yet conceaved a certain joy in the holy GHOST, and
faith of the mercies of GOD in his Son CHRIST JESUS: then O poor soul, and
catiue creature, albeit thou were a Monarch, and hade the riches of Croesus,
yet thy case is most miserable and lamentable: then I say O desperate creature,
I pray thee delay not the time of thy repentance, but go and sell all that
thou posessest, for this precious Jewel, and arlepennie of thy salvation, for
the day of the LORD is at hand, when thou shall be shut out of that endless
joy and rest for ever, and then shall reap no faith in the mercies of GOD; but
such a doolefull and miserable desperation out of the justice of GOD, that thou
shall curse the very day of thy birth and nativitie.

Have thou not hated the Devil and thy sin here in this life, the Kingdom
of Heaven is at hand, when as the Devil and thy sin, shall so hate thee with
a perpetual hatred, and torment thee in the Hell for ever.

Have thou not kythed here in this life, the fruits of true repentance, in
glorifying GOD, and in charitable and merciful works unto thy brethren, I
will assure thee, the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, when as God shall be
glorified in thy endless ruin and destruction, where no mercy nor charity
shall be kythed on thee, but most horrible and tyrannous torments executed by
the Devil and his Angels: O misery of all miseries! O pain of all pains*
and never dying torments, how horrible and fearful is thy rememberance? Oh
Father Abraham, who in thy lifetime was a pattern of mercy and pity, on the
poor and indigent, how art thou thus disposed, as not to pity the poor
catiue, and tormented Dives in Hell fire, and send Lazarus unto him, that he
may dip the top of his finger in water to cool his tongue, in such fire and
unquenchable flame? or how do thou not comfort him in his misery, that it
shall either end from him, or he from it, which would have given this poor
damned and tormented Dives some contentment: but I see thou do rather rejoice
as to have pity in that it tends unto the glory and justice of GOD, and
that his pain is endless, and never shall be eased, how terrible should the
consideration be unto a good Christian of the straitness of this torments,
and perpetuity of pain for ever.

But on the contrare, art thou a soul who have repented of thy former
transgressions, and do repent daily of thy infirmities, who have attained
unto this sanctified sorrow, out of the which thou have conceaved the honey of
true repentance, namely joy in the holy GHOST, faith in the mercies of GOD in
his Son CHRIST JESUS, it is a certain token thou art a child of God* and the
Kingdom of Heaven, which thy soul thirsts after is at hand, where thou
shall enjoy that fullness and sum of all blessed joy, with all the Saints
and Angels in the Heavens for ever: which glorious, blessed, and everlasting
Kingdom of GOD is so furnished with joys, that no creature in Heaven nor in
earth can think of, much less express this eternal happiness laid up in
store for the elect, where the just shall shine like the Sun, Math. 15. This is
the promised crown of glory, this is the Paradise and place of pleasure, and
joy of all Saints, this is the hidden Manna which no man knows, but he who
injoyeth it, and with DAVID, Happy are they that live in thy house O LORD,
Psalm. 8. 3. for they shall be drunk with the river of GODS divine pleasures,
and with the abundance of GODS house, Psalm. 3.5. where we shall see GOD which
is our chief happiness.

Augustine speaking of this Kingdom, says, O joy above all joys, passing
all joys, and without which there is no joy: when shall I enter into thee,
when shall I enjoy thee, to see my GOD that dwells in thee? O everlasting
Kingdom! O Kingdom of all eternities! O light without end! O peace of GOD,
that passes all understanding, in which the souls of the Saints do rest
with thee! O Kingdom of everlasting bless, where thou O LORD the hope of all
Sancts art, and the diadem of their perpetual glory, rejoicing them on every
side, with thy blessed sight: In this Kingdom there is infinite joy, mirth
without sadness, health without sorrow, life without labor, light without
darkness, felicity without abaitment, all goodness without evil, where
youth floorisheth that never waxes old: life that knows no end, beauty that
never fades, love that never cools, health that never diminishes, joy that
never cease, where sorrow is never felt, complaint is never heard, matter of
sadness is never seen, nor evil success is never feared for that they
possess thee O LORD, which art the perfection of their felicity.

Oh dear brother into this very moment of life, whereon depends all
eternity, why should we delay our repentance, when I look unto the world
with my spiritual eyes, I wonder to see how the most part of men, weary
themselves in vanity, and in the triffle of worldly things, neglecting this
Heavenly treasure and Kingdom of all happiness: why does not rather now all
men, in the last moment of times, run after this Kingdom in buying this pure
and tried gold of CHRIST JESUS: It is a lamentable and inward grief of true
Christians, to see almost the whole world so busied, and exercised in buying
straw in Egypt, where as they could buy fine gold with less labor, and at a
lower price: is it not now time for worldly men, to follow the doctrine of
CHRIST, and sell all that ever they have to purchase this Kingdom? and the
example of Paul, who esteemed all the world as dung, in respect of this Jewel,
and Ignatius, who says, fire, gallows, beasts, breaking of my bones,
quartring of my members, crushing of my body, all the torments of the Devil
together, let them come upon me so I may enjoy this treasure of Heaven: and
Augustine who was content to suffer torments every day, yea the very torments
of Hell it self to have this joy.

Oh how few considreth this Kingdom of Heaven to be at hand, and how many are
they who bestow their time in vanity, pleasures, and delyts of the world, so
that men all most are bent to wickedness, and abomination, which is an
infallible token, that destruction is imminent, and the Kingdom of Heaven is
at hand: and seeing all tokens and prophecies are fulfiled in the Scripture,
whereby it is most certain that the day of the LORD is at hand, so is the
hardness of the heart and wickedness of mankind likewise a true token and a
note of imminent destruction, as is evident by all examples of the holy
Scripture, how it has been the form of worldlings and reprobate persons to
harden their hearts, and double their sins against the day of vengeance: So
was it in the days of Sodom and Gomorrah, who could not be warned of Lots
exhortations, but hardened their hearts and doubled their iniquities: Judas
wicked resolution could not be changed by his masters forewarning presently
before his imminent destruction, neither the Jews would take heed unto all
the prophecies, or plagues hanging over them, but hardened their hearts against
all exhortations, preachings, promises, and thundrings made by Prophets,
proceeding in such an excess in sin, and defection from GOD, hard before
their utter ruin, and destruction executed by Titus. And when we confer to
these former examples, those of our days and latter times how mercifully and
abundantly is GOD warning, and crying us to repentance and amendment of life,
by faithful Preachers of his Gospel.

But who hears and repents, where is the worldly and avaritious man, who
has amended his life, and turned from his avarice, or where is the prodigal
man who has left his prodigality, and is clothing the naked and feeding the
hungry, or where is the proud and ambitious man, who is become humble and
lowly, or where is the false usurer and deceatfull man restoring it again
unto the poor with Zacheus in the Gospel: but rather all sins are
prevailing in their highest degrees, drunkenness, adultery, pride and
avarice, especially are become so usual and followed of all men that they are
rather accoumpted virtue than vice: so that the Elect of this age may now sigh
and cry out with that holy Martyr Policarpus, O Domine in quaenam tempora nos
reservasti: O LORD what perrilous, sorrowful, and miserable times let thou
thy Elect live in those days, what time or age in the world, since the
creation of Adam, has more sin and wickedness abounded, or what time has
there been in old, whereinto charity and truth has been so cold, and
wholly departed from the hearts of men, as now in those days: and if the
ground of election were not sure, what a hard thing is it, and a matter of
great difficulty for a Christian soul, to attain unto the work of his
calling, and persevere in true faith and obedience, into those dangerous and
latter times: seeing how rare they are to be found, who by a godly life and
conversation, shows a good example to others, and the Devil has got such
victory in this age, that he has almost all dominions, and powers of the world
under him, as Ambassadors: yea, most of all creatures, are very instruments
for enlarging the Kingdom of Satan, who certainly goes about like a roaring
Lion, seeking whom he may devour: seeing he fears his hellish torments
draws soon to a beginning, and therefore striveth with all diligence, if it
were possible, to lead and carry all souls borne on the earth unto endless
perdition, and destruction with him: will we look unto all the estates of
men, both civil and eclesiasticall, from the rich Monarch unto the poor
beggar, from the learned doctor and prelate, unto the lowest deacon, from the
aged father, unto the very infant, we shall see now in those days the hearts
of Kings moved, and induced more by Ambassadors of Satan, than by the
counsel of the godly, embracing rather the counsel of subtle and treacherous
Achitophell, who stands after the destruction and ruin of a Commonwell, than
the counsel of the old and wise favourer of land and policy, and that in
those last times. How pitiful a thing it is to see such a consort of
traitors to intrude themselves in the company of potentats and superior
estates, who by their deceiving prctaickes have brought to pass such fearful
events, in whole Europ, as miserable experience by loss of life, wife,
children and goods, has proved unto many thousands, within those few years
begone: Behold how nobles and men of State, how their hearts and ears are
locked up from the cries of the poor, and repel their cries without help, as
the stony rocks repelleth the vaves of the Sea without sense: look unto the
lower estate of men, thou shall find nothing more to abound than pride, in
imitating the footsteps and form of apparel of noble men, lust of the flesh,
in abusing the Temples of the holy Ghost with incest, adultery, and
fornication: drunkenness in spending of their own life and means; behold the
very beggars, who as men would say, in troubles, in necessities, and want
should work and seek that everlasting riches in the LORD, waiting for the
coming of the LORD JESUS; thou shall mark no hungring nor thirsting after
righteousness in them, but a maine consort of ignorance, lewd and vicious
creatures, who are more exercised and busied in time of divyne service in
tippling and secret places, and about their own bodies, rather as to find them
in GODS house begging grace unto their souls: will we look unto the common
course of youth, thou shall find and hear the first lesson they learn, is
pride, cursing, and profaning of GODS Name, even from their very infancy:
again from their youth to their age, running from one vice to another, and
where then we see commonly they are more addicted unto the worlds
avaritiousnesse. and lewdness, than with any godliness, or goodness, and so
most part ending their days without repentance, they die miserably without
any sense of their sins, and are swallowed up at the hour of death into the
horrible pit of despare, where their torments do begin with never dying
pain. Behold the Ecclesiastical government, thou shall see avarice and
ambition so to have intruded themselves amongst many of them, so that they
seem rather to dig earthly than heavenly treasures, resembling well the
workmen of Noah, who were good biggers, but not possessers: so that many
Kirkmen are good edifiers in the word, but are evil example givers: who are so
possessed, part with ambition, and other with avaritiousnesse of the world,
that they seem to neglect their own salvation. Far be it said from the
worthy Divine, and faithful Preacher of the Gospel, who seeks not their
own glory and advancement, but the advancement of GODS glory, and edifying of
souls unto GOD, all which spait of iniquity, and senseless security, are
evident tokens I say of imminent ruin and destruction: for this our age lives
as secure of our selves, as in the days of Noah, Sodom, and Gomorrha, and as
the Jews before the destruction of Jerusalem, but how came it to pass in
these days, when they were most sure, and expected least any destruction,
presently the floods of Heaven opened, and the waters overflowed the whole
earth with her creatures; the elements conjoined them selves in fire and
brimstone, and destroyed Sodom and Gomorrha: and when the Jews cup of
abomination was full, GOD stirred up instruments amongst themselves, who
presently were the cause of their own destruction in Jerusalem, and the whole
land of Judea.

It is to be feared therefore, that it will likewise so event in these last
days, when all sin takes the upper hand, and when men live most
negligently, and careless of themselves, that then the LORD JESUS will come in
the clouds, and take account of the wickedness of mankind.

The wicked abomination of man's heart, made GOD in his wrath cry out, and say,
I repent that ever I made man, Genes. 6.6. And certainly, if we will view and
consider now in those times the tragedy of the world, it is placed in very
wickedness it self, and when we look unto conscience of religion, how many
wondrous cursed and damned sects and opinions are spread on the faee of the
earth, and every man affirming Scripture for upholding their heretical
opinion, wresting the Word of GOD unto their own wills and inventions: O thou
religion! how art thou changed and disfigured, yea, rather abused, how can the
simple soul knew thee, or to what hand shall he turn, when so many miserable
opinions are at strife, 2 Cor. 4. It is only the humble heart that the truth
is manifested unto: it is not without cause that the spirit of GOD prophecieth
in the Revelation, that thou should be clothed in sackcloth, Revel. 11. yea
thou art surely disguysed, and most by the great comfort of Antichristians,
who are dispersed amongst all Nations.

Now is the mother of whoredom mounted upon the seven headed beast, that ten
horned monster, yea that old Dragon the devil has given him his power, and
has printed on his fore head the name of blasphemy, he spueth out now a days
unclean spirits, who are ambassadors to enlarge the Kingdom of Satan: so
that the Church may now lament in the prophet Jeremiah: Have you no regard, all
ye that pass by this way, behold and see if there be any sorrow like unto my
sorrow, and that GOD is forced now to speak, I have long time holden my peace,
I have been still and refrained my self, now will I cry like a traweling
woman, and I shall destroy and devour both at once.

O wicked and abominable age! O sinful and miserable generation! what other
object do thou bring before our eyes, but sin and wickedness: are not
Kings opposed against Kings, and Nation against Nation, so that the one
triumphs over other men's spoil: yea, subjects mutine against their own
natural Prince, and all sins and wickedness are conquerours, and drunken in
by men as water of a thirsty stomach: what lying and deceiving, what slander
and shameless villainy, is done by all the estates of men in all places, the
general voice of the people is nothing else, but vanity, baudrie, whooring,
detraction, and backbyting, pride, envy, deceit, drunkenness dissimulation,
wantonness, flattery, lying, swearing, perjuring and blaspheming, so that all
abomination and wickedness is grown to a certain perfection and maturitie
in those days, and that the shoulders of this universal globe, is overlaiden
with the wickedness of mankind: The trumpets of GOD may now cry out with the
Prophet Jeremiah, O ye Heavens, be astonished at this: be afraid and utterly
confounded, says the LORD.

And lastly, will we look unto GODS creatures and unto the elements, what
comets, signs, and wondrous tokens has been seen, and heard within those
few years, I doubt not but it is well known unto the diligent searcher, as
experience has well taught, albeit not to all in those parts, yet in sundry
parts in Germany, Italy, Denmark, and Norvay, are kythed fearful tokens,
as untimely birth, and Monsters borne in Denmark, blood rained from the
Heavens on the earth one half foot deep, ash, stones, and fire rained from
the Heavens in Island, the pitiful crying thryse of a child in the mothers
womb in Berone in Norvay. All which I have seen approved and heard by
experience, and many more visions, and terrible tokens seen in Europ, both by
earthquakes, overflowing of watters, and fearful visions seen and heard in
the elements, and witnessed by sundry: all such things may very well teach us
that the latter days are imminent: Therefore he that is unjust let him be
unjust still, (says CHRIST) Revel. 22. let the wicked man dwell in his
abominations, and triumph in all kind of wickedness, for behold (says
Christ) I come shortly, and my reward is with me, to render every man
according to his works.

O would to GOD we could consider attentively the prospect of all GODS
creatures, how they teach us daily, that all things draws to their end, all
things wax worse and briefer, the earth gives not her wonted fruits but
worse: men sins with new sins, GOD plagueth again with new sickness, and
the life of man commonly attaineth not unto former and wonted age, and commonly
cut off in her first prime, the waters give not their wonted abundance of
creatures: the sun and Moon misseth their wonted shine, and virtues, the
stars of Heaven are, turned into comets, for preaching of GODS vengeance: the
Air and all elements are moved with fearful and unacquainted
tempestuousstormes, and all things as it were wish to be disolved, so that
the earth is waerie, worn, and overburdened with the wickedness of her
creatures, also that she faints, trembles, and wishes to be fred, and
disburthened of her most intolerable birth, all which prophecies fulfilled, and
conferred together with the experience of this our age, there is no spiritual
man, but of necessity must conclude, that the day of the LORD is at hand: and
if any learned Divines have ought to pretend, as yet not fulfilled, yet I
persuade my self there is none of them, but will subscryue to CHRIST'S own
words, that the latter times shall be shortened for the Elects sake. Math. 24.
and that all the Saints in Heaven are now rejoicing, and hoping for the
accomplishment of the fullness of their joy, when that soul and body may be
coupled and united together, and enter with all the blessed Elect into that
glorious and triumphant Church, and Kingdom of glory.

Therefore to conclude, I say, Will nothing move thee unto this repentance, no
the mercies, patience, and long suffering of GOD can move the^? neither the
benefits, and temporal blessings of GOD bestowed upon thee; nor the prospect
and defection of elements and creatures, neither the abomination and
wickedness of mankind; no not the daily experience of violent death can move
thee; yet let the fear of imminent justice and day of the LORD, that glorious
Kingdom of Heaven now at hand move thee to repentance, and amendment of life,
I pray thee consider with thy self, if there be any creature created in
Heaven or in earth, who can by any evident argument assure thee, that when thou
sit down to thy table, that thou shall rise before CHRIST come in the
clouds, and ask account of thee: or when thou go out of thy doors about
thy worldly respects, to turn back to thine house, but that thou may be
caught into the clouds of Heaven, before the justice seat of GOD, either when
thou lie down in thy bed with thy mortal body, but that thou shall be in
an eye blinck in thy sleep exchanged, into an immortal creature, and
presently presented before the glorious throne, and Majesty of CHRIST JESUS,
to give account of thy works.

Good LORD! when I do meditate with my self of the imminencie of this
Kingdom of Heaven, and of the former works of mankind in this age, it
troubles my thoughts, and vnquyeteth my spirits, and makes my bones to quake,
and my flesh to tremble for fear, to think how that the LORD of Glory shall
find the whole world in such damnable and pitiefull estate, and how few they
are who are prepared with the oil of grace in the lamps of their hearts:
shall he not rather find men busied about the vanities of the world, and
lusts of the flesh, then attending the coming of the LORD JESUS: O doolefull
and miserable experience! O wicked abomination and sinful generation of
mankind! What fearful justice art thou prophesying to be imminent. Oh how
doolefull, lamentable, and sorrowful will the event prove to many, who are
sleeping in senseless security in the lap of worldly vanities: awaken O
secure man, and harden not thy heart, nor delay not the time of thy repentance,
abuse not the long patience and suffering of GOD, accept of grace in this very
last moment of grace, for now the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, where the
gates of grace and mercy shall be closed, and never opened nor offered
again. O miserable, wretched, damned, and forlorn creature art thou, if thou
repent not in time, how pitiful shall then thy estate be, when thou shall
be forced with perpetual shame, infamy, and confusion, to stand naked in the
presence of all creatures, and before the justice throne of GOD, where thou
shall hear that horrible sentence, of the KING of all Kings, and judge of all
the whole world, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, into everlasting
fire prepared for the Devil and his angels. O terrible and fearful sentence
once pronunced, how fearful and inexpressible shall thy pain be, where no
repentance, no tears, no treasures, no friend, no foe, no grief, no sorrow,
will then help thy miserable, damnable, and desperate soul, out of her
endless quaill, and never consuming torments. And on the contrare, how joyful
shall that soul be who has repented here in this life, when they shall be
promoted in the Heavens, to live as Kings in that everlasting happiness and
joye of all Saints. The LORD of his mercy make us prepared against the
coming of the LORD JESUS, to whom with the Father and holy Ghost, be praise
and glory for ever. AMEN.


