THE LABYRINTH OF MAN'S LIFE.

OR VERTVES DELIGHT AND Enuies opposite.

By IO: NORDEN.

Virtus abunde sui est pr^mium, quicumque sequ^tur euentus. Printed at London,
for John judge, and are to be sold at the great South door of Paul's* and at
Britains ^u^sse, 16^4.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR ROBERT CARR Knight, Baron of Branspeth, Vicecount
Rochester, Earl of Somerset, of his Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel,
Knight of the most noble order of the Garter; And Lord High Treasurer of
Scotland.
Most Honorable Lord,
I Have bin long balanced between Desire, and Fear: The first inclining
unto: The second swaying me from, the publishing of these unworthy lines:
especially under so honorable a Name. But the first being a passion, in
counterpoysible prevailed. Only Fear remains, least your high prudence, and
admired gravity, should disesteeme the gracing of seeming Le^tlie. Because many
friuolus Poems, are daily begotten and brought forth, worthy to be abandoned.
Yet many worthy subjects have been handled in verse, much graced and embraced
of the wise. And howsoever these silly lines, may seem unworthy the hand, or
eye, of so worthy a Patron, there is use in some of them, to be made by men of
whatsoever condition: If it be but to the chasing aaway of that common enemy
Idleness; And to prevent thoughts less beseeming minds inclinable to virtue.
For, where virtue is a stranger, vice is a daily guest. (...) tue, the M^ther,
(...), and guide to most solid content: Containing the Appetite, ever within
the circle of Sobriety. Observing that the more Concupiscence is satisfied,
and fed, the more irregularly it runs, from one voluptuous experiment to
another; never satisfied with the admired varieties, of abhorred vanities. Men
enter this life, as into a Labyrinth, or fatal Desert of changes, and
miseries. And none escapes the encounter of those hideous Minotaures, Vice, or
Envy, whose dangers are as Silla, and Caribdis, by shunning the first, he falls
into the second. Democritus laughed to see the folly of men: But much more
might Heraclitus weep to observe the miseries, whereinto they are subject to
fall by Vice, or Envy. Only that Divine Ariadne ( virtue) gives unto every
prudent Theseus, the line of Right Reason, to conduct him, through all the
ambiguous Angles, and crooked turnings of this life's Labyrinth, wherein Vice and
Envy, couch to snare and surprise the wisest. Common experience the Mother of
best understanding reueileth this, as in the glass of the risings and
fallings, of men, which I have endeavored, in some weak measure, in these
simple Elegies to dilate: not to teach, but to put men in mind, of the
uncertainty of all estates in this mortality, wherein there is neither
safety, or content, without adhering to Virtue, whose companion is Envy, which
ever follows, but never fails the virtuous. Sola virtus inuicta.

Most bound unto your Honor, IO: NORDEN.

The Authors farewell to his Book.
THou silly Orphan of my dulled brain,
I send thee forth, in basest Country tire:
Least falling in, to that high Courtly ^raine,
Should be enui'd if thou were clothed higher,
So were my cost bestowed in vain.
Therefore where so thou shall be entertained
Give what content may best befit thy place:
And tell thy Readers forc'dly were constrained,
To leave thy Sire, and seek some vulgar grace^
Which by desert may be obtained.
And as thou may fly selfe-conceited wits,
Though they pretend experience:
The meanest apprehension best befits,
Thy Country-breeding wanting Eloquen^^.
Digest it well, whatsere hits.
If any tax thee with too base a style,
And say thy verse, is but a ragged Rhyme:
Entreat those Eloquents to use their file,
To burnish thee from that suggested crime,
So shall thou seem A new compile.
Some will content to hear thee speak so plain,
That long to learn, and be not superfine:
First will them read, if cause be to complain,
If matter nor the meeter please their eyne,
Be not dismayed, come home again.
And leave this errand with the Curious,
Who seem to (...) things most intricate.
The ^^aker, willing, though less Coyous,
Search, and conceive, what Readings intimate,
Else R^^^ing were superfluous,
And tell the Captious thou art not ignorant,
Of higher Poems and Invention:
But that thou dred'st to be deemed arrogant,
Exceeding measure of Intention,
So censured too extrauagant.
Chawcer* Gowre, the bishop of dunkell,
In ages far remote were eloquent:
Now S^d^ey, Spencer, others more excel,
And are in latter times more excellent,
To antique Lauriats parallel.
But matters of great admiration,
In modern Poes^es are words estranged
Invention of hid speculation,
The scope whereof hardly conceived as it is ranged
But by a Comentation.
Who reads Chaucer as a modern man,
Not looking back into the time he wrote,
Will hardly his ambiguous phrases scan,
Which in that time were vulgar, well I wot,
Yet we run back where he began.
And all our praised Poems art beset,
With Chaucers words and Phrases ancient:
Which these our modern ages quite forget
Yet in their Poems, far more Eloquent,
Not yet from Gowre or Chaucer fett.
Why should it not befit our Poets well,
To use the words and Phrases Uulgar know?
Why should d they rouse them from obliuions cel
Since their ambiguous terms from whence they flow
The learned Reader scant can tell.
But things illustrated with art and sense,
As Chaucer did his Troylus and Creside:
To amplifi't aptly with Eloquence,
Base matter by good Verse is beautifi'de,
And gains admired Reverence.
Not using words and Phrases all so dark,
But so familiarly as vulgar may,
Well apprehend the Poets couched mark,
And see the Idea which he does display:
About the Center in his Arc.
This will excuse thee to the friendly wise,
But not perhaps unto the Captio^s:
Be silent yet, know, nothing fructefies
In fattest wit, if will be scurrilous,
Wit wilful, will will tyrranise.
But for more hoped comfort and content,
Keep on thy way, first to that worthy wight:
To whose protecting favor I thee sent,
He either will accept thee, basely dight,
Or send thee back incontinent.
And thus I leave thee to thy fortunes lot,
As other Orphans left deprived of friends:
If he affect thee, though some other not,
Though some do rob thee, and some make amends
It is enough that thou have got.
To his dear friend Master John Norden upon his Labyrinth of Man's life. R. N.
Encomium.
NOt Egipts old laborious Labyrint,
Turning, returning, winding in and out,
Which whosoever once did enter in it
Ever to issue stood in deepest doubt,
Nor the Dedalion Labyrinth of Crete
Wherein King Minos shut, the Minotaure,
Nor which Porsenna' in Italy did complete,
Nor that in Lemnos Isle, of stone hewed square,
Nor which King Henry-fit^ Empress did found
At Woodstock, for his beauteous Concubine,
That famous and renowned Rosamond,
Can be compard with this work so divine,
That Norden here (with his Practice p^nsife)
Reueales in this his Labyrinth of man's life.
Non luco, subter Rosis.
Amico suo I. N.
THe labor of this Labyrinth I find,
A perfect mirror of an honest mind:
Who having truly trod this worldly maze,
Has left the wonder for the world to gaze,
Where Judgments care, does by description prove,
Which is the chiefest, Earths or Heavens Love:
A work of worth, and worthy good Regard,
The pains well way'd, well worthy like Reward.
N. B.

To the Author of the Labyrinth of Man's life.
WHile vulgar heads are stilling Venus Rose,
NORDEN thy Lembeck drops the purest balm:
Thy Nectar to the Pensive shed in Prose,
With this thy Mummy mingled for each qualme,
Shall give thee life: and dying, Love revive,
While Love, or Life, on earth remains alive.
R. J.

THE ARGUMENT.
THe man that in the Cell of silence fits,
Imports content, in his distasteful fits,
The Labyrinth, the worlds inconstancy,
The passionate Desert does signify.
True virtue does the Lady represent,
The hag foul Envy, always malecontent:
Who what the Lady, frames and rectifies,
She in despite, inchants, and vilifies.
Wherein the Authors purpose is to show,
Enuies assault, And Virtues counterblow:
How Envy shows her most obsequious,
When she would circumuent the Virtuous.
THE LABYRINTH OF MAN'S LIFE.
CAn man oppressed, though silent, rest content?
Can grief grow great, and can the heart consent?
Tweene mirth and mourning can true concord be?
Can fire and flax consorted well, agree?
Can seeming grace that is not grace in deed,
Relieve the heart, it wounds, and yields no meed,
Hope, fed with fawnes, is like a withering tree,
That Is dead at heart, yet seems alive to be.
That Hope that has naught but fair words to feed it,
Is crushed by him (in show) that seems to breed it.
Despair at helm, how can Assurance sail,
Assurance tossed, wits card and compass fail.
What then can bring hopes houering bark to rest,
That Is forced to floate in sea of raging breast?
Only sad silence, in a secret cell,
Where only patience and contentment dwell.
This Cell is happiness, to them it find
More precious far, then gold unto the mind.
By sea and land to find it some men run,
As near at last, as when their race begun.
The place, the thing, the way they seek amiss,
Fond Fancy knows not, what Contentment is.
Men run they know not where, seek know not what,
Find not Content: not to be wondered at.
For wit, nor art, nor policy can find,
That true content, that cures sad grief of mind.
Who does suppress and bridle Appetite,
Has best content, *if not an hypocrite.
Appetite implied all affections,
Mou^d as the heart, gives her directions. The fruit^ of Lust.

As when the heart, is ouer-gorg'd with Lust,
It vomits forth, gross humors, things unjust.
Anger, Revenge, Envy, wrath, and Hate,
Fruits only growing, on the desperate:
The desperate cannot true patience have,
They kill content, which they would seem to crave.
The daughters of Ioy-priued Acheron
Alecto, Megera, and Tysiphon.
Hels furies, got on darkest shade of night,
Feed with despair, their vassals void of light.
Deprived of light, men live, they love, they hate,
Abhor, affect, disdain, are passionate.
Never content, content (in show) they grieve,
Fawning, they frown. And seeming dead they live.
Seeming alive, are in heart, dead in deed,
They seem to see, and seeing take not heed.
But grudge to see, another good content,
That still as like, in good and ill event. Content.

Not moved to mirth, when fawning fortune shines,
Nor fears her storms, when her fair faune decline^*
For, in my Cell I found a pylot fit,
That steres the bark, where I contented sit,
Twixt S^l^a, and Caribdis gulfes offeare,
I safely sail conducted by her steare.
Often bearing near, where sweet Sirenes sing,
Sometimes where furies have their habiting,
Sirenes here, the furies there, me hail,
Divinely steered, twixt both along I sail.
Yet often the tempests of sad crosses rage,
Then take I harbor, in port Good courage:
Casting Hope-anker, on soil sapience
Floating secure, in hull true sapience.
Aloof a little from Cape ficklenes,
Where often I hear sad songs of heaviness.
Silent I sat in Cabin of desire,
The storm past over, we hoyse and retire.
And on the bank desert, I did descry,
One cast ashore, through wrack of penury.
And as we past him by, he thus relates,
The doubtful Labyrinth of all estates.
IF the earth were brass, my tongue a grauing pen,
I would therein grave fickle states of men
That rise and fall, that change and alter often,
From basest clown to Keysar set aloft.
Related words are only wind, and dye,
Letters, transfer them to posterity. Man's inconstant state.

My subject sad is man's inconstant lot,
That is to day what yesterday, 'twas not.
No state stands long, but rises or it falls,
And best resembles tossed tennis bals.
Now stricken hye, then lights, and then rebounds,
One now is low, then raised, then redounds.
Most strange vicissitudes, of states I see,
Yet not, who happy, or unhappy be. Outward seeming deceitful.

Though present wealth or want, seem grace or grief,
Few know what hurts, or truly gives relief.
For, as earthes creatures live by contraries,
So, seeming good, or ill, are falacies:
Beginnings good, often end with ill success,
Ill seeming ends, may bring most happiness.
Man, of all creatures that subsede the sky,
Only partakes, none else eternity.
Guided by Reason has the use of Arts,
Of tongues and of diuinest inward parts,
None else has yet so strange varieties,
Of good and ill, of mirth and miseries.
Who notes how man begins, per^ists and ends,
May see strange chances on which life depends,
From birth to youth, from youth to man's estate,
He grows unlike and still degenerate.
As years increase, so alters life and lust,
The body, mind, affection, fear and trust:
Man learnes, forgets, he loves, dislikes and lives,
As weakness, power, as wit, or folly gives:
The heart the fountain of the vital spring,
Distilles the blood that nurseth fancying*
For, though men's souls seem reasonable all,
All men show not, their souls caelestiall.
As are men's humors and complexions,
By nature so are inclinations:
Where art or grace guide not, there Nature swayes,
But where they rule, there Natures force decays:
Yet Nature has a power commanding strong,
Though art, or grace, have some command among.
As Art helps Nature, so experience tries,
Where in best arts the most perfection lies:
Hardly can art make straight a crooked mind,
Nor make him see whom Nature brought forth blind
As fire in flax, cannot be long conceil'd,
At length so Nature is though hid reueil'd:
Mala^^^olly, the mother of best arts,
Has greatest power, (grace absent) in men's hearts,
All humors strong or much defective breed,
Both good and bad, fruitful or fruitles seed,
Mirth, grief, sloth, diligence, superbity,
Fear, Envy, Folly, sweet tranquillity,
B'instinct of nature, bred and brought to light,
Do show that humors have commanding might:
Some are opinatiue, gracious, pitiful,
Envious, loving, feeble, strong* fearful,
Sober, light, foolish, wise, true, false, liars,
Quarlous, deceivers, of unclean desires.
Strangely affected, all men stand and be,
As humors have mean, or extreme degree.
By grace some curb ill disposition,
By discipline and education.
Complexions principal in all but four,
Their branches infinite, distinct in power:
Some attribute men's dispositions,
To Stars aspects and Constellations,
That are predominant, at time of birth,
Thence to proceed hearts heaviness or mirth.
Some to the clime, where men are borne, and live,
Some to the tribe, whence men descend, it give.
Some to the feebleness or force of seed,
Some to the Nurse and food whereon men feed,
These much prevail: not yet of force chief cause,
Why men refist, or hold diuiner laws.
An inward cause there is that works the will,
As light or dark gives motives good, or ill.
Two ruling powers are of distinct effects,
Men's minds are led, as each of these directs:
Of love divine the one, the other of set hate,
As these prevail, men's actions perpetrate.
Betwixt these powers is always emnity,
The good confirmed by contrariety,
For, if there were no feeling fight within,
Law needed not to make a sin a sin.
Nature the mother of all earthly things,
Creates, preserues, by due contraryings, Concord of contraries.

Without a discord can no concord be,
Concord is when contrary things agree:
But these two contraries that guide the mind,
Are so disiunct can never be combined:
As good and ill, as right and wrong cannot,
Be in one subject, as may cold and hot:
So heaven and hell, and what partakes their might,
Can never be in one without a fight,
Though things repugnant may have unity
And seem as one and of one quality;
Though Natures, simples may in one combine,
And one to others quality incline,
Yet one too strong breeds such dissension,
As Nature hardly works reunion.
Nature by art may imitated be,
And contraries by art be made agree:
Of colors mixed, merely contraries,
She moldes and makes most pleasing decencies,
The eye beholdes the mixtures with delight,
If they have beauty, and be exquisite,
But if the growndes, as white, or black, or blew,
Exceed too much, it marres the mixed hew.
Drugges far unlike, in hot, cold, moist and dry,
Are brought by art to true Congruity:
Music, the medicine of heavy hearts,
Makes concord, only of discording parts,
As high and low, as longs and shortes agree,
So harsh, or sweet, is music found to be.
No contraries appear in perfect kind,
But seen together, or by art combind,
Unlike to these are inward qualities,
The heart indureth not her contraries:
But as to good or ill it stands affected,
It harbors one, the other is rejected.
Virtue, and vice, are merely contraries, Virtue and Vice.

And each is foe, to others qualities.
And neither Art, nor Nature, can bring those,
At one; they are, and will be, mortal foes.
Vice, seeks to blemish minds best qualified,
Never preuailes in persons rectified:
Where Virtue lives, there Vice does seldom dye:
Vice lives below, virtue aspireth hie.
Virtue in earth, is merely perigrin
In heaven a naturalized Citizen.
Who so is led, by that celestial guide,
Confronts all Vice, strong, truly fortifide.
Of inward heart, and not of outward weed,
Do all effects of good, and ill, proceed.
But what is good, that Envy does despise E^^^.

Foe to true virtue, friend to vanities.
What can best wit, what can deep'st wisdom choose
Or best perform but Envy will abuse?
No public place, no person of estate,
Whom hateful Envy will not emulate.
Then I, of lowest rank, can I be free,
If Envy heave at highest in degree?
I will digest, foul Enuies cup of spite,
Since they taste most, that are most exquisite:
Foul Envy aims to hit the innocent,
And wounds her self, she is so maleuolent:
She waxes lean, seeing another fat,
She kicks at others, she not spurned at.
Long have I trod, this Labyrinth with care,
Yet know I not in it what curuings are:
The ways and turnings are ^'ambiguous,
They make me doubtful and infatuous.
But who so treades it, with best skill throughout,
Walks not so wyselie, but finds ways of doubt, (...)

Two guides are in this maze, most principal,
As are the ways, two in the general,
The branches infinite of either be;
All doubtful, though the entries plain men see.
They guide the passengers in either way,
The first aright, the second, leads astray.
The first yet narrow, slippie, full of let,
The second fair, broad, full of pleasures set;
The first seems base, most ignominious,
The second pleasant, and tres-glorious.
But whether so or merely contrary,
Success declares, not wit, or policy;
A hidden mystery, unseen there lies,
Within this Labyrinth of Destinies.
Wherein scarce two estates, stand equaliz'd
More one then other, hurt, or benefizd.
As many men, so many earthes estates,
From basest beggar to great'st potentates.
Some sing, some sigh; some laugh and some lament,
Some fast, some feast, some murmor, some content,
Some fawn, some frown, some act and some admire;
Some hope, some fear, some run, and some retire.
Some graced, some griu'd* some wrong, and some complain
Some get, some lose, some take, some give, and gain,
Some rise, some fall, some stand, some feed, some pine,
Some heau'd aloft, some lofty ones decline.
Some sail with tide, some swim against wind and tide,
Some flote, some sink, some run and never slide,
Some sleeping get, for frutelesse gain some wake,
Some all men grace, some causlesse all forsake.
Some neitlie tired (sotts) held of high desert,
Some basly clad (deserving) held in erte.
Some bosting, break into the worlds admire,
Some meek, though worthy, sildome raised hier;
Some frowned on in fine regaine regard,
Some fawned, fail of their vain hopes reward.
Some living ill, stand yet in wished grace.
Some well yet live but in penurious case,
Some cruel, tyger-like, some temperate.
Some mild, some mad, some kind, some obstinate,
Some hauty proud, some of an humble mind,
Some loving, hateful buxsum, some unkind:
Luxurious some, lustful, some continent,
Perfidious some, faithful, some insolent,
Thus yeeldes this labyrinth, wherein men live
It gives some joy, and some it maks to grieve.
A thousand thousand, strange varieties
Of outward mirth, and inward miseries,
It yields to men: yet none true judgment have,
To shape their wills, to his who first them gave.
But feed on vapors of a strange content,
That vanish quite, as soon as they have vent.
On human promise, that is made, and dies:
Clip'st as the Sun, by blackesse clouds, that rise,
Who thinks all promises will come to pass,
Makes fair, foul fancy, with a flattering glass,
Fancies far fetched, do feed a feeble heart;
They cure, or comfort, by dissembling art.
As he that is placed in highest rank conceiues,
Him most secure, yet fancy, often deceiues:
The Bramble, and the Cedar, neighbors be,
And far the stronger is the Cedar tree;
The Bramble bends, breaks not, when tempests rise:
"That soonest falls, that is of greatest sise,
Under the Cedar, on a mountain set;
The lower trees, and shrubs, there shelter get:
But when the tempest, tumbles down the tree,
They bend or break, that vnder-shelter'd be,
Her stature tall, her massy body tears,
And breaks the branches, which the body bears.
And underlings, which Cedars shelter have,
Do bow, or bruise, or others shelters crave.
High Cedar falling, has no means of stay,
His fall affrights, and makes whole woods dismay;
The mountain whereon Cedar firmly stands,
And woods, when Cedars flourish clap their hands.
Some from their birth, left in this maze forlorn,
As fruits abortiue, and untimely borne,
And he that looks into Times glass of steel,
Shall see all states, in earth, as on a wheel
That turns them all about inconstantly,
Aloft, and low, with much uncertainty.
Glory, and Baseness, are the boundaries
Of all estates: all but two contraries. Glory and Baseness.

Between them both there is a limit set
And either mean, does her extremes beget.
And he that from the basest rises hie,
In self-conceit has most felicity.
But he, whom Fortune has advanced most, (...).

And not true Virtue, has no cause to boast:
There Is no estate, which Virtue founded not,
That has a certain, or contented lot.
Fortune, is constant, in inconstancy,
Most churlish in her seeming clemency:
For, what she gives to day, too morrow takes,
She comes, and goes, she follows, and forsakes:
As clouds, and cleerenesse, clipse and clear the Sun,
By Fortune so, are men made, and undone.
The vulgar hearts, eyes, senses, all
In thought, in ^ight, in judgment partial.
They judge unequally, of this earths lots
The great, earths ornaments, the base, her spots,
Earths highest portions, seem true pawnes of grace,
Graceful allotments, have no seemings bace:
But in these mysteries hid matter lies
Which none can see, with his own natures eyes,
Therefore I leave it, ^o event* And smile;
At Enuies weakness, and her strong revile. Enuies ^^a^te^ers.

Partial she fawnes, and flatters high estate,
And (false) suggesteth, mean, unfortunate.
Fortune, and Envy, are two secret foes Fortune and Envy.

And neither does her purposes disclose.
For, whom, and when, they seek to smite they smile:
And still conceal, the substance of their wyle.
Where Fortune favors, there does Envy hate,
Between them both, there is no sure estate.
But where true virtues Heroickes, do stand
Constant, th'incounter these foes, hand, to hand.
But Fortune, taken, in diuiner sense
Is not a foe, but nurse of patience:
It is that power that swayeth all estates
And loves them best, that most she verberates.
Therefore the causes of men's want and weal,
This power Divine, daignes not them to reveal,
But lets the ambitious, holds them only blessed
That win earths happiness; and loose the rest.
No art or eloquence, no fear or love,
Can from earths love, their blinded hearts remove:
Opinion strong, rejects Reasons skill,
Feeds foolish Fancy, and peruerts the will.
A face most ougly, may in self-conceit
Seem fair, welfauor'd, amiable, neyt,
But when he sees it, in a perfect glass,
He checkes conceit, misdeeming what it was.
So they that think naught good, but this earths might,
Live yet in dark, not having inward light:
Though this high power do freely it bestow,
Yet for what cause the wisest do not know:
For, Fortune gives but things of outward use,
She gives and takes, for fear frames no excuse,
But he that sees and swaieth all events,
Heaues sometimes up, some graceles malcontents.
And who foresees when he is lifted high,
What future peril may succeed thereby,
None see the issue of a thing begun,
Nor how success of good or ill may run,
False, fond, and rash, are humane arguments,
Of high or low, conceyl'd are all events,
Sometimes best seemings worse then baser hit,
Which none fore-sees, not one preuenteth it,
The power divine, often turns an ill to best,
And best supposed of best often dispossessed.
High powers permit a wicked man to rise,
And by usurped greatness tyrranise:
But it is observed, he has not long to stand,
In his false greatness, but the self same hand
That heau'd him up, so one hurles him down again,
That naught regardes, fair fawnes, or deep disdain.
And some that see such changes in Estates,
Hold al successes wrought by fained Fates:
No, no, a power superior sits and swaies,
This Labyrinths right race, and her estraies,
Who does, ne suffers ought, mong men in vain,
And yet turns often men's ways of loy to pain,
And pain to pleasure if it more befit,
None know things issues ere they see them hit,
Astrologers by Planetary skill; Astrologers err in their speculations

Presume to tell successes good and ill.
If they indeed had deified wits,
They might pre^age a thing before i^ hits,
But he that by celestial influence,
And stars aspects seeks truths intelligence.
Fore-tels man's lot, and how his end shall make,
May hit by chance; more certainly mistake,
Gain makes them gaze, vainglory makes them speak
They pawn their credits, yet their promise break:
So they that judge, by present weal, or woe,
That future joy, or grief, must needs be so.
(Though as the cause men deem the effect to be)
Their judgment blind, cause, nor effect can see,
Blind then that judge of things succeeding well,
By their well-weening, when they cannot tell, Well hardly known.

What is that well that men ^o much desire,
Wealth, honor, beauty, credit, wits aspire
All which compared to well, indeed are found
Base, evil, idle, rotten, and unsound.
Unless with these concur hearts humbleness,
Fear, reverence, and faithful thankfulness,
True thankfulness, chief argument of grace:
Of grace divine, that leads in that right race,
That tendes indeed to truest happiness,
To earths contentment and heavens blessedness.
And to that peace that feeds still a guest.
That naught remooues but earths care from the breast,
And yet earths care the carnal hearts delight,
That breeds a peace that fosters selfe-despite,
Yet seems sweet that seeming yields content
The heart mistaking falcifies consent.
As greatest pearls and gemmes of best respect Simile

By humane art are found often counterfeite.
And he that wants true judgment of the thing,
Esteems that base fit lewell for a King.
The perfect pearl, is precious, permanent;
The counterfeit, decays incontinent,
In color, weight, and value, which does show
The thing not current, which does alter so.
So alter all this life's felicities,
That fall to good, and bad, and miseries:
They alter often, and never stand secure,
One gives the check, and lies aloof the lure.
The Other ^toopes, when men would have her fly,
And both disdain all humane policy.
A^^ not the low, set sometimes all-aloft?
Are not the lofty, hurled down as often?
Profane, Divine, our own Domesticals
Are mirrors, of Times true memorials:
Sometimes the great, by b^fe are captiuate
To show that none till death is fortunate.
The low, and hye, stand all, in fickle stay
Like changing actors, in a tragic play:
In this life's Labwinth, men rise and fall,
As creekes, and curuings lead, they meet withal.
And nothing more leads passengers awry,
Nor breeds more danger, then Security. Security.

Securest, often things most unjust commit,
Not deeming powers Divine, consider it.
But when they are, in their securest pride,
Not looking low, where danger lies, they slide.
Earths comforts, are like Phoebus splending rays,
Her crosses like sad dark, and gloomie days: Prosperity and Aduersitic.

Prosperity resembles, Summer spring,
Adversity, Autumn, and wintering,
Alternately have these their turns to run,
Shining or shadowed, as, with clouds, the Sun.
Which way s'euer, the inconstant wind does blow,
It Is still full-various, blow it hye or low.
And like to it, are Earthly men's estates,
Increasing now, forthwith again abates.
Best wits, do most affect Ambition: Wit and Wisdom.

True Wisdom not, but with condition:
For, if she think advancement dangerous,
She makes a pause, not rashly credulous.
For who sees not whereof high state's compounded,
May think it large, till he see how it is bounded.
It is great honor, to be set on hye,
But greater wisdom, to shun danger nigh.
For Envy, Virtues black infernal foe,
Cannot affect any advanced so.
A pleasing step to mount a regal throne,
A wished lot, to be subject to none.
Yet he that has the highest step of state
May not be happy, yet seem fortunate.
The greatest happiness, is found to be,
In him that lives at large, and ever free.
What care, what travels, what regard have Kings, Kings have great care.

To manage those, under their gouernings?
Kings need but learn this one peculiar art,
Over their Subjects the right ruling part:
To do themselves, what they would others should
For Subjects minds, follow the Princes mould,
What love, what duty, what affection,
Ought be in those, in their protection?
For whosoever lives, and rules, a multitude
May say he lives in Honors servitude,
Though he command, the inferior sort obayes,
They censure yet, what ruler does, or says.
If he be just then censured too severe,
If pitiful, he loses vulgar fear.
If he reward, as princely liberal,
They tax him then, as too too prodigal.
If he be saving, and seem worldly wise,
Th'accuse him then, as too too couetise,
If he be peaceful, and refrain Debate,
He is a coward, far, unfit for state.
If he courageous, princely valarous,
They grudge at this, as too too quarrellous.
If he be grave, then is he proud in show,
If affable, not fit a Prince be so.
If he be sad, then discontent in mind,
If merry, light. Thus vary they as wind.
Can Honor wake, and will foul Envy sleep? Honor has Envy.

If Virtue rise, will Envy silence keep?
Who then can see, though virtue be his guide;
What may within this Labyrinth, betide,
Wherein the wisest, often, amazed stand:
For best success, to turn on whither hand.
The highest of the highest rank is set,
To tread this maze, not free from counterlet.
For, Envy bands, and does oppose her skill,
To circumvent as well the good, as ill.
Whom she detracteth, be he hye or low,
Receives a wound, before he feels the blow.
But, who pursues, another, in despite,
Hurts more himself, then him he aims to smite.
Virtue the loadstarre of a lively life, Virtue and Envy.

Is free it self, by Envy forced to strife.
Where virtue shines, yet, in the outward deed,
By inward light, makes Enuyes heart to bleed:
Yet none can stop the mouths of Machiauels
That fawn, and whine, yet bite him that excels.
Hardly the highest, and most honorable
Avoid the scandals of those execrable,
Not one, advanced, can tread this maze so right,
But that foul Hagg, will scandalize his might.
The iustest Magistrate, censures not that,
Which will not be, by her, accepted at.
Envy maligneth all, affects none,
No, no, not those, of her own faction.
For if she see her instruments to rise,
She is suspicious, and will tyrannize.
To raise and then reject, is her delite^:
She makes a pastime, of her works of spite.
Yet is her force, but merely feeblenes,
Her wisdom folly, her wit giddynes.
Self-harme she fears, at others goods she frets,
She eggs to vice, and virtue counterlets.
Desertlesse vpstarts, that from basest rise,
She does with most desertfull, equalize.
She frames the fancies, of the vulgar so, Vulgar censure.

As, they give censure, as is outward show.
The robed in the brauest weeds, they deem,
Most worthy; base in show, of base esteem.
They seem to reverence, the glorious,
To get their shelter, are obsequious.
To whom, their fawnes, in love they level not.
But to be graced, by him, that grace has got.
And some that thus obtain, the fawning train,
Think it true greatness: yet, concealed disdain.
The likest way, leads often to most annoy:
Th'vnlike to grace: This Labyrinth is coy.
For often their lies, abayt, in pleasing'st things,
Enchanted, and men bite, and then it stings.
Sweet first in taste; And yields a while content,
The taste, well pleased, will, yields full consent.
And swallows it: And thinks it will digest,
To his high happiness, and thinks him blessed,
That in this Labyrinth, he found the way,
That others sought; But found not where it lay.
Then he puffed up with vapors of his pride,
Sails on as he commanded wind, and tide.
Then fawning some, some flatter, some admire,
Some yield al-haile, that hate his haute aspire.
Some emulate, some envy, some devise,
To hurl him down, that they themselves may rise,
By right or wrong, Ambition seldom stays, Ambition

When she begins, she scorns to make delays:
From lowest step, she lifts her foot aloft,
By large degrees; And he that steppeth often,
Goes far: Yet, some, as in a Crane does raise
Some others hye, by his steps, yet he stays.
And when the wheel has mounted some too hye.
The engine fayles, and they fall fearfully.
And standers by, that see them rise, and fall,
Admiring say better not rise at all.
This moving world, may well resembled be,
T'a Jack, or Watch, or Clock, or to all three:
For, as they move, by weights, or springs, and wheels,
And every mouer, others mouer feels,
So do the states, of men of all degrees,
Move from the lowest to the highest fees,
The lesser wheels, have most celeritie,
The greatest move with far more constancy,
And if there mouings lowest wheels neglect,
The greatest mouer does them all correct.
For, if the wheels, had equal force to move,
The lowest would check, the leading wheel above.
So, if there were, no difference in estates,
All would be lawless, yet al Magistrates:
Therefore has Art, well ordered the thing,
That best resembles, Subjects and their King.
The spring is set to force the motion
Of the unequal wheels; to make distinction:
The wheels ought move, but as first mouer will,
If too too fast, or too to slow its ill.
And if the spring, do tenter string too hye
It breaks: And wheels run back confusedly.
Therefore a mean preserues the whole in peace,
And true concordance: yields sweet increase.
The frame of heauen's admired, orbs mighty sphere
Does show, by nature, how arts wheels should stere:
The princely Planet Sol, has limits set,
But in his moving has no counterlet.
She Is only Mistress of the Zodiac,
And that she walks, and weyneth forth and back,
Teaching Earthes potentates to rest content,
Not to vsurp, beyond their set extent.
For if the Sun should grow, too hye, or low,
Earth's orb or heavens her heat would overthrow.
Ambition faines, fames period only lies
To be Earths Monarch, as sole Sun in skies:
If one in earth seem greatest of renown,
Another thirsts to deprive his Crown.
Atchieu'd he holds, not yet his fame complete,
Seeing some neighbor Diadems so great.
There must no equals, or superiors be,
Ambition scorns, comparatiue degree.
Which makes the ambitious, rash to undertake,
Things desperate, for gold, and glories sake.
He thirsts, for blo^d, he hungers most for gold,
He ouerleapes men's heads, takes not good hold,
Then Fortune frowns, and gives his pride a check,
Aspiring wings clipped, falls and breaks his neck.
Ambition is the spark of Enuies fire,
Aspires it self, hates others that aspire.
Retains not any drop of Temperance,
To quench the heat, of hateful Arrogance.
Where haute Ambition climes th'inferior fall,
Hard are th-ambitious, and illiberall: ^3 Emperors of Rome in 100. years:
whereof only 3. dyed of a natural disease, the rest were slain by ambition.

Unless to Agents, in their Tragedies,
Men merely of infernal qualities.
Who stops their enterprise, by force must down,
Blood must make way, to haute Ambitions crown.
And when the diadem is wonn, and worn,
With highest dignity, and best adorn:
The Actors of their miscrean policies
No longer held their needful accomplices.
But seeking surance for their secrecy,
Make agents, patients of their treachery.
Then like the Sun resplending in the skies,
In self-conceit, they are glorious in men's eyes. In the time of Galienus 30.
usurped the name of Emperor. The like ambition among P^pes, 6. at one time in
the time of Henry the Emperor.

Then sway they the earth, as if whole orb were theirs.
And due to none, but to them and their heirs:
As in a dream puffed up, awak't they fall:
Ambition beats the ambitious to the wall.
Successively, Ambition, reigns by force,
The sword her right, and Rigor, her remorce.
Glory and gold, are two extremes of lust,
They shine in show awhile: then turn to rust.
The virtuous man, will not exchange his state, The virtuous man.

With him that seems, in fame, more fortunate.
For, though the greatest, and the most of might,
Have this life's outward, reverenced hight,
It is uncertain, nothing permanent,
But minds, true patience, and the hearts content:
The virtuous is, and will be as he is,
No tossing tide, or tempest comes a ^isse.
The riches of the mind, are light and long, Riches of the mind.

They bring content, and make the owner strong.
Portage, not ponderous, the roomer small,
Where th'owner goes, his riches go withal.
When th'worlds rich man, has most he thinks in bank
Unfolds his bills, and finds Assurance, blanke.
What he possesses, others possessed before:
Dead, what he had, others divide his store.
These riches, rise, and fall, they pitch and fly,
They run, and rest, as dust, before the eye.
The greedy Miser, is earths moth, and eats, The Miser.

The fruits of others, he, yet never sweates:
Nothing more pest, to public weal then he:
Nothing more shunned, of virtuous men can be.
Though gold, nor glory, in themselves be ill,
If Will, rule them, And they rule not the Will.
Avarice, a Beast, which hardly men can tame,
It brings in pelf, puts on it a noble name.
But he that least affects riches lot,
Has that best lot, which some rich men have not.
For, he that is content, possesses most:
And least distracts his mind, what he has lost.
Virtue much greeues not, at sad misery:
Nor much insults, at earths felicity.
But as the power Divine, appoints his lot
He rests content: The Ambitious man can not,
He thirsts to rise, regards not though by wrong,
His triumph short, in vain, desired long.
Drinks are held best, that soonest quench the thirst,
Ambition, drunk, drinks, more then at the first,
It ever drinks, yet never is but dry,
One cold the mouth. Earthes orb, fills not the eye.
Fancy, a Fever hecttique of the mind,
It sees sometimes, sometimes again is blind,
Affection, guided, by right rule of grace,
Disgraceth foolish fancy to her face.
Right Reason, glut with Fancies banquettings
Disgorgeth Fancy, and her flatterings.
And bendes her appetite to feed on that,
Is only good: shunnes ill though delicate,,
What happiness in seeming happy days, Life and Death

Since life begun, immediately decays?
Delight, a dream; his death can no man shun,
Entreat preuailes not when times glass is run:
Though life begins alike in general,
By diverse means fierce death determines all.
Deaths memory a motive to live well,
She comes on sudden, when, disdaines to tell,
Al creatures irrational show more content,
In Brutish life: and seem more continent:
Then many whom true reason should possess,
As joy and grief: by two extremes express:
Humane delights are short, repentance long
Weak the resistance; will to vices, strong.
What way soever, seems sweet men take,
The truly sweet, they wilfully forsake,
Heavens sacred children do the best embrace, The virtuous and vicious.

The worst the wicked by mistaken grace:
Both have their joys, but by two contraries,
Heavens truth the one, the other earths vanities,
The first has inward the other owtward light
The first divine, that other carnal sight.
The things men see and what they here possess,
Is theirs they think, and therein happiness,
Things present in conceit do profit most,
Past or expected, deemed things but lost.
The greatest men, that spacious buildings have,
At once, possess of all, one only cave,
At once they can but in one place reside,
Though Gods on earth, in earth not deifi'de
Where so the highest or the lowest be,
In person are only, as eye does see.
Thoughts, yet, are hid, hearts, are extrauagant
Hearts hot desires too too, exorbitant.
The greatest, wise, contain their greatest mind, Honor, mild.

And hold themselves, but as them others find:
Though great in state, true Honor is most mild
Stout yet in heart, most constant, vndefil'd,
To whom inferiors ought all duty lend,
As members worthy, and most reverend.
The memories, are still solemnized
By th'vertuous living, of the virtuous deed.
Some think their glory, of high mountain fame,
When less then molehill others hold the same. Fame arrogate.

Fame arrogate, is but a doubtful dream,
A building founded, on a broken beam.
A castle set, nere surges, on the sand.
Which falls forthwith under the builders hand.
Desert, preceding hearts desire to rise,
Is only that, that truly dignifies.
A fickle trust, or fear, Earths fawn, or frown,
When Fortune smiles, she plots to hurl Men down.
And when she frowns, she frowns to try the mind:
If it be constant,, then is she most kind.
True Constancy, is always, one, the same
In all events: it holds the force and name.
It Is not the thing, that joys, or greeues the heart
It is conceit, of best, or worser part.
For, he that is in crosses discontent,
In best estate, was but maleuolent.
The virtuous, in hye, or low estate,
Show not the higher, or the lower rate.
Most men, do most affect, but mortal things,
Blind, not conceiving, rightly, what it brings:
What future times may be, seek not to know,
But that, whereby vainglory most may grow.
Affecting that, which seems in show content,
Like liberty, indeed, imprisonment.
Fetters seem ornaments, freedom, but guile,
Misery sweet mirth: home hard and harsh exile.
Sickness of body, crosses, poor estate,
Nothing so hard, as heart infatuate.
Aspiring minds that fight for Honors fame
Faint not, but in conceit, atchieue the same.
The gain that grows, by hearts ambition,
Is but the breath of basest of condition,
Who by the vapors of their lips al-haile,
Raise fickle blasts, that fill vaine-glories sail:
But he that best deserves, true glories fame,
Is, that deserves, and seeks to shun the same.
Some great about great princes, seek for praise:
As do Heroicks, by martial essays.
Yet either may usurp, and challenge that,
Which by desert, neither attained at,
High hope of glory, moves to undertake,
Things good, and ill, that may them famous make. Baltaser Scrach killed the P.
of Orange, one Clement a Friar, and Raui^ia^k, killed the two Kings of France.

Some minds so mad, and fancies, furious,
They seek for fame, by actions impious.
Project in heart to perpetrate some act,
That soul, and body perish for the fact.
Vulgar salutes, and courtly congies fly,
To gain the beck, that feeds the fawning eye.
Some struggle to be Princes favorites,
And yet in heart, but fawning parasites,
Some deck them with that vermal excrement,
Of peacock-plume-like, colors orient:
To win worlds wonder, and to gain the gaze
As the only merit-mirrors of this maze.
Aesops plume-stealing Crow, the birds, admired
As men admire, the peacock-like attired.
But when each bird, had his fair plumes re-reft
The poor proud Crow, was naked, plumelesse left.
Then birds admired, more her penurious case,
Then her false glory, and usurped grace.
A prudent Caveat, framed by Esops wit,
Needing no Coment to discourse of it,
Vainglorious Habit, some, assume to seem,
One of the Worthies, highest in esteem.
But were his heart seen, as his habit is,
Few men would guess, wit, or the habit his.
The tongue, the gesture, and the habit show,
What fancy feeds the heart, whence these plumes grow:
None, yet can find, depth of conceiled mind,
Linx-persing sight, to hidden hearts is blind,
Some shroud a secret guile, by seeming grace,
A doubtful mirror, is a fawning face,
More to be trusted is a threatening foe:
Then he that faynes to love, and does not so.
Who thinks all congies, and fair looks are love,
May much mistake, and of all knees that move,
The Ass that bare the goddess Isis frame,
Assumed the Honor, done unto her name.
Fortunes men have, gain, glory, or disdain: Fortune and Virtue.

Fortunes are coy, but virtues courses plain.
True virtue scorns, that silly Ass should bear her,
Fortune not, for many asses wear her.
And As-like sottish, who, so much mistake:
The congies, which, men to their garments make:
The wise, indeed, and truly qualifi'de:
Seek not, but suffer, to be dignifi'de.
But where desire, presumes, before desert,
He may vsurp it, Th'honor, will reuert.
Admit a man, gain glory, and he grow
(By means usurped) hye and look not low.
He will by his own weight, and fulness fall,
And fained friends, and fawtors fail withal.
And though he stand, and grace usurped possess,
The outward can not inward part express.
None sees, how deep, how dark, how black, how blind
Is dungeon of despair, in doubting mind
Sorrowes-serpents, and griefes-torments lie
Hid in fair prison, of false dignity.
The man that lives in competent estate,
And enuiously, does others emulate;
If he grow greatest, of his rank will not
Yet rest content, but still distaste his lot.
The dropsy malady, is always dry,
A quenchlesse thirst, is auaritious eye.
It always climbes, has never wished hight,
It seems to love, yet laden with despite.
And if it loose, or miss, what it would get,
It breaks the heart, it had a counterlet.
Some seem to be, what they in heart deny,
And seek, and find, what th'would, but can not fly.
And what they fly, still follows them perforce:
Themselves, self foes, have not yet self remorce.
Great men, that hold themselves in servile state, Opinion.

Though great in show, think slaves more fortunate.
What so man holds him, in estate to be,
Though not in deed, In heart, the same is he.
Opinion joys, or grieves at things unseen,
It works the Will, will blinds Reasons eyne.
One sleeps secure, though peril be his bed;
Another cannot, not endangered,
Some are but prisoners, yet supposed free;
In freedom some, are prisoners in degree:
A real prisoner has seen gyued parts,
Distracted minds, are fetters to men's hearts.
What most distracts, is haut Ambition:
Never content, with Earthes fruition,
For had he got, this ample Orb would yet:
Not rest content, nor bound his will, to get. Alexander.

The things in earth, that man affects most,
Decreasing grieve, increasing, make him boast.
And when he boasts most of flowing tide,
It ebbs again, and back his fortunes slide.
For as the Sea, stands not in one estate,
But at the full it does forthwith abate.
And as, when Cancer, does enjoy the Sun,
It falls to Capricorn, where it begun.
The Moon increases, and decreaseth often,
She new, comes old, now low, forthwith aloft.
So do the states of men, aloft and low:
Now rise, then fall, now ebb, and then reflow.
A Father gets, a Son spends all, and dies,
A Father spends, A Son does get, and rise.
No thing is permanent within this maze,
Long'st lasting, passes as a paper blaze.
And none by nature, rightly sees and shunnes,
Apparent dangers, as, in have, he runs.
The strongest strive, to run before the rest:
The weak sometimes, themselves do re-inuest.
When partial censure, does detract good deeds,
It starues desert, in steed, it Envy feeds.
No partial hand, nor tongue, nor eye can be,
In virtues life. In Enuies all the three.
Right Reason, and true Virtue, are two twyns, Reason and Virtue.

The second does perform, what'th first begins.
True Virtue, always has, right Reason guide,
With her consultes, by her is rectified.
A virtue shaped in a forged show,
By seeming true, has often the overthrow.
An Ass attired in a Lions skin,
May seem a Lion, yet an Ass within.
A masked face, implies; true beauties hew:
The mask took off: often, filthy face in view.
So counterfets that virtue falsify,
Have but the shadow of integrity.
The substance is, indeed, but seeming right,
Compared indeed, to Virtue in the light.
For, if she were in substance, as in show,
Envy could not but seek her overthrow.
Envy, a while is to the false, a friend,
But to true virtue, never to the end.
In what affairs, can man converse and live, Censure,

But must endure, what censure all men give?
If he do ill, high Jove becomes his foe,
By due desert, his conscience tells him so.
If well, the world, and worldlings, enemies.
They will, obrayde him, and him scandalize.
And if he seek to please the multitude,
(A monster) tamed by no fortitude.
Selfe-pleasing, seems sweet, and most secure,
Of all diseases, held the helping cure.
Right Reason yet, condemns, self-love, as hate
Who does not public good, is detestate.
He Is happy'st that best pleases powers divine,
Though he thereby, break league, with humane line.
Some hold the Court, the paradise of ease, The Court.

Of plenty, pleasure, free, of all disease.
Feigned Honey drops, of courtly smiles do feed,
Blind fancy, till it starve, yet feels no need.
But when the Well, of sugar promise dryes
Without performance: then fond fancy dies.
Reason reuiues, stirred up by sorrows signs,
Retires, with sighs, to see, vain hopes declines.
Some wish to lead, a rural private stare, A Rural (...)

Rusticks some hold, of all, most fortunate:
Domestic cross, distracts, another brain:
Some glory in a clownish, rustic train.
The swain that sweates, at paunch-full table toil,
Feeds fat, more free, then Master of the soil.
Some sick of court, and country, seek to please,
Perturbed fancy, in the doubtful Seas.
Some hoyse the sail, for glory, some for gain, Travelers.

Successful some, some loose both by, and maine.
To see the parts, the persons, and the states,
Of foreign soiles, and mighty Potentates,
Some pilgrim-like, forge habit to have pass,.
Returning know not, what their errand was.
A multi-linguist, is of such request,
To gain it. Some, give carcas little rest.
When all is done, that humane heart can find
None holds himself truly content in mind,
Desire, is so exorbitant and large, Desire.

It keeps no mean; of what it has in charge.
Rich therefore no man, can be truly said,
Whose will with appetite, is ouerswaide.
The seeming best content, will change his state,
With him, seems more, and is less, fortunate.
This doubtful Labyrinth, full of varieties,
Amazeth many, with her contraries.
The most men trauers this Labyrinth awry,
Some ofsel^e will, some of necessity.
Pretended fear, or shame, lead men awry,
They rightly see, and yet miscast their eye.
They would retire, from hurtful things they take,
But fear disgrace, their rash exchange would make.
Is he not mad that fosters in his breast,
A Viper venomous to make his nest.
Who knows the thing he perpetrates is ill,
Ers not by chance, but with consent, and will.
The guilty heart, then touched with the same,
Feeds inward viper, to shun outward shame.
Among a thousand, ten have not the skill,
To curb conceit, or manage well their will.
There is a guide, and happy who her finds,
Most ready pressed, to best inclined minds.
Few crave, or have her (in this maze) direction:
But rashly run into self plagues infection.
Yea they of seeming high and hidden skill,
Do physic others, yet themselves do kill.
Some counsel others to a wholesome layre,
Yet they themselves, stay in infected air.
Whither may one, fly from his inward sttife? (...)rs of (...) diuer^.

Where may he live, to lead contented life?
The Court has cares to get and keep what is got,
And fear to loose, what one indeed has not.
In Country grows, a thousand discontents,
Rural crosses, Disaster, accidents.
Some seek content by solitarines,
That yields no solace, but sad heaviness.
Company, some crave, to move the mind to mirth:
Short, is that mirth, often dies in the birth.
Some seek the Desert, some the froathing Seas,
The Wars seek some: none, yields contented ease.
A thousand fantasies possess the breast,
All promise, yet not one, gives grieved rest. (...)*

They flatter all* as fawning Harlots do,
They hugg, and kiss, the weak conceits, they woo.
They draw the mind* from prays-full constancy
To rash consent, and peevish leuitie.
For, what the eye does apprehend and see,
The heart conceiues, and breeds fantasy.
Fancy affects, or does reject the things
That th'artes conceit to th'vnderstanding brings.
The heart sometimes in covert policy,
Conceales effect, of hidden fantasy,
As he that seems, to fly the praise of men,
Seeks it, by shelter, in monastic den.
In show, some, do deny, what they desire,
Some would go on in show, yet they retire.
Some set themselves before, by drawing back,
In show some forward, that in heart are slack.
Some thirst for honor, that deny to take it,
Some well deserve it, would, can not forsake it,
Some seem to hide them from society
Desire it yet, under feigned modesty,
Some are most meek, in seeming outward pride,
In heart some proudest, seeming mortifide.
No man can judge another mind by guess,
Though outward gesture seem it to express,
A hart-proud man, may be but base in show,
In heart too hye, in weeds a strain too low.
If men of worth, of office, place and state,
Be base in show, their grace extenuate.
And bring disgrace upon the place they use;
And give men place, them and their place to abuse.
The person just, the mind within upright True glory.

Give grace, and glory, to the basest dight,
Graceful attire, a lawful ornament;
To him that swayes a place of government.
Although the garment, nothing dignifies
The persons, but the place they exercise:
The mean therefore, (though few it seek or find)
Should rule, and curb, the gross extremes of mind.
Some stand conceited of their own desert,
Of all men's humors, seem not in-expert.
But hold them all that flatter truest friends,
He is no foe, whose knee and bonet bends.
Strange thing to see, that he should least suspect,
Another fawnes, himself most counterfeit,
But as he forged coppor coin, for gold,
With it is paid for feigned fawnes he sold.
A thousand humors strange man undergoes,
And dangers infinite, to gain him foes.
For, what true virtue holds not for just
Proceeds, from inbred, and forbidden lust.
Lust, inward enemy and rages most.
In that vain heart, that outwardly does boast.
Pompey could not endure, an equal mate,
Nor Caesar, one in Superior estate.
Yet neither had a stronger outward foe, Arrogance.

Then inward pride, that bred their overthrow.
Antiochus did bear himself in hand
That he could foot the seas, and sail the land,
When will, and power, and Arrogance do meet,
Virtue is trod, and Reason under feet.
As sotted Sabor, that proud Persian King,
Was ^^ouerswayd with foolish fancying.
As he the title, King of Kings assumed,
Companion of the stars, himself presumed.
Brother unto the Moon, and glorious Sun,
And they shone not, till his light first begun,
Thus arrogance inflames the fuming breast,
Consumes true peace, depriues the heart of rest:
The errors infinite, of wauing mind:
What pleases now, is suddenly repined. Conceit.

Conceit intends, all what it seeks is best,
And had, it holds it, most accepted guest.
But when a cross conceit, comes thwart of it,
The first cast off, the second held more fit.
The greatest grace, is mighty Princes grace, A Princes favor.

His bounties hand, and his affecting face:
When it is at highest, it harbors yet a fear,
Least fairest Sun, presage a tempest near.
A Lions fawnes, fed by his keeper shows,
Whence Lions love, unto his Keeper grows,
Though gentle clawings, and often feeding makes
Fierce Lion tame, heed yet the Keeper takes,
And fearfully he gives, familiar Lion food,
Doubting his fawnes, may turn to fiercer mood.
So Princes favorites amazed stand,
Lest Prince should frown, turn, or withdraw his hand.
A Prince may raise, for cause, hurl down again,
He Is only absolute, and sovereign.
But Princes of respective clemency,
Are still the same in princely constancy.
Yet if their favorites Dependancies,
Prove not of love, but lust for Dignities.
The Argos-eyed Prince, will soon detect,
The hollow-hearted, and the counterfeit.
The Prince then checks them, (full of ^reasures fraught)
Wrings out their wealth, and brings their fame to naught.
The way to win, another aid, at need,
Receivers heart, must correspond the deed.
The Talion-lawe, gives like to like to all,
Prevailing deeds, for love effectual.
Fearce-loue procures, a deed of like effect,
Fair in the show, in deed, but counterfeit.
When things succeed not to th'expectants mind,
He looks not where he might the occasion find.
His hidden heart, and self hypocrisy,
He might, but will not lay before his eye.
But does accuse, his fained friend, or chance,
Of self desert, will take no cognizance.
Some feign that Fortune gives, yet does not see Fortune.

She makes at random, high and low degree;
In constant, fickle, of Camelion-showes,
A fancy or a dream, whom no man knows.
Some feign her, brutish, sottish, and some blind,
None can define her, as she is in kind.
Her name, nor nature, nor her qualities,
Are truly such as man Philosophies:
For when we say, fortune, or fortunate,
It Is providence Divine, we intimate.
This providence distributes, as he will,
In outward things, alike, to good, and ill.
To none by chance, Divinely he fore-sees,
Where great, or lesser portion best agrees.
The greatest portion, and the least may fall,
Alternately, and suddenly to all.
And all for good, unto the good befalls,
The best good thing the wicked most inthralls.
And whether seeming good, or ill men have,
For good, or ill, the powers Divine it gave.
Not ill, in what is given, or him that gives,
The heart does hurt, mistaking what relieues.
For what is good, blind Nature does despise,
And likes of bad, pleasing fond fancies eyes.
As is opinion, so is good, and bad,
The good and ill, is as it is held, and had.
Much joys, some man, when he by fraud does rise
And thinks him happy in his enterprise,
Such gain and glory, yet are steps to shame,
Unless true virtue soon, reform the same.
True greatness, grows, by right and not by wrong, True greatness

The Just are great, the contrary not strong.
Though seeming so, in humane fantasy,
It Is but the shadow of felicity.
For, when the Fates, (by Poets fayn'd) so called,
Deprive again, what they themselves instal'd.
Then how that greatness, futurely succeeds,
Soon shows it self, by vanity it breeds.
Fulness, breeds pride, and pride, breeds liberty,
Liberty gets sin, sin brings misery.
Misery breeds grief, Grief sadness to the heart,
Sadness, the gall of out, and inward part.
If outward, and the inward parts sustain,
For present pleasure, such succeeding pain.
Why should men mourn, when they begin to slide,
From Earths fair favor, so often falsifide?
Assured to none, no, none, so great can say,
He stands secure; If powers Divine say nay.
Where greatness grows, there emulation breeds,
Where Emulation lurkes, there Envy feeds.
Where Envy lives, there hidden Treachery,
Seeks to betray by seeming amity.
It Is seldom seen, a man of might to fall, Covert Treachery. Androm^cus
betrayed Crassus under color of love etc. Zopirus betrayed the Babilonians to
Darius coue^ou^ly.

But some, that seems to love, prepares the gall.
Needless to quote examples, here by name,
For, full are our times legends of the same.
Are not great Cities, by like guile, surpised,
As well as men, the actors long disguised?
How then can men advanced high be sure,
That they are safe, though they themselves be pure?
Since inward favorites may undermine,
Their hearts deseignes, and covertly combine, P^ltrot killed the Guise his
master etc.

With Enuies Actors, to hurl down the tree,
Under whose beams, themselves safe sheltered be?
Hate may be hid, under true Loves pretense, Love and Hate.

And true Love live. And yet, but held offense:
The first is subtle, secret, politic:
The second, simple, ouert, still it like*
The first pre tends love, and loves not,
The second loves, beloved, thinks it not.
Deceived sometimes, by fained humblenes,
And verb all duty, forged thankefulnes.
The fearful, mild, stands off, in heart comes near,
Not faining duty, If true trial were.
The most officious are not firm'st of trust,
Though forward, and by deep protests most just.
The habit, face, and tongue, might show the heart,
If it were skil-lesse of dissembling art,
The touch of truth, does in true trial rest,
Truly tried, duty shows, transparent breast,
Only foul E^^y dissembles that,
May draw the innocent to stumble at.
In words, and deeds, and what men do project,
It much behooues them to be circumspect.
Deeds done are seen, words heard, and thoughts conceil'd
Fools speak, and do, yet say, I Will haue't concealed.
What Is done or said, nay thought, will be disclosed,
Too late to say, I wish it were not proposed.
All states of men by nature dangerous,
For all are carnal, too too humerous.
And in their humors, often perpetrate,
Offensive things, too inconsiderate. God disconers secretst thing*

For, though they think, the things they spoke, or did,
Could not be known (from foes concealed and hid.) God discoucred the powder
Treason.

That power Divine discouers secret'st things:
Concealing none, no, not the thoughts of Kings.
He will re-rouze from dark Obliuions pit,
Fare bypast sin of men forgetting it.
His Majesty of wisdom infinite
Is patient, but not forgetful quite.
His long for bearance, no quietus est,
Mercy, and Judgment, still possess his breast*
The powers Divine, behold the inward part,
Of Rich and poor: naught hurts, but the heart:
A poor man proud, A rich man covetous,
The powers Divine, hold equal odious.
The poor content, The rich man liberal,
In earth betoken, grace spiritual.
The Rich, and Poor, resemble two estates, Rich and Poor.

The one, and other, as each estimates,
Their joy and grief, resemble heaven and hell,
How either stands, none, but himself can tell.
Although the Poor seem here afflicted most,
The Rich may have, then he, less cause to boast.
A harder lot, lights, not on men that need, Need.

A strong commander in the active deed:
But in the passive part, no thing more strong,
Perforce, accepts, and undergoes all wrong.
But if it would, it can not do the thing,
May ease the mind, commanded by a King.
When grief of heart, proceeds of outward need,
Supply reuiues, the inward parts that bleed, Grief twofold.

But if it grow, by sins felt guiltines.
No outward cure, can ease hearts heaviness,
Only the heart, incountring what is ill,
Not doing ill, but as against the will,
Obtaines the victory: that brings peace,
That peace, heales grief, makes sorrow-feuer cease.
Hearts nature seeks, to please it self below,
Where, what it feels, pretends, it well does know: The future not foreseen.

Yet knows not, by present, future things,
Though what too day, not what too morrow brings.
Much less by this, the carnal minded see,
What joy, or grief, in future time shall be,
What Is found in fine, shall be perpetual,
Here wunne or lost, the best and principal.
But hearts divinely light do here foresee,
Of carnal hearts delights, what end will be:
Bondmen of free, these earthly pleasures make,
The wise preponder, what they undertake.
For, pleasures coming, promise hearts relief,
Retained, performed, and gone, leave th'hart in grief.
A man best qualifide, indeed does ill,
To gaze on that, that may pervert the will.
The eye does show the object of the heart.
The heart then likes or loathes what the eyes impart.
And when desire, inkindles and consents,
Be It good, or ill, it is the thing contents.
What best contents, is that good thing men crave,
Which they themselves, or which some others have.
Desire, and Appetite, are blind and strong,
They both command, both lead commanded wrong.
Unless right Reason, daigne to be their guide,
By whom the heart is rightly rectifide.
Not to aspire, against right Reasons will,
To run and rise, without regard, is ill.
Many hid gulfes, and pits of danger lie,
Which they avoid, that run advisedly.
Some may mistake, and judge of men amiss, All men advanced not ambitious

Not every one, advanced, ambitious is.
Whom Virtue rayseth; honorable parts
Will show desert, good deeds, bewray good hearts:
When earthly honor, has celestial grace,
The Inferior by them, are in graceful case,
For, as the Sun, shines not, but gives all heat,
So by true honor, meanest, comfort get.
A painted Sun, may seem in show to shine,
So may the ambitious to the outward eyne,
And he that seeks to warn him by that Sun,
Needs not complain of too much warmth he wun.
A man that scales, fair Honors mount by might,
Though most unlust, presumes to seem upright,
Where virtue daignes not her prevailing hand
To raise: the raised, is as a plant in sand,
Though watered wythers, with the frost of have,
The blossoms fall, forged fair, and delicate.
As good men grow, and rise to wished grace,
So grow the ill, not judged by their place.
But by the sword, that in the place they sway,
The Use or abuse, whereof their heatrs bewray.
None are advanced by chance to government,
Nor rise, nor fall, by Fortune, discontent.
But all are set in places high or low,
And wither too, or else more greater grow,
By powers Divine: The good he sets,
To succor those that have wrong counterlets.
The ill he sets, that good and ill may see,
How right and wrong, how light and dark agree.
For as all creatures, live by contraries,
So Commonweals, in their societies.
If all were of one disposition,
Law needed not, nor imposition.
But, as the night, and day, are two in show,
And each gives other, changing over throw,
So right, and wrong, are ever in debate,
The second seeks the first to violate.
Yet takes the habit, of the thing she hates,
To feign it good, the thing, she perpetrates.
A wicked man that counterfects his deeds,
Couets to show them, as true virtue's seeds:
At length they show the soil, wherein they grew,
By bud, or bloome, by branch, or stalk, or hew.
It boots men much, advanced, to have foresight,
Whom they accept, and shelter by their might,
Yet wish I none to be suspicious,
Without good cause, or too too credulous:
None can forsee, the event of future days,
His harms, his helps, dispatch, or his delays,
Naught can succeed unto the good, or ill
Wealth, want or mean, with, or against their will:
As they do will, or as they can foresee
All things are done by him whose will is free,
And if men knew what providence divine,
Works by his will, they would their wills incline
To take it well; how so their wills were crossed,
For often it is ill, when seeming wisest boast.
If one advanced, be brought to mean estate,
Let him not murmur, rather r^^inate, One advanced brought low.

Re-chaw the cudde of wilful ways forgot,
Which who forgets the powers divine do not:
From whose al-seeing eye nothing is hid,
Disclosed shall be what so the closest did.
If Envy hurt thee ( virtues dismal ghost)
Fear not nor faint, think not thine honor lost:
Where Virtue lives, there Envy never dies,
Where Envy lurkes is nest of villainies.
True Honor maybe stung, but cannot dye,
Though Envy hiss she stands and scorns to fly.
True virtue fortefies true Honors seat,
The heart heroycall, that still is great
By inward grace. If by his vice one fell,
Obraid him not, nor wish him greater hell,
For, sin suffices for sins punishment,
Without inflict of death or banishment.
Men in this Maze have sundry greefes and pains,
Yet none that lives, all greefes at once sustaines:
But one with this, with that another pines,
As heart corrupt, or member gross inclines.
Some cry as did the Sh^na^ite his head,
Some as Antiochus, his belly ill besteed,
With Asa some against the gout complain,
With Aristarch against the dropsey pain
Th'aflicting fever shakes some's trembling bones,
The grating Stone inforceth helples groans,
If theirs and other greefes combined in one
And in one body, did insist alone,
They all could not one evil equalize,
A troubled Conscience gulf of maladies,
Which though men feel not in their pleasures fits^
In fine 'twil try the quintessence of wits,
As rivers run into the Ocean all,
So in the conscience greefes in general.
To rack the heart that feels no terror now,
And naught shall ease it, deep'st protest or vow,
Though men of might may deem them free from ill,
For that none dare to countercheck their will,
A guilty Conscience will bring miseries,
No boot to plead high lawless dignities:
Though Tyrants seem to have no fear to fall,
In outward show, within they feed on gall,
The outward lawless, have small inward rest,
Their seeming free, is froth of fretting breast.
Foolish, feeble, faithless is vanity,
Yet feeds fond fancy with variety.
Oh fly her truthlesse faining flatteries,
That seeks to sooth men in impieties:
And yet betraies the worthiest wights that love her,
Thrice happy he that can in time remove her.
And most unhappy who embrace her most,
A Saint in show, in deed an owgly ghost.
Some great, disguize their guile, by smiling face,
And seem in show to back the weak with grace:
A strong conceit, of dreamed feast does feed Promises not performed

As does a promise of a helples deed.
Resembling th apple, Tantalus would taste,
That gapes, and bytes, but byteth still in waste.
A promised favor not performed is, Mare Sodomi^um.

Much like the Apples of Asphaltidis,
Which to the eye are goodly great and fair,
Within all ashes and corrupted air.
The fairest promises are farthest tossed,
Often, stricken fair, as often nicely crossed,
A ball that has no stuff to bear it out,
Lights always short though he that strikes be stout.
Great care ought men of greatest place to have,
In promise or denial what men crave,
A quick denial or a quick consent,
In all demands, yields Reason best content.
Lingering performance of a promise made,
Makes Hope to wither in the ripening blade.
Experience teaches how to take or shun, Experience.

As former good, or ill success has run:
Some men do find by others fortunes fall,
A stronger staff to stay themselves withal:
He then is happy who can harms forsake,
By shunning that, some to their hurts did take.
Examples teach to take or to eschew,
And only steed, as helps, or harms ensue.
The best examples may direct awry,
Though in the president no error lie.
As is opinion, so is good or ill,
Mistaken often, by rash conceiving will:
Who so pre-ponders how things may succeed,
Before attempts, takes likeliest way to speed. Ignorance breeds content.

Sometimes does Ignorance, breed most content
Not to foresee some dangers imminent:
It breeds, but terror, anguish grief, and fear,
A known inevitable danger near:
It profits nothing danger to fore-show
To him that by no means can it foregoe.
Only it may prepare the hearts consent, Fantasy,

To undergo what means cannot prevent.
Sometimes to lack what one desires most,
Is best: And when a thing held dear'st is lost,
Fond fancies, best, is often worst to have,
What she affects often makes a freeman slave:
Fancy miscarried by a doubtful guide,
Is much deceived by ignorance or pride,
Rash presumption, and blind ignorance
Are common actors of self hinderance.
The one is rash, in self-conceit aspires,
The other sottish, may rise, yet retires,
The first conceiueth his deserts so great,
He scorns to seek: the great should first entreat.
The second knows not to distinguish who
Is fained friendly, or professed foe:
Without the guidance of celestial light,
It rests not in power of mortal wight.
By it the giver, and the taker knows,
For what desert the given guerdon grows:
This only rests in true honors breast,
Where never Avarice or Envy rest.
This Honor lives her virtue never dies,
Her fame immortal by true loves Trophies True honor never dies.

( Honors renown) Envy cannot stain it,
Although she frown, and in despite disdain it.
This earthly honor, heavens benedice,
Her virtues life an earthly Paradise.
The garden of content, where grows the seed,
That bears the fruit whereon the poorest feed.
In this fair Eden, are exalted most,
Who best deserve. Not such as only boast:
This Honor hears, and justly arbitrates,
Men's causes, when, the partial vulnerates.
Since counterfects cry out likewise for aid,
It does observe, how each man's cause is swaid.
And onl'endeuors truly to descry,
Who feel indeed, and who forge misery.
That power divine that is absolute, and sees,
Both base and big, disposing all degrees.
Sets up high Caesar, gives him sword and crown,
He bows, or breaks, and hurles the proudest down.
To infinite Earths portions infinite
He gives, from Scepter, to the meanest mite,
And whosoever grudgeth, at the lowest rate,
Usurps, his portion, and bewrayes his hate.
From lowest step, and basest in degree,
Lots rise by rule, unto the largest fee.
And none mong all, can so compare his lot,
As he may prove he has what others not.
No, none, by just comparison, may say,
His lot is like another every way.
For, as men's faces, infinite to see,
Are all unlike, though some resemblance be;
Yet all compared to one, or one to all,
They differ all: So states in general.
And as they differ, in their hye and low,
So their offense greater, or less in show.
For persons, time, and place do aggrauate
Faults more or less, or them extenuate.
For when a great man errs in public view,
The examples draws offenders to ensue.
Therefore behoues them to beware or shun* Powers Di^^ ^^rd^n (...) (...).

Offense: for powers Divine see how they run.
Who does reward in substance, not in show;
If it stay long, the heavier is the blow:
He does discover by al-seeing light,
Most cunning counterfects, that seem upright.
Will future answer counterfect prevail?
The Judge is just, and will accept no bail;
But as the cause deserves, the party finds,
Pardon, or punishment: his sentence binds:
Affirmative, Come, Negative, Depart
Without respect of person, but of heart.
The greatest in his sight, unjust, are base:
Upright, are great: though in penurious case.
This Judge of Judges, of true equity
Forgiues, condemns; But neither partially.
It Is not the basest, not the great'st, in grace,
That can pretend, or challenge greater place,
Nor by his place, fore-showes, his weal or woe,
But by his inward, heart, or outward show.
The one is secret, and from man conceil'd,
The other ouert, sundry ways reueil'd.
Yet neither truly does appear to men,
The heart is hid, a deep, and darksome den.
But powers Divine, well see the closest heart,
The work, and will, the thought and hidden part.
This Providence, Al-knowing, works all,
He hurles down some, And some he saues from fall,
He feeds some fat; And some he keeps but low:
He cuts down some, and some he leaves to grow.
He does dispose, the things, he gives or takes:
Some ignominious, some he glorious makes:
Some Rich as Craesus, poor as Hecalen,
Some needy, as was Irus Ithacen.
And none can counterm and his providence,
Policy, nor power, nor haute insolence-
Grief cures not grief, sad sorrow yields no meed,
Content releeues; Conceit does starve, or feed:
Vain hope, that hungers for uncertainties,
Feeds fainting heart with helples vanities
Who ties his hope on humane anker-line,
Carnal conceit holds, that vain hope divine.
On humane help yet hope may builded be,
Foundation laid first by divine decree.
This hope I have this anker-hold my rest,
The line of love has linked it to my breast:
This line is lent to lead me in the dark,
Of doubtful maze: true duty is my mark.
THis Tragical discourse of man's estate,
I heard attentively; yet silent sat:
And as I sat in my sad sorrows Cell,
My heart gave Echo, as his speeches fell.
And as I mused what this project meant,
A Lady grave, I saw herself present, The description of virtue.

She Is Sovereign gouernesse within this maze
Her glory great made passionate to gaze,
Her looks were loving, beauty sun-like bright,
Her stature tall, above the clouds in height,
Her arms extended infinitely far,
And on her breast a brazen shield for war:
One hand a Scepter, her other hand did hold,
A sword; her head a Diadem of gold,
Instead of pearl rich, to adorn the same,
There streamed from it a far extending flame,
Over her head, a rich pauilion set,
Azure-coulor'd, which in a circle met:
Under her feet a Pauement strangely spread,
Laid, and compact of ghastly bodies dead.
This strange aspect, and vision mystical
I could not think, but mere celestial:
Therefore, without Divine assistance, I
Durst not coniect the hidden mystery:
But searching inward truth by outward show,
I did collect whence each of these did grow.
Her looks of love, imports the sweet delites,
Wherewith she feeds, her constant favorites,
Her Sun-like beauty, shows she is Divine,
Her stature tall shows, she is boue sight of eyne.
Her arms extention, her great might imports,
And readiness to strengthen, her consorts.
Her shield upon her breast, shows her defense,
When Envy rages in great'st violence.
Her Scepter shows her power, and love to peace.
The Sword, her valor, and her mights increase:
Her golden Diadem, her victories,
Her splending beams, do show her dignities:
She set within a circkled azure Tent,
Shows her true limits, and her powers extent.
The pauement, of the corpse of dead men shows,
She has her foes, and them she overthrows.
She treads them down that do withstand her might:
None see her clearl' her beauty shines so bright:
But they alone, whose hearts conformed be,
Have inward sight, and with delight her see.
They frame the faculties of Sense and Will,
To apprehend the good, and shun the ill.
Attendant on this Lady grave, I saw,
A hidious hagge, clad, with rent leaves of Law:
For, impious ones, that only work disdain,
To seem upright, seek shrowde for outward stain.
This hagge was ougly, colored pale, and wan;
Her face puffed up, she covered with a fan.
Her eyes were fiery, teeth of gastfull (...)
A sword-like tongue, seen when the hagge did gape.
Lyon-like her claws, in hands and feet were set,
And when she gryp'd, her ougly tallandes met.
Her nosthrels wide, her breath a stinking sent,
Her stature low, her body corp^lent.
Her hands were both the left, she had no right,
Her arms seemed great, with bow and arrows dight.
Her life she leads in dark, and dismal den,
She comes among, but seldom seen of men.
She counterfeits, Camelion-like her hew,
That none may know her by the outward view.
She Is always dry, and only drinks of blood,
Whereof there flows, where she abides a flood.
This hidious sight affrights my mind oppressed,
And what it meant, I pondered in my breast.
A voice (me thought) divinely thundered out,
The meaning of this mystery of doubt.
The hagge was Envy, which did thus appear,
Her color pale, imports despite and fear.
Her swollen cheeks, shows her puffed up with spite,
Covered, imports, she flies reueyling light.
Her fiery eyes, bewray revenging mind,
Her gastfull teeth, her cruel Tigers kind.
Her sword-like tongue, imports her words are wounds,
Her gaping mouth, whom she can seize, confoundes.
Her Lions claws, her cruelty imports,
Her stinking breath, her poisoning her consorts.
Her stature low, imports she is but weak,
Her belly big, she must disgorge or break.
Both hands sinister, shows she does no right,
Her bow and shafts, her furniture of spite.
The den wherein she lives, in dark does show,
That naught in her, but things of darkness grow.
Her counterfeyting sundry shapes, declares,
How forging love, her deep despite prepares.
None knowing her by outward habit, makes
Some fall into her snares, and them she takes.
Her thirst for blood, imports her hate so great,
As naught, but death, can quench her hateful heat.
The spring of blood that issues from her Cell,
Shows her delights do spring and flow from hell.
All which, she cloakes with feigned piety,
Cou'ting to cover inward enmity.
This ougly filth, the Mother of despite,
Pursues that Lady of true loves delight.
These visions strange appal'd my mind oppressed;
For sorrows subjects, would, but cannot rest:
Yet by the process of each course I gessed,
Whose person each, of all the three expressed.
This passionate, (deserving) cros'd relates,
By his success, the change of all estates.
The Lady fair, true Virtue represents:
The hagge foul Envy, nurse of Malc^^tents.
Her clothing of rent leaves of books of Law,
Imports her seeming, but of Law no awe.
The Lady modest, had a veil e'cast
Over her face, this hagge often makes it fast,
Lest men should see the glory of her face,
And guide them by her rudiments of grace.
The Lady mild, beheld this passionate,
Blush at her presence, and her graceful gate.
The hagge perchance, did most amaze the man,
Who on the Lady sprinkles with her fan
Distasteful savors, and reproach with tongue:
Yet this mild Lady undergoes her wrong,
Seems not to hear, or feel her injuries;
Custom makes constant in extremities.
This graceful Lady, does thi^ common so^,
Captive at will, yet wills to let her go.
Gives not consent unto her works of hate;
She holds her, feeble, ^urious, detestate.
This lovely Lady, with affecting cheer*
Her veil cast off, wills passionate come near:
He, fearful falls, before this Lady fair,
And seeks on sudden, outward faults repaire^
For, whosoever comes obruptly in the view
Of great estates, will all defectes renew,
And set external things in order neyte,
Though a mere Pharisaycall conceit.
Much was this passionate deceived in this;
This Lady looks, what is within amiss.
No outward onament allureth her,
Who think to win her by gay garments, err*
No outward want, or baseness in attire,
Disgraceth her, none great, make her admire.
Defectes within, she only loathes* and ^^yes:
The good: within, with grace, she fortifies.
The impious ones, she hates, and scorns to be^
Where that foul hagge is entertained, not she.
This hateful hagge, usurps dominion
Within this Labyrinth, (disunio^)
Before she came, and did intrude the place,
It was no Labyrinth, but place of grace:
But now she bands, in her al-hatefull bower,
In spite usurping virtues seeming power.
She is most hateful to the virtuous:
In outward show, yet, most obsequious.
They scorn to foil their fingers in her deeds;
Deluding some, yet, by her painted weeds,
Camelion-like she often transformes her face;
And faines her Angel-like, in frauding grace.
The Lady shines* and shows he^ self to those
That love her light, and be black Enuies ^oes.
Her counsel consequent, to'ch passionate,
Shows how to curb this hagge, though obstinate.
Though she b^traies, by wiles, and circumuentes,
The most desertfull, by her instruments.
This Lady lures, and would have all men ^^ye
That monster, mother of impiety;
Who luls her lovers, like a nurse of spite,
With kiss of curses, seeming sweet delight.
The Lady her speech to the Passionate.
LOng since I this confused Maze possessed,
(Chief Lady) when it was place of heavenly rest,
Before the fall of him, I first did bear:
Who^e dismal fall, this hateful hagge did rear.
Herself once set (pu^e) in celestial place,
Envy, and Pride, deprived her of that grace.
Cast down from bliss, then stripped of light, and love:
Malign'd the glory, shining from above;
And hates the happiness of man below,
Placed in the Garden, where Content did grow;
She then intrudes* pretending wisdoms love,
And my first borne, in malice did remove,
From light to dark, from grace, to giddiness,
From Love to ^ust, from Faith to sicklenesse.
In him (my first) have all posterities,
Lost true content, and found sad miseries.
Now she seems greatest, and of greatest might;
She Is so indeed, but only in despite.
She counter checkes the course, which I advise,
And fills this Labyrinth with cruelties.
The place where now this Labyrinth is set,
Was free to me, I had no counter let,
Until this hagge usurped power, and place,
And by her w^les, robbed humane kind of grace.
A graceless guide, her light, infernal fire,
Begot below, black Darkness was her fires
A hateful monster* of infernal breed,
On humane hearts and souls delites to feede^
As Toades and Serpents, creatures venomous,
Feed on gros^e poison, and (...):
So this foul hagge feeds only on despite,
Envy, (...), Have, are ^er delight*
None can escape her hidious hands of hate,
The purest, she seeks to contaminate.
Within this Labyrinth high power^ (...),
That qualities (...) I might beget*
And men by me might learn to live upright,
And reassume the grace of heavenly light:
Which is not got by humane policy,
By Art or force, or restless industry.
The proud, mali^ious, hautie* ins^lent,
Learn of that hagge, their graceless government.
The humble only, and true fearful take
The way of life, I level for their sake
A way, yet seeming way of bitterness,
Of hearts distaste, and irksome weariness:
Only to those, whose reason she peruerts,
And seeds of Ignorance, in steed inserts:
She muffles men, and hoodes them, lest they see,
The means to make them, of her bondmen, free.
Thou know that have had trial of her spite,
He is her slave, that is her favorite. The practices of Envy.

If thou persist a favorite of mine,
Thou can not be but odious in her eyne.
She will oppose thee, and against thee band,
She Will fawn in (...), have wounding sword in hand^
A seeming cup of sweet delight she bears,
If that serve not, sh'in^atuates with tears.
Flattery and force, are weapons of her fight:
A fearful combat, to the virtuous, light.
Revenge of wrongs (though light) she instigates,
Puts patience by, she only plots debates.
Revenge heroycall, Meekness cowardice:
Pardon, ((...) wrongs) indignities.
The hautie, proud, and insolent, she makes
The Minions of her Court, who undertakes
A course by wrong, If he grow thereby great,
She wills hold fast, to give for no entreat.
He is her prudent, her provident, her bancke,
Him she commends, inhibites to be frank.
And he that will the contrary embrace,
(The prodigal) that spends in virious case,
Bounty, who promises, performs not,
Is truly pollitique, and not a s^^*
She blindes* men's eyes* the mean, they may not see,
The mean is Vice, Vertue^ the extreme degree.
A thousand counterfeites of Virtues deeds,
She gives for current, and truthes-bearing seeds.
The Spider and the Toade (both venomous)
Are each to other deadly odious:
So Pride and Envy, borne infernal twins, Pride and Envy.

Hold mutual war, but Envy still begins.
This hagge haunts me, where I am, there is she,
Her works and mine, as light and dark agree.
She in despite, peruertes the ways I teach,
Where I affect, she seeks to make a breach.
Whom I advance, she plots to hurl him down,
From basest abject, to the imperial crown.
How did She instigate those bloody hearts? Envy plotted the Powder Treason.

How kept She concord of so many parts?
That plotted lately, that strange Strategeme,
That aimed, not only to the Diadem,
The Stock and Branches of admired State,
To Prince, and Princess pure, and Potentate:
But Arts, and Artistes, and Religion,
Had felt together, sad subversion?
But that the power, that curbes her deepest despi^^,
From darkest cell, brought Devils device to light.
Worlds wonder, how this hidious hagge could find,
So many, knit firm in infernal mind:
But that, whom she once windeth in her clewe,
Seldom untwist, or liberty renew.
Spider-like she spins snares, stings, lets them lie,
Whom she finds instruments for villainy:
Else needs must some of that infernal crewe,
Disclosed the plot, though sworn to be true.
Traitors are worse then worms, that eat the tree, Treason.

Under whose bark themselves ingendr'd be.
Worse then the Viper, and the Moath that gnawe
Their mothers bowels, maugre Natures law.
Antigonus could love a Traitor so,
As he could plot to circumuent his foe:
The treason done, transformes his love to hate;
Reiects the Traitor, person detestate.
What then, if these reneged impes had sped?
They Had cut themselves, by treason, from their head.
And seeking for their treasons, salarie,
They should have guerdon fit; like treachery.
What Traitor thinks, another will him trust,
That Is to his Head suborned to be unjust?
A giddie head, an idle thirst to rise;
A heart corrupt, breeds Treasons first surmise.
Surmising fears, his inbred plot is known,
Suspectes ill harvest ere the seed be sown.
If this ^oule hagge, the nurse of dyre despite,
Heave at the highest, will she not excite,
Her hateful instruments, to hurl down those,
Of lowest rank, and yet, of force, her foes?
In all complots, how so of spite they rise,
On me she fasly fathers th'enterprise.
She makes Religion color outward hate,
Which makes the fact far the more detestate. Religion color of Treason.

Religion is the builder of estates,
And true Obedience, her remunerates.
Strange thing that true Religion should be foe,
To that estate she planted, first to grow.
This hagge does haunt me at each wished deed,
Not to assist, but hinder lest it speed.
Where true desert may challenge due reward,
She frowns, and strives the gift may be debarred.
If any prosper by my ayd-full hand,
Her malice great, takes sword in hand to band:
Not one escapes, who her despite feels not,
And often preuailes, her heart of hate is hot.
Examples of her ougly cruelties,
Are infinite, couler'd by flatteries.
But when the plot, has taken it effect,
It Is found herfawne, were merely counterfect.
False, fraudulent, and secret undermines,
Which when the wise do shun, then she repines.
And vomits out her glutted g^rge of gall,
Without respect of State Imperial.
Deceit her sword, flattery, defensive sheeld,
Are her chief instruments of ^ight in feeld: Enuies chief weapons.

Put by the first, the second naught auailes,
She flies, or falls, before him she assailes.
Thy self who (...)
By proof, do find, (...)
Though showing (...)
She hates and seeks to (...)
If thou conioy^e (...), to what (...)*
Thou shall be nee^e her, ye^ without (...)
I am thy guide, this (...) (...)* Honor is attained by Virtue.

Thou shall go right, it by (...)*
The way to (...) this (...) (...),
Is not self* force, but only of my ^^gh^
Thou must begin, by banish me (...) ill,
To what is good to dedicate thy will,
And hone^ life free from impi^tie,
Is first and chiefest step to dignity.
It is not acts of auncester^ (...) make,
A virtuous man, but way^^ (...)
If any vaunt him of high, honor a (...),
And is no^ virtuous, gives himself (...)
It is no praise, t*haue a (...) worthy (...),
Unless the son by virtue (...) (...)
True virtue is the (...),
Who has not that, ^ur^^^ the Noble (...)
None can be Noble, but the Virtuous,
All Virtuous are not Noble yet gen^^ous,
The vertuous-base, may, have an honest ^al^e,
True generositie imports the same.
One may be virtuous, yet not seen to rise
To great estate, or earthly dignities:
Though men see not* nor praise thy ver(...),
Embrace them full, for inward grace ^t (...).
If Virtue live within thy secret (...),
She will be working, V^rtue cannot ^^st:
Nor seldom may, for E(...) (...)
Me^ live in thee, or thou to (...).
Set thou therefore, (...),
As thou be not (...)
She will (...) wiles,
By office, (...).
For we(...)y place,
Or by (...).
She heaues (...)eth, di^^^ines, Fortune and Envy.

^he fawns, and (...), constrains,
As she for (...)d,
Fortune (...)*
Fortune (...), (...), ^^e ^^iles;
The fawned, and (...) with equal wiles.
Trust not (...),
Ficklen(...) ^^e (...)*
And falsely imitate (...),
Which gives, nor (...) (respecting men) ^^ward:
But as the heart(...),
So high, or low, con(...).
What each (...) of (...) wrest,
The good to ill the ill (...) (...)*
Thou have had (...) of (...)er,
Be constant, walk (...) (...). Envy (...) posite to Virtue.

Cons^rt not (...) base,
Were thou ^ branch of most high honors race.
Refrain the way, where (...)d,
I will conduct where (...)de
Though (...),
Like subt^le (...) I have.
To place polluted (...) the ^^lth of (...),
She will in^i^e ^orbea^^ (...)*
What I command, (...),
What I fo(...) to (...) (...).
Be not too rash what (...) bi^^ ^ndertake,
Attempt it not, by me, first trial make.
What I advise, if thou revolt and fly,
(Faining consent) it is hypocrisy.
The Truth is naked, Craft is clothed with guile,
None use deceit, but are deceived the while.
Embrace the words and documents I teach,
Let not this hagge, make in thee smallest breach:
For it she set foot, in thy heart, and find
Foundation fit, in thine unstable mind:
Hard to remove her from the Ci^^^^ll,
She in thy heart plants, and prepares to dwell.
Armies of Vice and Vanities will be
At her command, and over master thee.
The chiefest point that first thou art to seek*
Is that true wisdom, which makes hautie meek. Wisdom

It is not Natures gift, as Nature stands
Polluted, but given by Diuiner hands:
Man's nature knows not things celestial,
No not it self, and parts material.
But only as they seem, them takes and holds,
The cause material, and the formal mouldes.
The perfect, and imperfect outward parts,*
Not th'in clinations of imperfect hearts.
Speech, motion, breathing, sickness, health, and light,
Are somewhat subject to weak Natures sight:
But who, where, how, wherefore men are; to know
Is given by grace, does not by Nature grow.
In show the impious may appear upright,
And see some steps of Truth, by Natures light:
But brought unto Truths test, it is found but dross
That flies, and vaporates, and brings but loss. Youth and age.

The young and old are apt to hide their ill*
(That comes by Nature) not to^^ be the will:
Unsettled in their judgments, young men are,
The aged feeble, yet of deeper care.
The idle froth of youthful fuming brain,
Must be cast off by Wisdom, to contain,
Not to consent to all what th'hart would have,
Nor to effect all Appetite does crave.
In doubtful things, give not too rash consent,
Lust buys too dear a rash experiment: Concupiscence brings ^^ame.

Her present pleasures, with succeding pain,
Content, with grief, both, with perturbed brain.
Continuing lust, gets hateful Impudence,
Infamy and shame succeed concupiscence,
Young years in some, have old experience,
And aged men the least intelligence:
But it is observed, soon rots that ripes too fast, Soon ripe soo^rotten.

A sudden flame, is no long-lasting blast:
True Wisdoms seed, sown in the greenest head,
Watered by grace, does quickly branch and spread:
So do the humors of unstable mind
Grow strong or weak, as Fancies are inclynde.
A life contemplative in things Divine,
Brings hurtful humors under, that repine.
It Is not the Cloister, or the Hermit life,
That keeps perturbed mind from inward strife:
But constancy in Virtues exercise
Which he obtaines that best Philosophies:
That by true reason can his judgment guide,
Which he can not, that is not rectifide.
This Wisdom does in words and deeds consist, Nature renewed

Not in the Will, that works what it list:
But in the Will, by grace Divine renewed,
And in the sense, by Nature new indew'd.
This Nature sowes, in minds prepared, the seed,
That bears the fruit, whence will and work proceed.
This changed nature, and reformed, swayes
In some degree, the mind that most estrayes.
Some spark she leaves, (...) minds polluted most,
Which most neglect, and deem it merely lost*
This Nature will require, what first it gave,
As well what'th vicious as the virtuous have:
Though they forget, and make no use of it,
Excuse, but vain, framed by the finest wit.
There is a light, within the darkest mind, Every man has a spark of Divine
light.

Though it shine not, none can pretend him blind:
For, he that sues, and soon consents to ill,
Feels yet a law, that countermands the will.
The will yet obstinate, performs the fact,
That light within does witness the contract:
That light will shine unto the conscience,
And will reveal, most hid concupiscence.
The things indeed thou must avoid, and do,
Are in effect in general, but two:
To fly, what Envy eggs thee to effect,
To do what I, in contrary direct. Envy and Lust, comprehend all forbidden
things.

Under the name of Envy, and of Lust,
Is comprehended, what I hold unjust.
Pride, Envy, Cruelty, and Avarice,
Deceit, Hypocrisy, and flatteries,
Presumption, and prodigality,
Ingratitude, Hate, Sloth, and Gluttony,
And many other things forbidden, rest,
Harbor'd and hugged in every doting breast.
Earths pleasures, vanities, carnal delites,
Are Natures content, not guided by my rites.
As many Senses as the body bears,
So many appetites Affection reares:
Each pleasur's propper to some Sense alone,
The rest then sleep, or are content with none.
The thing beloved, delites the longing eye,
The other Senses, silent willingly.
The eye suffi^'d, the ear pertakes her share:
The taste, smell, feeling, all propensiue are
To feed affection, and abuse the heart,
Which erres, led by polluted Natures Art.
When each has yielded, what his office gives,
The heart misguided, thinks it much relieues.
And when the heart, whence springs affection,
Has ^edde at full, of false refection,
Then hungers it anew, for new delight,
What fancy likes, it holds most exquisite.
The changes of fond fancies appetites,
Are infinite, seeming a while delites*
Forth with they grow unto such harsh distaste,
Others are had, fit fuel for a blast.
New choice, new change, strangest varieties,
Are sweet awhile, in fine, perplexities.
Affection, guided by Reason Divine,
Shuts up the outward, opes the inward eyne:
Auoids earths pleasures, treacherous and short,
Seeks pleasures, which eternity import.
The pleasures which determine, be not best, Pleasure permanent.

Nor long content the mind, wherein they rest.
Pleasures alone, that inwardly are bred,
And by right reason nourished and ^ed,
Shall never change, though outward senses die,
Their inward joys shall live eternally.
Let thy delight be then, in what does last,
Sport sparingly, in that may bring distaste.
The weakest worm, has motion to aspire,
Knows not yet whether it rise or retire:
No more knows he, that fancieth this and that,
Where, or what mark it is he aymeth at.
The brutest beast, seeks and desires to have,
What so his brutish appetite does crave.
Resembling those, that what they see, affect,
Though ill have not, true reason to reject.
The mind does long, the will consentes and takes,
Lawful, or not, as minds delight, it makes:
But if the will, and full affection be
In earthes delites, it makes a bond, of free.
As pleasures come, they fawn, as harlots do:
But past, the mind left stunge, they come into.
I^ outward act o^ thy delight regaine,
More inward force* t'exhilerate thy brain,
Dul'd with the practice of true virtues deeds,
Be moderate, and then no ill it breeds.
And for the choice of ^it companions, Choice of companions.

To pass the time in recreations,
Look not upon them, as they only seem,
Nor think them fit, in show of good esteem:
But try the humors and the inward mind,
Before consort, prove how they stand inclinde:
If they affectate vicious words and deeds,
Abandon them, scurrilitie it breeds.
And in thy recreati^e disports take heed,
Thou loose not that thy inward grace may feed.
Thy constancy and magnanimity,
By wantonness, and effeminacie:
No recreation beedes more infamy,
Then to bestow dear time in gamestrie.
Dicing beseemes noe men of gravity,
But brands them with the mark of leuitie,
Of frenzy* indiscretion, wanting wit,
With these the sagest Romans branded it.
Let virtues acts, be cherished in thee,
So shall thou keep thy mind (assailed) free.
Virtue a power, ruling the inward part,
Brings into order the disord^ed ^^art,
And sets th'appetite in so comely frame,
It thirsts for naught, but Reason holds the same. Goods.

One thing among a multitude, is had
In great esteem, which makes the gainer glad:
It bears the name, which trul'it cannot take,
Goods: yet not good, for good it cannot make.
It rather makes the good indeed the wurse,
^exing the mind for goods to fill the purse.
When inward heart does rest in settled peace,
If thou thy health, thy limbs, and sense possess,
What more can wealth, and great abundance bring,
But fear to loose (and lost) thy sorrowing?
In getting much is great perplexity,
In keeping it as much timidity.
But grief of greefes to leave it when he dies,
Can that be good, that breeds such miseries?
Can houses, lands, can gold or silver give
To minds distract, harts-Mummy to relieve?
Can Jewels of the highest price abate
A fever heckticke, or the darts of hate?
Be not too bold, to riot of thy store, Prodigality

Though thou be sure supply will bring thee more:
A mountain wastes with soft drops of rain,
And wasted once, hardly supplied again:
Therefore if fortune fill thy fist with gold,
Spend, yet, in spending, be not too too bold.
Nor spare it so as if thy heart had not,
Some other, and far more releyuing lot,
Some know no other bounty then to spend,
Yet can propound therein no lawful end.
The wise yet find, idle expendings vain,
They spend in measure and a mean retain.
Not prodigal, as if it could not wast,
Nor too sparing, fearing, to want at last:
Anoyding these two strong extremes of ill,
They find the mean does purchase most good will:
They that embrace and love earthes excrements,
Love only things compact of elements,
Which by their composition have defects,
One chief predominant, the rest reiects:
For when the elements do disagree,
The bodies long continuance cannot be.
So he that sets his mind on money most,
Has use of sacred virtue merely lost:
For earthly pelf, and virtue, contraries,
Agree as fire and waters qualities:
And as the fire, predominant preuailes,
And all confining fuel still assailes,
So love of lucre does increase and rise,
As riches rise, and earthes felicities.
Riches are good if owner knows to use them,
But merely hurtful; if he do abuse them.
When thy desire, begins to grow to strong, Desire.

Give it not head, nor foster it too long:
It hardes the heart and sotteth so the brain,
It makes commit the foulest things for gain,
A common fault reigns in polluted breast, Lying.

And cloked often, by deep, yet false protest,
To gain vainglory by the mass of pelf,
Some sell a lie for loss of soul it self:
Incident to most, respecting mysteries,
Respecting persons, great diversities:
But they that have the habit in the heart,
Can color it by nimblenesse of art.
But what they gain is like unto the lie,
It seems, but is not, as appears to eye;
The hearers heart, deceived by false relate,
So is the liar by the gain he gate.
For, what he gains, by false protests, consumes,
As snow in sun, and as light vapor fumes.
This hagg, my foe prescribes this false receipt,
To nature sick, which works in men deceit:
Nature corrupt finds sweetness of this drugge,
Fancy affecting, does the potion hug,
Drinks first a dram: then quaffes of falsity,
^omits at last whole floudes of perjury.
Lying a grievous sickness of the mind,
And's where wants Reason or where Reason's blind.
Cured by right Reason or by public shame,
Who loves to lie, hates yet a liars name,
A liar ever is rewarded best,
Not to believe him though he do protest*
Pope Alexander Sextus never did ^^icclardi^^

The thing he spoke, and Caesar Borgia hid
His inward thought, and spoke the contrary,
Father and Son of deep hypocrisy.
If power and place may seem thee to permit,
To act the thing by law thou think fit.
Be not too rash, consult with reason first,
And do not thou but what right Reason dirst: Reason and Law.

The law without, rules not the mind within,
What Law may do the mind may think it sin:
The law commandes, some things it tollerates,
The first exacts, the second moderates:
Four virtues has each law that governs,
I^ swayes, forbids, permits, and punishes,
In these right Reason moderator stands,
Contracts and suits, in Justice, pass her hands.
The Laws extremes are too exorbitant
That to right Reason are disconsonant:
Therefore the mean in case of difference,
Best equalzeth law and Conscience.
How impious is it, and yet a common crime,
Grossly to err, and make it yet pastime: To do(...) and boast it.

Many presume, and foulest facts commit,
Blush not to tell it, rather glory in it.
They hold their infamy a badge of grace,
They make, and cast their own dirt in their face:
These are the men, whose lives the world laments,
Their deaths untimely, bring as great contents,
These are the forth and scumme of Enuies train,
She breeds a swarm of vices in their brain.
Some do deny, or forge their faults offense The great^t fault is to defend it.

With shift or lie, or by some hid pretense,
This aggrauates the fault more then the fact,
Confession lessens guilt of foulest act,
By art some shroud their inclinations long,
Conceiling nature, yet when it waxes strong,
It breaks forth, in perfect colors seen,
What seemed, seemly, found to be unclean.
Dissembling holiness and sanctity, Reform thy self before thou reprove.

Are the only pictures of impiety.
If thou hold not true mean in what thou do*
In judging others art the more unjust:
Reform thy self, and then command, correct,
Judge when thou have repaird thine own defect.
If thou be just and constant in thy deed,
Whom thou exhorts will take the surer heed.
It Is easy to give counsel and direct,
To hear as easy, harder to effect,
In consultations see thou still consort Consult with the wise.

With men of virtue, and of best report:
No Counsel steedes, ^east it true wisdom guide,
It prospers not, not by her rectifi'de
Wisdom is slow, in resolution
Resolved: constant in execution.
But if the counsell-giuer be not wise,
Consult a new, before the enterprise:
Advised policy cannot but be,
The best assurance, wit of man can see,
In most attempts, steedes magnanimity,
But never (but by chance) temerity.
But howsoever, things well plotted, fall,
Be thou the same (constant) grudge not at all:
For I will fortefie thy heart anew,
And good content shall futurely ensue.
As thou consistest of two contraries Nature and Grace.

Nature, and grace, seeming unities:
So are there in thee two distinct desires,
Carnal downward, spirit'all upward aspires.
Whether of these predominant in thee,
Caries consent where thine affections be,
What thou affectest is thy best delight.
If it be earthly it is my opposite:
That delectation, how sweet soever,
Is but conceit, conceited to persevere.
Yet fades on sudden, as a morning mist,
And of like substance, all the like consist.
As far as does the Sun exceed a star:
Heavenly delights, the earths, exceed as far
None set delight in pleasures here below,
But such as the superior do not know.
If once true judgment thy opinion sway,
Affection, cannot lead thy will astray. Spiritual pleasures.

Accustom thee to joys spiritual,
They comfort most though supernatural
Natures delights are sweet to outward sense,
Sour in effect, breeding in fine offense:
Honey sweet in taste, yet if the silly Be,
While thou do taste, bestow her sting on thee.
Thou will be wary in thy second taste,
Pleasures have stinges, when their delights are past,
Then satisfy thou not fond fantasy,
It darkens sense and blinds Reasons eye.
The more thy fancy is fulfilled and ^ed,
More strength it takes, and more peruerts the head.
Pleasures are like a whorish painted face, ^alse delights

Only in show, void yet of inward grace,
The taste of pleasures to the outward part,
Is seeming sweet, within polutes the heart,
Carnal delights are foolish fancies joys,
Right Reasons guide abandons them as toys.
A thousand things by fancy are affected, Fancy

Not one of ten, accordingly, effected:
A gulf it self, a gulf of grief it makes,
It is self bane, and still self bane it takes,
Sensual delights, She falsely holds divine,
Yet work they dangerous effects in fine,
And though men laugh that live licentiously,
They laugh at loss of their felicity,
Mad men, and ^ooles, do laugh at injuries,
And wittingly embrace their miseries,
Some err in diet, staff of man's relief, ^i^^.

Be temperate for gurmondy bringes grief:
Most danger grows by gross satiety,
But never any by sobriety,
Yet often, hurtes, to be too abstinent:
In mean, is Nature, (ruled) best content,
When vulgar congies yield thee most all hail,
Think then some monster seeks thee to assail:
Stick to thy virtues to defend thy fame,
No other weapons, can protect the same.
The idle vapors of the vulgar rise, ^icklenes of ulgar cen^^^es.

And fall again, as favor lives or dies.
The fawnes, and frowns resemble well the Be,
When sun does thine they swarm and sing we see:
But in a black and gloomy day they lie,
Within the hiue: Thus they observe the sky,
So when on th vulgar rays of favor shine,
They fawn, let favor fail, their loves decline.
And like a monster fawning; to be fed,
Failing of food, gripes keeper on the head.
Sometimes the great, fall from their outward grace, Patience in Disgrace.

To low estate and ignominious case:
What then can his perplexed mind content,
That seees redresles dangers imminent?
Ready to fall, he flies, and seeks to shun,
The ill he fears, from which he cannot run,
In this sad strait there is one remedy,
To make a virtue of necessity*
That Is to embrace what he cannot forgo,
To dye the death if force determine so,
Where virtue dwells, there dwells true sapience,
The mother, nurse, and life of patience.
Virtue resembles Aarons sacred wand,
That buddeth blessings, held in working hand, Virtue.

But cast to ground- breeds serpent in thy breast,
In life and death let thy heart be her nest.
There will sh^bud and bring forth sacred deeds
Devouring all the serpents spawne that br breeds
The wise, strong, carnally magnanimous, Carnally wise

Have virtues habit, hearts prodigious:
For that foul hagge, the dame of faise delights,
Gives outward glory to her favorites,
She mooues the mind she works the affection,
As only Lady of direction:
She paints the baits, affection sucks delight,
Lu^'d in Lusts lap, the better parts despite.
Hy this infernal hagg and her inchants,
It Is not for good the seeming best she grants.
She does excite to gross and vild atempts,
And by protests, al danger she exempts:
And by degrees she winnes the doubting mind,
She frames the baits, as she finds minds inclind.
Ambitious minds, meanly incensed to rise, Ambition

She liftes a little to low dignities:
Then tenders she matters of greater sort,
Sugiesting those, their glory much import.
Then who so stands in way where they must pass,
Must down, a Diadem, or head of brass, Vaineglory.

And when these silly subjects of her frauds,
Are at the highest, them she then applaudes,
Feeds them with fawnes, and false security,
Plotting the while against them treachery,
They must not stand, suffices her to see,
Her plots prevail and them in high degree.
Soon she repines, at their advanced state,
She trips their heels, whom she did eleuate.
Whom she observes vain gloriously bent,
She shows false means to make more excellent:
To gain him grace, the mean is to exceed
All of his rank, in cost and form of weed.
Spending gets glory, sparing but disdain,
He Is too mistrustful, if he save, or gain.
Spares not spends all, at last deprived of all,
Then she obr aides him as too prodigal,
She leaves no heart vnsearch't what she detects: Enuics observations.

Is fundamental ground for her proiects:
Some are by inclination nigardly,
Them she persuades to live more thriftily.
Until they grow most auaritious,
Sugiesting them yet too too prodigous.
And when they are in highest honor set
To gain; she snares and takes them in her net.
Concupiscence, the bane of best estates, Concupisce^ce

Though most pestifrous, she extenuates;
She shows it in a glass of liberty,
To make it seem love, and no leuitie;
Yet fastens she a foil of deep disgrace,
Grief in the heart, Shame in the outward face.
A mind inclinde to hateful Jealousy Jealousy.

She feeds, with strong deluding fantasy,
And lays the counterfeit, so like in show,
As if it were the thing he sought to know:
And when she has the strong suspicion wrought,
She breeds him Envy, for the thing he thought;
A greater sickness sacketh not the mind,
Then this that seems to see, and yet is blind,
It does pretend the quintessence of love,
*And yet condempnes the part it would aproue.
What is the thing man's heart incline unto
How ill soever, but she eggs to do?
And done, appears to those in ugly wise,
Whom she seduced, and them she terrifies.
What brings revenge, the act of foul despite; Revenge.

Vaineglory egged by Envy to the fight?
When light occasion moves the mind to rage,
What head so light, will lay his life in gage?
Who leaves his foe in field dead, combat done,
Grief and repentance are the gain he won:
Where hearts affect revenge, she lays the plot,
Hearts coldly hateful, she fires and makes hot;
Suggesting him a coward that remits
The smallest wrong; yet when the offender smits,
She eggs the smitten to that deadly hate,
That each must othe^r kill or vulnerate.
And him that wins the prize with best content,
She does pursue death, or banishment.
(...) glory, and excess in needeles pride, (...).

Resemble Phae^ton, (vaineglorious guide)
That mounted on the Charret of the Sun,
Could not cheek, nor manage horses run;
No more can he that gives his will the bit,
It ^^nnes to riot, cannot manage it.
What gains the auaritious, but his cares Auance.

To ^et and keep what he in vain prepares?
He fits secure, yet suddenly befall
A thousand deadly dangers corporal;
Besides the grief, that he must needs depart
From that false god, he honors in his heart.
What deadly fear, amazeth him to see
The ghastly gulf, whence no escape can be?
How prize men lust, brutish concupiscence, Concupis^^ce

That brings so many griefs for recompense?
It is the pledge, and earnest of that shame:
Of force, succeeding, sorrow-winning game:
Short seeming-sweet, sharp in the final taste,
A brutish rage by the brutish held repast.
The errors infinite tht do distract
The minds of men, in purpose and in fact:
To tell them all were a superfluous deed,
Not one of all, but this foul hag does breed:
She shows the thing, though most pernicious,
In a false glass to make it glorious.
Fly and resist the practice of this witch,
Scoope not unto her lure, nor soar her pitch,
Of smallest spark of thy pressed wills desire,
She kindles thirst, and longing to aspire,
Distasting then what present fortunes be,
No true content, or peace, can lodge in thee.
Envy, Despite, and hateful Emulation,
Lust, Lucre, and unbridled Ambition,
Will be the fuel of thy fuming brain,
The smoke thy smother, thy disgrace the gain,
Inward distasts, thy hardened hearts vntest
Shall be the banquet, thou sad Sorrows guest.
Oh fly her, follow me, live and learn my law,
Thy truest freedom is of me thine awe:
My strongest hate, is hate to hateful vice,
My love I level to the virtuous wise;
To such as shun the painted paths of lust,
Set not delight in things compact of dust;
Nor tide, nor tempest, can drive them to doubt,
Assailed they stand, a Lion not more stout.
Foes fright them not, threats breed in them no feate,
Poor state grieves not, nor daunts whatso they hear:
Hope being helmet, Confidence their shield,
Assurance their sword, nothing can make them yield;
Death that most dreadfully threatens and kills,
Heavens fiery gusts that fearfully distills,
Thunderclaps, nor tempest, plague, nor war
Affrights the hearts of men that virtuous are.
But as a Ship in stormy tempest tossed,
So he at death, in life that boasted most,
Because true Reason pilote to the wise,
Stirs not the heart, when storms of Fancy rise.
Affection as a stormy gust does drive
The will on ground; wise he it can retriue,
And bring it back, by Reason to the port,
Where I am Gouernesse and keep the fort.
But if it harbor where that hag does keep,
A seeming haven, safe, secure and deep,
A storm arises, shelter then not near,
It sinckes the hope, and none can it vpreare:
The mind inconstant, swaide with every wind,
Sails every, yet no way but as the blind.
The blind in light, are always in the dark; Inconstancy.

So he that is inconstant aims no mark:
Now moved with lust, revenge then seeks he,
Now spends, then spares; In bondage now, then free:
Now hope, then fear; now favor, then disdain;
Ambitious now, then in the lowest strain;
Suspicious now, forthwith too credulous;
Now prodigal, then auaritious.
As are desires, so are their opposites, Dissimulation

Concealed sometimes by art of hypocrites;
A smile may cover hatred of the heart;
Inward deceit shadowed by outward Art;
Seeming frugalitie shrowds Avarice,
Dissembling grace, a seeming benedice.
But thou in following me shall surely have
No seeming succor, but the thing shall save;
No carnal care needs much perturbe the mind
Of him whose heart is virtuously inclind; The virtuous.

To him is fulness, peace, plenty, content,
Never distracted by most cross event;
He still is one, Fancy, Affection,
Envy, Revenge are in subjection:
Suffices to be virtuous indeed,
Not only seeming, having but the weed;
The theoricke, wanting the practicke part,
With speculation, must be use of Art:
Else when the storms of meanest crosses rise,
They hold sad silence, or give childish cries;
If griefs within, nor cries without prevail,
Their wits becalmed, floate without a sail.
Then steps this hag unto the helm and steares;
Hoiseth her sails, aloof off Grace she bears:
Lanching the Bark into most vnious seas,
Among ragg'd rocks of horror hearts disease;
Then falls the Bark upon the rock of Pride,
Lust beats her then, and boulgeth the other side;
Ambition breaks the prow, Envy the keele,
The storms of Blasphemies make t'hull to reele:
The masts and shrowdes of Reason lacerate,
With bullets of Despair in that estate.
Then houers Hope, having redreslesse leakes,
In gaining anchor, Surance-cable breaks;
Some swimming haste to shore, leave Fancies bark
Unto the hagge, rent, floating in the dark.
They work again for life of inward grace,
Then th'hag leaves helm, and has these (escaped) in chase,
They cry to me, I reach the hand and save them
From that foul hag that makes pursuit to have them:
Then she retires and seizes on the rest,
Makes them her folly slaves, she first possessed;
She chains them then, feeds them with false delight,
And makes them row the Bark of her despite,
They are the instruments of her complots,
For prize she gets, her silly slaves cast lots:
Their shares are griefs and sorrows preparatiues;
Their seeming pleasures, conscience corosiues,
Yet seems to bless them with a thousand joys,
But what she does or says found deadl' annoyes.
How can she bless, that is a cursed sot,
How can she grace, who grace has never got?
She leads men back, in show they forward run,
She keeps them dark, yet faines them in the Sun;
In words she seems to be right rule of grace,
In works, and wiles the worst of hellish race;
Who frame their fancies, as she does, or says,
Are most unhappy in their happi'st days:
The more to move the ignorant to err,
She shows their glory, whom she does prefer.
Examples more prevail in good or ill, (...).

Then Counsel does, to win, or wrest the will:
Therefore examples she propounds and shows,
Of good success, never of overthrows:
Her fautors rising, not their falls reueales,
Their seeming joys their inward griefs conceales,
Nothing but pleasures she depaints to lure,
Allured, pretends they cannot but endure.
What pleasure can be truly pleasing long, ^^a^ure (...)t

Although Affection be never so strong?
It waxes weak, and then the pleasure dies,
Although by art the same she fortifies:
The Power may die, and yet the Will may live,
If Will be dead, the Power can not it give:
The will does work the act, act not the will,
Yet weakest will increas'th by active skill.
For, Custom, is a second Natures Nurse, ^u^^ome.

Best actions may by custom wax far worse;
Yet Custom is not simply dangerous,
Though in the worser part suspicious.
Of slender spark arises mighty flame,
But not unless fit matter feed the same.
So where as Custom sets it foot to rise,
In ill, subdue her lest she tyrannize,
While she is young she may be managed,
But growing old, she will be strong in head;
But ever weakest is she found to be,
When she should work the minds of men to me.
And when she frames her will to aid my foe,
She Is pressed; the hag needs not constrain her go.
Yet not of her selfe-inclination,
But as men's minds have preparation.
For though she seem a Princess by her law,
She is not absolute, but under awe;
She does command, the minds she can surprise,
(The seeming so) but not the truly wise:
By nature men are pro^nest to do ill,
Without an outward prompter of the will:
And where she finds the will prepared so,
She feeds affection as fond fancies go:
She offers still occasion of her aid,
Still building more upon the plot she laid.
Thus custom alters, or begets anew,
A nature, which at first, her self withdrew;
Both good and ill she can transform, and make
As is the heart apt good or ill to take.
She Is agent both for that foul hag, and me;
Regards not much whose instrument she be:
But that my foe has her attendance most,
She brings me only those that hag has lost.
Decrepite, feeble, aged, impotent;
The wronged, oppressed, lowly, indigent,
They that by her despite and pleasing charms,
Have found her witchcraft, and do feel their harms:
Not yet by nature, but b'instinct of grace,
That only light bewraies her ugly face.
Fly her, her pleasures and false instruments,
And set thy heart right on my rudiments,
I am delight, my ways and works delight,
My pleasures please not carnal appetite,
Heroicke acts, that make men honorable,
Are only sweet, and most inestimable,
The rest are false, found mere scurrilitie,
By which some loose, both fame and dignity:
But such as have me patroness and guide,
Shall never fall howso they seem to slide:
They shall withstand, and get the victory
Over that hagge and hellish company:
Whose conquest far exceedes the manli'st hand
That swaies a sword, none stronger can withstand.
The life of man has two distinct delites, Two kinds of pleasures con^ra^^e.

Contraries, each to other opposites;
One seeming not, yet is delight indeed;
The other seems, but is not of the seed.
The seeming not is blemished with spite,
Which makes it seem sad sorrow, not delight;
The seeming, is, as it is found to be.
Sweet in the first, sharp in the last degree:
One seems contempt, and yet is glorious,
The Other glory, yet ignominious.
The issues of these two delites do show
Whence either takes, the root and sap to grow,
The first does spring from my loves influence,
And bears Content, fair fruit of Sapience;
The other issuing from polluted head,
Defiles the organ, through the which it is led;
And whosoever tastes of that poisoned spring,
Infatuates, or dies murmuring.
The wife in me, by me do learn to shun Experience.

Harms to themselves, as others harms have run:
And if thou see some run this Maze awry,
Conceive the curuings, cross the wisest eye;
Therefore I wish thee to observe and take,
My rudiments aright, and trial make,
By inward exercise and meditation,
And by true practice sweet'st recreation.
Proud hearts are hie, yet grouell on the ground,
The meek look up, where true content is found,
And that content is planted in the heart,
Watered and pruned, by right Reasons art;
And bears the branches of those true delites,
That spread abroad in hearts of Proselites.
True Conuerts, who from Ethnicke Envy came,
And gain them grace, and glory in my name.
If thou have Honors birth or dignity, W^^^ what the hono^able should deck
^^em.

Adorn it more and more with piety,
With justice, mercy, and true patience,
With constancy and heavenly sapience,
With humbleness, true magnanimity,
With love, with providence, and policy:
Thus thou adorned with celestial gems,
Shall far exceed the far more honored stems;
Let name and nature, heart and hand agree,
Let Honors name be dignified in thee;
For I approve the parts, the person not,
But only so, as he approoues his lot.
Birth is the badge that shows from whom men came,
Not much material, base or noble name.
Of base degree, I raise, and set aloft, The noble and base are interchangeable.

The noble birth, abusde, I check as often;
It Is not the sire that dignifies the son,
Nor him disgraceth; but grace lost and won:
A noble birth may be disgraced and fall,
The base may rise by acts heroical:
As greatness grows to ripenes, and to ro^,
So basest rise, and come to highest lot.
Some are of noble stock derived far
From Williams conquest, yet in's Arms a bar,
That bars him not from higher honors state,
(By due desert) then he th'first honor gate:
There was at first no diffrence in degrees,
Time brought forth Honor, and indignities.
How came men first of equals differing,
Advanced some; some contrary, declining?
The first, magnanimous and valorous,
The second, ba^e of mind, and cowardous;
The first, approved by prowess in the field,
The second, faint, vnhardy, prone to yield;
The first, to Letters, and to Wisdoms law,
The second, to vain vicious ways gave awe;
The first, by gravity gate government,
The second, wanton, graceless, male content;
The first, g^te honor, scepter, sword and crown;
The second, shame, disgrace, and public frown:
These were originalls ^f cac^^d egree*
As men were led by that foul hag* or me.
These changes hold, by providence Divine,
The virtuous grow, the vicious decline.
And though the generals in heads but twain,
The branches infinite, they both sustain:
And as there are in Greatness, steps to rise,
So many downe-falls, in their contraries:
If that foul hagge my opposite have place,
No honor rises but with deep disgrace*
My ways resemble ^ugar in their kind, The effects of virtue.

Sweet in themselves, and sweeten all the mind,
Make crosses light, and easy to be borne,
Digested, pleasant, cheering the forlorn:
The love of me abandous love of lust,
True trust in me infeebles carnal trust.
In whom I rule, and he be ruled by me,
All difficulties to him easy be.
It is a matter difficult to find, N(...)nd.

By Nature how another is inclinde;
No^ is it my will, thou should diue deep to know
How others stand; but how thy self do grow.
But if a public note, by art thou see,
Judge, yet not rashly till the issue be.
For he may rise, or suffer for his guilt;
And thou may fall, by building as he built,
A happy president* that does fore-teach,
Before a flood to stop a doubted breach:
When others harms far off thou do behold,
Think thine are near, Wisdom not rashly bold:
If thou perceive an error in thy friend,
Judge not, advise; None happy till the end. Desert and Bounty.

When due desert may challenge thy regard,
True Bounty rests not in a bare reward:
But Favors eye, preferring will and might,
Give all their aid, to yield deseruer right:
And when thou see, by fained readiness,
One to assume selfe-greatest worthiness,
Think greatest boasters are not best of deed,
A cable-show in substance, spiders thread. Envy.

When hateful Envy stands inuenomed,
To spew her malice on best qualited,
Let them be silent, silence works her shame,
No outward force, but inward makes her tame:
She flies when I resist, she falls, and dies,
When I encounter her with verities;
Her force is Falsehood, Flattery, Disdain,
These ouer-gorge her, she cannot contain.
Foul Envy, blindness, and true Virtues light, Enuies blindness.

Resemble Egypt when it was dark and light;
Where I inlighten, darkness vanishes,
Black darkness where that hagge inhabiteth;
None comprehend my light, but they that have it,
They hate that darkness, and the hag that gave it. Virtues light, and Enuies
blindness.

My light resembles that celestial place,
Her darkness hell, deprived of light and grace;
Mine is a mount of joy, hers gulf of grief,
Mine gives content: hers bar to all relief;
Her charmed venime strong, strong her despite*
Whereby she draws the weak to her delight:
And to deceive, she counterfeits true light,
That they that can not judge, may deem it right.
She sets foul visard on the fairest face,
And on her own depaints dissembling grace;
Deprauing me, she seeks her own renown,
And in conceit she stands, and hurles me down.
She slanders those that I do train aright,
By it supposing to increase her might.
She makes hers seem by outward ornaments,
Worlds happy ones, and mine as malcontents:
But Plants may seem to live, dead yet in heart,
And seeming dead, may live in inward part.
Man's twofold life, a twofold death declares* As life, so death twofold.

The one of each all men see how it fares;
For, that men live, and that they die, men see,
Their inward life, or death, not how they be;
Therefore rash censure I forbid to give,
The living, dead, the seeming dead may live.
As censure sound, or partial doom affords, Censures uncertain.

So are men held; A public error words.
Words work report, Report, fame, good or bad,
The fame often false, grieuing, or making glad.
The badge that best assures what others be, *All outward shows deceive.

Is gesture, act, and countenance men seen
All these deceive, and therefore rest content,
Search not, judge not, but leave it to event.
Thy self, I wish thou would thy self unfold
Unto thy self. In secret, who not bold?
What in thy self by due scrutation
Thou find^st, make it a law or caution;
A law to live in awful temperance,
A caution to prevent more arrogance,
So shall thou settle peace within thy mind,
A wall of brass before thee and behind:
Who or what so incounters thee thus guarded,
Shall fall or fly; and thou stand, and rewarded.
A thousand censurers will look on thee,
As are affections, so their censures be;
The vicious, to the vicious virtuous,
The virtuous to the vicious odious.
Who builds a house, or does some public acts,
Stands on the stage of flatteries and detracts:
If he be valorous, then desperate;
If he be a coward, then considerate;
If he be bountiful, then prodigal;
If he be covetous, wise and frugall;
If he be civil, then a seely sot;
If he be insolent, fit for what not?
If he be affable, then base of kind;
If he be arrogant, of gallant mind;
If he be proud, a comely personage;
If mean in tire, fit for no equipage;
If he grow great, he is ambitious;
If mean, content, he is infatuous;
If truly zealous, then a Puritan;
If irreligious, great Politician.
A world of wonders, this worlds wonders maze,
None see themselves, yet all on others gaze;
A foreign fault men see; not selfe-estrayes.
The guiltiest censure, the less guilties ways;
Fret not at this, faint not, nor be dismaide,
From Clown to Keisar, all are thus displaide.
Now for conclusion thus I say to all,
To base and big, I am not partial;
But he that swaies his words and deeds by me,
In fine shall find a Diadem for fee.
When this Discourse this Lady fair had ended,
And I observing whereunto it tended,
Rightly collected what before I guessed.
Whose persons these three vncoth'd gifts expressed.
Forth with this Lady and the Hagge were gone,
And left this Passionate in cell alone;
For though they seemed of shapes substantial,
They have no bodies but are spirit'all:
Yet can and do dispose themselves to be,
Where either likes, though no man may them see.
FINIS.

