A pensive man's practice

Very profitable for all persons, wherein are contained very devout and
necessary prayers for sundry godly purposes.

With requisite persuasions before every prayer.

Written by John Norden.

Psalm. 55. In the evening and morning, and at noone day, I will call upon the
name of the Lord, and that instantly, and he will hear me. James. 5. 13. If
any be afflicted let him pray. AT LONDON. Printed by Hugh Singleton. 1584.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, for as much as I know the Callender to be a thing for diverse
respects and purposes very necessary, and in nothing hurtful to be an^exed
unto this Book, I have requested the Printer to extend so much the more his
pains for thy profit, to collect some principal Rules, and most necessary for
thy use, to be thereunto added, as hereafter may appear.

A necessary Almanacke, for 16. years.
The year of our Lord. Dominicall Letter. Leap year. Golden number Easter
day. The first day of Lent. Whit sunday. 1584 D E 8 19. April. 3. March. 7.
June. 1585 C 9 11. April. 24. February 30. Ma. 1586 B 10 3. April. 26.
February 22. May. 1587 A 11 16. April. 1. Mar. 4. June. 1588 F G 12 7. April.
21. Feb. 26. Ma. 1589 E 13 30. Mar. 12. Feb. 18 May. 1590 D 14 19. April 4.
March. 7. June. 1591 C 15 4. April. 17. February. 23. May. 1592 A B 16 26.
March. 9. February. 14, May. 1593 G 17 15. April. 28. February. 3. June. 1594
F 18 31. March. 13. February. 19. May. 1595 E 19 20. April. 5. March. 8. June.
1596 C D 1 11. April. 25. February 30. May. 1597 B 2 27. Ma. 9. February. 15.
May. 1598 A 3 16. April. 1. March. 4. June. 1599 G 4 8. April. 21. February.
27. May.

Note that the Golden number and Dominicall letter, do change the first of
January.

Note also that the year of our Lord begins the 25. day of March: which day
is thought to be the day upon which the world was created, and the day wherein
Christ was conceived in the womb of the Virgin Mary.

A Rule to know how many days be contained in every month in the year.
Thirty days has November,
April, June, and September,
The rest have thyrty and one,
Except it be February alone.
Which always has 28. mere,
When it is no Bissextile or leap year.
A note of the Months, weeks, days, and hours, throughout the whole year.
The year contains. Months 12. Weeks 52. Days 365. Hours. 8766.


Day Natural. has 24. hours. Day Artificial. has 12. hours.


January has xxxj* days. Sun rises at vii. xlviii. minutes. Sets at
iiii. and ii. minutes.
1 A Circum. The first day of this Month, Christ was circumcised. Luke 2* 21.
The tops of the mountains appeared unto Noah. Genesis 8. 5. The Jsraelites put
away their wives. Ezra. 10. 16. 2 b 3 c 4 d 5 e 6 f Epipha. 7 g The 5. of this
Month, word was brought unto Ezechiel ye Prophet, that the City Jerusalem
was sinitten. Eze 33. 21. 8 A 9 b 10 c 11 d 12 e The sixth of this Month,
Christ was worshipped of ye wise men. Mat. 2. 1, etc. baptized Mat. 3. 15.
turned water into Wine, Ioh. 2. 1. etc. as testifies Epiphanius. 13 f 14 g 15
A 16 b 17 c 18 d The 10. of this Month, Nebuccadnezzar King of Babel, moved
thereunto by the rebellion of Zedechiah, besieged Jerusalem most fiercely, as
may appears 2. King. 25. etc. Ierem. 52. 4. Also Ezechiel was willed to utter
his parable. Eze. 24. 1. etc. 19 e 20 f 21 g 22 A 23 b 24 c 25 d 26 e Paul
called and converted, the 25, of this Month. Act. 9. 3. 27 f 28 g 29 A 30 b 31
c

February has xxviii. days. Sun rises at vii. and xi. munites. Sets at
iiii. and xlix. minutes.
1 d The first of this Month Moses repeated the Law unto the children of
Israel. Deuteronomy. 1. 3, 2 e Purification of Mary. 3 f 4 g 5 A The 2. of this
Month our Savior was presented to the Lord, and Marie purified, Luke 2, 22,
6 b 7 c 8 d 9 e The ninth of this Month, Noah, 40 days after he had seen the
tops of the Mountains, sent out of the Arc a Raven, and afterward a Dove,
which returned. Genesis 8, 6, etc. 10 f 11 g 12 A 13 b 14 c 15 d The 15, of this
month, the Jews spend merrily together, for that ye spring of the year does
enter then as they think. 16 e 17 f 18 g 19 A 20 b The 16, of this month,
Noah, the second time sent out a Dove, which returned with an Olive branch in
her bill, Gen, 8, 10. 21 c 22 d 23 e 24 f Mathias 25 g apo. The 24. of this
month, Zachariah was commanded to Prophecy, Zach. 1, 7, Mathias was elected
into the number of the Apostles. Act, 1, 26, 26 A 27 b 28 c 29 d

March has xxxi. days. Sun rises at vi. and xix. minutes. Sets at v.
and xli. munutes.
1 e The temple of Jerusalem was finished the third day of this month. Ezra.
6, 15, in the 1 of Esdr. 7, 5, it is said to be the 23, of this month. 2 f 3 g
4 A 5 b The tenth of this Month, Christ was advertised that Lazarus was sick
Ioh. 11. 3, 6 c 7 d 8 e A feast was celebrated among the Jews for the
overthrow of Nicanor, the 13. of this month, 2, Mac, 15. 37. also upon the
same day, all the Jews under Ashuerosh, were commanded to be put to death,
Esther. 3. 13* upon the same day, the Jews had a privilege given them to
stay all their enemies. Esther. 8. 12, this day the Jews also solemnized for
their joyful deliverance, Esther. 8. 17, 9 f 10 g 11 A 12 b 13 c 14 d 15 e 16
f 17 g 18 A 19 b The 14. day of this month, was called of the Jews Mardocheus
day, 2, Mac, 15, 37. also Purim, as may appear, Esther. 9, 21. 26. 20 c 21 d
22 e 23 f The 15. also is another day of Purim. Esther, 9, 21. 24 g 25 A The
anu^ciation of Mary. The 16. of this month, Lazarus was raised from the dead.
Ioh. 11. 43. 26 b 27 c 28 d 29 e 30 f 31 g

April has xxx. days. Sun rises at v. and xvii. minutes. Sets at. vi.
and xliii. minutes
1 A The first of this month Noah uncovered the Arc, and saw earth, Genesis 8.
13. Moses reared the tabernacle. Exo. 40. 2. 17. the Temple began to be
sanctified. 2. Chro. 29 17. 2 b 3 c 4 d 5 e 6 f The 10. of this month, the
children of Israel passed through the River Jorden on dry foot, Joshua. 4.
19. the Paschal Lamb was chosen. Exo. 12 3. 7 g 8 A 9 b 10 c The 13. of this
month, the edicte of King Ahashuerosh came out for the murdering of the
Jews. Esther. ^. 12. 11 d 12 e 13 f The 14. of this month, the Passover was
kept, Exo. 12. 6. Leuit. 23. 5. Joshua. 5. 10. 14 g 15 A 16 b The 15. of this
Month, the Israelits departed out of Egypt. Number. 33. 5 17 c 18 d The 16. of
this Month, Hezekiah made an end of sanctifieng and purging the Temple. 2.
Chro. ^9. 17. 19 e 20 f 21 g The 18. of this month, the Children of Israel
walked on dry land through the midst of the Red sea. Exo. 14. 19. 22 A 23 b 24
c The 24. Daniel saw his vision. Dan, 10. 14. 25 d S. Mark. 26 e 27 f 28 g 29
A 30 b

May has xxxj. days. Sun rises at iiii. and xxiii. minutes. Sets at
vii. and xxxviii. minutes
1 c Phillip and Jacob. The first of this month, Moses was commannded to
number the children of Israel. Number. 1. 1. etc. 2 d 3 e 4 f The fifth of this
Month, Christ is thought to have ascended up into heaven. Mar. 16. 19. Luke
24. 51. 5 g 6 A 7 b They which could not keep the passover at the day
appointed by ye Lord, were willed to celebrate the same the 14. of this
month. Number. 19. 10. 11. so did the Israelites, at the commandment of King
Hezechiah. 2. Chron. 30. 15. 8 c 9 d 10 e 11 f 12 g 13 A 14 b The 16. day Manna
rayned from heaven. Exo. 16. 14. 15 c 16 d The 17. day Noah entered the Arc,
and the flud began. Genesis 7. 11. 13. 17 e 18 f The 22. fire from heaven consumed
such as murmured against the Lord. Number. 11. 1. 19 g 20 A 21 b The 23. the
Israelites with great joy, triumphingly entered into the Castle of Jerusalem. 1.
Mac. 13. 51. Noah the 27. the waters being dried up, came forth of the Arc.
Genesis 8. 14. 22 c 23 d 24 e 25 f 26 g 27 A 28 b 29 c 30 d 31 e

June has xxx. days. Sun rises at iii. and xliiii. minutes. Sets at
viii. and xvi. minutes.
1 f The first coming of the children of Israel unto Mount Sinai was the
first of this month, where they abode eleue^ months, and 20, days in which
time all those things were done, recorded in Exo. 19, 1, etc, 2 g 3 A 4 b 5 c
6 d 7 e 8 f The firt of this month, Alexander that mighty Monarch of the
world was borne, of whom, Dan. 11. 3. does pro phesie. Also on this day the
famous tem ple of Diana in Ephesus, numbered among the seven wonders of the
world, was set on fire by Herostratus. The Jews likewise kept their feast
of Penticoste on this day. 9 g 10 A 11 b 12 c 13 d 14 e 15 f 16 g 17 A 18 b 19
c The 23, of this month, the first edict came out for the safetye of Gods
people the Jews against Haman, and the rest of their enemies. Esther. 8. 9, 20
d 21 e 22 f 23 g 24 A S. John Baptist. The 29, of this month, the Arc of
Noah, through the increase of waters, was lifted up from the earth. Genesis 7,
17, 25 b 26 c 27 d 28 e 29 f S. Peter. 30 g

July has xxxi. days. Sun rises at iiii. and lii. minutes. Sets at
viii. and viii. minutes.
1 A 2 b The 5, of this month, Ezekiel saw his vision, Eze, 1, 1, 3 c 4 d 5 e
The 6, of this month, the Capitol of Room, counted one of the 7, wonders of
the world, was burned: and the mirror of Christian Princes King Edward the 6.
dyed the sixth of this month Anno. 1553, 6 f 7 g 8 A 9 b 10 c 11 d 12 e The 9,
of this month, Jerusalem after it had a long while bin besteged by
Nebuccadnezzer, was taken. Ierem 39, 2, 13 f 14 g 15 A 16 b 17 c The 12, of
this month, Julius Caesar the first Roman Emperor, was born. Of him is this
month called Iulie, 18 d 19 e 20 f 21 g The 18, of this month, the Egiptians
begin their year, Plin. li. 8, cap. 47 22 A 23 b 24 c 25 d James. ap. 26 e 27
f 28 g 29 A 30 b 31 c

August has xxxj. days. Sun rises at iiii. and xliiii. minutes. Sets at
vii. and xvii. minutes.
1 d The first of this month, Aron. 40. years after the children of Israel
were come out of Egypt, dyed on Mount Hor, Number. 33. 38. Also on this day Ezra
with his company came out of Babel, unto Jerusalem. Ezra 7. 9. 2 e 3 f 4 g 5 A
6 b 7 c 8 d The 7. of this Month, Nebuccadnezzer burnt the house of the Lord,
and all Jerusalem. 2. Kin. 25. 8. 9. 9 e 10 f 11 g 12 A The 10 of this month
some think Jerusalem to have bin burnt by the Babilonians, Ierom. 52. 12.
Josephus. (lib. 6. cap. 26.) said it was burned afterward by the Romans the
same day. Therefore do the Jews on this day observe a most straight fast, and
go bare footed, and sitting on the ground read twice over the Lamentations of
Ieromie 13 b 14 c 15 d 16 e 17 f 18 g 19 A 20 b 21 c 22 d 23 e 24 f S. Bartho.
25 g 26 A 27 b 28 c 29 d 30 e 31 f

September has xxx. days. Sun rises at vi. and xxxvi. minutes. Sets at
vi. and xxiiii. minutes.
1 g The first of this month Haggei the Prophet began to prophecy. Hag. 1. 2.
2 A 3 b 4 c 5 d The ^ixt of this month, Ezechiel saw another vision. Eze. 8.
1. 6 e 7 f 8 g 9 A 10 b The 7. of this month our most noble Queen Elizabeth
was born at Greenwich, Anno. 1533. 11 c 12 d 13 e 14 f 15 g The 8. of this
month Ann. 73. Jerusalem was utterly with fire and sword destroyed by Titus
the Emperor. Joseph. lib. 7. cap. 26. 16 A 17 b 18 c 19 d S. Math. 20 e 21 f 22
g 23 A The 25. of this month Nehemiah finished the walls of Jerusalem. Nehem.
6. 15. 24 b 25 c 26 d 27 e S. Micha. 28 f 29 g 30 A b

October has xxxi. days. Snune rises at vi. and xxxvii. minutes. Sets at
v. and xxiii. minutes.
1 b The first of this month, the Jews celebrated the feast of trumpets,
Leuit. 23, 24, The latter Jews call this day the beginning of the new year.
2 c 3 d 4 e 5 f Jerusalem after it had bin possessed of Christie^ Princes 88,
years, through mortal discention, came into ye hands of the Saracins, Anno,
1187, 6 g 7 A 8 b 9 c The third of this month, some think the Jews fasted
for the death of Gedaliah, whereby occosion was offered to bring them again
into the miserable servitude of the Egiptians, 2, Kin. 25, 25, Ier, 41, 1, 2,
etc, 10 d 11 e 12 f 13 g 14 A 15 b The tenth of this month, the feast of
reconciliation was kept, Leu. 23, 27, so did the year of Jubilee every fiftye
year begin as on the same day, Leuit. 25, 9, 16 c 17 d 18 e Luke Euangel. 19 f
20 g The 15, of this month, the Jews observed the feast of Tabernacle, seaue^
days together, in memory of ye Lords protecting them in the desert, Leu. 23,
34, 21 A 22 b 23 c 24 d 25 e 26 f 27 g 28 A Simon and ^ude. 29 b 30 c 31 d

November has xxx. days. Sun rises at vii. and xxxvi. minutes. Sets at
iiii. and xxiiii. minutes.
1 e All Saints The third of this Month, Constantius the Emperor son to
Constantius the great, departed out of this world Anno, 364, Hist. tripart in
the end of the 5, book. 2 f 3 g 4 A 5 b 6 c 7 d The tenth of this month Ann.
1483, D. Martin Luther was born in Islebia. 8 e 9 f 10 g The 15, of this
month, was made a new holy day by Jeroboam without the commandment of God,
where, upon he committed most wicked Idolatry in Dan and Bethel, but he
remained not long unpunished, nor his people vnplagued for the same, as may
appear, 1. King. 12. 32, 33, 1, Kin. 13. 1, 2. etc. 11 A 12 b 13 c 14 d 15 e
16 f 17 g 18 A 19 b Queen Elizabeth began luckily to reign, for the
advancement of the Gospel of our Savior Christ, the 17. of this Month. 20 c
21 d 22 e 23 f 24 g The 18 of this month, Titus the Emperor, most cruelly
executed to death, a great number of the Jews. Iosep. lib. 7. cap. 20 25 A 26
b 27 c 28 d 29 e 30 f Andrew apostell.

December has xxxi, days. Sun rises at viii. and x. munites. Sets at
iii. and xlviii. munites.
1 A The 15. of this Month, Antiochus placed an abominable Idol upon the
Altar of the Lord, 1. Mac. 1. 57. 2 b 3 c 4 d 5 e The 20. of this Month,
Esdras exhorted the Israelites to put away their strange Wives, 1. Esd, 9. 5,
6, etc. 6 f 7 g 8 A The foundation of the second Temple was laid the 24. of
this Month. Hag. 2* 11. 19. 9 b 10 c 11 d 12 e The 25. of this Month, our
Savior Christ was borne of the Uirgin, the year after the worlds creation,
4018. On which day also, Antiochus Epiphanes entered into Jerusalem with a
mighty Army and spoiled the same. Iose. li. 32. cap. 6, On this day he
profaned the Altar of the Lord. 1. Macc. 1. 62. which day also the Jews kept
holy, because thereon the Temple was purged from Jdolatry. 1. Mac. 4. 59. 13 f
14 g 15 A 16 b 17 c 18 d 19 e 20 f 21 g S. Thomas apo* 22 A 23 b 24 c The 28.
of this Month, Herod caused the poor Innocents to be murdered, thinking
thereby to have slain Christ, Mat. 2. 16. etc. 25 d Christin. S. Steven S.
John. Innocen 26 e 27 f 28 g 29 A ^0 b ^1

To the right Worshipful Sir Henry Kniuet Knight, and Lady Elizabeth his wife:
Their humble servant John Norden, wishes happiness here, and after this life
eternal felicity.
THales a wise Philosopher, being demanded what was the hardest thing in the
world, answered, for a man to know himself, being then demanded what was the
easiest thing, he answered for a man to give good counsel unto another. Both
which his resolutions, to the said demands, I may be thought rightly to
verify, by this mine enterprise, being of so slender judgment, and young of
experience, taking upon me to discribe unto the learned and wise, a form for
their better instruction, wherein many may condemn my self, in neglecting the
principles of the same. But (right worshipful, notwithstanding my weakness) my
good meaning, is not herein altogether to be condemned, who of my self am
nothing, and can do nothing, Sed Deus been facientes adiuuat, God is ever
ready to further the good attempts of every man, his hand is ready to guide the
pen of all that endeavor to glorify his name by their doings, from whom if I
should not acknowledge all godly desires to proceed, and attribute the benefit
of every man's godly travail unto his provident care of our welfare I should
not but think my self an enemy unto his divinity. VVherby incurring his heavy
displeasure, my travail should turn to mine own trouble, and my desired
praise unto my deserved pains: But for as much as Lex domini imaculata est,
conuertans animas, testimonium eius fidele sapientiam prestaus paruulis. The
Law of the Lord being undefiled converting the soul, his testimony faithful
and gyuing wisdom even to the babes and little ones, mine hope is that his
hand was the directour of my pen, and his grace the governor of my heart in my
proceeding: and as my self have had, no small comfort and sweetenes, in the
exercise thereof already. And so much as I persuade my self it can not be, but
likewise beneficial to such as in ^eale shall vouchsafe to bestow some time
in the faithful practice thereof. Notwithstanding, some will say there is
prayer books enough (in my judgment) not too many, so that they be consonant
and agreeable to that form of prayer which Christ himself set down and
prescribed, wherein is contained six petitions or requests unto God, whereof
the three first are for the setting forth of the glory of God, the three last
pertayne only to our own commodities, as for all things necessary for our
bodies for remission of sins, and to be preserved from temptations which
concern the soul, in which six petitions, is contained the some of all
prayers whatsoever. And as it has been lawful for the zealous and godly for
their own godly practice, heretofore to writ, and the same for the benefit of
others allowed to be published, I presume, (acknowledging my travail
altogether inferior to those) to commit this my practice to the Print, not
deemeing it of my self worthy, but by the judgment of others, learned,
persuaded to consent thereunto, the rather wylling for that my purpose in
writing, and intent in publishing rightly wayed, and the matter duly
considered, none (or rather the less) by reason of your good countenance will
seem to vomit out their conte^ptuous terms of the work or reproaches of the
poor paintaker, as against the best book, and most zealous Author that ever
wrote, the envious have done, but for mine own part, I hold me rather worthy
rebuke then reward, for wading so far into that that belongs unto the
zealous, learned, and men of most sound judgment to set forth, and I
(being as it were ignorant) should put before the eyes of such as have both
knowledge and wisdom, a glass or spectacle for their better light and
furtheraunce when as (in deed) I should rather repair unto them, as blind,
for their aid to direct my self. But (right worshipful) acknowledging my
fault herein (upon hope of your taking it in good part) I presume to present
this my simple travail unto you, taking it in hand with no less good meaning
unto the highness (my light, and guide) with no less good will to you, then he
who has deserved far better for his travail, I have entitled it A pensive
man's practice: and I think (not unfitly) who in my too much liberty in the
service of the right worshipful, Lady Ann Knyuet, your late disceased mother,
and my good Lady and Mistress, spending many days in idleness and void of good
(but in fryuolous) exercises, among many inclyning to their own pleasant
devises, considering that S. Ierom says that Per publica^ viam non ambulemus
we should not walk after the most: And weying the sentence of Terence, who
says (truly) that Omnes deteriores sumus licentia, All men are the worsse for
too much liberty. I withdrewe me from their so familiar society, insomuch, as I
was thought of some sulleyne, of some proud, of some foolish, and none past
with out his verdite of my solitarines, whereunto upon these considerations, I
had drawn mine untoward desires, in so much, as by sundry sudden passions,
and greefes of heart, for things passed and to come, I was often perplexed,
the grace of God (only of his mercy) more prevailing with me, the^ an infinite
troop of carnal persuasions I betook me to often and sundry prayers unto
almighty God in all my perplixities, and troubles, with earnest de sire to the
reading of that, that most might stir my dulled and untoward mind to the
desire thereunto, whereby by little and little, feeling a certain inward
sweetenes and comfort, to grow in mine heart, by the practice thereof, (the
flesh being always repugnant) it began to be of such force, and to my comfort
in my necessities, as I thought it a fit practice in allpensiuenes, a
practice in all perplexities most precious, in all distresses most delectable
ye in all things, in all places, at all times most requisite and comfortable,
which (although some will condemn my circumstaunce) moved me to give it the
title of A pensive man's practice, which (I speak not to mine own glory) I
would that every one in all extreamityes would use the same (I mean prayer)
he should find comfort therein, yea he should find (as I know by experience)
pleasure in perplexitye, for no thing moves sooner desire of invocation upon
God the^ bodily necessities, for the pleasure of the body takes away the good
desire of the soul, we ought to pray for the gift of the spirit of God, and
then shall not our desires depart empty away, a zealous and faithful inward
desire, without motion of the tongue in our distress, sends up even to the
throne of God so sweet a savor. That even the holy ghost, in our greatest
pensiuenes, wylbe most ready to give assistaunce to our good desires, and will
bring the same to most wished perfection. But corruption abounds in all men,
all men are prone to do evil even by nature, and none there is that does
good, no not one. The spyryte is often wylling, but the flesh is always weak,
we must therefore pray continually, and when we are so dull as that the outward
show does argue insufficient feruency, in us having (yet) a longing desire.
Let us then in heart* faithfully say: Oh Lord increase our faith, and let us be
occupied in continual contemplation of heavenly things, and no doubt but
dulnes will soon vanish, and the spirit have his effect: for it is not the
tongue only or lips, that makes the sacrifice of prayer, sweet and
acceptable to God, but an humbled mind, a contrite and sorrowful spirit,
declyning from sin, and inclyning to God: wherefore it behooves us under the
burden of our sins, with David to groan in heart, saying, we have sinned, we
have done amiss, we have dealt wickedly, and in the name of that second
Adam, let us pray for power to tread the fruits of the first Adam under our
feet, for of our selves we are weak, we are of no force to remove that is
evil, or to embrace and follow that which is good, but all what good is
comes from God, to whom we ought at all times to bend our repentaunt hearts,
and pray him for his sweet and well-beloved son Jesus Christ's sake to show us
and guide us, by the working and direction of his holy spirit, the right pathe
unto the kingdom of heaven, that all things* as well ghostly as bodily, may be
ministered unto us. It were superfluous to make any great collection of proofs,
of the singular effect of this most excellent practice, of earnest and
faithful prayer, for praying in the name of Christ, he shall obtain
whatsoever he knows needful for us, examples whereof are infinite,
wherefore, omitting further discourse, I have set before every particular
prayer, certain godly motions unto the prayer following, the rather to induce
and stir up the godly minded to the use thereof: hoping by his assistance,
by (whose these small fruits have proceeded,) to perform the execution of my
small Tallant, to a further benefit of others hereafter: It rests now (right
worshipful) to pray your favorable pardon, for presuming to publish the same
under your good acceptaunce, not standing in deed, long in suspense, to whose
hands first to commit my travail. But your woonted clemencye, wisdom,
and zeal, soon stirred my willing mind to present it unto your selves,
dismayed at nothing, but at the simplenes of the painetaker only, who being in
all respects poor, presents this day a poor gift, praying pardon for his
boldness, and lawful favor at your hands for his reward. And though many be
the precious gifts, that this day pass from one to another, and they tend
(but as the smallest and simplest) to the remembrance of the new year, I
most humbly beseech your worships willingly to accept this handful of cold
water, flowing from the fountain of the well of life, which gift as it is not
mine: so I crave but contentation at your hands and wylling enterteinment of
the simple messenger, the presentor heerof, and with him to give thanks to the
heavenly giver. In whom as all wisdom consists, so I humbly pray him to
instill into our hearts, that water of heavenly life, his holy spirit to
direct us al, to perfect perfection in heavenly things for his sons sake, in
whose name I heartily wyshe you as a whole and happy new year, and many
hereafter to his will, so new joys here, and in the end eternal joys of
eternal bliss. Westminster. 22. December.

Your worships bound and obedient Servant. John Norden.

Meditationes sieve sententiae piae de huius vite fragilitate et de vita eterna,
secundum ordinem Alphabetarij in nomen Henrici Knyuet militis.
H HEC est voluntas Domini vt omnes qui videt filium eius and credit in eum
habeat vitam eternam. Ioh 6. E Estote parati quia filius hominis veniet in hora
qua non putatis. Luke 18. N Nolumus nos ignorari fratres de dormientib* vt non
contristemini, sicut et ceteri qui spem non habent. 1 These. 4. R Recordatus est
dominus quia puluis sumus, homo sicut foenum, dies eius tanquam flos agri, sic
efflorebit. Psalm. 102. I In imagine pertransit homo, sed et frustra
conturbatur, Thezaurizat, et ignorant cui congregabit ea. Psalm. 38. C Cuncti
dies nostri dilabuntur: Annos nostros finimus dicto citius. Psalm. 89. V
Vniuersa vanitas, omnis homo viuens. Psa. 83 S Statutum est ominbus hominibus,
semel mori post illud autem iuditium. Heb. 7. K Kahos hulus mundi in principio
formauit Deus, et statuit iterum semel perire cum omnibus in eo continentibus.
Gen, 1. N Nihil intulimus in mundum nec offerre quicquid possumus. 1. Tim. 6. I
Illi serui beati quos cum venerit dominus inuenirit vigilantes Luke 18. V Vita
nostra quid est? vapor est ad modicum patens and deinceps exterminabitur. Iam.
4. E Eccemensurabiles posuit dies nostros dominus. et substantia nostra
tanquam, nihilum ante illum. Psalm. 38. T Traditus est Christus propter dilicta
nostra, et resurrexit propter iustificationem nostram. Romans 4.
Certain godly precepts, Alphabetically set down, upon the name of the
right worshipful the Lady Elizabeth Kniuit.
E Endure temptations patiently.
L Live as thou may live eternally.
I Embracing truth unfeignedly.
Z Zealously and freely.
A Ask God mercy heartely.
B Beware of evil warely.
E Endure all crosses willingly.
T Trust in GOD faithfully.
H Hear his word attentively.
K Know him thy maker rightly.
N None helps but he effectually,
Y Yield him praises daily.
V Use his gifts reverently.
E Embrace them thankfully.
T Take all things of him joyfully.
A godly motion to awaken the hearts of such as sleep in securitye, by the
Lady Anne Kneuet.
A Arise Oh sinful soul in haste, lie not in slumber still:
N Now time begins to fly full fast, to make his final will.
N Now come the days of woeful sights, or now the days of bliss
E Eternal joys the lost shall see, feel pains who do amiss.
K Knock now or never at thy breast, thou soul that lie secure,
N Neglect not time, for tune does paste, tho time for aye endure,
E Each (...) that hopes to have good hap that happy life has led.
V V(...) shall hap the same when cleiesh corpse are dead.
E Exchange thy choice of worldly weal, for heavenly harbor here,
T Too late to turn when Trumpet soundes and final flames appear
The Printer to the godly Reader.
I Crave thy favorable pardon (Gentle Reader) for sundry faults past in the
impression, and thine own willing amendment of them in reading, as they are
heerevnder corrected; The cause of so many committed, was, that the Author
could not have the examination of the proofs thereof: But at the next
impression, more care and diligence shall be given, by the grace of GOD, whose
grace I wish to direct thee. Amen

Leaf. Page. Line. Fault. Correction. 4 2 25 thy business my business. eodem
eodem 26 my blessing. thy blessing. 9 1 18 to ye sanctetie the sanctetie. 10
eodem 27 where were. 25 eodem 24. desease deseased. 26 2 4 as white be as
white. 32 eodem 6 learn teach. 59 2 9 vndeserudly deservedly. eodem eodem 27
wylles wyles.

A pensive man's practice.
Before we pray we must forgive, if we have any thing against any man,
otherwise our heavenly Father will not forgive us. Mar. 11.
A prayer to Christ.
O Sweet Jesus, who haste taken upon thee to be our intercessor and
Advocate, unto God thine heavenly Father, vouchsafe (I humbly be secche thee)
to accompanye me, in these my supplications and prayers, presenting them unto
his heavenly majesty, in such sort as for thy sake (sweet Jesus) they may
be acceptable unto him, to the washing away of my sins, and obteining things
necessary for me and all men, according unto his will in all things. Amen.

O Lord increase my faith.
O Lord open thou my lips, that my mouth may extol thee with praise, and be
thankful unto thee for thy benefits, and grant that I speak nothing but
that which may be to thine honor and glory, to the relief of our
necessities bodily and ghostly. Amen.

O Lord make speed to send us help and succor, from the Tower of thy
strength.

O Lord let thine heavenly kingdom be always ready to receive us to
eternal salvation.

Eternal praises be unto thee oh God. So be it.

A prayer for the assistaunce of Gods holy Spirit.
Ask what thou will and thou shall have,
If thou in Christ the same do crave:
For Christ thy Mediator sees*
When thou to him do fall on knees.
Ask and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened
unto you. Matt. 7.

If ye that he evil, can give unto your Children good gifts, when they ask
them, how much more shall our heavenly father, give his holy spirit to the^
that faithfully desire it. Luke 11.

We know not what to ask, nor how to pray, as we ought, but the spirit it
self makes request for us, with sighs which can not be expressed. Romans 8.

Seeing therefore our prayers be vain, and of none effect, without the grace
and assistaunce of Gods holy spirit, let us fail down unto the throne of his
Majesty, praying faithfully for the same, and it shall be given us.

O Almighty God and omnipote^t father who comfortest such as be sorrowful, and
who give all good and perfect gifts: as thou of thy free favor and love
have willed us, in all our afflictions and necessities and as often as we find
our selves burdened with any kind of tribulation, or affliction, either of
body or mind, to call for ease at thy merciful hands: So vouch safe to
hear my cry, and to consider the secret groans, sighs and sorrows of my
sillye soul. Oh blessed and eternal God, (lo here before the thro^e of thy
mercy, even at the gate of thy sweet promises) I thy silly creature and work
of thine own hands, prostrate my self in heart, most humbly beseeching thee,
to send down upon my dark understanding, the bright beams of thine holy
spirit to lighten me, and to direct me in all my supplications, and prayers,
and especially, at this time (Oh Lord) for that thou know my weakness,
wickedness, and ignorance, to be such, as I am altogether unable, to frame my
requests according to thy will, or to seek, that is truly for mine own
souls health, and am altogether ignorant of the right gate to knock at,
without thine especial grace, directing and assisting me: Wherefore I most
humbly beseech thee, to address and prepare mine heart, to the true
understanding of thy will, and my tongue, and lips; to the pure and unfeigned
calling on thy holy name, even for thy son Jesus Christ's sake, our only
Mediator, and Advocate, for whose bitter deaths sake, I humbly beseech thee,
of thy mere favor, and loving kindness, to wasn me, and to make me clean, by
the operation of thine holy spirit, that being sanctified* I may utter those
things, which may be unto thee, an acceptable sacrifice, through the same thy
sons mediation, and intercession; And that nothing pass the bands, of mine
vnsta^ed lips, but that which may beseem a single heart, always sounding to
thine honor, and setting forth of thy most worthy praise, both at this time,
and at all times; Let th^ne holy spirit (Oh Lord) come unto me, let it
continue with me, work and prevail effectually in me, unto the end, that I
may both at this time begin, and for evermore continue, as thou willest I
should, namely in faith, that I fall not in any temptations; In hope, that I
may constantli^ look for, and faithfully attain unto perfect understanding of
thy will, and ablenes in all things to fulfill the same: Make me also (good
Lord) fervent in charity, that I may freely and vnfeynedlie, even from mine
heart forgive and forgett, all injuries, wrongs, and evil doings, of such,
as by any means have ostended me, with hearty prayer for their amendment: that
I approaching unto the throne of thy mercy, in a pure and simple heart, may
hartelie, as well for all others as for my self, for things necessary, both
for body and soul* say that prayer* which thy deerlie and well beloved son
Jesus Christ, taught us to say* Oh our Father which art in heaven. etc.

Oh Lord increase our faith*
A shorter prayer to the like purpose.
OH God almighty, most loving and most righteeus, who vouchsafest to instill
into the hearts of thy chosen servants, grace, unfeignedly to serve thee, and
to call upon thine holy name, in their necessity and distress. Uouchsafe I
humbly beseech thee, ^f thy mere mercy, to expel out of mine heart, all
natural dulnes, misbeleefe, and blindness of error. And through thine holy
spirit to plant in steed thereof, perfect zeal, and unfeigned desire, to
prostrate my self in heart before thine heavenly Majesty, in faith unfeigned.
That at this time it may please thee, so to accept these my supp(...)cations
and prayers, as I may obtain at thy merciful hands, what soever thou see
necessary both for body and soul, through Jesus Christ our only Sautour and
Redeemer. Amen.

Oh Lord increase my faith.
A morning prayer for the working day.
Before thou d^o thy work begin,
Thank God: crave pardon for thy sin*
And then thy work shall prosper so,
As want shall never breed thee woe.
WHat a great benefit we receive at the hands of almighty God, by our
natural sleep, none is ignorant what perrils we escape, in the dark and
doleful night, we may easily judge. And what fauome the almighty extends
toward us, in giving us lodging, not in the fields but in houses, not upon
the hard and cold ground, but upon soft pillowes, warmelie covered*
experience teaches: What thanks for this so bountiful benefits of his, we
are daily bound to yield, I would we allknewe, and had will to yield them
accordingly. as did David who Psalm. 55 in the morning, at midday and at night,
calling on the name of the Lord, with thanks said, Psalm. 143* 6.

Lord let me hear thy loving kindness betimes in the morning, for in thee is
my trust.

So let us yield his majesty due praises for his continual loving kindness
toward us saying.

OH almighty God, father of our lord Jesus Christ, who have vouchsafed (of
thy thy great favor and love) even from my childhood unto this day, to take
such fatherly care of me, that nothing has destroyed, or hurt me, but have
been saselie preserved both day and night, from sudden death, and from all
other perrils and dangers incident unto mankind, and have all my life been
preserved: And of thy free favor and love (without a^^e deserte or merit of
mine to my great comfort) enjoyed the sweet benefit of sleep and rest,
which is most wholesome, for my poor and weak body, yea and so good a
nu^^iture thereunto, as good soil, to the barraine field, or thy timely
showers to the dry ground, or meat acceptable to the hungry stomach.

Oh sweet Lord, such has been thy fatherly care of me, this night past that
the sleep which thou have given me, is most comfortable, both to my body,
and soul, in so much, as I am the more aptly given to the execution, of my
worldly business, and the service of thy divine majesty this morning, wherein
asist me (sweet Lord) with the help of thine holy spirit, comfort and
defend me this day and ever, with thy merciful aid, that none affliction,
hurt, or misfortune, dismay me, no tribulation or anguish of mind draw me
from thee, no worldly care, delight, or fantasy, carry me at any time into
any wicked cogitation, action, or speech, for (Lord) I know that it is not
thy will, that any evil shouldedwell in us, or that we should at any time
offend thee, but to keep our hearts pure and undefiled, as a fit receptacle
for thy Majesty. Yet thou suffer sometimes, unlawful affections to have
the upper hand, to the end, that we (feeling our weakness, and corruption)
should wholly confess, all our strength, all our godly cogitations, and
works, to proceed from thee. And for that all flesh is full of sin, and
that the just fall seven times a day, forgive (Lord) my wickedness, mine
offenses, and sin committed, either this night past, by foolish dreams
fantasies, or other temptations, or at any time since I came into this
miserable world, being a most sinful creature: and that (being pardoned by
thy mercy in Jesus Christ, I may proceed in the residue of my days (governed
by thy holy spirit) void of all offenses, using my vocation and calling so,
as may be to the setting forth of thy glory, maintenance of thy favor
toward me, and getting those things which may be sufficient for the
maintenance of mine estate here, and for the relief of such as are committed
to my charge; And grant me always, such regard of serving thee, as thine
hand may always direct me to good and happy success, in all mine affairs;
Bless thou the work of mine hands (good Lord) and grant me so to fly
ydlenes, the mother and Nurce of all evil, that both this day and all my life,
I may, by godly care and travail, get me a sufficient, and competent living
here, that I be no burden and charge to such as are rich and welthie, nor
depend upon the succor, help* and furtheraunce of others, whose help is most
slippery and deceitful Least that in hope thereof, I giving my self to
ydlenes, and loytering (when their help shall be withheld from me) I be
driven (as the wise man says) to go in a ragged coat, and to want my food.
But contrary wise (Oh Lord) grant that I may so employ my self, to labor,
and dilligent execution of thy business, this day and ever, that, I may (through
my blessing) luckelie prosper therein, and show my self so helpefull to the
poor impotent and needy, as the fruit of my travail, shall extend unto.
That thou may fulfill in me, that most sweet promise of thine. That who so
considers the poor and needye, thou will deliver him in the time of trouble.
Lord thy mercy is infinite, and thy love toward us unspeakable, wherefore
give me grace, always to serve thee, yea at all times and in all places both
in labor and rest, wealth, and poverty, sickness and health, yea all my life
and at the hour of my death, that I may pass this day, and all the rest of my
transitorye life, in the fulfilling of thy laws, and be ready at thy
favorable beck and call, to come and appear before thy throne of mercy, in
perfect hope, of thy loving receiving me into the bosom of thy sweet
imbracinges, not for my woorthines or d^serces, (which is but corruption) but
for the merits of thy son Jesus Christ, there to rest, inioying the fruits
and benefit of his death and bitter passion in whose name, I refer my self
and all mine, both this day and ever, unto thy Fatherly protection, humbly
beseeching thee, to direct almy thoughts, words and actions, unto my lives
end. Good God.

Amen.
Oh Lord increase my faith.
A short prayer to the like purpose.
I Thank thee most merciful Father, my maker and preserver, that thou have so
lovingly vouchsafed to tender my safety this night past, giving me sweet
sleep, to the refreshment of my feeble and weak body. So (of thy goodness
vouchsafe) to extend ye like loving favor, to wards me this day, whereby I
may be both safely preserved, from all kind of evil, and employ my self,
dilligentlie unto the execution of my vocation, to the relief of me and mine,
and to thy glory.

Amen.
Oh Lord increase my faith.
A prayer for the Queen.
What so thou he, pray God always,
To bless our Queen with happy days:
Whose wisdom (under God) so long,
Has kept this Realm from sorrame wrong.
THe unspeakable benefit of our long peace, and gracious tranquillity, may
(without many circumstaunces or many words) suffice to move thankful
minds to praise the God of Heaven, for his unspeakable love, toward us, in
giving us so gracious a gouernesse, under whom we have not only these xxv.
years, peaceablye lived but enjoyed the comfortable passage and food of the
gospel, when many other nations have wanted the same, to the famishing (as it
were) of their poor souls, wherefore, considering, that we may (if not the
more to our shame) feed thereof at full, and thereto friendly entreated, and
enjoined, not only (which is general) by the word it self, but by several
injunctions set forth for the further aunce of Gods glory and our profit by
her majesty, in England only: And therefore (as we ought for all men) so
especially we are commanded to pray for the good and prosperous estate of
Kings and Princes, and those in authority. 2. Tim. 2. Let us, as we have
unspeakable cause, beseech God of his goodness, favorably to look upon our
most gracious Queen Elizabeth, and to grant unto her a prosperous reign,
with many and happy days, to the pleasure of him, and comfort of us, Let us
not forgitt it, least God forgett us.

ALL possible thanks we give unto thee, Oh Lord of mercy, King of all the
Kings, and kingdoms of the earth, for that thou have vouchsafed to place over
us, thy little flock of this Realm, so pure a guide of true religion,
Elizabeth (by thine heavenly providence) our Queen, under whom, enjoying the
free liberty of the true service of thee, we rest in a quiet estate both of
body and mind. We humbly pray thy favorable regard, to behold with
merciful eyes, the same thy servant our sovereign Lady, and gouernes. And so
fructify her heart, with the good grain of thine holy spirit, that she
always inclined (by the working thereof) to the settinge forth of thy word,
may walk according to the truth of the same, sincerely, that we thy servants,
and under thee her subjects, seeing her godly example, may be ashamed to fall
from that due form, of honoring thy name, which for thy glory, she has
through thy grace, by the rule of thy word, prescribed unto us. Banish good
Lord from her heart, all ignorance, and print therein perfect wisdom, and
knowledge of thine heavenly will, give her an obedient mind, abounding withal
humility toward thy divine majesty: Save and defend her from the tyranny
of foreign power and authority, and from all such, as profesle not inwardly
unfeigned zeal of thy Gospel, give her godly Counselors, and such zealous
and true hearted ministers of thy will, that she and we, according to the truth,
of every our several functions, may truly serve thee, in this life, and in
the end, for evermore reign with thee in thine heavenly kingdom, for Jesus
Christ's sake, our only Redeemer Advocate, and sweet Savior.

Amen.
Oh Lord increase our faith.
A prayer for the Sunday morning.
Let labor pass* let prayer be,
This day the cheifest work for thee*
AS the Lord has assigned unto man six days of seven for his necessary
travail. So has he expreslie commanded Genesis 2. the seventh to be hallowed
and kept, only for the service of him, where in (all business set aparte) we
should refer our selves to prayer, to the hearing or reading of the word of
the Lord, without any ungodly exercise at all: wherefore as did David, Psalm.
55. 6. every day, so let us, especially this day, instantly call upon the
name of the Lord and he will hear us. And with Esaias. Esaias. 26. Let our souls
with a longing desire in the night, seek un to the Lord, and in the morning
earelie call upon his name, so shall our doings please him, and all shall go
well with us. And especially upon this day which the Lord has reserved for
the service of himself. Nu. 1^. Punishing such, even with death, who break
the same, as appears in the book of Numbers, by him who was at the
commandment of the Lord, stoned to death, for gathering sticks on the
Sabbath day: Esaias. 56. Blessed is the man that keeps the Sabbath day
undefiled, serving the Lord in prayer. Esaias. 58. Not in seeking his ownewil,
nor speaking a vain word. Pray that it may be honored, and not abused and
dishonored as it is: least God the Creator of it and us, punish our
disobedience.

OH almightye Father, most wholesome protectoure, and keeper, both of souls
and bodies of the faithful. I yield the humble and hearty thanks, for
defending and saving me, thy sinful creature, this night past, and all my
life hethervnto, from sudden death, and from other perrils and dangers, where
into my silly soul and weak body are subject to fall. And wherewith I am
so besette, that (had I not been preserved by thee) it could not otherwise
have been, but my body had perished, and my silly soul been carried into
eternal perdition.

But most sweet Lord, my strong Castle and defense, my shield and buckler, my
sure refuge, and succor, who have continual regard of the safety of thy
servants, that thou never suffer them to be overcome with any kind of
evil, nor to fall into any kind of danger: vouchsase to forgive me what
soever I have committed, and done against thy divine will, either sleeping or
waking, this night or any time (secretly or openly) heretofore, by reason
of the corruption which remains in me.

And vouchsafe, that as I have quietly passed this night, so I may enjoy, at
thy merciful hands whatsoever thy fatherly providence, shall think meet and
convenient, for mine own, and for the relief, of such as thou have committed
unto my charge, and government.

Establish (good Lord) within my weak and feeble body, strength, to
withstand all evil motions of the flesh, all ungodly desires of the mind,
and worldly vanities, that I may fervently (as I ought) continually, both in
the morning and at night, and at noone day, yea and at all times, and in all
places, truly serve thee, without hypocrisy, dissimulation, or malice. And
for thy mercies sake, keep me this day, and all the rest of my transitory
life, from sudden and unprovided death, keep my tongue and lips, that I
speak or utter nothing, which may be either uncomely to be spoken, or whereof
may redownde hurt, or hinderaunce to my self or others, but that I may
endeavor (as much as in me lies) to speak and utter those things, which may
be, to the setting forth of thy glory, maintenance of peace and concord,
and to the reducing such into the right way, as wander and go astray; As for
slaundering, lying, backbyting, falsewitnes bearing, envy, and such like,
(good Lord) take utterly from me. And keep mine heart and mind, from the
most damnable sin of murmuring against thee, and from dyspayre, that in all
adversities, tribulations, and troubles, I may always, bear, a patient,
contented, faithful, and a thankful mind, with full persuasion, that if thou
suffer, mine adversaries (being maliciousliebent against me) to revile me,
persecute me, to molest or hurt me, or if thou permit either fire to consume
me, or my substance, or any other casual mean to diminish mine estate, and
stay of my living, or if I sustain loss of friends, sickness of body, or
hurt of my limbs, it proceeds not but by thy divine providence, yea only
of thy mere love, and fatherly care, which thou have of mine amendment: for
nothing happens to those whom thou love (breed it within their weak
minds never so great grief, or fall it out never so contrary, to their
desires) but it brings with it some secret working, for their good.
Wherefore in the name of thy son Jesus Christ, I most humbly beseech thee,
that thou will vouchsafe, to settle in mine heart, such perfection of patience,
as what soever, either this day or hereafter shall happen or befall unto me, I
may accept it as a most wholesome medicine, for my so deadly disease of
security, and so in hope of thy loving kindness, and mercy to go forward
this day, and all my life, in perfect love, unfeigned zeal, and continual
obedience to thy will. In hearing thy word attentively, in reading the same
dilligentlie, in following it effectually, and in praying unto thee zealously,
and faithfully, embracing all goodness willingly, and avoiding all evil
watilie, that so spending this day, I may the better proceed to the execution
of my calling, this week following, to the relief of my necessity, and
furtheraunce of my neighbors; That so continuing unto the end, I may receive
the reward of thy celestial kingdom, which thy son Jesus Christ has
purchased with his blood, for all true believers in thee. In number of whom
(sweet Lord) for the merytes of him thy son, make me, that I with them, and
they with me, may continually sing laud and praise unto the Trinity
eternally, which grant for thy son Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
Oh Lord increase my faith.
A short prayer to the like purpose.
ALL possible thanks, I render unto thee, most loving and most merciful
Father, that it has pleased the^ to be my careful watchman, this night,
preserving me from many evils, vouchsafing sleep unto mine eyes, to the
unspeakable comfort of my poor bo^^e. Let it likewise please thee, I humbly
beseech thee, to give me grace, according to thine heavenly will, (...)
express commandment, (as at all times) so this day especially, to employ me
to the service of thee, in all godliness, and pureness of life, leaving all
bodily labors and exercise, as to the Sanctetie which thou in the beginning
g^uest unto the day, when thou had^est sinished all thy work, does instly
deserve. Amen.

Oh Lord increase my faith.
A confession of sins.
Confess thy sins to God on hie:
Who pardons sinners when they cry.
FOr as much as all men by nature are sinners, and none, (Christ excepted) ever
lived without man fold offenses, Let us with Dame^l ^^^esse Da. 9 that we have
sinned, that we dealt wickedlie, in tr^sgressing the law of the Lord. Pro. 28.
For who so hides his sins shall not prosper: but he that confesses them and
forsakes them, shall find mercy. For when Adam Genesis 3. had broken the
commandment of the Lord, be excused his fault, and was accursed. But David
confessing his wickedness found favor The lost son Lu. 15. after long going
astray, at last returned, confessing his fault and obtained pardon. John
Baptist. Mat. 3, when he first preached the gospel, he baptized none, but
such as confessed their sins: wherefore let us faithfully, and continually
upon our knees, acknowledge our sins, and prepare our selves to unfeigned
repentance, and undoubtedly we shall obtain mercy at the hands of the Lord
For if we acknowledge our sins. 1. John. 1. he is faithful to forgive them,
according to his promise. Say with David. Psa. 23. I will acknowledge my sins
unto the Lord, and will not hide mine iniquity from him, yea confess against
thy self, and he will forgive thy sins.

OH omnipotent father, and everliving God, from whose wisdom and
foreknowledge, no secrets are or may be hidden: but do plainly consider
and behold the works words, and thoughts, of all creatures, I most humbly
beseech thee of thine infinite mercy to have compassion upon my sins,
which are so great and grievous, so many, and they so vile, and loathsome, to
thine heavenly eyes, that thou can not abide to turn thy loving
countenance toward me. Oh Lord I do confess, that my conception, my
birth, yea and all my life, has been in sin, our Fathers and mothers sinful,
even from the stock of our great Grandfather Adam, whose blindness should
have been our light, and whose sight was turned to our blindness and darkness,
by the deceitful and most vile alurings of that enemy of ours, the wily and
most subtle serpent satan, by whose ^ntisements, our forefather (being
clothed with innocence and simplicity, in most pure and unspeakable happiness)
was moved to the desire of the knowledge of that, that thou would he should
have been ignorant of: And which thou had utterly forbidden him. By
breking of which thy commandment, he with Eve (whom thou had ordained out
of his own flesh, to be his companion and comfort) where with thine Angel
(according to thy determinate will) driven out of Parradice, a place of joy, to
a pit of sorrow, from good to evil, from ease to labor and travail, from
quietness to trouble, from wealth to want, from light to darkness, from mirth to
mourning, from succoure to be succourles. In so much (Oh Lord) as he, our
father, purchased for us his children, none other possession or inheritance,
but the unhappy enteraunce into sin and corruption; And we his children,
being by succession engrossed in this detestable stock of sin, have
hethervnto (notwithstanding thy most loving, and by so sundry means, calling
us by thine holy Gospel of comfort) continued therein, to our utter
perdition, deserved death and destruction, confessing and acknowledging our
selves, runnagates, outcastes and trewantes, and of our selves altogether
unable, to cast away and lay aside, these works of darkness, and to obtain
again the Lantern of light. Yet for as much as I am most sorry from the very
bottom of mine heart, that I have offended thee, wilfully, and disobedientlie
strayed from the ways of thy Laws. And do unfeignedly condemn al my former
life, to be most vile, determining in heart, (by thy grace) to forsake sin,
and cleave unto godliness, and pureness of living, to decline from evil, and to
do good, I most humbly (even upon the knees of mine heart) beseech, thine
almightye Majesty, to lysten with a most willing and attentive ear, unto my
groninges, secret sighs, and unfeigned repentance, and with the eyes of thy
mercy, to behold my lamenting spyrite, and so vouchsafe to accept the same*
as it may be unto thee a sufficient sacrifice for all former evils. That I
being free from sin, (not by any deserte or merit of mine own, but only
by the death and passion, of thy Son Jesus Christ, may take perfect hold
of the remission thereof: and fully persuade my self, that through the death
of him thy son, I am again restored to the former happiness, and blessed
estate which our first parent Adam, was in the beginning placed in.

And the head of that subtle Serpent satan, (who so wylilye deceived him) by
the seed of the Woman, to be altogether bruzed, trodden down, and vanquished,
and his power quite taken from him. So that he is not able any more, to lift
him self up against the Children of Faith, as he seeks and desires, yea
and often preuayleth against the weak and feeble ones.

Vouchsafe (sweet LORD, and most loouing Jesus) to consider my weakness,
and frayltye, and mortefye in me all delights of this miserable world, and
the corrupt flesh. And stand between me and Satan, that he prevail no
further against me, then I shall be able to resyste, for we can not stand,
but do continually yield, unto the deceivable shows of this world, the
false motions of the flesh, and temptations of Satan, without thy continual
aid and assistaunce, wherewith (I beseech thee) both at this time and ever,
a^me me, wash me with thy blood, and purge me with thy grace, that I may now
begin, and for ever continue, in living according to thine holy and heavenly
commandment, to the praise of thy name; and mine eternal salvation, sweet
Savior.

Amen.
Oh Lord increase my faith*
A short prayer to the like purpose.
OH Father of mercy, and God of all goodness, I confess unto thee, the
corruption which from Adam to us remains in our flesh, whereby we daily
rebel against thy divine Majesty, vouchsafe Oh Lord, I humbly beseech thee,
for Jesus Christ's sake, to forgive my sins, and to pardon mine iniquities.
And instill into my heart, unfeigned repentance, that the death of him thy
Son, may take away the hea^e burden, which the fall of our first Parents
laid upon us* Amen.

Oh Lord increase my faith.
A prayer for the evening.
When thou betakst thee to thy rest,
Commit thee to tha'lmighties hest:
For when thou lie down at night,
Thou art not sure to see day light.
ALthough that we can not at all times, duly examine our selves as concerning
our life past, yet once in the day it is most requisite to consider, how we
have spent the time past: namely at night to weigh what we have done the day
before, and in the morning, to consider, how we have past the night. For
although the night was ordained for rest, yet as says Paul. 1. These 5. we
should then watch and be sober, singing praises unto the Lord, as David did,
Ps. 42 giving him thanks for the help of his presence, that is to say, for
his protection, the day past, praying the same in the dark night, when all
th^^^es by reason of the darkness are hidden, and when the wicked god about
their evil pretended purposes, to the disturbance of the godly. Therefore,
whatsoever thou do Dan. II, whether thou lie down or (...), be medita^^ng the
law of the Lord.

OH heavenly God and eternal Father, giver of all good things, and
protector of all that love thee, I yield thee most humble and hearty thanks,
for thine inestimable benefits, not only for keeping and preserving me this
day, but all my life, that neither mine enemies have prevailed against me, as
they sought and desired, nor any other misfortune which within this world is
incident unto mankind, has overcome me, but have like a most loving father,
and careful Puruey or, given and provided for me all things necessary. In
so much as I have been well refreshed and replenished, with thy great benefit
of feeding me, and with thy gracious benefit of clothing, me, so that I have
not sayn^ed through want of so^de, ^^t been ^^^resie^ with overmuch cold for
lack of ravment, as with mine eyes (to my great grief) I may and do behold
a number da^^e, in diverse corners of the streets, and ways as I pass, who
are most grievously tormented, with hunger, cold, sores, and sickness,
(lamentable to see) whom also thou have bought m^st dearly, and yet s^sterest
them to be oppreiled, and I, who have deserved no less, nay rather good Lord,
a great deal more, then some of them have, by thy fatherly goodness, not only
escaped those afflictions, but received at thy mercifall hands, infinite good
gifts, and unspeakable benefits, for which thine inestimable love, I cannot
sufficiently praise thee. Oh Lord forgive mine offenses, which this day I
have committed and done against thine almighty majesty, whether they be
secret and unknown, or open, whether they were done in my youth, or at any
time since, pardon them Oh GOD, for Jesus Christ's sake, and vouchsafe me thy
grace, to amend my life, and to return unfeignedly to the service of thee. And
for as much as I can not continue without thy continual protection, vouchsafe
to extend the same unto me thy wretched creature, this night, that I may
quietly take my rest, which thou haste appointed for a refreshment of our
wearyed members, and have ordained the night and darkness as a time most
convenient to take the same in, being a time, wherein we should, to that end
cease from our labors and daily affairs; And vouchsafe unto me thy poor
creature, (who am of my self, neither of power to lie down, nor being laid,
able to rise up) thine especial assistaunce, and help, that in thy name I
may lie down, and receive at thy merciful hands, sweet and comfortable
rest, not according to the greedines of my corrupt nature, but as shall be
only expedient for the refreshment of my weak body.

And for as much (good Lord) as thou know with what mortal foes, we are
continuallye assaulted, both sleeping and waking, who endeavor by all means, to
entrappe us by some evil or other, which we hear or see, in this vale of
vanity, to our delighte, (though contrary to thy will) whereunto we often
yield, and that in the day time: much more in the dark and loathsome night,
wherein all things are covered and hidden* and when the heaviness of drowsy
sleep, keeps down our understanding; in which time of darkness, such as
intend* to work wickedness, are most ready with diligence (abhorring the
light) to put in practice their mischeuous devises. Therefore I most humbly
beseech thee, Oh God almighty to prevent the^ in their evil imaginations,
that in no wise they hurt me; And to grant (though sleep to my body
sufficient and not overmuch) yet to my poor soul watchful and dilligent
waking, that I fall into no danger, by yielding to any evil in the sleep of
my body* vouchsafe also to guard and defend me, that nothing hurt me this
night, that fire consume me not, nor any thing that belongs unto me, nor any
other danger whatsoever dismay me. Keep me also (good Lord) from sudden and
unprovided death, and preserve me so by the watch of thine holy Angels, that
I may take my rest in quiet, until the morning, and then give my self, unto
the finishing of my duty, to the discharg of my vocation, and fulfilling of
thy will, unto my lines end: for which thy favor, and for all things else
necessary, for me and all other, for whom thou have commanded us to pray: as
for* all such as are in any kind of affliction, in body or mind, for the
testimony of thy truth, that thou will strengthen them, and thine whole
Church, in pure religion. For all such as are sick and diseased, that thou
will, either restore them to health, give them patience, or receive them unto
thy self, for the preservation of our Queen and gouernesse, Elizabeth by thy
dinine providence, far over us, that she may continue to thy pleasure, long
and prosperously over us, and for this whole Realm of England, that thou will
grant us all true repentance, for our Parents* Brethren, Sisters, Kins^olkes,
Neighbors, and all them that thou would we should commend unto thee in
prayer* Give me grace to say that prayer, which thy son Jesus Christ taught
us, saying: Our Father which art in heaven* etc. And for as much as we cannot
pray effectually without thine especial gift of faith, vouchsafe to ingraffe
the same in mine heart, that I may both now, and ever, make vnseyned
confession thereof, as thine Apostls have set down in these words. I
believe in God. etc. Oh Lord, now vouchsafe to embrace me with the Arms, of
thy mercy, vouchsafe to receive me into the bosom of thy love, shaddowe me
with thy wings, that I may safely take my rest this night, in peace, in the
name of thy son Jesus Christ: in whose name I refer me wholly into thy
loving protection, beseeching thee, that when my last sleep shall come, I may
take mine everlasting rest with thee in thy celestial kingdom, sweet God.
Amen. Oh Lord into thine hands I commend my self.

Oh Lord increase my faith.
A short prayer to the like purpose.
OH almighty Lord God, I thank thee that this day past, thou have of thy
mere mercy vouchsafed unto me, thy poor creature, not enelie protection,
against all dangers and evils: But also all things necessary. So I humbly
beseec^^ thee, of the same thy mercy, and for thy son Jesus Christ his sake,
to (...)de the like protection and favor, toward me this night, that I may
enjoy at thine hands, safe and quiet rest, to the comfort and refreshment
both of my body and soul, for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

Oh Lord increase my faith.
A prayer for the increase of Faith*
If thou will have, what thou do crave:
Pray thou in says, the Gospel says*
FAith (as says S. Paul unto the Hebrews) Heb. 11 is a sure foundation of
things hoped for and an evident feeling, of the manifold promises, which God
the father has made unto us, 1. Pet. 1 touching our salvation, in his son
Christ our savior: and whereby also, we already inwardely taste of the
unspeakable toys where of we shall be hereafter made full pertakers Heb. 11 in
Heaven: without it we can do nothing: But by it Gal. 3. we are blessed of
him: and by it 1. Pet. 1 we are saved: by it Ephesians 6 are all the fiery darts of
hell and satan quenched. The just man Aba. 2. shall live by faith: the
daughter of the woman of Canaan, Ma. 8. was healed by the faith of her mother.
Elias the Thesbyte, 3 Kin. 16. 17. through faith was fed with Ravens in his
distress and hunger, he prayed for rain, and through faith obtained it: by
his faith was the Oil of the widdowe of Zarphat increased, Dan. 6. and her
child raised from death to life: The three Children were delivered from the
whot furnace by faith, and Daniell out of the Lions den: by says the sinful
woman, Luke 7. obtained pardon: the Apostles by says. Act. 3. healed sundry
diseases: Now wl at greater Jewel can there be had at the hands of God, then
faith: for have faith and all things food sent from heaven: defense from
Lions: saftye from fire in the whott Oven: forgiveness of sins: and
whatsoever else, concerns either body or soul: And therefore let it be a
principal request unto his Majesty, that he will vouchsafe that gift.
Without wavering ask it, and God will give thee it abundantly* Without
says Heb. 11. it is impossible to please God. Neither can we have access to
Christ, Eod. without it, who is the Mediator between God the Father and us.

O Halmighty God, and father of our Lord Jesus Christ by whose word we are
taught, that to love thee, fear thee, and serve in truth, godliness, and
sinceretie of life, is the only way and mean to continue thy love and favor
toward us, without the which, we can not but perish. And belief and
confidence in thy son Jesus Christ, the only mean of our redemption, and
atonement with thee, the only hold of our salvation; whereof we can not be
sufficiently assured, without thine especial gift of faith, which is the ancor,
whereunto the cable of our salvation is fastened. And being broken, the hope
also of our salvation, decays and waxes of none effect plant therefore (most
merciful God) one sparcke of true faith, in mine heart, that I may certainlye
know thee, perfectly love thee, and duly fear thee and unfeignedly acknowledge
Jesus Christ to be sent into this miserabl^ world to save us miserable
sinne^s, and for us by his bitter death, to purchase thy favor and love
again, which we had lost by the fall of our Father Adam. Oh Lord grant me
to take such hold, of his death, passion, resurrection, and assention, as by
his death we may have pardon by his resurrection, rise to righteousness, and by
his assention, ascend with him to celestial glory, and finally attribute the
cause and mean of our salvation, to proceed only by his passion. Increase
this faith in us (good Lord) daily more and more, that it may grow, by the
working of thine holy spirit, to full perfection, accompanied with good
works and godly behavior, without the which (I ca^ fesse) faith cannot be,
that I may both in life and conversation, fulfill thy divine will in all
things, with-holde not from me (good Lord) that singular gift of thine which
is the stay of our happiness, and the want thereof, a most certain token of our
perdition. It is the strength of the weak and feeble ones, the staff and stay
that guids the blind, the only way that leads unto the unspeakable ioies of
eternal bliss, the mean to obtain, possess, and enjoy, the only good, which
is the knowledge of thy will, the band of mutual peace, the Forte, the
Castle, and comfort of a distressed mind, and the only harbor of a
sorrowful soul, no good thing wants to him, on whom thou vouchsafest to
bestow the same, to whom all things are light, in whom remains no darkness
at all.

Banish therefore (sweet Lord) all misbeleefe, all wavering, and doubting,
out of mine heart, and plant insteede thereof, unfeigned faith, that applying
the same to every affliction, both of body and mind; I may vanquish and
overcome satan, with stand the delights of the world, and suppress the
corruptible motions of the flesh, overcome my bodily enemies, and enjoy at thy
good pleasure, health of body, soundnes of mind, perfection of limbs, and
all things else requisite for me, as no thing is impossible to him, that
enjoys this thy gift estecttually indeed: a most precious jewel* an
unspeakable good thing, for thou say; Who so hears thy word, and believes
in Jesus Christ whom thou haste sent, shall have everlasting life. Then Lord
(on the contrary) he that believes not, is in danger of everlasting death. Oh
Lord increase my faith, where by I may believe in that thy son, and take hold
of all his promises, who said: That who so believes in him, shall want no
manner of thing that is good. (Lord) I believe, help mine unbelief. Give me
faith but as the grain of a Musterde seed, and I shall be able to do great
wonders, yea I shall be able to remove satan, out of his desired habitation,
expelling him and his ministers out of my mind, and walk no longer according
to the will of the flesh, but casting away the works of darkness, enjoy the
pure light of the Gospel, and persevere and abide therein, enjoying thy favor
and love, unto the end, without fainting, in any tribulation, or vexation of
Spirit, going forward, in hope, in fear, in love, and unfeigned zeal
toward thee. That I may obtain at thy merciful hands, whatsoever is
necessary in this life* or for the obteyning of the life to come, and after
this life ended, enjoy thy celestial purchased inheritance, sweet Savior

Amen.
Oh Lord increase my faith.
A short prayer to the like purpose.
I Humbly beseech thee Oh merciful God, for thy son Jesus Christ's sake, to
power into mine heart, by the operation of thine holy spirit, one sparckle of
true says, whereby I may truly believe in thy Son Jesus Christ, as our
only mediator and ^duocate, through whose death and passion, we are restored
to our former happiness, wherein we were in the beginning placed, which none can
believe, but through the holy ghaste. Increase therefore my faith, that
working by charity, I may do that which may be acceptable unto thee, all the
days of my life, Through Jesus Christ. Amen.

Oh Lord increase my faith.
A prayer against the devil, the world, and the flesh, very necessary to be
often said.
If thou these Captain foes wilt fly:
Thou must crave aid of God on hie.
THe devil, who is Prince of darkness, Ephesians 6. and wbo rules in this world,
goes about, seeking whom he may devour, and lead headlong into destruction:
by putting before our eyes the veil of the vanities of this world, that we
should not see the light of the truth, but to continue in darkness; in hautines
and pride, as bondslaues and captives to him, whose children they are 2. Tim.
2. that continue in voluntarye blindness, whose end shall be the fire everlasting.
Ioh. 8. prepared for him and his Angels. Mat. 25.

Pray that the world overcome you not. 1. Ioh. 5. wherein rests nothing but
wickedness and sin.

The whole world, 2. Esd. 4. is full of unrighteousness and wickedness, which who
so loves, is an enemy to God.

They that are in the flesh can not please God: To. 8. but shall die. E^de.
That is, such as yield them selves to follow the lusts thereof, shall have
the reward of the wicked, in eternal perdition: Pray therefore that ye enter
not into temptation, but that ye may walk godly, as the servants of
Christ, and not as the servants of sin.

OH Christ son of the living GOD, who in the time of thy humanity, when thou
walkedst here in the veil of this miserable world, in the form of a
servant, in the substance of mankind, art not ignorant, of the sundry
grievous assaults, and temptations wherewith satan, that monstrous enemy to
mankind, tried thee, thou being altogether clean and clear from all
corruption, yea, without all desire of sin, yet hardly assaulted by sundry
means, to procure thee to yield to his allurings, whereby (sweet Jesus) thou
had sufficient try all, and experience of his like assaults, unto our
corruptible and weak flesh, who are by reason of the fall and wilful
transgression of our great Graundfather Adam (as thou know) most easy to
be overcome, who in all assaults, have none other refuge or defense, but only
to fly unto thee, and to rest under the shaddowe of thy wings, which is so
sure a ha^bour, and so strong a defense, as who so faithfully betaketh him unto
the same is safe from all the raging storms of satan, the deceites of the
world, and motions of the unbridled flesh, all which are, unto our souls,
most monstrous, mortal, and most cruel enemies.

Oh Lord let thine holy spirit dwell in me, let it never depart from the
inner part of mine heart, but decking the house of my soul, with the flowers
of love, faith, and unfeigned zeal, it may please thy divine Majesty, to
settle thee, and frame thy self therein to abide, that thy presence may be so
terrible unto his assaults, as he approaching near unto me, seeing thee, and
hearing thy name (Oh Jesus) may fly away, as he did from thee, in the
wilderness, as he did from thee, on the Penicle, and in all his temptations;
Thou were pure at that time, without spotte of sin, I am sinful and full of
corruption. He could not overcome, or prevail against thy sanctetie, but I am
prone to fall, and therefore easy to be overcome; strengthen me therefore,
stand with me, fight for me, that he take me not captive, and make me a
bondslaue of sin: keep me free out of his claws (sweet Jesus) let the
brightness of thy grace, so shine about me, that his darkness come not near me
to ouershadowe me, with the darkness of iniquity, Let thy savor be a wall a
bulwa^ke and strong buckler for my defense, for Lord, thou know that his
force, is so great, his will so ready, and his doings so wily, as if thou do
but pluck back thine hand, he strikes us, if thou turn thy face, he wins
us to his will, and if thou depart utterly from us, we shall run headlong
into most horrible destruction. Wherefore (Oh sweet Jesus) save me, sweet
Jesus keep me, sweet Jesus embrace me, hold thine holy hand over me,
conducte me, and lead me in the midst of the path of truth to celestial
happiness, and let me not be drawn awrye to the left hand, or to the right,
but keep a middle and direct course, until I come to the place of celestial
bliss, where neither satan shall overcome me, the world deceive me, nor the
flesh procure me to sin, but be in the light of thy most glorious presence,
with the residue of thy saints, singing eternal praises unto thee. But Oh my
most loving redeemer, my time is not yet come my iourny is not yet at an end,
my days (which though they be but a span long) are not yet finished. And
until this body of mine shall pass to the grave, my poor soul must have and
abide continual conflictes, with the devil the king and Emperor of this world,
and with as many his ministers, as my tongue can not number, and principally
with the world, who sets before me insteede of divine and heavenly
contemplations, worldly vanities, insteede of celestial and true comfort,
worldly delights, insteede of heavenly hope, worldly and vnauailable promises,
to bring (as much as in him lies) my godly enterprises, to wicked end Lord he
labors by all means to draw us into despair, by loding our minds with too
much doubt of the performaunce of thy most comfortable promises But sweet
Jesus, though his power be in show great, thine is in deed greater, though he
be strong, thou art stronger, though his instigations and prickings for ward
to wickedness be many, thy loving and father lie callinges to grace are more.
Thou have promised us thy help, and that most meruey lous to our eyes, for
thou have said, that thou will give us power to do, not only as thou did,
but more, and greater, which is so strange to the dulnes of our understanding,
that we can not but marvel, that we, who are nothing but corruption, nothing
but an heap of sin, should do greater things then thy self, (sweet Jesus)
who are only God, only pure, only holiness, and only grace and power it
self. Oh Lord make this perfectly known unto me, make me faithful and then
I know I shall rightly understand it. Lord if we that are sinful and full of
frailty, give satan the repulse, despise the world, and withstand the evil
motions of the flesh, we do that which thou dyddest not, in respect that
thou being pure and without sin, or will to sin, were not so soon to be
wunne, as we whose strength is weakness, whose holiness is mere corruption, and
therefore was thy victory less then ours: Sweet Jesus give me thy strength,
thine help, and the light of thy grace, to obtain the victory, and to avoid
his tyranny. Save me from the detestable crew of his ministers, for great are
the conflictes which daily arise in our consciences, between thy grace and
satan, between thy soirite, and our flesh, between thy divine will, and the
wicked world. Oh what an heavy burden is it, to bear the innumerable
temptations which the devil, the world and the flesh do ofter? and
especially to those, that take not hold by the An^or of patience, and who
settle not themselves within the harbor of thy seat, but give the raines of
their ungodly desires scope to run, whether the force of every unlawful
motion of the wicked f^end, the vain world, or the corrupt flesh, shall move
and drive them.

Oh sweet Jesus, guide the raynes of the bridle of my desires, that I run
not headlong into any ungodly action, but being lead by the hand of faith,
under the conduct of patience, I may overcome this capital, and archenemy of
mine, that he being once vanquished, his ministers may quail and be
discomfited, their crafty wilines wexe of none effect, and mine hope in thee,
my love toward thee, and my fear of thee, daily increase. That the world with
the desires thereof, may die in me and I to it, that the vain dissembling shows
thereof, draw me not out of the way of truth. Strengthen me (sweet Jesus) in my
conflictes, and temper them so with patience* that they may rather be
Medicines, then maladies to my poor soul, and healthful exercises that I
neeuer think my self to be secure, but always subject to try all, for
without exercise we remain unskillful, and without an enemy, we prepare not
weapon, neither is victory gotten without battle, nor reward without
victory. Yet though we overcome, the victory is not ours, but thine who
fightest and ouercomest for us, and yet such is thy love, that thou give us
the reward, and crown, of victory. Make me strong (sweet Jesus) fortefye the
Castle of my soul, with spiritual weapons, as with faith, love, hope, peace,
long suffering, gentleness, humblenes, thankfulness, meekenes, strength, and
patience, and such like, that I may continually withstand the proud attemptes
of these my ghostly enemies, through thee, and by thee, sweet Jesus, mine
only savior and redeemer.

Amen.
Oh Lord increase my faith.
A short prayer to the same effect.
I ^oore and wretched sinner (Oh merciful God) humbly beseech thee, to send
me from thine holy heavens strength, to withs^and the assaults of the wicked
fiend satan, who go^th about like a roaring Lion, seeking by many mea^^s to
d^^our^ me. Lord give me like wis^ gra^e, to resist the raging and vn^aciable
lusts, and desires of the corrupt flesh, and vanities of the world. That
bee^^g through th^ne help acquitted, from the force of these my mortal
enemies, I may serve thee in holiness and righteousness, all the days of my
life. Amen.

Oh Lord increase my faith.
A prayer for the help and assistance of God in all our doo^ngs, and that we
do nothing, but in his fear and due obedience.
Do nothing* but see ^^st thou crave
Aid ^^^m the Lord* good end to have:
So ^halt thou have su^^^^le always,
As thou w^^t wish: and happy days.
David considering the frayltye of man's nature, and his insufficiencye, of him
self to do any thing arighte: wylleth us to commit our ways unto the
Lord, Psalm. 37. and to put our trust in him, assuringe us, that in so doing,
God will bring our matters to good effect, and bless all our godly endeavors.
Our forefathers trusted in God, and were not confounded. Eccl 2. They continued
in his fear, and were not ^orsaken: they called upon him and were not
dis^^sed. Sym^on feared the Lord. Lu. 2. in all his doings, and the holy ghost
came upon him and reue^led unto him, that he should not die before he had seen
the Messiah, eue^ Christ our savior. Corneli us with his whole household, feared
the Lord, Act. 10. and an Angel came to him and told him, that his prayers and
alms, were come before the lord, yea the mercy of the Lord, is from
generation to generation, upon them that fear him, and walk in his ways,
he takes great delighte in the people that stand in awe of him. Den 5.
Judith feared the Lord, Judith 8. and none had the power so much as to r^yse up
an evil report of her: All things go well with them that fear the Lord,
and who so craves faithfully the assistaunce of the Lord, shall (doubtless)
never d^o amiss, for he reuealeth his secrets unto them Psa. 25 which fear
him, and makes the^ to understand his covenant. Wherefore, trusting neither
thine own wisdom, thine own wealth, nor help of man, seek the assistaunce
of the Lord, and that faithfullye, and he will rightly direct thee for his
eye, Psalm. 33. is always upon him that fears him, and trusts in his help.

OH God of most excellent wisdom, unspeakable mercy tender love toward us,
and marvelous foreknowledg of all things, who have commanded us at al times
to direct our doings by the rule of thy laws. I humbly beseech thee to direct
al my coun sails, studies and labors devises and determinatio^s so as they may
be always measured and guided by thine almighty wisdom, and that I take
nothing in hand, disagreeable to thy will, but may always faith fully crave and
favorably obtain thine assistaunce help and furthera^ce therein That
whatsoever I do, it may come to such end and take such effect as may be to the
glory of thy name to the health and benefit of my soul and pro^ite of my
neighbors. That I at no time, rashly, or unadvised ly, leudly or loosly attempt
or determine any thing without thine especial fear, duly considering that
thou art the author of all good things, and bring prosperously to pass all
godly actions, attemptes, and purposes: And whatsoever is done in secret, or
in intent to hide it from thy knowledge, which none (work he never so
secretly) can do although for a time it have some sweet taste, namely a
fleshly delight some savor, or likelyhoode of happy success: vet is the end
thereof, bitter and most perilous, insomuch as it brings shame and
confussion, to the so unadvised enterprisers of the same. Lord thou say that
a Sparrow can not light on the ground, without thy permission, and providence,
which is a creature of small value, in respect of man, whom thou have made to
thine own image and likeness, and whom thou accountest of more value then many
Sparrowes: in respect whereof (good Lord) and for thy mere mercies sake,
extend so thy favorable care unto me, thy frail creature, that all mine
intents may have their beginning, by the working of thine holy spirit and
mine actions end in the same, and not according to the motions, of mine own
foolish desires. Thou like a most loving father willest us to take counsel at
thee, in all our exercises, concerning either body or soul, before we
proceed too far in them. Oh Lord bless me, with thine heavenly inspiration,
that my mind imagine nothing but what is according to the Law of
righteousness: Oh Lord bless the works of mine hands, the sight of mine eyes,
bless mine ears, that they hearke^ not but to the hearing of godly and
virtuous communication, and thine holy word, my tongue and lips with decent
speech, and my feet that they may keep the way of righteousness. And place
within the secret corners of my heart, such due regard what I go about, or
determine, as before I proceed to far in request of good and luckie success,
I may understand by the secret working of thine holy spirit, whether my
request be according unto thy will: And grant that I never absolutely crave
thy furtherance, in accomplishing any my desires, until by the same spirit, I
be truly resolved, that my desires be lawful, consonaunt, and agreeable to
thy divine will, but may faithfully refer all my matters unto thee, whether
they be heard or not heard, whether presently or tarrying long, not giving
over, feeling in my self by thy grace, that it pleases thee, constantly
continuing, thy good pleasure, though it come not as I wish, let me not by and
by fall from my good beginning, but perseuering in continual prayers, for
thine assistaunce, and fatherly help unto the end, for thou have promised
never to deceive our godly disires, nor to send them away frustrate,
mercifully hear me (Oh Lord) in time convenient. And attentively hear me,
approaching unto thee, with unfeigned desire, and hope of thy help, that when
any plague, any affliction, misery or vexation shall come upon me, when the
want of any necessary thing oppresses me, or accomplishing of any lawful suit
moves me, I flying unto thee, as the fountain from whence flows all true
help, all perfect assistaunce, all good success, and prosperous events of all
godly endeavors, not seeking any other by mean, either to avoid the one or
to obtain the other, then thy fatherly directions and spiritual motions, I
may obtain the same, according unto my necessities, and in thy good time oh
heavenly God, for thy son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, grant this, sweet
God.

Amen.
Oh Lord increase my faith.
A short prayer to the like purpose.
COnsidering mine own blindness, ignorance, and the wilful obstinacy of my
corrupt nature, which seeks rather the fulfilling of the fantastical devises
of mine own brain, then thy divine will. And to use human aid, rather then
to crave thine help, vouchsafe I humbly beseech thee, to establish godly
fear in mine heart, and unfeigned obedience, to thine holy ordinances, that in
all mine enterprises, which in thy name I take in hand, thou will vouchsafe to
direct me, according to thy will, and to give me prosperous success, for thy
son Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

Oh Lord increase my faith.
The sorrowful sinner, afflicted in conscience, by reason of his sins, may
say thus.
If thou with sin, afflicted be:
Oh then (says Christ) come thou to me.
LEt us acknowledge our selves to be wretched sinners, and with fear fall
down before the mercies seat of the highest judge. Contemning our selves* to
be most unrighteous, and justly deserving confusion. And then, (as S. John
says) 1. Ioh. 1. 9. we shall find God most merciful unto us: who is most
faithful and just to forgive us our sins: and to cleanse us from al our
unrighteousness for he desires not the death of a sinner, but that he turn
from his wickedness and live. And therefore as Ezekiell says, Ezekiel. 23. Turn
you, turn you* from your wicked ways, for why says he, will you dye in your
sins: And again Ioell says. Ioell 2. 13. Rent your hearts and not your
garments, and turn to the Lord your God. Because he is gentle and merciful,
and of much mercy, and such a one as is sorye for your afflictions, wherefore
if thou be afflicted in conscience by reason that thou haste been a notorious
offender, remember Mary Magdalen, whose wickedness was great, upon repentance,
received pardon, as also the thief and the Publicau and many other: Despair
not, but in hearty prayer, and by unfeigned repentance, turn to the Lord.

O Almighty god father of merci, who art more ready to give, then we to ask,
more apt to pardon then we to repent, more willing to receive the contrite in
heart, into thy favor and mercy again, then they to offer themselves by
unfeigned repentance. Lord I come here prostrate in heart, before the throne
of thine infinite mercy, and loving kindness, as one altogether ashamed, to
look upon the detestable, vile, and abominable offenses, which I have done
against thee, being so heavy a burden for my poor soul, that the shoulders
of my poor diseased conscience, begin to sincke under the same, and am
altogether destitute of any proppe or mean, to support the same, or to ease me
thereof, but only thy death and bitter passion (sweet Jesus) who came into
this world to call (not the righteous but sinners to repentance) Lord I
bewail mine he^nous offenses, and am most sorye for my sins, which are so
vile, and the burden of them so intolerable, that when I turn mine eyes but
to the beholding them a far off, I am by and by, stryken with so great dread
that I am driven to most heavy sighs, grievous groans, and think my life an
enemy unto me, wishing the beginning of my days, had been the day of my
departure out of this miserable world. But (most sweet Lord) when I note
them perfectly in my mind, and take as it were a straight account, what the
deeds of my youth have been, (being indeed) most lewd, most evil, most
vile, and sinful, what a terror do I suffer in mind? what a dungion of
dollours, does open it self (as it were) to swallowe me up? what gryping
greefes do torment my poor conscience* in so much as I am at the pittes
brincke, of despair, wavering in mind to and fro, seeking rest, but lo
(Lord) unquietness of mind, oppresses me so sore, that considering with my
self, what I have been, and what I am, a great matter vexes me* But when I
look into the time to come, the time wherein all mine offenses, and faults
shall be manifested and laid to my charge. Oh then whether shall I fly think
I? whether shall I conueygh my self? who shall hide me from thy presence? who
shall save me from thy just judgment? Oh sweet Lord I am even at my wits
end, wishing for death and end of my days; And yet then the fear of the
torments of hell fire, so strives in me to the contrary, that I quake at the
rememberaunce thereof. And when I covet to live longer, and see more days,
Lord then I am stricken with doubt, and imagine, that as my life has been
(even from my birth) given and inclyned, so greedelie to sin, and that, the
cause of my present dread* I then loath and abhor my longer continuance
here, fearing least the aptnes of my corrupt flesh, by the daily rebellion
thereof, against the spirit, heap greater plagues upon my poor soul: What
shall I do Lord? fear and despair thus oppressing me on all sides, all hope
of comfort has left me, only grief and sorrow remains, knowing not to
whom to fly for succor, or to whom to make my moan. If to man, I know his
strength, policy and wisdom, and comfort to be vain* his nature inclined
to weakness, and wickedness, as mine, and in him to be no help And seeking any
wo^ldly mean, for pardon and remission of my sin, I acknowledge it
altogether transitory, superfiuous and to no purpose. But the seeking thereof to
renew and increase my grief, that I should leave and give over, the true and
only platform of my delivery, and seek to a counterfeyt show of aid. Oh
God forbid that ever I should, but only seek for pardon of thy self, whom
most grievously I have offended, and therefore to thee I fall prostrate even in
heart (sweet Jesus) the only Physician of all sick souls, in whose power
consists the alone forgiveness of sins* be they never so many or great. I
come, I come, though altogether ashamed, unto thee my savior Jesus Christ, who
haste promised to be a Mediator for the penitent, unto God the father. It is
thy property to call home such as wander and go astray, and to train them up
in new ways, be their sins as red as Scarlet, thou have said thou will
make them as white as snow, and were they as purple, thou can make the^ as
white wool. Oh most sweet promise, Oh comfortable saying, Oh voice of
heavenly consolation, whereby I am comforted, whereby I am revived, yea now is
my conscience lightened, now have I found the true and only Physician of my
long disease poor soul, even thy self (sweet Jesus) who call me, I come,
I come Lord stretch forth thine hand and receive me, give me perfect hand
fast of this most comfortable saying of thine: let me enjoy the true working
of this most singular medicine, thy death and bitter passion (sweet Jesus) who
sufferedst for our sins, and came to take away the punishment due for our
transgression, and to call us to repentance, without which there is no hope,
of remission of our sins. Thy mercy is infinite, thy love unsearchable, and
wisdom incomprehensible, whereby thou call us, whereby thou love us, and
whereby thou guydest us: And even of mere love, which thou haste to the
salvation of my poor soul, whom thou would rather should convert then
perish, thou have stirred up in mine heart, a lothing of my sin, wherein I
have walked, and embraced the same, eue^ with greedines: Oh that I were as
ready to come, as thou to call; So willing to leave, and give over the
fulfilling of unlawful desires, as thou art to forgive the same; So apt to
serve thee, as thou art to save me. Then should sin no more dwell in me, nor
I in it, but should enjoy thy continual favor, and rest under the wings of
thy mercy. Oh Lord, I humbly beseech thee, that as it has pleased thee, to
stir me up at this time, to repentance, as thou have called me home from
the wilderness, of wickedness, from deep despair, so to place me in the
pleasant fields of sincerity, truth, and godliness, as thou have plucked me
out of the claws of satan, so vouchsafe to hold me, under the shadow of thy
wings, and to embrace me with the arms of thy mercy, that I run no longer,
after the vanities of this world, nor yield unto the ungodly motions of the
flesh, that my mind being free, from all sinful cogitations, I may keep my
body an undefiled member of thy Church unto my lives end. And although, til
thine appointed time, this miserable vale, must be my continuing city. And
although I must be driven to use this world according to the necessity of
worldly causes, as thy providence has assigned, every man to exercise his
vocation, yet grant that my mind may be continually conversant, in heavenly
things, and though my body wander in earth, my soul and spirit, may have
their perfect being, and abiding, by perfect faith in heaven, where thou
sit and reigns for ever.

Amen.
Oh Lord increase my faith.
A short prayer to the like purpose.
OH God whose property is ever to have mercy, yea whose mercy is infinite,
and love incomprehensible, and who haste not delight in the death of a sinner,
look favorably upon me, who have so deeply offended thine heavenly
majesty, that I confess nothing but condemnation due unto me, for my so
manifold iniquities, my conscience accuses me, and mine heart bewraieth my
disobedience, being but a cast away, unless it may please thee, for Jesus
Christ's sake, to turn away thine indignation, and to take away the plagues
which I have justly deserved, and punishments for the same which thou have
ordained. Lord cease to be angry, and according to thy mercy, not to thy
justice, deal with me, but according to thy most loving promise, my sins
being as red as Scarlet, may through my faith, in the death of Jesus Christ,
as white as Snow. And as I have hitherto followed, even with greedines, that
which I should not, give me now grace to follow and embrace that which thou
commaundest, in thy son Jesus Christ, unto my lives end. Amen.

Oh Lord increase my faith.
A prayer for a competent and necessary living,
The God above vouchsafes store,
To him (in faith) that prays therefore.
ALthough thy store increase, and so greatly multiply, that thou be said to
enlarge thy rooms to bestow thy fruits: think thee not discharged of this
most necessary exercise of prayer, but so much the more bound thereunto, ^for it
is not the increase of fruits the labor of thy hands or store of wealth that
mainteyneth thy life, and feeds thee, unless it be seasoned with the word of
God, which preserves all that faithfully trust in him. Matthew. 24.

For thou can not live by Bread alone (which is) with things necessary for
thy body, but by the word of almightye GOD: And yet we are not only licensed
and permitted, but most louinglye called to come unto our heavenly father, for
whatsoever we want: as did Jacob Gene. 28. who prayed for food and apparel,
and obtained it with abundance God sees before we ask, what we want, and
yet to show our dutiful obedience and to acknowledge our help to come from him,
we must prostrate our hearts be fore him in faith, asking and he will give,
knocking and he will open, seeking and we shall surely find what we want.
Dut. 20. For God of his mere mercy feeds the fatherles, voucbsasing unto
them al good things wherefore, whatsoever thou be, pray faithfully, use the
gifts of God thankfully, and reuerenly, and think not that thy friends can
help thee, thy fruits satisfy thee, or labor prevail thee, without the
blessing of God. Tim. 6. whereby enjoying food and apparel, be therewith
content, and in any case despair not* for the providence of God is great, to
give food and things necessary, to such as trust in him. And it is not daintye
fear that feeds so much as the trust in God can relieve with a small and
simple diet, as does appear in the 1. of Daniell, by the^ that were so well
replenished with pulse and water?

OH almighty God and loving father, who of nothing have created all things
living, whose care is, so great over them all, that thou suffer not the
most vile or symplest of them, to perish for want of food, and things
requisite for the^, but seeking the same at thy hands, thou gyuest it them, in
due season: And by thine unsearchable wisdom haste appointed to every living
creature, an abiding, according to his kind. But such was thine unspeakable
care of man, whom thou have created to thine own image, that he is as a king
and governor over all, the rest of thy creatures, whom thou haste set and
appointed under him, being so far inferior unto him, as where thou haste
planted in him reason, wisdom, and government, in them brutishnes, being
altogether unreasonable, and where they live and have there being upon the
tops of cold mountains in desartes, upon hills on hie, and in valleys below,
and in sundry other uncouth and unknown places, where tempest and heat,
hardness and cold, and other continual dangers oppress them, thou have given
and provided for man, houses, castelles, and towns to preserve them from the
force of winds, tempests, and storms, and from the assaults of wild
beasts of the field, in the night and darkness quietly to rest: And although
born naked, thou give him ray meant to cover and to clothe him, herbs for
his use, and oil to make him a cheereful and glad heart, and joyful
countenance. Besides all this of thy mere goodness, haste given him the
beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, and fishes of the sea, to be his
food and sustinaunce, yea (Lord) such is thy favor toward man, that all
the rest of thy creatures, thou have ordained for his use and service, wherefore
I thy silly creature and work of thine hands, humbly prostrate my self in
heart, beseeching thee favorably to look down, upon my necessity, and
grant me whatso ever thou see necessary for me, even a competent and
necessary portion here, not overmuch, least I wexe proud, or disdain mine
inferiors, and if it be thy will, vouchsafe unto me, not over little, least
urgent necessity drive me to over much care, and over much care carry me to
unlawful means, and so run headlong into thy dis^auor. But fill my Baskett,
and bless my store Oh Lord that I may enjoy at thy merciful hands,
sufficie^cie for my self, and for the relief of such as thou have co^ mitted
unto my government: and for as much (good Lord) as all mine industry, carke,
and care, and great travail, can not any thing further me, relieve or satisfy
me, in my necessity, unless thou vouchsafe thereunto good success, for thy
mercies sake, bless me in all mine affairs, bless my fruits in the field,
my cattle, and all other things, belonging either to my self, or any other
thy servants, as by the fruits thereof, I and they may be relieved. Bless
the works of mine hands, that they may prosper, bless my senses that they
wexe not dull, but be always capable of such things, as belong unto my
vocation, effectually to execute the same, both according to thy laws, and the
truth of that which I take in hand, for without thy blessing and fatherly
furtheraunce, I can not sufficiently execute, neither can that prosper, where
upon the whole state, of my living and maintenance depends. Wherefore (good
Lord) guide mine hands, and bless mine understanding, to the prosperous
execution of all things, concerning my vocation, that I may get those
things, which may be sufficient, for the releese and maintenance of me and
mine, to the profit of my neighbors, and glory of thy blessed name. And what
so ever does happen unto me, pouertye or riches, make me (good Lord) of a
patient, contented, and thankful mind, that in adversity, I run not
headlong into such means as are ungodly, neither in prosperity, wexe the
prowder, but weight thy good pleasure in them both, with thankfulness, and ever
more live in thee, and by thee, and in the end reign with thee in heaven,
where thou sit as Author and giver of all things, grant this for thy
son Jesus Christ's sake, to whom with thee, and the holy ghost, be all
honor for ever.

Amen.
Oh Lord increase my faith.
A prayer necessary after the hearing of the word of God.
Attend unto the Gospel bright,
Hear it, and read, and live upright.
Consider when thou hear the word of God preached, it does but as it were
beat thine ears: and rendereth no further benefitt until by the workyng of
GODS holy spyrite, it be inwardlye revealed, unto thee. For GOD by two means
speaks unto us, namely by the Preacher whom he sends, to teach us. And
by his holy Spyrite, whereby his doctrine is so settled in our hearts, that we
inwardly enjoy the true benefit thereof. For without the help of the holy
ghost, the voice of the preacher vanishes, and the hearers profit nothing at
all, S. John says, That he that knows God, hears his word, 1. John. 4. but
he that is not of God hears it not. whereby the spirit of truth is discerned
from the spirit of error. For the word of God is lively, Heb. 4. and
effectual, and pearceth more then a two edged sword, entering even into the
division of the soul and the spirit. etc. wherefore pray that as the Lord
sends his messengers to show his will. So you may both hear it, understand
it, and purelie live thereafter, pray for faith, For without faith Heb. 4. the
hearing of the word, profits nothing.

OH heavenly Father, who have not only vouchsafed to make us, to thine own
image, and likeness, but also to send thy son, Jesus Christ into this
world, for our salvation, and have by him, not only, given us knowledge, of
thy divine will, here on earth, and left it for our learning. But also freely
taken away our sins, and set us down the perfect rule to direct all our*
actions and dooinges by the same, which yet nevertheless continues hard and
dark, to such as neither by thy grace have been enlightened, nor by the
preaching of such as thou have sent, been taught, which also is of none
effect, without thine especial grace, worcester king to the true settling thereof,
within the bowels of the inner man, for (Lord) although we hear with our
ears, we can not conceive it in our hearts, nor show it in conversation,
without the especial woorking of thine holy spirit, within us. Oh Lord I
thank thee that thou haste vouchsafed us to live, in the time wherein darkness
and ignorance is so much defaced, and superstition suppressed. That thy
truth, the word of life, the seed of our salvation, is bountifully
distributed, throughout this our Country, to our unspeakable comfort, and
great terror of such as hate the same: Lord I thank thee, that it has
pleased thee, to feed us at this time, with the wholesome bread of life, the
heavenly Manna, the word of eternal truth, wherewith grant us, so to be
replenished, and fed at full, that we may loathe and abhor all things,
which are not of the true table of our salvation, the gospel of thy son
Jesus Christ.

But forasmuch (Oh merciful Lord God) as we may hear, and not perceive, and
read, and not understand, without the light of thine holy spirit guiding and
instructing us, I humbly beseech thee to inspire our hearts, with a true
understanding of that which this day we have heard, with our outward ears,
pronounced by the Messenger and Preacher of thy word, and grant that it may
so work to the amendment of our lives, and the increase of our faith, fear,
and love, of thee, continually abiding with us, and to our great comfort,
effectually work in us unto our lives end, accepting the same, at the mouth
of thy messenger, as delivered even, by thine own heavenly voice (as indeed
it is) as long as it differs not from thine holy word and gospel, giving
all the praise and glory unto thine own self, for he is but a Minister to
declare thy will unto us, who are the ground, and thy word the seed, which
being sown in our hearts, by this thy minister may, not only take some
root, but grow up effectually, to our comfortable edification and learning,
being so lively and effectual, as it enters even into the division of the
soul and spirit: give us grace (Oh heavenly God, in this so pernicious a time
of sects, scismes, and dangerous controversies, that we may bear constant
hearts, careful and devout minds, to the truth, avoiding (with diligence)
the persuasions of such as seek to set up superstition, and to maintain
errors, and untrue doctrine; And as the Ninevites at the preaching of Jonas,
repented their sins, so give us grace, not only to repent, for a time, but
earnestly to bewail our manifold offenses, and wholly cleave to fulfill the
truth of thy laws, to the salvation of our poor souls. Let not satan
(sweet Lord) at any time wrest thy truth sown in our hearts, neither let
him, nor his ministers prevail, in sowing tares, cockle, or Darnell, among the
good Wheat of thy gospel, as they continually seek and desire, to mar the
Harvest of our good fruits, which (though they be few, by reason of our own
corruption) which we have gathered by the hearing of thy gospel, yet (sweet
Lord) vouchsafe to increase them, by virtue of thine holy spirit, working
within us. And let not our desire of serving thee, be either choked or snared,
with the unlawful desires of this most wretched world, but rightly and
truly discerning the truth, from false doctrine, may understand who are thy
true ministers, with earnest attentiuenes unto the utterance of thy will by
the^, carefully and warily avoiding the counterfeit barking of such as speak
for their own benefit, having further respect to their own pleasure, profit,
and commodity, then to the edifying of our poor souls, whom thou resemblest
to Wolves, taking upon them (under the shadow of simplicity, and feyned show
of innocence) to guide thy flock, who (indeed) are most detestable
Hipocrites, and deuourers of thy sheep, whom I beseech thee to cut off,
from that godly and divine function, and office of preaching, that thy truth,
being at all times, purely uttered by godly and devout Pastors, we thy poor
flock may for evermore be truly edified, and continue within the Hardels of
sincere conversation, and godly living, to the praise of thy holy name, and to
the attainment of our heavenly inheritance for thy son Jesus Christ's sake.

Amen.
O Lord increase our faith and make us evermore attentive hearers, true
conceiuers, and dilligent fulfillers of thy will.
Amen.
A short prayer to the like purpose.
OH Lord vouchsafe, that as of thy goodness thou have, through thy son our
Savior, left for our learning, and to our unspeakable comfort, the word of
truth, the gospel of our salvation, which none can learn unless he be sent,
I humbly beseech thee to give me thy grace, that as I have heard the same, at
this time by thy minister and messenger. So I may be able, perfectly to retain
the same, in the inner part of mine heart, according to the truth, and that I
may express the same, in my conversation and life, doing all things
according to thine heavenly will, unto my lives end. Amen.

Oh Lord increase my faith.
A thanks giving to God, for his benefits.
Bless thou the Lord, that gives bliss,
Heblesseth him that thankful is.
BE thankful unto almighty God Ephe, 5. for all things, in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who has left us a perfect pattern of thankfulness, Mat,
26. always lifting up his eyes unto heaven, giving thanks unto his heavenly
father. So must we bear always a thankful heart, as a testimonye of our good
wills, for the benefits of God toward us let us pray always, 1. These 5. let
us always rejoice, and without ceasing give thanks, for it is the will of God
the father, in his son Jesus Christ, toward us, Saint Augustine breefely in
this wise exhorts us to be thankful, namely, hartelye to say, God be
thanked. A sweet savor (no doubt) it is in the nostrelles of his heavenly
Majesty, and an acceptable sacrifice. Chrysostom also wills us to give
thanks unto the Lord, and to bless him, yea although evil chances happen
unto us, and then shall those evils be taken away, and on the contrary, (as it
must needs follow) he says that if prosperous things happen unto us, and we
continue unthankful, our prosperity shall be turned in to aduersitye. So pure a
balm and sweet odoure, is giving of thanks, that the Lord takes it, as a
most acceptable recompense, for all his benefits, which as we can not
otherwise deserve, let us continually say the name of God be praised. Although
it bea term sometimes used of the wicked, who have their reward with
Hipocrites, but bless the Lord in faith, and thou shall be blessed.

OH God of unspeakable mercy, and father of marvelous loving kindness, the
only giver of all good and perfect gifts, who art more ready to give then
we to ask, hearing before we call, and giving before we desire, things
necessary for us* I yield thee humble thanks, for thy continual favor, and
loving kindness, toward us thy creatures, for whose salvation when we were
lost, thou wast contented even of thy mere love, to send thine only, delight
into this world, thy son Jesus Christ, taking human nature upon him, and
abiding the most bitter pangs of death upon the Cross, to redeem us again,
into thy favor, which by our disobedience was lost, from darcknes (whereunto
our blindness had brought us) into the light of truth, from ignorance and
error, to wisdom and knowledge. Oh what greater comfort, what greater joy,
what a greater benefit, could thy divinity have bestowed upon silly man,
then being of a castaway, to be made a saved soul, of a lost son, made the
child of God: and of a poor banished wretch, to be made an inheritor of the
kingdom of heaven, (Lord) if it were possible for us to yield unto thee, as
many thanks and praises, as could fill even thine eats, at the full, and did
yield our bodies and souls to bitter torments in hell, for thy sake, from
which thou have redeemed us, it were nothing in recompense of the least part
of this thy love, in giving this sacrifice thy son, in whom, was thine only
and whole delight, to pacify thine own displeasure, and to purchase thy
favor and love again a thing most merueilous, that the offended, should
seek tha'ttonement with the offendour, and after so unspeakable a mean, and
yet requiring nothing at our hands, but thankfulness and obedient hearts. Lord I
yield thee all possible thanks, I yield thee thanks, even from the bottom
of mine heart, from the very depth of mine understanding, who have deserved
more then we can by any means, in desire satisfy, or any way requite, not
only in gyuing thy son for us, but in leaving unto us a continual
rememberance of the same thy gospel, wherein consists the rule for our
direction unto thee, even thy word, which (although heaven and earth pass and
perish) yet shall not one iotte thereof (as thou have promised) deminishe or
decay, without the which we should have continued in our accustomed blindness.
These thy benefits are unspeakable yet sweet Lord, the creating of us after
thy likeness, and making us after thine own image, deserves no less praise
and thanks, where it lay in thy power to have fashioned us, after sundry other
forms, as of worms in the earth, fishes in the sea, and beasts of the land,
most owgly, and most strange, having neither the knowledge of thy will, sense,
or seeling of thy goodness (which is the sweetest comfort in the world yea
without the which, is no true comfort at all) nor enjoy any quality either of
body or mind, which is any thing at all comparable to the gifts which thou
have endued mankind withal, I thank thee also sweet Lord, for all other
thine unspeakable mercies and benefits, as for feding us, clothing us, and
protecting us hitherto, giving us al things necessary both for our souls and
bodies, and lord as of thy free favor and mere mercy, thou have vouchsafed
unto us thy creatures, all these, and many other unspeakable benefittes. So
vouchsafe the like love and tender care toward us always, that we may
prosper in our vocations and go forward in the daily service of thee, and
through the merits of thy son Jesus Christ, obtain pardon for our sins
past, and live in thy faith, fear, and love hereafter, enjoying all things
requisite for mine own, and for the relief of those whom thou have committed
unto me, and also for all other thy servants, so that we may have sufficient,
and not be chargeable, but rather helpful to others, for thy son Jesus
Christ's sake, grant it.

Amen.
Oh Lord increase my faith.
A devout prayer, or Meditation, that we may always have consideration, that
we must dye, which, as it is good at all times, so especially in the time of
any common plague or sickness, a godly meditation.
Remember as thou art a man,
So must thou dye, none help it can:
No thing more sure, the time unsure,
Wherefore take heed, live not secure.
SYlenas the Philosopher (having it but by the instinct of nature, before the
publishing of the gospel) could see further into the estate of man, in those
days, then we endeavor to understand (living too securelye) now in the
clear light of the same. For his opinion was, that if we consider, with our
selves, what we are, whereof we are, and what we shall be, we could not but
lament, our miserable estate. This saying of his was marvelous then, when men
lived in darkness, but much more marvelous that it is no better considered,
now in the time of the light of truth. For where we should have great care to
live well, we live in wicked security, and where we should have greater care
to dye well, we foolishlye think to live for ever. But let us persuade our
selves, and not only persuade, but fully resolve our selves, that we shall dye,
and let us endeavor to make a good end, for a good end excuses a badde life
paste.

And even so likewise is an evil end a great argument of an evil life. For
sake sin and embrace death wyllynglye, so shall thou seem happy in this
life, and not unhappy at the hour of death. In the morning, think not to
live till night: and at night, think not to live till morninge. So shall thou
live so much the more cyrcumspectlye, and be always ready to dye.

Account thy self in this world but as a gueste, that lodges for a night,
and departs in the morning, and as a wandryng Pylgrime of no certain abode,
list up thy mind to God, Ecclesi. 4, having here no certain City, for if
thou live ten, or an hundred or a thousand years, there is no help but the
grave must be thine end. Blessed are they Reu 14. that dye in the Lord.
Wherefore prepare thy self to dye, not in your own wisdom, for that will
deceive you.

But in the wisdom of GOD, that your hope may be sure, his joys yours, and
his goodness your inhearitaunce.

OH God the only giver of life, the mainteyner, and preserver thereof, and the
life after death, grant me continual due consideration, that as this body of
mine, is builded, upon an earthly foundation, and framed of the substance of
dust, and clay, which is not durable, the glory thereof vanishing, like the
flower of the field, which is soon cut down and withered. So the same
being the mansion, or rather the Prison of my poor soul, so frail, weak,
and feeble, subject to so many infirmities, diseases, greefes, and maladies,
yea to so many causes, that procure the dissolution of body and soul, that it
often happens, when we think least thereon, it comes sodamly, as the
lightninge, and takes us unawares.

Wherefore grant Oh GOD of my life) that I may have such continual care,
foresighte, and dylligent respect unto the direction of my dealinges,
cogitations, and words, that I load not, my poor soul so much with the
burden of scenlesse securitye, sin and iniquitye, that the body being
suddenly entangled with the snare of death, it be carried where there is no
rest, no joy, no comfort, or consolation, but continual mourning weeping,
and anguishe of mind, as the Glutton spoken of in thine holy Gospel, who
going on blindly, loosly, and carelessly, without regard, either of thee, or
remem braunce of his end, in most detestable covetousness, and all kind of
wickedness, was suddenly taken from his mucke and wealth which he had wrongfully
gotten, and myserably whorded up, and yet denying poor Lazarus the croomes
that fell, and were taken from his table, but was carried by the devil and his
Angels into everlasting and most bitter torments, where was weeping and
gnashing of teeth.

Oh my sweet Lord let not mine heart be so blinded, with the vale of vanity,
nor nouseled in the delights of this world, so intangeled in the net of
concupiscence, nor clad in the weeds of wilful forgetfulness of mine estate,
that I be taken as the rich man, who devising within him self, to enlarge
his Barnes, wherein he might convey his grain, so much increasing, who standing
in his evil conceit, of covetousness, (thinking himself most secure) was
taken unawares from his abundance, and left his riches he knew not to whom
(Oh most gracious and most loving God) a most unhappy end, wherein steed of
heavenly contemplations, and godly cogitations (which thou requirest at al
times of such as are thine but especially at the hour of death) there appeared
a most horrible intent of covetousness, which thou utterly abhorrest, a manifest
token (good Lord) of forgetfulness of his end, and an argument, that he was
the child of Satan. But thou show mercy to as many as convert and turn
to thee.

Oh my most loving father, lighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in sin, nor
wander in darkness, according to the will of the flesh, that I fall not
unawares into the dungion of destruction, death, and hell, but make me always
ready and willing, to come unto thee, even with desire when it pleases thee to
call me, by laying thy hand, by any plague or sickness upon me, let me not
draw me (as it were) backwarde, when thou inuitest me, to the sweet banquet
of thine heavenly kingdom, as by the word and gospel preached, and reueiled
unto us, which is an especial calling us, or when I feel my self
distempered, grieved, or vexed, with any kind of sickness, plague or disease,
which is another of thy callinges, and an especial warning that we must dye,
or when by course of time, in extreme age, we may imagine our end to be
near, but (Lord) when I am at my daily business, and labor, when I eat or
drink when I am in my best temperature and health in childehoode and young
years, at all times, and in all places, give me grace to think, that death
stands at mine elbowe, always ready to strike me, that I sleep not in
sin and security, till the time suddenly come of my departure, and so be
taken unprovided, and perish withour repentance, who can persuade him self,
to live long and see many days, especially, in dangerous and contagious times
of sickness, and seeing so many examples daily to the contrary, even in the most
temperate time of health, some we see at their Mothers pappes, by human
indgement likely to live, suddenly to give up the ghost, some in their
youth, some in middle years, yea and when grauest experience abounds, to be
suddenly called away, and to be no more seen. Al which, notwithstanding (Oh
Lord) such is the blindness of our nature, that we think this world a continual
being for us, and cover (even with greedines) to see many days, where we heap
sin upon sin, to the ouerburdening of our poor souls, seldom, or not at
all thinking to dye.

Grant (sweet Lord) that as I desire to live, so I may have a greater desire
to live well, that I may make an happy end, abandoning all fear of death,
that the cogitation thereof, may dwell in peace, with in the mansion of mine
heart, and when it shall approach near unto me, I fly not from it, but may
go forth with joy to meet the same, considering that it is a mean, to end
my cares, and to begin my joy, it is the finishing of sorrow, and enteraunce
into bliss, which made thy servant Paul to say, That he desired to be
delivered of the burden of this life, and to be with thee, where is nothing but
joys unspeakable* and contrary, here on earth, nothing but care, and woe,
which moved thy servant Job, to call this life a warfare, and this world a
wilderness, and vale of misery, where is nothing but conflictes, between the
flesh and the spirit, daily increase of sin, and continual care, of
vanities. Oh good God give us careful hearts to love thee while we live here,
give us continual fear, unfeigned zeal, perfect faith, godly care* to do good
to all men, and earnest desire to come unto thee, who art the end of all
trouble and labor, and the beginning of ease, the end of strife and the
beginning of peace, the end of all misery, and the beginning of all bliss,
whereunto sweet (Lord) grant, that with vnseyned desire, we may faithfully
endeavor our selves, to come, and to take possession, of that thy most glorious
kingdom, where thy son is gonne before, to direct us the way and where thou
sit to judge, according to every man's deserts, making all those that thou
find with the Lamp of true faith, burning in their hearts, partakers of the
everlasting joys thereof. In number of whom, (Oh sweet Lord) accept me
here, that I may appear among them, in the world to come, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, in whose name, I commend my self into thy hands* to live
for ever in thee, sweet God.

Amen.
Oh Lord increase my faith.
A short prayer to the like purpose.
OH God, in whose hands, consists the life of all mankind, for thy Son
Jesus Christ's sake, vouchsafe to give me grace, to set before mine eyes, (as
a most certain mark where unto this frail body of mine must tend it self)
the Image of that which is to the faithful the end of pain, and beginning of
pleasure, the end of misery and beginning of bliss, but to the secure and
careless, the end of their pleasures, and beginning of eternal pains.
Ueuchsafe me therefore earnest desire of serving thee, and leading my life
according unto thy will, that when so ever it pleases thee to call me, I be
not through fear stricken with doubt of condemnation, but even at my last
gasp, through unfeigned faith in Jesus Christ, may take and have a taste of
eternal salvation, that death be not terrible unto me, but rather when it
comes, I may* with joy receive the same, in the name of Jesus Christ, mine
only savior and redeemer. Amen.

Oh Lord increase my faith.
A prayer upon the Lettany, or prayer for all men, at all times necessary.
Pray thou in faith, for each degree.
As God by James commands thee*
So shall thou prosper in thy ways,
And live both many and happy days.
THe Lettany being a most singular and devout prayer for the estate of all
men in general and set out for the use of the whole congregation, as it were
with one mouth, and one voice to be pronounced begging at the hands of God,
not only pardon for such several offenses as are therein expressed, but also
craving things necessary, as well for them that are absent as present, yea for
all men a thing most commendable and godly, praying one for another, as S.
James wills Iam. 5. us to pray one for another, that we may be heard of
God, for the prayer of the righteous avails much. And because the zealous may
(without the so often repitition of these words. Good Lord deliver us, and we
beseech thee etc.) priuatlye utter his godly desire of the prosperity of his
Christian brethren, without answering himself in those respects, I thought
it not much amiss, to contriue it into this prayer following, the which I pray
the Reader willingly to accept.

OH almighty God, and father of all that believe and trust in thee, Oh Lord
God, son, redeemer, and advocate of all the^ who faithfully serve thee, Oh
God holy ghost, who proceeding from the father and the son, santifiest the
elect and chosen ones. Oh blessed and most glorious Trinity, three persons,
and yet but one God, have mercy upon us, who most miserably have offended.
Remember not our offenses nor the offenses of our forefathers nor punish us
according to the multitude of our sins. Spare us good Lord, whom thou have
redeemed, and so direct all our cogitations, and actions, that we give none
occasion of thine anger toward us, for ever, mercifully save, and defend us,
from sin and mischief, from the crafts and assaults of satan, from thy
displeasure and eternal damnation, good Lord for thy mercies sake deliver us,
from darkness of misbeleefe, from hautines of mind, from malice, envy,
hatred, and double dealing, from evil motions of our corrupt flesh, and from
all worldly vaneties. Save us from plague pestilenee, from extreme hunger, and
famine, from sudden death, from heresy and false doctrine, and grant us
always will, and ablenes, to fulfill all thy most godly commandments, with
a clean and a pure heart.

Oh sweet Jesus deliver us from all evil, even by thy death and passion, by
thine anguish of mind, by thy bloody sweat, by thy glorious resurrection* from
the deep of death and hell, and by thine assention, into thy celestial
kingdom; Be present with us (good Lord) in all our troubles, vexation of
mind, and at the hour of our departure hence. And for thy mere mercies sake,
be thou favorable unto us, in the day, when we must give account for our life
past, that we be not rewarded according to our deserts, but by thy merits may
enjoy eternal salvation. Oh most merciful and everliving God, we most
miserable and most wretched sinners, here humbly prostrating our selves before
thee, beseech thee to listen to our petitions, and grant unto thine
universal Church, godly and devout preachers of thy word, and gospel, that it
may daily increase in virtuous and godly government, daily growing and
proceeding, from faith to faith, truly knowing thee, and unfeignedly serving
thee. Grant unto thy servant Elizabeth, our Queen, true understanding of thy
will, and unto her counsel, knowledge and wisdom. That under her, for her,
and in thy name, they may establish godly Laws, statutes, and ordinances, for
our good and godly government, and unto us thy people* grace continually, to
follow, and fulfill the same. Be thou (good Lord) her defendour in all
aslaultes of her enemies; and so rule her heart in thy faith sear and love,
that she may always seek to advance thine honor and glory, deface
superstiton, error, and false religion, and ever be able to vanquish and
overcome suchas rise up against her, to seek the contrary. Lighten the hearts
of all Bishops, ministers, and Pastors of thy church, with* right
understanding* and knowledge of thy word, that they may not only in speech,
and doctrine, but also by their conversation and life, soundly and sincerely
utter the same, to the true edification of thy people. Oh Lord let not such as
are put in authority to see the due execution of thy laws, be slow, negligent
or ignorant therein, but endued with grace wisdom and understanding, and
boldness, may execute justice, and maintain thy truth, without affection,
favor, or respect of persons, vouchsafe to endue us all with continual
unfeigned good will, one toward another that we may live all the days of our
life in unity, peace, and godly agreement, pleasing thee, by living according
to the rule of thy blessed commandments. Grant us Oh Lord, fervent desire, to
be where thy word and gospel is preached and taught, and endue us with thy
grace to hear and to bear away, and not only to hear and bear away, but to
express the same in our life and conversation, that the truth of thy gospel,
which is the fruit of thine holy spirit, may dailye increase in us: and call
home all wandering souls, which are carried into blindness, by the subtlety,
and procurements of satan, and his wicked ministers, following strange Gods
and worshipping that, that cannot avail them in their distress, and give them
(Oh Lord) repenting hearts, converting the soul. Show them thy true light,
that they seeing it (though a far off) may by little and little, attain unto
the perfect enjoying of the same. Strengthen al them that have taken hold of
thee by true faith, and pure religion, that they fall not from thence, by any
deceiuable show of any counterfeit sect, comfort those that are weak, and
lift up those that are down, that they by thee, and thou in them may beat
down, and keep satan under their feet. Vouthsafe good Lord to give succor,
help and comfort to all such as are in any kind of affliction, danger,
necessity, or tribulation, preserve and keep safe, all such as labor and
travail, by sea or land, for the benefit of our common weal.

Strengthen all women with child, and send them good deliverance; comfort all
them that are sick, and give them either patience to bear it, or mittigate
their grief, give health and nourishment to al young children, and grant them
grace, to go forward in nurture and knowledge of thy will. Lord we beseech
thee, to show compassion, upon all such as suffer impty sonment, and give
them deliverance, at thy good pleasure. Provide (good Lord) for such poor
children, as are fatherles, or helples, consider the cause of all VV iddowes,
and be helpful unto them in their distresses. Lord have mercy upon all men,
forgive our enemies, and such as persecute us, and if it please thee, turn the
hearts. Fructify those things on earth which thou have appointed for our
use, and so increase the same, that we may enjoy the fruits thereof, with
sufficiency, for our necessities in time convenient. And vouchsafe to give us
grace, to fall down upon the knees of our hearts, with unfeigned repentannce
of all our sins, that we may obtain at thy merciful hands, pardon for our
offenses, negligences, and ignoraunces, and vouchsafe, to endue us with thine
holy spirit, that we may go forward in daily amendme^t of our lives, and
govern the same according to thy will. Amen. Oh son of almighty God, we
beseech thee to hear us. Oh Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the
world, grant us thy peace, and have mercy upon us.

Oh Lord increase our faith.
Amen.
A prayer for the fulfilling of the ten Commandments.
Pray that thou may fulfill the will,
Of him whose hand defends thee still
And these precepts forget thou not,
Which Moses for thy safety wrote.
BLessed is the man (as says David) Psalm. 1. 2. that delights in the Law
of the Lord, and meditateth therein day and night, he shall be blessed in his
goods, in all that he takes in hand, at his going out, and his coming in,
and in all things. But contrariwise, he that declyneth from his commaundeme^ts
and neglects them, shall be accursed in all his ways, and nothing shall
prosper with him, although for a time it flourishe in show here, the end of
the same will be evil. And therefore David in all his prayers, (considering his
own infirmity) besought the Lord to instruct him, in his commandments,
saying make me Oh God to understand thy laws, and I will meditate upon all
thine wondrous works. Yea his delight was in the commandments of God. And
Saloman says, Pro. 28. that he that turns away his ears from hearing the
law, his prayer shall be abominable. For it is the love of God that we should
keep his commandments. 1. Ioh, 5, Pray therefore that God will stir up in
you, an unfeigned zeal in all your doings and enterprises, to observe the law
of the Lord.

OH almighty Jehovah, God of heaven and earth, who haste promised thy self,
even from the beginning to be our Lord and our God, our shield and our
Fortress, our buckler and defense, our Castle and refuge. And who have
brought us with a mighty and strong hand, with an outstretched Arm, out of the
Land, wherein we were strangers, wherein we lived in bondage, under the yoke
and tytannye of Antechriste and satan, into the land land that flows with
the Milk and Honny of true religion, wherewith thou feedest the souls of thy
faithful ones.

Grant that as through thy mere mercy and love, thou vouchsafest to bring us
into this world, and to frame us to thine own image and likeness, So we may
account thee as our only God, worshipping none other besides thee, making unto
our selves, none image of any likeness, either of things above, or things
beneathe, nor bow or seek help at the hands of any (as a God) beside thee,
who as by thy mighty power, thou broughtest the children of Israel out of
Egypt, by the hands of Moses and Aaron, where they were in bondage, where they
were continually oppressed with sundry kinds of vexations both of body and
mind. So have thou vhuchsased to bring us and to deliver us from a greater
bondage, servitude, and stauery, even from the power of Satan, under whose
tyranny we rested, and now escaped, not by the policy, strength, or power of
any Moses, but by the blod shedding of thine only son Jesus Christ, who took
upon him the death of the cross for our sakes, to bring us from darkness,
wherein we walked according to the will of the flesh, unto the true knowledge
of thee again* and to redeem us out of the bondage of sin, into the land of
righteousness, from blind ignorance, to the bright shining daystarre, of thine
heavenly will, who art not only a most loouing and gentle Father, but also a
most sharp punisher and revenger, who art not only desirous, that we should
come unto thee, but art also most ielious over us, least we should seek or
follow any other God besides thee, yea in all our afflictions and troubles, to
seek only unto thee, and being relieved, to attribute the only mean
thereof unto thy self, whereby thou have promised to be merciful unto
thousands that love thee, fear thee, seek thee, and truly take hold^ of
thee, as their only God. And again, threatnest thy vengeance, and heavy
displeasnre, to continue upon the third and fourth generation, of them that
hate thee, and follow strange Gods* (Oh sweet God) vouchsafe that it may be
far from our minds to have any desire, once to put our foot toward any
strange Gods, appear their help* never so likely or plentiful, but that it
be both now and ever in our hearts, to confess both in word and
conversation, that there is none other God besides thee, who art most glorious
and a most loving Father, have mercy upon us. And so vouchsafe to direct us in
all our dooinges, cogitations and words, as we may always and in all things,
fulfill thy will, never taking thine holy and most glorious name in vain, by
blasphemous speeches, dishonouring the same. Keep us most loving Father, not
only from the most detestable sin of perjury, whereby thine holy name is
often defaced, and (as it were trodden under foot, as in making it the author
of abominable falshoodes and lies, but from all frivolous and vain oaths,
which (to the great grief of thy children) are most uncomely in the mouths of
such as irreverently and rashly use it, even in common speeches, without any
urgent cause or matter forcing, whereby they fall into the most hemous sin, of
taking thy most glorious name in vain, but that we may use such a reverent
manner, and godly order of using thy name for trial of any matter in lawful
causes, as thou may always find us true hallowers of it thereby. And
forasmuchas thou within six days did finish al things in the be ginning,
and in the seventh day did rest from the same labor, commanding us likewise
to observe the sanctification of the same for ever, and to rest from all
labors, travails and worldly business and not only our selves, but all other
whom thou have committed to our charge, as servant, Oxen and Asses, and such
like? grant that we may not only lay aside all worldly cares, and business on
the Sabbath day, resting our wearied members, but may in all things sanctify
it and keep it holy, with godly exercises, divine prayers, and heavenly
meditations with careful and diligent regard, to the avoiding of all wanton
pastimes, foolish and uncomely exercises, and unlawful practices, whereby
(oftentimes) the affection being moved to impatience, powers forth chollour
to the dishonoring of thy name. Let our conversation be altogether modest,
mortefiing our own desires, wholly appliing our selves, not only on the Sabbath
day, but all the week, yea all our whole life, to the sreuice of thee, to the
honoring and glorifying of thy name, to the benefit of our souls, profit of
our neighbors, and due reverence to our parents, whom thou have commanded us
to honor, love, and obey, as the instruments of our beginning, thou being the
workman. Grant, Lord that we may truly and unfeignedly, reverence them as thou
willest we should, that we may long continue upon the earth, not in the number
of careless and disobedient Children, in whom rests no thankfulness for so
great benefits had and received at the hand of their parents, from whom thou
have said, thou will with hold thy blessings, and altogether deprive them of
their liberty and living.

But grant that we may so order our selves, by thy grace, both to them and to
other our Superiors, as we may be blessed with many good gifts, and length
of days here according to thy will.

And that it may please thee, so to confirm their blessings in and upon us, as
that it may go well with us all the days of our lives. Take from us sweet
Lord) all desire of revenge, all rancor, malice and hatred, least the devil,
(who redily stands to prick us forward to a desperate mind) procure us to
slay the innocent, we beseech the Lord, let not (at any time) such evil
imaginations enter into any part of our hearts, least we (giving our selves
over thereunto) lose the raynes of our natural disposition, which is so
inclined to wrath, that unless the strength thereof be subdued, or the
venoumous sting thereof plucked out, by virtue of thine holy spirit, it will (no
doubt) provoke us to wait opportunity to wreake our malice with violence, upon
such as by slight occasions, have offended us, yea and by little and little,
break out into the flame of deadly hatred, and so seek to destroy the
innocent most wickedly.

Oh Lord forbid it, and keep us from the most pernicious sin of adultery,
which being so odious in thy sight, thou causedst to fall in one day, for the
same three and twenty thousand. Oh Lord indue us with thine holy spirit,
that we may keep our bodies clean and undefiled members of thee, being
endued with perfect chastity, may abandon all occasions, that may procure us
to offend thee, reteyning a godly behavior, which thou so dearly love, and
expel evil concupiscence which thou so much abhorrest.

Oh merciful God, vouchsafe to keep us from taking any thing, by secret
means, or otherwise from our neighbors, whom we ought to love as our selves,
The desire whereof (good Lord) proceeds often by scarcity and want, by
pouertye and need, which (indeed) thou art able and willing to relieve
without any such unlawful means. And therefore I beseech thee to grant us a
sufficient and necessary portion, or else constancy and unfeigned hope in thee,
to be relieved in thy good time, and utterly to derest the horrible sin of
stealing for thou have promised neither to fail us nor forsake us, calling
faithfully upon thee. And as we ought to beware of taking any thing from others
by stealth, so likewise vouchsafe us grace, when any occasion serves, or
matter forces, to bear witness of the truth, in any controversy between
brethren, grant us heedefull minds, to depose and testify that, which is
truth, according to our knowledge, without respect either of the ability
freendshippe, or favor of the one, or the envy, malice, or poverty of the
other. And grant that we raise no false accusation or slander upon any man,
considering that the same fault, whereof we wrongfully accuse another, shall be
imputed as great unto our selves, but that we may keep our mouths, from
speaking any thing hurtful unto others.

And like good men muse and meditate, before hand, what we ought to speak, not
letting the brydell of our lips loose, to babble out that which first comes
into our minds, and that we may content our selves with our estates,
whatsoever thou sendest, without any ungodly desire of any thing that belongs
unto our neighbors. And grant us thine especial grace, ever more truly to
observe, and faithfully to fulfill all thy most godly commandments. In the
name and for the sake of thy Son Jesus Christ, in whose name, as well for
grace to keep thy laws as also for all necessaries for body and soul, I
heartily pray thee, by that prayer which he has set down unto us in these
words. Our Father which are in heaven. etc.

Oh Lord increase our faith.
A short prayer to the like purpose.
FOr as much oh God of all wisdom, and mercy, as thou for our direction and
godly living, have by the hands of thy Prophet set down and prescribed unto
us, godly institutions for us to follow, considering our corruption, and
natural declination, from following thy Laws, and how we are inclined to the
things forbidden by thee therein. I most humblye pray thee, to vouchsafe me
not only dilligent care, and daily endeavor, but especial grace to fulfill
them, according to thy blessed will, in all things, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

Oh Lord increase our faith.
A prayer for the true ordering of worldly riches, very necessary for such as
God has endued with the wealth of this world.
Even as thy wealth increases, so
Pray that, them well thou may bestow.
For they that have their wealth at will.
Are plagued worst, (using it ill.)
Our Lord and savior Jesus Christ. Ma. 19 the fountain. Mar 10. of all
liberality Lu. 18. an hundred fold in this life, and life everlasting in the
world to come, to all such as for his sake^, shall forsake all worldly goods
to follow him. But let not (says he again) Matthew. 7 thy left hand know what
thy right hand gives* Give, Luke 6. and it shall be given thee, and minister
unto the holy ones of God. To. 12. and it shall be rewarded thee. Break thy
bread unto the hungry, Esa. 58. give drink unto the thirsty. etc. And take
heed, that when thou do intend to give 1. Cor 7. let it be for Gods sake,
who has given thee store, to the end that thou should extend thy
liberalitye to the relief of the necessity of his Saints, neither grudgingly
nor by compulsion, nor for praise or vain glory, but with modesty and zeal,
concealing thy good deeds, and thine heavenly father shall reward thee, Covet
not to be rich, least thou fall into temptations, snares, and into many
foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction, for
the desire of money, is the root of al evil, and causes men to fall from
faith, to pearce themselves with many sorrows. Trust not in uncertain riches,
but in the living God whose hands preserves the poor as well as the rich, ye^
respects the cause of the needy that trust in him, and sends the secure
rich men emptye away at the last. Therefore to do good and to distrybute
forget not. Heb. 13 for with such sacrifice God is pleased.

OH bountiful God, and most merciful father, naked came I into this world,
bringing with me not a clothe or ragge to cover this silly and weak body of
mine, wanting sustinaunce and food, without the which (sweet Lord) life can
not endure, which I have received at thy merciful hands and that most largely
the one to cover and keep my naked members, and weak body from parching
heat in the so^mer, and extreme cold in winter, and the other to feed and
nourishe the same, in so much as it has by neither of these extremeties,
fainted or decayed to this day. I thank thee (sweet lord) that I have not
continued in nakedness, wherein I was born, but in warm and necessary
clothing, not in hunger, but in fulness, not in scarcety but in abundance, and
sufficiency of all things, not in want but in wealth, not in labor but at
ease, not among the lowest, but with the highest, which blessings of thine (Oh
Lord) I confess were not gotten by mine own industry and pains, not by mine
own policy or wisdom, nor bestowed on me for mine own sake or deserts*
who am borne in sin, but as sent from thee, as thine own free blessings
far passing the capasity of man, by wisdom to comprehend, by labor to
get, or by pollicye to purchase, but only by thy blessed providence, setting
thine helpinge hand unto the godly industrye of such as by their vocation and
just travail shall endeavor to gather the same, which is thine only and
bountiful gift, as also where thou give and blessest the children with the
inheritance of their parents, which also is thine unspeakable blessing; grant
Lord, that as all those thy gifts, come altogether without our deserts, so we
never abuse the same, but duly considering, the mutability, the ^lyperie hold,
and inconstancy of worldly treasure, and that the fear of the alteration
thereof, does often load and encombe^ our minds, with so many and sundry
cares, that we seldom rest without some doubt and perturbation of mind,
breeding also within us diverse other great inconveniences, as hawtines of
mind, contemning others of inferior conditions, with a grudging disdain of
them, in respect of ourselves, puffing up our hearts with arrogancy, vain
glory, excess, glutionie, and finally, leading a man to all kind of vices,
making him even to forget himself and thee, being lead by the indirect rule,
of their own proper nature, which is altogether, contrary to thy will,
wherefore, forasmuch as these our worldly riches, do ^ende either to the
winning or loosing of thy favor and love, and thy love, the end of our
happiness. Grant me thy grace and assistaunce, in bestowing, ordering and
occupying, those terrestrial things, that neither the love of worldly
commendation or praise of men, make me prodigal in spending them; nor the care
of coue^ousnes, draw me to whorde and lay them up, to canker and rust, and
where it may be taken by thieves, but as I have plentiful, so I may be
liberal, distributing according to the portion thereof, unto the necessity of
others, as the cause of their need, and mine hability shall require; And as it
pleases thee to increase my store, so make me more and more thankful, and
more and more ready to give, enduing me with the more humility, gentleness, and
pity, stretching forth mine hand with a glad heart, to help the helples,
to feed the hungry, to clothe the naked, to comfort the comfortles, that these
thy bountiful gifts, be not bestowed upon me in vain That I be not in the
end, in case like the rich man spoken of in thine holy gospel, turning mine
eyes from the begging cries of poor Lazarus, but may willingly impart, such
things, both of my table and store, as it pleases thee to bestoweon me, unto
the necessity of the poor all my days: and take from me all hardness of
heart, and extreme dealing to wards such, as by any light offense have
displeased me. Grant that I may consider of my self, and way of my self, as
one of the lowest, meanest, and weakest, and not to disdain the simplest,
always considering my beginning, my present estate, how it may please thee to
alter it, and what may befall unto me, before or in the end, as also to be
mindful of such as are of a lower estate and calling, yea of the worste and
poorest, and to do for them as I may, and as occasion shall require, without
ouercharging any that for their relief seek any thing at mine hands. That in
the end I may be found a good and faithful Steward of that tallant which thou
have put me in trust withal here.

Oh Lord make me willing to forgive them that offend me, acknowledging my
self a thousand ways offencible unto thy majesty, pardon me Oh God of thy
mercy, and give me grace to amend mine evil and corrupt life; And let me not
by misponding and abusing thy gifts here, make forfeyture of so precious a
dwelling place, as thou by the blood of thy son Jesus Christ, have purchased
for all such, as show themselves faithful Stewardes here. Make me to
consider (good Lord) the vanities of this wretched world, and give me thy
grace daily to contemplate and in faith to behold, the fayrenes, beauty, and
certainty of thine heavenly kingdom, that I may daily grow in hatred and
contempt of this vale of misery, and the vain pleasures thereof, and be ready
at thy fatherly call to come unto thee, willingly* bearing the burden, which
this this world continually charge me withal. Oh almighty and merciful
God, giver of all good things and the taken of them away again at thy good
pleasure, make me in prosperity always thankful: and if thou visit me with
poverty, endue me with perfect patience, that the delight of the one ^ull me
not and rock me a sleep, in the Cradell of security, not the heaviness and
grief of the other, waking me with the dangerous darts of despair;
Strengthen me (good Lord) for thy son Jesus Christ's sake, and help me in
this my great account, which I have to reckon for, at my last and final end,
and that before thee, the Lord of our souls, when and where there shall be no
thing left vncharged, but shall be forced to account for those receytes, and
actions which we little think on now, and proved even then to be parcel of
that whereof thou made us Stewards here.

And therefore grant that I may not bestow my Tallaunt, as to mine own use and
behoof only but to the furtheraunce and help of them that stand in need
thereof. That in the end thou may with that comfortable saying, receive me
(saying) Oh thou faithful Steward, seeing thou have been faithful over a
little, I will make thee Steward of a great deal, even partaker of that place
which thy son has purchased. In hope whereof, I do wholly yield and
commend my self and all that I have unto thine hands, praying thee to direct
me, by thy grace and wisdom, to the bestowing it according unto thy will. In
the name of thy son Jesus Christ, to whom with thee and the holy ghost, be
continual laud and praise, for ever and evermore

Amen.
Oh Lord increase our faith.
A short prayer to the like purpose.
OH God almighty, the gyuer of all good things, the only stay of mankind,
their guide and comfort, give grace unto me thy servant, that as thou have
blessed my store, and increased my wealth, in so much as I have not only that
which may suffice *mine own necessary want, but have also sufficient to
relieve others in need. Drive from mine heart, all natural desire of more,
and give me a will to distribute, and according to the abundance of my
wealth, to feed the hungry, cloth the naked, and to do all things else which
thou requirest of them, on whom thou bestowest thy blessings, to the
furtheraunce of godliness, and not to live to my self, and for my self only,
but to the help of all that want my furtheraunce. That laying up a good
foundation in the end, I may leave the world willingly, and purchase through
Jesus Christ, thy kingdom eternally. Amen.

Oh Lord increase my faith.
A prayer to be said of a woman with child.
As Eve thy Grandame causde thy thrall,
Pray to the Lord, case it he shall.
For as by Eve thy thraldom came*
Christ Jesus (since) to ^ase the same.
PRay that GOD may mittigate the pains of your travail which by reason of the
transgression of your Graundmother Eve, God has pronounced to be great, saying
unto her and in her, unto you all, in sorrow Gene. 3. shall you bring forth
Child. And you daily see that th'extremity thereof, does often end the days
of many a sister of yours: (before that hour healthful and strong.)

And therefore I think it a part of great wisdom to prepare and address
yourselues against that hour even to give up the ghost, for without the
merciful help and favor of almightye God, you can not escape death: wherefore
I wish, as many as are in that case, to betake them humbly on their knees unto
him, in hearty prayer, without whose outstretched arm no womans help can be
auailable in that behalf: pray therefore pray, that God of his tender mercy,
will vouchsafe you an hour, wherein you may be happily delivered.

OH merciful God and omnipotent father maker and Creator of all things, who
in the beginning had placed mankind, in most unspeakable happiness, where
they should have continued had not our first parents broke^thy precept and
will, whereby they procured thine heavy indignation against the^ selves, and
their posteritye for ever, so that the earth for their sakes was accursed
denying things necessary for their use with out their great labor, industry
pains, and sweat of body. And unto us the daughters of Eve for her*
transgression thou haste appointed most grievous pains and torments of body,
in the travail of childbirth, saying that in sorrow and great pains we
shall bring forth child. Oh sweet Lord, for as much as thou art almighty and
bring all things to pass, according unto thy good pleasure, and show
thy self in no thing more omnipotent, then in the conceyuing, forming and
bringing mankind into the world, which (although it were in the beginning
ordained most easy) by the subtilty of our continual enemy satan, in causing
our first parents to transgress thy commandment, and to break thy will, by
tasting the forbidden fruit) it is now most painful, grievous and perilous.
In so much (Oh sweet Lord) as without thine especial grace, favor and
mercy, it is altogether impossible to be brought to pas^e, our imperfection
and feeblenes is such that of ourselves we are not able to endure the least of
all the panges and sorrows that does accompany this kind of travail.
Wherefore (sweet Lord) mine humble and most hearty desire unto thy majesty,
is that thou would vouchsafe to extend unto me, and to all women in this my
like case thy mercy and loving favor to mittigate the pains thereof, that we
may be able, patiently to endure and continue the panges of the same, at the
hour appointed.

Make that easy and light unto us, which our deserts have made burdensome and
heavy, that the burden wherewith I am now laden, may fortunately be delivered,
from the shoulders of my weak body. Send us all (good Lord) happy
deliverance, that we may be made joyful mothers. And vouchsafe unto me, and
to all that have conceived, and be with Child, strength to bring forth, that
which thine omnipotency has so wonderfully wrought in us.

Be present with us in our travails Oh Lord help us most merciful God, and
mightily deliver us. Let thy power, might and love, be no less manifested, in
the delivery, then in the forming of thy creature, that being through thy
goodness, made glad and joyful mothers, we may obtain our perfect strength
again, and live to praise and please thee for evermore.

Amen.
Oh Lord increase our faith.
A short and most necessary prayer, always to be said of one with child.
OH Lord, whose goodness we have offended, and deserved infinite plagues, look
upon me and pardon me, lay aside thy justice, and show thy mercy, let me have
the benefit of thine helping hand, and not feel the wright of thine heavy
hand. Favorably lighten me of this burden, in thy good and gracious time, and
in the hour and instaunce of my delivery, be present with me (Lord) and
tender my safety, through Jesus Christ Amen.

Oh Lord increase my faith.
A thanks giving to God after the delivery.
As God has now delivered thee,
So, well thy praise deserves he:
For if he had not stood thy freende,
These panges of thine, had wrought thine end
FOr as much as it has pleased almighty God, of his great goodness to give thee
good deliverance and to rid thee from the great pains and perril where with
thou were even now afflicted. Fall down, humble and prostrate thy self in
heart, with the rest that are present, giving no less unfeigned thanks unto
his omnipotent majesty, for his holy help in saving thee then thou did or
ought to pray for his aid, happily to deliver thee, and let not the joy or
glad tidings of a son or a daughter born into the world or the departure of
the^ so much possess thine heart, but that it may be always ready to give
praise: o God for thy safe delivery, as did Hannah, who being delivered of a
son, give hearty thanks to God. And think not that (the extreme plunges of
the very birthe being past) thou art presently acquitted of al danger, for the
weakness frailty and rawnes of your health, is many days after great. And
therefore what soever thou be, tendringe thine own safety, praise God
continually, praying for strength, and he will give it thee: for unthankfulness
is a mean to purchase (in stee^e of Gods favor his indignation, to punish a
new.

OH almightye and merciful God the only aid stay and comfort of all those
that trust in thee? the principal help, of them that fear thee, we give thee
most humble hearty and v^ fe^^ed thanks, for that thou haste vouch^^fed to
deliver this w^^^a^ M. thy servant, from the great pains and travail of
childbirth, which are so great, so grievous and so dangerous, that even by
thine own words they are said to be most grievous: In so much (sweet Lord*
as whensoever thou set foo^th in thine holy scripture any great pain or
da^g^r thou resemblest it always to a Woman's pain in travail

Therefore we confess and acknowledge that we in the behalf of this our
Sister, are so much the more bound unto thee, so far extending thy
furtheraunce and help to her delivery from such extreamitie and anguish, we
fall down eue^ upon the knees of our hearts, with unfeigned thanks for this
most merciful work of thine, but most loving and merciful God, thou know
that although she be delivered of this heavy burden, yet the pains some thing
continue, which without thy most sweet mitugation thereof, will drive her to
further grief and sorrow. We humbly beseech thee therefore to consider of the
estate of this thy poor servant by thy goodness, thus delivered, that thou
would vouchsafe to mitugate and assuage her pains and grief, that she may
be able to bear the same with perfect patience, and continual thank, for her
happy deliverance. (...)te the rest (...) Child be de(...)ying the (...)
pray^r. and (...) at the ^ude (...) prayer.
And forasmuch (sweet Lord) as the tenderness and misery of mankind is such,
that they can not of long time after their birth, attain to any mean to help
themselves, but wanting the (...) aid and attendaunce of the mother and (...)
they soon perish. We beseech thee to (...)gthen this little infant, and
tender babe, now (...)e into this vale of misery, and if it be thy good
pleasure, to vouchsafe it life and longer abiding here, grant it ablenes and
strength* to receive such food, and nourishment, as thy providence has
assigned, for such little infants and sucklinges. And so increase within the
pappes of the mother or Nurce such nu^riture, as may be sufficient for the
maintenance of the life and health thereof, working with such effect within
the bowels of the tender infant, as it may thereby grow more and more, to the
estate of man, according to thy good pleasure, and strengthen both the mother
and the infant, that they may both grow* to such perfect health and ablenes,
as the one may give, the other take, sufficient sustenaunce for the
preservation of life, and increase of strength, through the mighty power and
working of thee.

For which (sweet Lord) and for all things else necessary, for them and for
all other in their like case, we pray unto thee, as thy son Jesus Christ
has himself taught us, saying, Our Father etc.

Oh Lord increase our faith. And receive this woman thy servant, and ever more
mightily defend her. Oh Lord bless this little babe, and receive it into the
number of thy children. Oh Lord guide it evermore to the full obteyning of thy
favor and mercy, and to the perfect fulfilling of thy will, all his days. Amen.
To thee be all praise for evermore Amen.
A prayer for wisdom.
As worldly wisdom seeks naught,
(In time of need,) auayling ought,
So heavenly wisdom works still,
The things that please gods heavenly will.
Wisdom (as says S. Augustine) is the knowledge how to choose those things
that are good, and to avoid those things that are evil. And Aristotle defines
it to be a virtue of the mind whereby these gr^ces are obtained, which tend to
the felicity of this life and the life to come. Thomas Aqu^nus says, that
wisdom is the mean whereby we are reconciled unto God. If so, then what a
precious jewel is this* what more excellent gift can we crave at the hands of
God, then that whereby we may do that only which is good, and such things as
are tending to eternal felicity, and which reconcile us to God our maker,
through Christ our redeemer and Savior? the beginning whereof is the fear of
the Lord, whose love toward us is so great, that he wylleth him that
wants wisdom I am, 1, to ask at his hands, and he will give the same most
aboundauntly, (asking it in faith) as he gave it unto Solomon. 1 Kin 3 so
plentifully and in such sort, as they came from the fardest parts of the world
to hear the same.

Pray therefore that thou may obtain it, it is better then gold or precious
stones. Pro. 16, and more sweeter then honny or the honny comb.

OH almighty and everliving GOD, whose gift it is that babes sucklings and men
of base degree, have the knowledge and understanding of thy will, and men of
profounde learning, deep study, and worldly experience often want the same. Oh
God which expellest darkness and give light, which take away ignorance and
pla^test knowledge and wisdom, denying the same to none that unfeignedly asks
it at thine hands, without the which nothing can be obtained which good is,
nothing avoided, which is evil, nothing continue safe, be it never so
durable, nor any enterprise either rightly begun or happily ended without the
same, which Solomon considering (having promise at thine hands, that
whatsoever he asked he should obtain) above all things, above wealth or
riches, worldly praise, renown or glory, beauty or strength, yea above
possessions or kingdoms he only requested wisdom, which thou so abundantly
bestowedst on him, that they repaired and came from far to hear the same,
which is none other thing (sweet Lord) but the knowledge of thy divine will
and heavenly mysteries, it is the knowledge how to chose the good and avoid the
evil, it proceeds only from thee, and with thee it has been from the
beginning.

Send it down from heaven, where it attends about thy seat, replenish mine
heart with the knowledge thereof. Give me a new heart, and a right spirit, for
man's understanding fails in many things, but thy wisdom instructs the
simple, and makes the tongues of infants eloquent, directing the steps of
the blind. Wherefore Oh Lord, I most humbly beseech thee, to establish the
same in my spirit, and write thy Laws in mine heart, that I walk not in the
way of error, but may abstain from sin, cleave unto righteousness, and walk
in innocence, all the days of my life. Oh sweet Lord grant me this thine
especial gift of heavenly wisdom, that I may perfectly know, what thy
divine will and pleasure is, that I may always direct my ways, according
unto the same, loving thee in all things, and above all things, continuing
most thankful, for all thy fatherly benefits, bestowed and conferred upon me.
And that prosperity overcome me not, nor in adversity be foolishlie moved, to
seek reamedie or relief else where, but at thine hands only* who a^t my God
and my ^auiour, and who have promised, to give wisdom to all the^ that
faithfully ask it.

Oh Lord hear my prayer, and let my cry come unto thee Give me perfect
wisdom, whereby I may truly discern the difference between thine heavenly
revelations, (which is wisdom from above) and vain cogitations of worldly
wits, considering that the one in all things, as well in aduersitye as
prosperity, in sickness as in health, in anguish of mind, trouble or grief of
body, as in wished estate and pleasure, continues most constant, stable,
patient and firm, with due consideration, that it can not be but good,
whatsoever thou suffer to light upon us; But contrariwise (sweet Lord) the
other seeks with more diligence, to avoid afflictions, troubles, and
worldly calamities, the cross sweet Lord which thou layest upon thy children,
then wisely to avoid thy heavy displeasure. And that by worldly devised
means, as by riches, freendship, policy, and strength, with this deceiuable
and fond conceit, that Fortune where she favors, there is plenty and peace,
but where she frowns there is continual want and trouble. But my most sweet
Lord and heavenly comforter, grant that it may be far from mine heart to
think, that any thing comes to pass, otherwise then by thine almighty
providence, who willest nothing, nor do any thing but what is most expedient
and necessary, for the use both of ourbodies and souls, which we can not
rightly conceive* without this especial gift of thine, wherewith for thy son
Jesus Christ's sake, endue me, that I be not lead by fond conceyte, or deceive
my self with worldly experience, but governing my life according unto thy
will, measuring all mine actions, words and thoughts, by the right rule of
knowledge, and weying them in the balaunce of perfect wisdom, in the end, I
may be found in the number of those discreet Virgins, who had their Lamps
continually ready, and not in the number of those that were taken unprovided.
That the coming of thy son Jesus Christ be not terrible unto me as to the
loytering servant, for want either of the light of a pure life, or gains by my
tallant, but most acceptable and joyful, having the Lamp of love, and the
candle of a true faith, continually burning, with in the secret Closset of
mine heart,

That in the end I may have free enteraunce with thine elect, into that most
glorious kingdom which thy son Jesus Christ purchased with his blood, for
me and all believers.

Amen.
Oh Lord increase my faith.
A short prayer to the like purpose.
AS long as we bear about us this frayl^ body, imprisoning the soul, our
natures seek by all means, that which is contrary to the spirit, accounting
that wisdom which is mere foolishnes, where fore (good Lord) vouchsafe to
send down that wisdom which wayteth about thy throne.

And plant the same in mine heart, that measuring all my dooinges, and devises,
by the rule thereof, may always do and intend, that which likes thee, and
shun the contarie, through Jesus Christ our only Savior and redeemer. Amen.

Oh Lord increase our faith.
A prayer in misery and trouble,
Though thraldom thou do here abide,
Be patient, God will soon provide,
To ease thee, or to end thy days.
Bear thou his cross, and give him praise.
LIke as the furnace tries and seasoneth the Potters vessel, Eccl. 27. and as
the fire purifieth the Silver from the dross. So does aduersitye season and
purify the hearts of christians, from the dross of security. For by crosses
and many troubles* To, 5. comes patience, and by patience hope, through
trial, and therefore should we think it an exceeding joy when troubles
assault and pennurye pricketh us, Iea. 1. according to the will of God,
whereby we are stirred up, to commit our souls to Gods protection and
will, by well doing, manfully bearing all afflictions all extreametyes of this
world, and keep (as it were) secret the sorrows which calamitye brings unto
us, 3. Esd 10. and that with patience, whereby thou shall appear an happy man,
and receive a crown of life, which God thy faithful Creator, has promised to
all those that bear his Cross with patience. And think not that want of
relief in poverty. Lack of comfort in sickness, vexation of enemies, slanders
misreportes, contempts, or any other kind of trouble, either of body or mind,
happens unto thee by Fortune (as it is among such as have not the feeling of
the truth (commonly termed) But by the providence of God, and that for thy
good, if with wisdom thou weigh the same by patience, accepting it, as a
fatherly loving correction, putting thee in mind of thine offenses, and
uncertainty of worldly vanities: and be not dismayde, but turn from thy wicked
ways, cleuing and referring thee by hearty prayer, unto God (whose will it is
for thy better profi^te, that such things should light upon thee) without
ircksome taking it, or with greater desire to dye, then had S. Paul, when he
prayed to be losed and to be with Christ. Stand fast, stand faithful, and
take patiently all crosses, all afflictions, all temptations and calamities
here, being a ready way to patience, and pray for the aid of almightye GOD,
whose hand is always ready to help such as are afflicted here for his
Christ's sake. By many trybulations we must enter into the kingdom of heaven.
Call upon God, Psa 7. in the day of trouble and he will deliver thee. The Lord
hears the cries of the righteous Psalm 34. and delivers them out of all
their troubles.

But if thou cry, and be not heard (I mean) presently relieved, think not
much at it, it is for the best, wherefore accept it willingly and make of
necessity a virtue, which is, take patiently that which of thy self thou can
not avoid.

MY God my God, vouchsafe to turn thy loouing and favorable countenance
toward me, thy pore creature, who am brought very low, and mine enemies, laugh
and rejoice at my fall. I am like an Owl in the desert, that the birds, of the
airegaze and wonder at, mine estate is altered, my store is turned into
scarcity, and my wealth into want, my plenty into poverty, and joy into sorrow
and sadness. Oh sweet Lord, my prosperity is turned into aduersitye, my
friends have forsaken me. And where they have often promised to help me,
they do not only, not perform the same, but they disdain my company, they
loath and abhor my presence. I am utterly refused of al mine acquaintance,
and they that were before my familiars, are now my deadly foes. Sweet Lord
thou seeest how I am clapped up in cares, how I am environed with a thousand
causes, that procure intolerable grief, both in body and mind. Oh Lord I
have no refuge, I have no place of defense. I have no mean to help my self,
I am so bewrapped in calamity, that I can not enjoy any liberty either of
body or mind, but most sweet Lord, most loouing and most favorable, most
able and most ready to help, such as come to thee laden with distress, lo
here I lie at the gate of thy mercy, knocking for ease, humbly craving thine
assistaunce, who have willed such as are heavy laden to come unto thee, I
come, I come, sweet Lord, as one burdened with grief, receive me and help
me, show thy loving countenance, and extend the help of thine holy arm, and
I shall be safe, mercifully hear me after thy wonted goodness, consider my
distress weigh mine afflictions, and look upon my troubles. So shall my
sorrow be turned again into joy, my poverty shall be relieved, with
sufficiency, and all shall go well with me, for (sweet Lord) although when I
consider mine estate* when I view my present mysery and feel my want I be
stricken with great sorrow in mind, and vexed with intolerable grief: yet
when I consider, the cause of my troubles, with due consideration of thine
intent therein. Then can I not but comfortably resolve my self, Then does
inward comfort assuage the extreamitye of my grief and sorrow, remembering
that thou have said, that whom thou love, thou punishest.

Wherefore I cannot but give thee thanks (sweet Lord) for this thy fatherly
correction, in altering mine estate, for better try all of my patience. That by
patience I may take hold of hope, that so by hope of thy goodness, loving
kindness, and fatherly promises, which deceiuest no man, that unfeignedly
depends upon thee) I may enjoy a most comfortable renewing of mine happy
estate again, at thy good pleasure. I cast all my burden upon thee, as thou
willest all those that are heavy laden to do. Refresh me most loving and
merciful God refresh me with the timely showers of thy favor and love. That
the joy and gladness of mine heart, may grow up and choke the weeds of
sorrow, and anguish of mind. Oh my surpassing comforter, leave me not distitute
of thy defense, and patronage, vouchsafe evermore to be present with me, in all
my troubles, that I faint not, but may rather rejoice in tribulation, knowing,
that a crown of life, is laid up in store, for as many as bear thy yoke
with patience. Assist me therefore (good Lord) in all these vexations and
temptations of mine, that I may patiently look for thy good deliverance,
which although it come not as I wish, yet that (staying thy leisure) in thy
good time, I may be satisfied of my godly desire, which thou have promised
never to defraude us off, nor suffer us to depart empty away.

There was never any confounded that trusted in thee, nor any forsaken that
called on thine holy name. Thou raisest the simple out of the mire and dust.
Thou put down the mighty from their high seat, and exaltest such as are
meek and of a lowly mind.

Lord I cleave unto thee, I trust in thee, I depend only on thee, being
poor, thou rich, I weak, thou strong, I blind, thou giving sight, mine aid
is of thee, my comfort in thee, and all my joy comes from thee; Grant
therefore sweet Lord, that I think not the continuance of this my hard
estate to be long, or burdensome unto me, but may willingly accept the same, as
most sweet light and wholesome for me, and of a short time, always referring
it, to thy good pleasure, whether thou will raise me up or keep me low.
Thou know what is most necessary and expedient for me: And therefore do
with me what thou will, send me help when thou will and as thou will. Lo
here I lie at the gate of thy goodness and mercy, still looking for thy
stretched out arm, to remove that, which not of malice, but of love, thou
have laid upon me. Good Lord for thy mercies sake, give me not over, leave me
not altogether helples, take not thy favor utterly from me. But as thou have
fatherly corrected me, so vouchsafe lovingly to embrace me again, sweet God
for thy son Jesus Christ's sake.

Amen.
Oh Lord increase our faith.
A short prayer to the like effect often to be said.
WHen thou will Oh Lord remove this heavy burden from me, renew my comfort
and drive away the cares of mine heart, by the hand of thy loving kindness, whom
by my sin I have offended, come again unto me Oh Lord in love, and show me
thy loving countenance, take away these miseries which I have deserved, and as
in love thou punishest, to the end I should convert from sin. So Lord I
being sorry for my sins, hartelie pray thee to give me grace, and comfort
again, through the same thy love, for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

Oh Lord increase my faith.
A prayer to be defended from enemies.
If thou take God to be thy stay,
Thy foes shall not thy soul dismay.
IF it be possible (as much as in thee lies) have peace with all men. Romans 12.
And offend none but if it fall out that the world hate thee, take it not
grievously, Ioh. 15. (if thou have not deserved it) but if thou have deserved
it, be sorry and seek unity and concord quickly, least suddenly thine
adversaries entrap thee in thy ways, and so^^ scredite thee. The most just
men have been wrongfully accused and have (guiltles) been condemned, in many
and sundry things as Christ himself, the pattern of all integrity, the
savior of the world was accused of drunkenness of working by the power of
devils, and such like yet prayed he for his enemies, so likewise pray for thine
enemies, and do for the^ what lies in thee, as to seed the^ when they be
hungry To. 12. giving the^ drink when they be thirsty, clothing them and
harboring them. Bless them that curse you Mat. 5. do good to the^ that hate
you, and pray for them that hurt you, so shall you have recompense at the hands
of God. And in any wise seek not to revenge, for it is the office of God.
Serve him and he will bless thee and will lay his ^nrsse upon thine enemies,
Pro. 30. and will save thee out of their hands. Saul could not hurt David in
respect that David put his trust in God, although he were his mortal enemy.
1, Sam. 18. Rejoice not at thine enemies fall, nether be thou glad when he
decays. Pro. 24. but pray for his amendment. And GOD as he has promised
will be thy rock, thy delivery, thy shield and horn of thy salvation, and
thy refuge from cruel enemies. 2. Sam. 22. for in fearing him, thine enemies
shall fear thee. Five shall chase an hundred, and an hundred shall putt ten
thousand to flight, Le. 26 for the Lord has respect to them that love him
and keep his covenant* he will arise and scatter their enemies, yea as the
smoke vani sheth, so shall he drive the^ away, Psalm. 48 and as wax melts at
the fire, so will he make thine enemies to perish at his presence, trust in him
faithfully, and fear not thy foes.

Keep me Oh God from the hands of such as go about to do me hurt and
undeservedly to take away my life, for many there be, that hate me, seking my
shame, my destruction, and overthrow, in so much as without thine assistance,
thy protection and aid, I shall not escape their hands, I shall not avoid
their tira^ny but that they will obtain their desires, and accomplish their
devises, to mine utter undoing* they are good Lord many and more then I can
number that seek to do me evil yea my neghbours and familiars, and not the
least of them but is of power and ablenes to destroy me, yea as it were to
eat me up, unless thou take part with me against the furiousnes of mine
enemies. But Lord why should I fear? why should I say in mine heart, they are
so many and so mighty that I can not resist them? so furious that I can not
escape them?

So pollitique that I can not prevent them? my trust is in thee, and unto thee
I fly, in all their assaults, who art a Castle and fortress so strong, that
there is none, be he never so victorious, that can prevail against the
least that trusts in thee, and rests under the shadow of thy wings,
wherefore Lord for thy son Jesus Christ's sake receive me, who come unto thee
as the strength of my being, humbly beseeching thee to look upon my cause, to
consider my troubles and to weigh the sorrows of mine heart, lift up thy self
against the furiousnes of mine enemies, drive back and con found mine
adversaries, uersaries thine own self fight thou against them, that fight
against me. Turn their devises and wicked imaginations from me to their own
hinderance, let the weapons, which they lift up to hurt me withal, pearce
themselves, and the malicious words which they utter to my reproach redownde to
their own shame, let such as seek to persecute me without a cause, be
discomforted, and driven backward, and give me patience to bear their
cruelties considering, that there was never any (no not the most righteous) but
were subject to the evil devises, slanderous words, and wicked practices of
the wicked, whose tongues were full of guile, and the poison of Aspes was under
their lips, who were not ashamed to speak most approbriously of thine own
self, sweet Jesus, who wast void of all offense, yet slew they thee* and
thine Apostles, I cannot therefore (Oh merciful God) but take these extreme
dealinges of mine enemies with the greater patience, with greater humility and
more hearty thanks, for accepting me as worthy to be of the number of such
as the wicked do hate and grudge at.

But most (sweet Lord) as thou suffer for a time such ray lynges,
backbytinges, menacing words evil opinions, and evil dealinges, to prevail
against me, for the better envring my frail nature to bear greater burdens.
So vouchsafe to preserve me from all such envious hearts and malicious
tongues, and defend me from all blood thirsty men, and from the hands of such
as go about to hurt me. And in steed of them (if it so please thee) vouchsafe
to chose out and appoint for me, such as may be faithful, godly, virtuous,
religious, loving and freendly, that both in the fear of the one, and love of
the other. I may bear my self, by thine example and grace, so upright in all
my doings, as mine adversaries take none advantage against me, but that seeing
the sincerity of my life, and soundnes of my conversation, mine enemies may be
altogether ashamed, so much as to mutter any thing against me, much less to
devise any thing to hurt me withal, or to overthrow my goings: and the godly
glad and rejoice at my well doing. Oh Lord strengthen my says, and arm me
with continual hope in thee, whereby I may be able to withstand all the
cruelties of mine adversaries, in such sort as they may know it to be thy
self, who fightest for me and defendest my cause against their fury. Behold
(Oh Lord) my trust is in thee, thy rod comfort me, and thy staff stay me up
that I fall not into their hands, by trust in mine strength, which is as a
broken Reed in mine own policy or wisdom which is foolishnes before thee* or
in the help or freendship of man, which is vain and fallable. But lead thou
me and guide me in all my doings, cogitations and words, least I erring from
thy commandments, inclining mine heart, to vaneties, and vice, mine enemies
take just occasion to say, ah ha, we saw it with our eyes, and bring up an
evil report of me, and that undeservedly: Oh Lord guide me in all truth,
establish in mine heart, true desire to walk uprightly in all my ways, in
humblenes of mind, not in pride, least they say he is so hauty he knows not
himself, preserve me from drunkenness, least they say he is now out of the way
of discretion, he is beside himself, we have now sit opportunity to work our
wills on him, and so set on me to hurt me, vouchsafe also to keep me from
the dangerous desire of fleshly lust, from hau^ting the places suspected, or
poluted with uncleanness, least they (taking just occasion by my lewd
behavior) speak that which indeed may redowne to my shame, and deserved
infamy. Finally Oh lord keep me from all evil, that although, by reason of my
corruption, I be naturally inclined to wantonness and excess, thou will give me
sobriety, lowlines love, (even to mine enemies,) chastity, wisdom, and
discreet understanding, both of their wills, and mine own weakness, that
through thy grace framing my dooinges according to thine heavenly will in all
things, leading the whole course of my life in cinserety and godly behavior,
the righteous may be glad and rejoice thereat, magnifying thine holy name, who,
so regardest the prosperity of thy servant, that thou suffer him not, to
fall into the hands of such as would eat him up: (And let not the
adversaries of thy truth (Oh Lord) unjustly rejoice over me, tauntingly, and
contemptuously mocking me. But Lord I am in thine hands, and do confess it
to be great and good reason, that thou should do with me, what best
seems to thy f(...)erly will, accounting this thy trial of my patience, to
proceed even of thy mere love, And therefore (if thou will that they set
upon, or follow, to kill me, to persecute me, to laugh and scorn at me, to
frame approbrious speeches, and devises against me) vouchsafe to continue my
defense, my strong Castle and (as it were) the pillar of a cloud standing
between me and them, as thou stoodest in the wilderness, between the Tents of
the Egiptians, and the Tents of the children of Israel, so that the
Egiptians, could not prevail against them.

Lord (if thou will) thou can turn their hearts, thou can molisye the
hardness thereof, thou can turn their hatred into love, and their malice
into good will, and give them in steed of hearts to work wickedness,
merciful and godly minds, I refer it to thine heavenly providence, and wholly
commit my self into thine hands, humbly praying thee for thy son Jesus
Christ's sake, to deal with me and them according to thy mercy, and loving
kindness, and not after our deserts: be thou merciful unto me, and evermore
mightily defend me, unto my lives end, conducting me uprightly in all my
ways, for Jesus Christ's sake.

Amen.
Oh Lord increase our faith.
A short prayer to the like purpose.
LOrd I am a sinful creature, and have deserved thine indignation against me,
yea I confess that I have deserved many and great punishments, yet Lord for
thy mercies sake, turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me, let not mine
enemies prevail in their mischeuous devises against me. I am in thine hand,
and they are within the compass of thy power, stay their furye, let them not
take effect in their devises against me, but for thy son Jesus sake stand
between me and them and put them back, and as I have offended thee, by
natural blindness, so by the working of thine holy spirit I shall rise to
thee, and live in thee again, through Jesus Christ our Lord, which vouchsafe
to grant, that they may not only, not prevail but be ashamed, and fly,
sweets God Amen.

Oh Lord increase my faith.
A prayer when a man takes a journey.
Before thou take thy journey pray,
That God, by Christ, will guide thy way
FOr as much, as the earth is replenished with many perrils and sudden
dangers, have diligent regard, that when thou take thy journey, to desire
instantly the almighty God, to conduct thee, as he vouchsafed to conducte
Tobye, by the hand of his Angel Raphaell, in his journey to Rages, Toby. 5,
defending him from many dangers, and especially from the fish, which was like
to have devoured him. So shall he likewise send his Angels to take charge of
thee that no kind of danger shall prevail against thee, if thou heartily pray
his aid, behauing thy self godly and virtuously, not provoking his anger, by
enterprysing that which is either uncomely or unlawful, but be doing good, as
S, Paul in all his ^^urnyes saying faithfully and often, the right hand of the
Lord mightily defend me. Act. 1

Almighty God, and most merciful father, who guidest and defendest all those
that in thy name walk and travail in this world, vouchsafe to stretch forth
thine hand over me, thy poor creature, lead me and conducte me, in this my
journey, which urgent occasion forces, and considering (good Lord) that the
paths, (yea every corner of this wretched vale of miserye) is replenished
with innume rabble perrils and dangers both of body and soul, whereinto
without thine assistaunce, protection and aid, without the help of thy mighty
hand, and out stretched arm, we can not but fall and perish, walking and
wandering, in the troublesome and dangerous coasts of the earth, where
robbers, thieves, and evil affected persons, in great number, secretly lurk,
violently to take, not only our proper substance and goods, which by the
great labor and sweat of our bodies, we have gotten, or otherwise by thy
providence, given us, but out lives, also if we be not prevented, and by thy
good and fatherly providence defended. Wherefore I humbly beseech thee. Oh God
almighty, if any such lie in wait in my way at this time, grant me
foreknowledge thereof, that of thy mere mercy* I may happily avoid their
pretended evil, either by betaking me another way, or may be defended under
the shaddowe of thy wings, and so encounter with them, that by the force of
thy right hand, I may overcome them, being of mine own self, of no force,
neither lies it in the strength of our own hands, to put back or overcome
such, as in this wicked intent, arise up against us. It is not the sword
(good lord I confess) the spear, nor strength of the Horse, but thine own
power that overcomes for us. Vouchsafe therefore (Oh Lord) thine holy Angel
to go with me, let him go before me, to direct me, to save me preventing me
from all dangers, as he did thy servant Toby, going into a strange Country.
Conduct me safely (sweet God) in the name of thy son Jesus Christ, that my
business may take good success, and I make a safe and prosperous return,
without hurt either by the merciles and great waters, by wild Beasts of the
field, save me from the stroke of Thunder, from lightning and tempest,
preserve and keep me, as the apple of thine eye, under the shadow of thy
wings, from the ways of the wicked that accomplishing the end of my journey,
I may effectually finish, and with happy success end my business, and by thine
omnipotent conduction, prosperously return again, according to thy will (sweet
God.

Amen.
Oh Lord increase my faith.
A thanks giving, after return.
At thy return give God the praise.
Who still conducts thee in thy ways.
COnsider what dangers thou have escaped, in passing the pirrilous places of
this world (no place or time being without his danger) And therefore at thy
return, either unto thine own home, or to any other place of rest: Be not
unmindful to give God, hartye and unfeigned thanks for his gracious
protection, and fatherly conduction. So shall he, our heavenly protector,
evermore be mindful to direct thee in all thy ways.

I Thank thee Oh most loving and most merciful God, that it has pleased thee
to give me prosperous and happy return, from this my journey, escaping
diverse and sundry dangers. which do abound in all corners of the earth, and
have given me such success, in my business, as (I trust) shall be for my best,
and have of thy goodness and mere mercy, brought me again unto mine own
home, and dwelling place, to recreate my wearied members.

Also I thank theee (Oh merciful God) for protecting and saving me, thy silly
creature, from all pirrills, as from drowning by water, from the stroke of
thunder, and blastes of lightning, from the claws and jaws of wild beasts
of the feelde, and for defending me from thieves, robbers, and men of blodie
conditions, which (and sundry other) mishaps, I have (in this my journey)
escaped, and whereby I have both seen and heard of diverse other to have
perished, acknowledging it thine only goodness, thine unspeakable love, and
mere mercy, not able sufficiently to praise thee for the same, nor to yield
sufficient thanks for thy favor therein. To thee (sweet Lord) be all
honor, pray se, dominion and glory, for ever and evermore.

Amen.
Oh Lord increase my faith.
A thanks giving to God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy ghost,
worthy to be often said.
Give thanks to God who did us make,
And to his son so dear:
Who did our ransom undertake,
With tho'ly Ghost so clear.
ALthough we can not sufficientlye praise God, our heavenly father, for his
exceeding love in making and creating us in the beginning to, his own image
and likeness (and that when we were not) let us (yet) humble our selves with
dutiful obedience, as good children to a louinge father praying for grace to
set forth (as much as in us lies) his praises with David who said. Psam 145.
great is the lord and meruey lous worthy to be praised, who made heaven and
earth the sea and all that is therein who keeps his covenant and fidelity for
ever, giving us, for his son Jesus Christ's sake al things for our use in time
convenient, as by the placing the stars in heaven with the son and moan, their
course and orderly motions, the herbs of the field and due manner of their
spring fading and withering again. The sea so environed, compassed, and
notwithstanding, the rage and force thereof, kept within his limmits and
appointed bounds with the fishes so infinite therein both small and great, and
the ebbing and flowing thereof which all serves only for the use and service of
man, yea and with out the which man could not continue, yet especially and
above al things, so great was his love that he spared not for our sakes, to
give his only son even to dye most undeservedly upon the cross for our
redemption, which love of the father therein, as it moves (or should move) a
great desire of thanksgiving in us, so does the obedience of the son, give us a
greater occasion of thanks giuinge then the tongue of any mortal man can
express, by whose acceptance of the pangs of death came the remission of al
our sins as witnesses the holy ghost the water of life* which being
sprinkled in our hearts procures unfeigned love, whereby we have access to
Christ our only mediator, to God the father. Praise God the father, who made
us, praise God the son, who redeemed us, and is our continual advocate to
his heavenly father, praise God the holy Ghost, who has sanctified gods
elect, and gives light unto the hearts of all such, as serve the Lord
unfeignedly.

OH almighty God, maker and creator of all things, conseruer of all that thou
have made, and protector of all that love thee, who in the beginning, made
all things of nothing which al rest in thine hands, have their continuance,
and being, and without whose providence, they should convert again to nothing,
we yield unto thee al lawd, praise and glory, and unto thee ascrib al power
majesty, and dominion, who rulest all things, workest al things, and disposest
all things after thy will, to thine own glory, and to our unspeakable and
undeserved comfort, who are as Pilgrims and strangers, and without the same thy
continual protection as creatures forsaken, and castawaies, Lord thine hand
guides al things, preserves al things and guiueth all things for our use,
most disobedient, and stifnecked children who not withstanding thou through thy
mere mercy and love vouchsafed, in the beginning to place in the garden of
happiness where we should have continued, had not our first parent, by
transgression made forfeiture thereof, and so highly displeased thee, that thou
(repe^ting of the maki^g of us) did drown the whole world, for our sins sake,
and yet so tender was thy love, so soon was thine anger converted into a
desire of our salvation, that thou vouchsafedst to send into this world, Jesus
Christ, to redeem us into thy favor again, (a surpassing love where the
offended, should seek attoneme^t with the offendour) for which thy singular
love, and mercy in finit, we can not sufficie^ly thank thee, (god of our
comfort) nor thee sweetsaui our Jesus christ, for thine obedience, for thine
undeserved humility, and ardent desire of our reconciliation, and eternal
salvation* Lord increase my faith, send me thy grace, and endue me with
thine holy spirit, that I may heartily render, and continually yield; all
possible thanks unto thee, not only for creating keeping and preserving us
hethervnto, but also for reaching unto us thine hand of love again, after our
so great and long disobedience) I thank thee (Oh savior Jesus Christ)
redeemer and savior of our souls, who refusedst not, but most wilingly
acceptedst (for our sakes) for our redemption, from hell and eternal death,
being then thine enemies) the approbrious death of the cross, among notorious
offenders, being often spightfully entreated, buffeted, spette at, reviled,
and most iuiuriously handled, not for thine own (sweet Jesus) but for our
offenses, for our sins (yea) to purchase that by thine obedience, which we
lost by wilful rebellion against thine heavenly fathers precept and will. Oh
good Jesus, we thank thee, that it has pleased thee, to leave the sacred
mansion of thy Fathers right hand, thy celestial being, and to put on the
base attire of a servant, to walk in the troublesome paths of this miserable
world, and yet thinking it no robbery to be equal with God, though leaving his
heavenly habitation for a time, (according to his providence and heavenly
knowledge) to suffer here in this vale of misery, in this desert of sin,
most cruel and most shameful abuses, only for our sins, which were so
odious and vile, in the sight of our good God, that no sacrifice or oblation
could appeaze his wrath, and deserved displeasure* toward us for the same,
but thy death only, and sacrifice of thy precious and undefiled body upon the
Altar of the cross, who willingly sufferedst the same for our sakes,
notwithstanding they were so grievous, so in tolerable, and odius, that by
reason of the extremity and anguish rhereof, thou werte constrained, to sweat
water and blood.

Oh surpassing love, Oh love without the which, the hatred of thine omnipotent
father, had not been appeazed, nor removed from us. Oh love, without the which
we had been barred of all access unto the seat of mercy and woonted favor
of almightye God, and continued in his heavy displeasure for ever to our utter
destruction, death and damnation. Oh sweet Jesus, Oh healthful comforter, and
giver of health and restorer of life, how can we but praise thee? how can we
but love thee? how can we but magnify and extol thine holy name for ever?
who have received at thy merciful hands so unspeakable a benefitt, yea and
who so tenderly louedst us, that by thy means, (without our deserts) we are
restored from death to life, from the deserved displeasure of our creator, to
his unspeakable love and favor without which we had perished both body and
soul, we have atonement now with him, that before we had so greatly offended,
even God our maker, without whose favor we fall, and without whose help we
perish, and pass to naught.

Oh sweet Jesus thou haste also taken upon thee, not only to dye for our
redemption, and rise again for our Justification, and to place us in the
sweet mansion of thine heavenly knowledge.

But haste also promised, to continue our mediator to thine heavenly father
for ever, while we mortal men live sinners on earth, making continual
intercession for us, that he will vouchsafe never, to withdraw his loving
countenance from us, his poor creatures, but to be our Castle, stay, and
strong refuge unto the end. Oh Lord Jesus Christ we give thee thanks, not
only for that thou haste been for a time here present with us on earth, to
manifest thy self unto us, by the visible show of thine humanity* but in
making the cause of thy coming certainly known unto us, which was (indeed) in
that thou wast very God) to call us from blindness and error (wherein we walked
according to the will of satan) to take hold of thy miracles, and wonders,
which thou so apparently did work, to declare and manifest thy self, to
be our redeemer and advocate, and to confirm the same in our hearts by faith,
as thou did in the hearts of thy Disciples, who (notwithstanding there
being present with thee, continued yet nevertheless in darkness and
misbeleefe, without the working of thine holy spirit in them, whereby they
confessed thee to be very Christ, son of the living God, and only savior of
the world; Among all which thy great benefits (Oh good Jesus,) we yield thee
all possible thanks, for that it has pleased thee, to leave unto us after thy
departure unto the right hand of thy father, the Lantern of light, the
Gospel of comfort, the word of truth, the food whereon our souls may
continually feed at full, without the which we had been left unto our former
darkness, walking in error, and in our wonted ignorance. And for that thou
know us from the beginning to be carried into blindness and error, wrongfully
interpreting the parrables, and dark sentences of thy gospel, through the same
thy love, have left us a continual co^forter, even thine holy Ghost,
proceeding from thy father and thee, who in the likeness of a Dove descended
from heaven upon thee, showing himself upon the Apostls in fiery tongues; Oh
holy ghost our co^forter, we yield thee most humble thanks that through the
gift of thy grace we have our hearts prepared our understanding lightened, and
mouths opened, to conceive rightly thy word, to declare abroad the wonderful
things of thy law, and to manifest the secret mysteries of the kingdom of
God. Thou ^rt the true light, and the light of truth, without the which, it is
impossible to please God the father, nor have access to God the Son, who,
together with thee (Oh holy ghost) are but one God in essence though three in
person.

Make our hearts pure, make us clean, sanctifye us, and seal us among the
number of the elect and chosen, that when we shall approach unto the seat of
judgment, we may receive (through the merittes of Jesus Christ) not only the
stipende of servants, but the reward of obedient children, even the
inheritance of the kingdom of heaven. There to rest with thee Oh Father, our
maker, with thee (sweet Jesus) our Savior* and with thee Oh holy ghost our
comforter, and sanctifier, for ever and ever. To whom be all praise and
eternal glory, world without end.

Amen.
Oh Lord increase our faith.
A prayer to be said before the receiving of the Communion.
THere is said sufficient in a certain exhortation set down in the book of
common prayer, to stir up the minds of all well disposed persons, willingly
and zealously to come to this holy table, where unto before we come, we ought
to address and prepare our hearts, to put of all rancor malice, wickedness,
and all kind of vice, with the fruits of the old man, which is disobedience
and sin, and to put on the new man, which is righteousness, coming thereunto
in a pure and clean heart, abounding with love, peace faith, and charity that
we may receive it to our comfort: Read the 11. chap. of the first Cor. from
the 20. verse unto the 29. and there shall you find, not only the manner of
the institution and celebration thereof, but also how to receive it with
heavenly profit, the danger in the vnreuerent and unfaithful receiving of the
same: (to the cosort of the Godly, and shame of the wicked.)

SVVeete Jesus, son of the everliving and omnipotent GOD, vouchsafe I humblye
pray, and beseech thee even for thy death sake, to instill into mine heart, the
gift of thy grace, whereby approaching unto the sweet banquet of thine holy
body and blood which thou vouchfafest to give, for the redemption of us
miserable sinners, I may by faith, eat and drink the same, and be made a
fit and faithful member of thy mystical body, laying aside the darkness of
old Adam, embracing the light of thine obedience, love, and patience, that,
that most preacious body of thine, be not given not thy blood shed for me in
vain, but may direct the whole course of the residue of my life, by thine holy
spirit according to thine heavenly will, in all things, that after this life
ended, I may appear before the tribunal seat of his high and heavenly
majesty, as a faithful member of thine, and enjoy that heavenly
enhearitaunce, which thou our head and guide have purchased for all true
believers in thee.

Amen*
Oh Lord increase my faith.
At the receiving of the bread, say thus.
Vouchsafe (oh sweet Jesus) that as thou have given thy flesh to be the bread
of our eternal salvation. So vouchsafe to work in me by a lively faith, that
I receiving the same, may be, and evermore continue one in thee, and thou in me
Amen.

Oh Lord increase my faith.
At the receiving of the cup, say thus.
Oh lord vouchsafe that as thy blood was shed for me a sinner, So grant that
it may through a lively faith, wash me from the filth of sin, and renew in
me the fruits of righteousness, that I may become a fit member of thee, live
and dye in thee, for evermore. Amen.

Oh Lord increase my faith.
A prayer after the receiving of the Communion.
Use not the manner of many who in the day wherein they repair unto the holy
table of the Lord, do not only lightlye esteem the weightines of the
matter, but lewdly give themselves to wanton companyes, gadding here and there
to banquets, tauerns, and loosly (above other days) give the^ selves to wanton
behavior but remember thy promise that thou have made to god to become a new
man, to (...) all wantonness, and cleave unto godliness of life. Be not like the
dog that (...) ^o his vomit, or the ^^w to her wanted wallowing in the dyrt of
sin, (...) ^e holy, as your heavenly (...)er is holy. Seek the (...)me of
God, and the (...) thereof, and all things shall be given ^^u, and as the
true members of Christ, in the end r^igne with him in eternal glory.

OH omnipotent and most merciful father, I thy silly creature praise thee, not
able to yield thee thanks sufficiently for thine unspeakable favor, and loving
kindness, in feeding me at this time with the spiritual food of the body and
blood of thy son our savior Jesus Christ, whom thou vouchsafest to send for
our redemption into this miserable world and to give him even to the death, in
remembrance whereof, until his second coming, he has willed us to eat his
body and to drink his blood, to the end by says we should be united and
knitte unto his body and being washed from all our sins, to lead a new
life, vouchsafe I humbly beseech thee, for his sake to endue me with thine
holy spirit, whereby hereafter, casting aside the works of darkness, I may from
henceforth walk in the light of thy Gospel, in the number of thy chosen,
waiting faithfully when he shall come again for our deliverance out of this
mortal life. And whilst I live here, vouchsafe me an unfeigned desire to be
partaker of that his holy institution, and through thine holy spirit, to lead
my life according unto thine heavenly will in all things, keeping my body
undefiled, as a fit receptacle for so heavenly food, that my soul may enjoy
the benefitte of the mystery thereof by says, according to thine heavenly
providence, through Jesus Christ our savior and redeemer.

Amen.
Oh Lord increase my faith.
A devout meditation or confession of our sins, with humble request unto
almightye God, that he will vouchsafe, to establish true repentance in our
hearts, and of his mercy, turn away his plagues which we justly have deserved
for our manifold iniquities.
Let us fall down with weeping eyes,
With one consent (from heart) on knees:
Our sins have so deserved th^all,
Nothing so sure as sudden fall.
LEt us set as a glass before the eyes of our hearts, the cause of the
first floode (which was falling from God, and working iniquity) where in the
whole world ( Noe with a small number of persons only excepted) perished. Genesis
6. Let us likewise call unto our remembrance the sudden distructio^ of Sodom
and Gomorra with sue and brimstone from heaven, for disobeying the voice of the
lord* pronounced by Lot for their repentance, wherein we may as it were
behold before hand what will beco^e of us without our spedy repentance,
neglecting (as we do) the words and message of the Lord revealed unto us by his
prophers and prechers threatening plagues to follow our wilful ^e^ellion, let us
not be like unto the deaf Adder, stopping our ears from hearing of our
iniquiry which we embrace with such greedines, but like relenting hearted
Niniuits, put on the sackcloth of unfeigned repentance, mourning for our many
thousand sins, with fasting and earnest prayer, from the lowest to the high
est, and after the good example of David and Job prostrate our selves in
heart, with lame^ting spirits unto the mercies seat of our good god, who as he
is not hastye in plaging (expecting our repentance) so will his punishment be
the greater without our hearty and speedy conversion, let us not therefore be
slow to turn unto him, let us not deferr from day to day, for suddenly will
the wrath of god come, when we think not of it, and in his vengance will be
destroy us unawares. Pa^^. 7. yet so loving is he and merciful, that if we call
upon his name, making our prayers unto him unfeignedly repenting us of our sins
from the bottom of our hearts, he will hear us from his holy heavens and
receive us again, unto his mercy Esd 10. according to his promise unto Israel,
let us remember the wicked king Achab who humbling himself, and clothing
himself in Sackcloth, and sleeping in heirecloth, obtained pardon for his
sins. The mercy of the Lord is so great toward them that repent, that the
examples thereof are infinite in the scriptures. Wherefore let us speedely for
sake our sins, and more and more grow in hatred thereof, Eccl 17. unfeignedly
cleaving unto rightcousnes, and holiness of truth. Ephesians. 4. Repent repent, for
the kingdom of God is at hand. Mat. 3.

OH Lord vouchsafe to pour thine holy spirit into our hearts, whereby we
may sighe, lament, weep and even rent our hearts, at the consideration of the
wicked and abominable estate of this world, which is so far gonne with the
child of self love, that without thine unspeakable mercy, it is even at the
point to be delivered into the pit of eternal perdition, wherefore give us
grace (we humblye beseech thee) from the high est to the lowest, from the
greatest to the least, to repent us of our sins and heartily to turn unto
thee, whose high displeasure we have deserved, through our manifold
transgressions who^ thou have (in respect of our disobedience) pronounced
rebels, bastards, and children of the bondwoma^, and without repentance,
barred, from the inheritance which thy son Jesus Christ has purchased for all
true believers; Lord what shall become of us, we have so much yielded our
selves to the desire of sin, and walked according to the co^uersatio^ of the
old man which is corruption, so far degenerating from thy laws and divine
institutions fellowing so much the will of satan the lusts of the flesh and the
vile alluringes of the wicked world, that thou have cast us off as none of thy
children in so much as when we consider, the heavy and intolerable burden,
which by our unrighteousness we have deservedly heaped upon our selves in
loosing the favor of so loving and bountiful a father, and so sweet a
savior, it drives us into a great fear and terror, procuring a great dislike
and lo thing of our selves, for the time; but our nature being nothing but
corruption, falls into a present forgetfulness of our end, and turns
forthwith unto his vomitt again. But most loving God and everliving, when the
deserved punishments which hangs over our heads, shall light and fall upon
us for the same, what shall we do? It is prepared, and it is coming, we can
not (by any deserts of ours) but only by the intercession mediation and
deserts of Jesus Christ (which neither avails without our true repentance)
avoid it.

Mollify therefore our hard and stony hearts, (Oh Lord) for the same thy
son Jesus Christ's sake, give us lamenting spirits, endue us with unfeigned
sorrow for our sins, and make us wylling and ready to return unto thee; our
nature being so vile, and our blindness so great, that we are most apt, even
with great obedience, care and diligence, to serve, to please, and to obey,
men of Aucthoritye here, in this world, (by whose dis^auour there can arise
but some small (or no) hurt or punishment at all; And never give our selves,
(or very seldom) to the fulfilling of our duties to thee, by executing those
things which thou commaundest us whereby we break and forfeit that band,
which thy son Jesus Christ sealed with his preacious blood, upon the cross,
thereby confirming for evermore a league, and peace between thee, and such as
forsake sin, and cleave unto righteousness and truth. Oh unhappy creatures
that we are, who being in the very bosom of so loving and so merciful a God,
should by yielding unto the desires of the flesh, the vanities of the world,
and the will of satan, be thruste out of thy presence, wherein consists all
peace, all love, all hope, quietness of mind, patience, long suffering,
meekenes, and all good whatsoever. But wandering and going astray, after our
own corrupt desires, what remains in us, but strife, hatred, misbeleefe,
despair, covetousness, adultery, witchcraft, contempt of thy Laws, and all
kind of evil? and rest as accursed. Lord we acknowledge that sin and
iniquity has gotten the highest room, it sits, and rules in all corners
of the earth, and righteous dealing, simplicity, and innocence, is condemned of
many.

Root out therefore (good Lord) root out of our hearts, all hautines,
deceit, wrongful dealinges, and evil imaginations, and plant in steed
thereof, humility, ius^^ce, and ^^leyned good will, and help one toward
another. Let not satan rule, let not the flesh p^^^ai^e against the spirit,
let not the world beguile us, who are our enemies, our mortal enemies, most
strong, (...)ost weak, in so much as they are not so ready to encounter with
us, as we are ready to yield, they are most pollitique, we most ignorant,
forgive us Lord, forgive us, for thy son Jesus Christ's sake, strengthen us
(good Lord) stre^gthe^ us with thy grace, we have erred, we have done amiss,
we have followed too much the will of satan we have yielded too much to the
motions of the flesh, and too much embraced the pleasures of this world:
whereby we have lost the most sweet comfort of thy celestial promises, who
have said, that who so obeys thy voice, in keeping and fulfilling thy Laws,
shall be most blessed, yea in all his ways, in his going forth and coming in,
and in all things which he takes in hand. Oh sweet Lord, how can we
therefore, but lament our estates, how can we but sigh and sorrow, that we
have made forfeyture, of so many and so sweet blessings, and incurred the
penalty of infinite curses of thine, by disobeying thy will, and precepts,
which thou mioynedst us, in all things to fulfill and observe: Vouchsafe (good
Lord) vouchsafe of thy mercy for Jesus Christ's sake, to turn away thine
heavy displeasure, and punishment which we have deserved, that they light not
upon us, for our misdeedes: Blot out all our iniquities, lay not our
unrighteousness, our unthankfulness, and wilful rebellion against thee, to our
charge, for if thou should, (Lord) what should become of us? what might we
look for ^as our ^^^st reward but death and damnation.

Oh Lord we do confess, that for so sundry and bountiful beuefits, received
at thine hands (such is our corruption) that we do not only take them
without thanks, use them without fear, but most foolishly, and wrongfully,
attribute the gift thereof, to some creature, and cast the pray se upon him, or
else we receive them as given, by fortune, and take not only the due honor
from thee, but make the creature the Author of that, that comes only from
thee, the only creator, and giver of all things Oh most sweet Lord, such is
our ignorance, such is our blindness, and such is the error that rests and
remains in us, (from Adam) through our voluntary blindness, which (though we
embrace) thou offerest light, we refuse the same, we are ignorant thou give
wisedo^e, and we neglect the same, we go astray, thou call us, but we refuse
to come: Lord we are like the untamed Heyser, which resuseth the yoke, we are
like the deaf Adder, which resuseth to hear the voice of the Charmer, charm
he never so wisly we harden our hearts as the Adamant, we will not receive thy
gentle callinges, thy fatherly admonitions, and loving corrections. Thou
commaundest us to cast away the darkness of ignorance, and to put on the light
of thy Gospel, but we stop our ears, we refuse to hear, opening our ears
to pleasures, and fyxing our eyes upon vanitye, erring, in the paths of
ungodliness, drinking the puddelles of iniquity. and dispising the sweet water
of life. Our hearts are always ready to embrace delights and fantasies,
utterly dispising nurture, correction and knowledge: we remember the time
present, the time past, for which we have to answer, and the time to come, in
which we must answer. (Good Lord) we think not on, we consider not that our
time is like the flower of the field, to day fresh and fair, and to morrow
cut down, dried up and withered, we conceive not, that we pass as does the
shaddowe, and vanish as the bubble of water, as the smoke, and waves of the
sea.

(Oh Lord) notwithstanding all this, we folishly defer thamendment of our
lives, upon hope of thy long sufferaunce, and consider not that thy wrath
comes suddenly, we consider not the sudden death of sundry, being now
most lusty, gaye, and strong, and by and by dead, and laid with the substance
of their own flesh, even the earth, where the worms possess that, that they
so da^ntily fed with sundry fine delicates, and clothed with nice, monstrous
and gorgious suits of apparel, sumptuous attire, broidered heir, and settled
themselves in s^ately high houses, even to the skies, their souls departing
with the glutton, where is not water to cool the heat of thy displeasure
against them. Oh Lord, thou laughest at our vanity; yet most sorrye to see us
so led by the direction and hand leading of satan, whose desire is to
devour (if he could) even thy chosen ones. Thou would not that we should
perish, thou desire rather that we should convert and live, thou reioysest
not at the death of a sinner, but there is great joy in heaven of his
repentance, where unto though lovingly thou call us, we go still in our
wickedness. Thou gyuest us knowledge of thy will by preaching, and thine
omnipotency thou manifestest by thy creatures, both in the firmament above
and in the earth and Sea below. But we understand it not, we bear it not
away, we consider it not. The good which we should do, we do not, but the
evil which we should not, that we greedelie follow, notwithstanding all which
our corruption, our disobedience, and wilful wickedness, thou (of thy mercy
aboundaunt) so entirely love us, that thou gave thine only begotten son,
to suffer the most shame full death of the cross, for us, and have set him
as equal with thy self, even at thine own right hand, to the end he might
make continual intercession for us, unto thee, and that through him we might
have atonement with thee, and access unto thee for ever. VVretched sinners
that we are, if we by our wickedness, rebellion, and loosenes of life, loose so
great a benefit, which he so dearly purchased for us, even thy woonted mercy
and loving favor, and make of none effect his dying for us, what remains for
us, but the most fearful sentence of judgment, in the day when all secrets
shall be opened, and every man receive according to his deserts? to whom thou will say: Go ye cursed into the flames of eternal fire, prepared for the
devil and his Angels, which never shall be quenched* where shall be continual
weeping, wayling, anguish, and gnashing of teeth. when we shall be, neither our
selves able to plead to the contrary, nor have any advocate to gain say thee
in thy justice. Then shall we be sorry, then shall we lament (but too late) Then
shall we hear the most comfortable entertainment of the godly, when thou
shall say: Come ye blessed, possess ye the kingdom prepared for you from
the beginning, where shall be nothing but joy, without ceasing, continual gladness
comfort, and unspeakable consolations, even for such as clothed thee, fed
thee, lodged thee and visited thee, being in prison. Them shall thou embrace,
them shall thou meet in the clouds, with most sweet words of comfort, but
such as have seen thee (even the poor and little ones) to be sick and
comfortles, and have denied them help, relief and aid, or hungrye, and have
with-helde food, Thirstye, and have not given drink, naked and have not
clothed them. Such (sweet Lord) shall suffer hunger, cold, nakedness, and
thirst, with unspeakable grief of conscience, which shall never have end. Oh
that it would please thee therefore (Oh merciful God) of thy great goodness,
favor and loving kindness, to consider of these latter days, and perrilous
times, wherein we live, wherein eniquitie has gotten the upper hand, charity
waxing cold, and love banished from amongst brethren, and thy self (sweet
Lord) even thy poor and little ones, the Orphans and Widows, not only, not
relieved, not comforted, not defended, but trodden under feet, neglected, and
forgotten, even of such as have abundance.

Vouchsafe, vouchsafe good Lord, (according to thy promise) to shorten these
days, least also thine elect, be seduced, with vanity, and forsake thee their
only comfort. It is come to pass which thou have said. That as toward the
Summer, trees and plants of the earth do budde, so before thy coming (to
make us so much the more prepared) thou have promised to send us
foreknowledge, by sundry signs and tokens, both in the earth below, which
(has by thy passing (as it were) by us) quaked already at thy presence, as
also by the Sun and moon, and other thy creatures, apparently showing thy
rod of vengeance, to be over our heads, ready to strike. Oh Lord we
cannot but look for utter destruction, according to the weight and abundance
of our sins, and iniquities, unless it may please thee to show thy mercy for
Jesus sake in co^uerting us* we have sinned, we have gonne astray, we have
wrought wickedness, in yielding to the will of the flesh, but most sweet Lord,
let thy light so shine into our hearts, that we may now begin, to seek only
thy kingdom, and leave the darkness of sin grow to all goodness, and be
mortefied as touching the old man, which is corruption, dye to the world And
remove satan, that with godly desires we may attain unto the perfect
feeling of thy grace, that having obtained the pure understanding of thy word,
we may guide our lives by the rule thereof, that after the finishing of this our
pilgrimage, we may through the merits of thy son Jesus Christ) enter into thy
kingdom of eternal glory, there for ever and ever to reign, enjoying the
sight of thee, and to thy name, with the rest of thy saintss, sing laud and
praise eternally.

Oh Lord increase our faith, and give us grace unfeignedly to repent us of our
sins.
Amen.
A prayer necessary to be said, after and at the end of all our prayers.
VOuchsafe Oh Lord and merciful Father, in whose hands rests the hearts of
all men, who know what we want before we pray, what we will ask before we
speak, and what we do in all things; Vouchsafe to forgive mine ignorance,
dulnes, and slack coming unto thee, the fountain of all health and help,
increase my faith daily more and more, and kindle in me the perfect gift of
prayer, that I may at all times serve thee in truth, and whatsoever I have
asked, according unto thy will, at this time, give me, and what I have omitted
unrequested for my self, or any for whom thou would we should pray for, for
thy son Jesus Christ's sake graciously grant, for which and for all things
else, necessary for me and the^, for body or soul, I pray thee as thy son
taught us, saying:

Our father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from all evil. Amen.

Oh Lord increase our faith, and continue the same effectually in me and all
men unto the end.
Amen.
Great plagues remain for the ungodly: but who so puts his trust in the
Lord, mercy imbraceth him on every side. Psalm. 32.
Paul before he would presume to eat gave thanks, Act. 27, 35, Christ
likewise, before he gave the bread and Fyshes to them that were with him in
the wyldernes (yea although he were Lord of all) looking up to heaven, from
whence comes all goodness, blessed it and gave thanks, and brake it unto
them, Mat 14. the store being small, replenished many thousands, and left
many Baskets full: wherefore take the blessings of God with thanks.

A prayer before meat.
OH bountiful GOD, vouchsafe to look down with thy favorable eyes of pity
upon our weakness, and want, and give us at this time those things which may be
to our comfort, sanctify these thy gifts, that our bodies being replenished,
we may be thankful, and enjoy at thy merciful hands, the bread of eternal
life, to the relief of our poor souls, through Jesus Christ our only
Savior Amen.

God save and still increase thy flock,
Keep us within thy fold:
Vouchsafe to hear when we do knock,
Oh Lord our strongest hold.
Preserve our Queen, be thou her stay,
This Realm of thine defend:
Indue us with thy grace for aye,
On thee we all depend.
Oh Lord increase our faith. WHen God has fed your poor bodies, be not
therewith pust up with forgetfulness, what he requires at our hands, for his
blessings, but in a reverent and devout manner give thanks that he may
continue his loving kindness to your comfort unto the end.



A thanks giving after meat.
WE thank thee most bountiful Lord, for this thy fatherly feeding our hungry
bodies, so vouchsafe to feed our silly souls with the bread of eternal
life. That after this life ended, we may ascend where Christ is gonne before.
Amen*

Since God has fed our bodies poor,
Which else would soon decay:
Remember such as lie at door,
Say not their cryings nay.
God save his Church, our Queen defend,
this Realm preserve for aye:
And grant us all a godly end,
And joyful rising day.
Oh Lord increase our faith.
FINIS.
A Table to find out the principal Prayers, contained in this book.
A Prayer to Christ. Folio. 1. A prayer for the assistaunce of Gods holy
spirit. fol. eodem. A short prayer to the like purpose. fo. 3 A morning prayer
for the working day. fol. eodem. A short prayer to the like purpose. fol. 5, A
prayer for the Queen. eodem. A prayer for the Sunday morning. fol. 7 A short
prayer to the like purpose. fol, 9. A confession of sins. eodem. A short
prayer to the like purpose. fol. 11 A prayer for the evening. fol. 12 A short
prayer to the like purpose. fol. 14. A prayer for the increase of faith- eodem.
A short prayer to the like purpose. fol, 17. A prayer against the devil, the
world, and the flesh very necessary to be often said. eodem. A short prayer to
the same effect. fol. 20. A prayer for the help and assistaunce of God in all
our doings, and that we do nothing, but in his fear, and due obedience.
eodem A short prayer to the like purpose. folio. 23. The sorrowful sinner,
afflicted in conscience by reason of his sins, may say thus. eodem. A short
prayer to the like purpose. fol. 26. A prayer for a competent and necessary
living. fo. eod A prayer necessary after the hearing of the word of God.
folio. 29 A short prayer to the like purpose. folio. 31 A thanks giving to God
for his benefits. eodem A devout prayer, or meditation, that we may alwais have
consideration, that we must dye, which, as it is good at all times, so
especially in the time of any common plague or sickness, a godly meditation.
folio. 33. A short prayer to the like purpose. fol. 37 A prayer upon the
Lettany, or prayer for all men, at all times necessary. eodem A prayer for the
fulfilling of the ten commandments. fol. 40 A short prayer to the like
purpose. foli. 44. A prayer for the true ordering of worldly titches, very
necessary for such as God has endued with the wealth of this world. eodem. A
short prayer to the like purpose. foli. 47 A prayer to be said of a woman with
child, fol. 48 A short and most necessary prayer, always to be said of one
with child. folio, 49 A thanks giving to God after the delivery. fol. eod A
prayer for wisdom. folio. 51. A short prayer to the like purpose. foli. 53 A
prayer in misery and trouble. fol, 54 A short prayer to the like effect often
to be said. folio. 57. A payer to be defended from enemies. eodem. A short
prayer to the like purpose. folio. 60 A prayer when a man takes a journey.
folio. 61. A thanks giving after return. folio. 62 A thanks giving to God
the father, God the son and God the holy ghost, worthy to be often said.
folio. 63 A prayer to be said before the receiving of the Communion. fol. 67
A prayer after the receiving of the communion. fol. 68. A devout meditation or
confession of our sins, with humble request unto almighty God, etc. folio. 69
A prayer necessary to be said, after and at the end of all our prayers. fol.
74. A prayer before meat. folio. 75, A thanks giving after meat, fol. 76,
FJNIS.
^GOD^ ^IS^ ^MY^ HELPER
^ printer's or publisher's device

