The Guide of Faith. OR, A THIRD PART OF THE ANTIDOTE AGAINST THE PESTIFEROVS
WRITINGS OF ALL ENGLISH SECTARIES.

And in particular, against D. BILSON, D. FVLKE, D. REYNOLDES, D. WHITAKER, D.
FIELD, D. SPARKS, D. WHITE, and M. MASON, the chief vpholders, some of
Protestancy, and some of Puritanisme.

Wherein the Truth, and perpetual Visible Succession of the Catholic Roman
Church, is clearly demonstrated.

By S. N. Doctor of Divinity.

1. Tim. 3. verse. 15.

The Church of the Living God, the Pillar and Ground of Truth.

Permissu Superiorum. M. DC. XXI.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
MOST DREAD, AND GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN,
I know not to whom I should more fitly present these Disputes in matters of
Controversy, then to your Highness, who has Learning to understand, Wisdom to
discern, and Authority to command, that Faith and Religion be observed in
your Realm; which is most conformable to the Scriptures, and consonant to the
doctrine of the Primitive Church, to which you have been pleased long since to
submit your Royal Judgment, and now of late most prudently forbidden those
newfangled writers, who spurning at the Testamentes of their Forefathers, call
the Belief of all Antiquity in question.

Therefore I have here laid open to your Princely View, that unspotted truth,
which the Lamb of God delivered upon earth; which the Apostles preached, and
committed to writing; which the Ancient Fathers in the first five hundred
years sincerely taught, and inuiolably manteyned; as I prove, not only by
their own irrefragable testimonies, but by the confession also of the Adverse
Part: which if your Gracious Clemency would give us leave, under your
favorable wings, peaceably to enjoy, and freely to profess (at least in
secret without the offense of any) it must needs oblige us more fast to our
dutiful Allegiance (of which howsoever in our greatest extremities we shall
never be wanting) then all the laws of Conformity, Oaths of Fidelity, or
other Punishments can enforce.

For what more sure band then the tie of Conscience, the obligation of
Religion, the seal of Faith, and promise we owe to God? which being truly
kept, as our Catholic Profession strictly binds us, no danger of Treason,
no fuel of Sedition, no alienation of Minds from Prince, or Country, can be
feared. On the contrary side, if those heavenly bands be once violated by any,
in taking an Oath hurtful to their conscience, prejudicial to their Religion,
what trust or security can be reposed in them? what hope of fidelity in civil
affairs, who in matters divine, in the most weighty affairs of their Souls,
have openly committed the deepest disloyalty?

Wisely was this observed by Princes in former times. When Hunnerike the King
of the Vandalls had guilefully proposed an Victor Vticen. lib. 3. de persec.
Vandal. paulo post initium.
entrapping Oath to the Catholic Bishops of Africa, those, who refused to
take it, he presently banished from their Seas, as enemies to the Crown: Such
as condescended to his will, and bound themselves by oath to perform his
desire, he mistrusting their fidelity, commanded likewise to depart from their
Churches, and never to see them more; because contrary to the law of God, or
commandment of his Gospel they presumed to swear. A subtle, yet
pernicious devise.

More commendable was the fact of Theodorike Nicepho. l. 16. c. 35. Zonaras,
Cedrenus, and Theod. lect. 2. collectan.
King of the Goths and Conqueror of Italy. For when a favorite of his, very
dear unto him, to be more endeared, fell to Arianisme which the King embraced,
he straight way commanded him to be beheaded, with this cause of condemnation
pronounced against him; How should I look thou should be true to me a man,
since thou have not been faithful in thy promise to God? Eusebius l. c. 12.
de vi. Constable. Zo^om. l. 1. bist. c. ^.


But most prudent, and fittest for my purpose was that of Constantius, Father
to Constantine the Great; Who to discover the hearts and affections of his
Subjects, caused it to be promulgated to all of his Court at home, and Family
abroad, that free choice and liberty was granted the^, either by sacrificing
to the Idols to continue his Favor, and enjoy their wo^ted honors; or spoiled
of them to leave his Palace, his friendship and familiarity for ever.
Hereupo^, when his Nobles and other of his retinue had parted themselves into
two several companies, the one yielding, the other renou^cing to sacrifice;
the wise Prince sharply rebuked their timidity and baseness who were ready to
prostitute themselves tovile Idolatry, for preserving of their temporal
dignityes; and exceedingly commended the Constancy, and noble Resolution of the
others, who rather chose to forsake their preferments the^ their religion. The
former he cassiered as Traitors to God, and unworthy his Imperial Service, For
how (said A notable saying of of Constantius, Father to Constantine the Great,
and his fact ensuing as worthy.
he) can they keep their faith inviolable to the Emperor of the earth, who by
so manifest a sign have showed themselves perfidious to the great Monarch of
Heaven? These therefore he rejected and banished his Royal palace. Those who by
such an apparent trial and profession of Truth were found worthy of God, he
adopted into the number of his dearest and most familiar friends: those he
placed about him as Gardia^s of his person: those he more esteemed then
Exchecquers full of inestimable treasures; affirming, that they who had been so
loyal unto God, would be most faithful also and loyal unto him.

O that your Princely Wisdom would imitate herin the Father whose son you
worthily praise; and set before your Royal eyes, as a president to behold, in
the supreme Government of your Sovereign Estate! I would to God you would (as
you may securely) make the like account of such constant Recusants, who upon
just fear of offending God, forbear to yield in points of Faith, to the laws
of me^! I would their Dutiful Hearts were so well known unto your Highness, as
their cause deserves. Then with that famous Constantius, you would, and might
justly esteem the^, as the true Friends of God, Soldiers of Christ, Treasures
of your Kingdom, Suppliants for safety, and surest Guards of your Crown and
Scepter. In whose persons I humbly prostrate my self at your Majesty's feet;
beseeching the divine Majesty so to prosper your earthly Raygne, as after many
happy years of peaceable government, you may pass from this Transitory to
his Eternal Kingdom.

Your Majesty's most humble, and devoted Subject, S. N.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
I Have often heard this principle recorded by Aristotle much celebrated
amongst Deuines, Quierrat ad pauca respicit, He that erreth looks into few
things. Which A principle of Aristotle notably verified in our modern
Protestants
learned axiom of so grave a Philosopher the temerity of Protestants teaches
to be true. For they with partial eye have regard to few things when in
matters of faith abandoning al autenticall proofs and arguments of
credibility, renouncing so many approved miracles, historyes, prescriptions, so
many infallible traditions and testimonies of truth, they betake themselves to
the Scriptures alone, to the maine Ocean of Prophetical and Apostolical
writings, without card to direct them, or pilot to guide them in that sea of
difficulties. They look into few things, when rowing there, they pass over
innumerable evident texts which make against them, and take hold of some one
which carries a little show and semblance of countenauncing their fancyes. For
example, they once read in S. Matthew, The Lord thy God shall thou adore, and
Matt. c. 4. v. 10.
him only shall thou serve. And without further consideration of what homage he
speaks, they peremptorily condemn all religious worship and adoration of
Angels, of Saints, of their tombs and relics so often intimated in other
places. They once read in S. John: It is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh
profits nothing, and thereupon they deprive their own souls of the
inestimable profit of Christ's viuificall Joan. 6. v. 63.
and real flesh in the sacrament of the Altar, notwithstanding it be
constantly avouched by the Apostle, by S. John and all the rest of the
Evangelists. They once read: That Christ is the propitiation for our sins,
That he paid for us a full and perfect ransom, 1. Joan. 2. v. 2.
and they deny all Canonical or voluntary satisfactions, all works of
penance or expiations of sin, to which the Holy Ghost very often most
earnestl^ exhorts us. The like unadvised and precipitate rashness I might note
in all other articles in which they swerve from us, but it shallbe enough to
specify it further in their chiefest article of justification, Hosius l. 1. de
haeresibus nostri temporis: citatur apud Prateolum verb. lustificatorij. Genesis
^5. ad Romans 4. Romans 5. v. 19.
wherein they are so headlong as no sooner do they find any one word sounding
to their purpose, but they obstinatly cleave and stick fast unto it. For one
Protestant reads (as Hosius diligently pursues this matter) Abraham
believed, and it was reputed unto him for justice. And thence he gathers his
imputative justice, by only faith. Another reads: we are justified by his
blood, and he infers that the precious blood of Christ is our justice.
Another reads: As by the disobedience of one man many were made sinners: so
also by the obedience of one many shallbe made just, and he faineth Christ's
obedience to be the garment of our justice. Another reads: he rose for our
justification, and he Romans 4. v. 25.
accounts Christ's resurrection our heavenly vesture. Another reads: The
holy Ghost shall argue the world of justice, because I go unto my Father, and
he Joan. 16. v. 8. and 9.
straight way affirms Christ's passage to his Father to be our robe of
righteousness. Thus they devise above Prateolus in elencho verbo lustificatorij-
twenty several opinions, of that one substantial point of Justification
alone.

Again they look into few things not only in adhering, but chiefly in
expounding such particular passages as they first light upon: for neglecting
the public spirit and voice of God which speaks in his Church, neglecting
the general tribunal and consistory of the world, they hearken only to the
outward letter, and to the private spirit which resideth in themselves, by them
only they interpret and by them only they willbe tried whether their
interpretation be good or no. As if a thief accused of felony would deliver
his own tale as he frames it, Protestants are fitly compared to the guilty
person who admits no trial but his own.
and admit no examination of witnesses, no trial of jury, or sentence of
judge, no former presidents or decisions of like case, but his own information
and voice of his Sovereign diuulged in his law, which he makes to sound as
himself likes best; were not this to stop his ears against all testimonies
but his own, to refuse all trial or judgment which he himself being guilty
does not pronounce, and yet such is our adversaries dealing. They expound
Scripturs as their secret spirit in wardly persuades them, and they will try
their spirit by no other touchstone, then by the public word of God
interpreted by themselves. We appeal to the judgment of the present Catholic
Church, they contemn her sentence; we ascend to our Ancestors that have gone
before us, they cut off at one clappe the usage, practice, and prescription of
a thousand years space; we repair to the Doctors, and Fathers of the
primitive Church, to the general Councels, and their authentical decrees, to
the very sentences of Scripture explayned by them, they regard them not any
further then they agree in their opinion with the word of God. At last we
sommon them to their own Court, we press them with the authority of
Protestant writers, they answer, they were men, they might err, no man is
bound D. Whit. defens tractat. 3. c. 7.
to follow them any further then they follow the truth. And so these new
Reformers will judge alone what is truth and who are followers and imbracers of
it. The common shift of Protestants in answering their own writers alleged
against the^.


They look into few things when challenging at least in outward show one or
two, they despise all other Sacraments of God and ancient ceremonies of the
Church. When pleading for faith alone, they gain say the value of works, and
supernatural dignity of infinite virtues. When scandalized at the
licentiousnes of some dissolute livers in the Catholic Church, they admire not
the heriocall acts and resplendent sanctity of so many zealous Prelates, devout
Priests, Religious Friars, Monks, Nuns, and whole armies of Saints, which
flourish therein. When dismayed with the faygned impossibility of keeping Gods
Commandments, they lift not up their eyes to his Evangelical Counsels and
works of supererogation. When dazeled with the Sun of Christ's glorious
morits, they see not the beams of light and abundant merits he deriueth unto
us. They see not the efficacy of his sacraments, the dowryes of his grace, the
full indulgence and remission of our sins, the inherent beauty and splendor
of justice by which he garnisheth upon earth the souls of his servants.

They look into few things in perusing the ancient Fathers. When reading in
S. Augustine for example, That he is a miracle, who seeks for miracles
August, l. 22. de c uit. Dei cap. 8.
to believe, they conclude thereupon that all miracles have ceased, not
weighing the occasion of S. Augustines words, not attending to the miracles
which in the same Chapter he mentions to have been S. Ciprian sermon de lapsis
post medium. S. Gregor. Nazian. in laudem Cypriani. Demonum profligationem,
morborum d^pulsionem, futuram rerum praescientiam, quae quidem omniu^ vel
^ineres ipsi Cypriani, modo fides adsit, efficient. Vide etiam illum in funere
patris. Chrysostom. l. cont. Gentiles. Quotidiana ^ Martiribus miracula eduntur.
Hieron. Ep: 22. ad Eustoch. vide miracula diuersa ad Sanctorum monumenta ^dita.
Read him also de muliere septies icta, and in vita Hilarionis.
supernaturally wrought by the Relics of S. Steven: Not harkening to the
miracles which S. Cypria^ S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Chysostome, S. Hierome, a
thousand historiographers very plentifully recount and the powerful hand of
God in sundry Countries daily atchieueth.

They look into few things when angled with the conterfet bayte, and vain
promise of truth cast forth by their Ghospellers, they diue not into the
manifold absurdityes, and open repugnancyes implied in their doctrine. They
consider not their corruptions, falsifications, detorting of Scripture, and
racking of the Fathers which they commonly use to writh them to their purpose.
Thus they skimme of in Luther, in Calvin and other their predecessors, the
froth of their noweltyes, and ouerslip diverse notorious barbarismes, diverse
atheistical and blasphemous speeches couched in their writings, which have
been often laid open by the learned of our side. Yet to approve the vigilance
and wisdom of our sovereign King JAMES, who has prudently inhibited the
reading of such new brued and poisoned works, to the noble students of his two
famous Universities, I will briefly insinuate some few of Calvin, the chief
late Nouelist, his Atheismes, wherein he appeacheth the divine goodness it self
of injustice, impotency, and dissimulation, his beloved son Christ Jesus of
ignorance, incongruity in his speech, superfluons inferences, rashness, timidity
and desperation. The immaculate Virgin his dearest Mother, of sinful
enclosing the omnipotency of God within the bounds of Nature. For first he
often inculcateth, that God is chief author of his own just vengeance, and
Satan is but only a minister thereof. That God Calu. lib. 1 inflit. c. 18.. 1.
2. 3. etc and l. 2. c. 4.. 2. l. 3. c. ^1. Ibid. l. 3. c. 23.. 8.
purposes, wills, moves, loves, and commands the wickedness of sinners,
their obstinate blindness and hardness of heart. Then, that the will of God is a
necessity of things. From whence it ensues that the reprobate necessarily
sin by the appointement of God, which they cannot avoid, and that God is
unjust for punishing them without cause. Likewise it follows that sin it
self is no sin, but an upright action consonant unto reason. For the will of
God (says Calvin) Calu l. 3. c. 23.. 2.
is so the highest rule of righteousness, that whatsoever he wills, even for
this that he wills it, it ought to be taken for righteous But God (according
to him) wills sin, therefore sin is righteous, good, and according to
rule.

Secondly it follows, that Good decrees those Ibid. l. 1. inflit. c. 18.. 13.
things with his secret purpose, which he has openly forbidden by his law,
and so he both wills and wills not the same thing, which without
dissimulatio^ or contrariety cannot be conceived. Besides he denies Gods
absolute power of effecting all things. Ibid l. 3. c. 23.. 2.
We trust not (quoth he) in the feygned devise of absolute power, which as it
is profane so worthily ought it to be abhorred of us. No less impious is he
against God, then malepart and audacious against our Savior Christ in accusing
him of ignorance: That he knew In c. 24. Matt. 36. Matt. 21. v. 18. In cap. 9.
Matt. v. 2. Quod quidam existima^t Christum diuinitus conscium fuisseipso^um
fidei quae occultantius lat ebat. mihi coactum videtur. Matt. 7. v. 12. Calu.
in eum locum, Superuacua est illatio. Calu. l. 2. instit. cap. 16.. 12. Ibid..
10. Ibidem.
not as man the day of judgment, nor of what kind the fig tree was that grew
by the way side, nor the inward thoughts of the heart saying, That which some
think that Christ was acquainted from above with their says which lay hild
within, seems to me aforced and astrayned thing: he accuses him likewise of
inco^gruity in his speech to wit, That Christ promises from God reward to
fasting is an improper speech: of superfluous infere^ce, for when Christ
inferred, All things therefore whatsoever you will etc. Calvin gives it this
gloss, It is a vain or superfluous illation Of timiditye and searefulnes in
these words; Thieves and other evil doers do obstinately have to death, many
do with hauty courage despise, some other do mildly suffer it. But what
constancy or stout courage were it for the some of God to be astonished, and in
a manner stricken dead which fear of it etc. how shameful a tenderness (as I
said) should this have been to be so far tormented with fear of common death
as to melte in bloody sweat, and not to be able to be comforted but by sight
of Angels. Whereupon he brayeth forth another sacrilege, that our Savior
besides his corporal death suffered the death of his soul: he suffered that
death wherewith God in his wrathstriketh wicked doers. He felt the rigor of
Gods vengeance in his soul, he suffered the terrible torments of a damned and
forsakes man His Matt. 26. Calu. in harm. super eum locum v. 38. Calu. in harm.
in c. 27. Matt. v. 46. Sed absurd videtur Christo elapsam desperationis voce^:
solutio facilis est, quamuis enim sensus carnis exitum apprehenderit, fixa
tamen stetit sides in cord. Calu. in harm. in. c. 1. Luc. v. 34. Videtur
Sancta virgo non minus malign Dei praesentiam restringere quam prius Zacharias
etc. nec magnopere laborandum est vt eam purgemus ab omni vitio. Calu. l. 3.
insti. c. 20.. 24. and 27. and l. de rat. reforma. Ecclesiae, sanctos vocat
laruas, carnifices, vmbras, bestias.
v^nome is not yet spent. He traduceth also the divine Wisdom as rash and
inconsiderate in those words which he uttered: Father, if it be possible let
this cupp pass from me This prayer (says Calvin) of Christ was not
premeditate but the force and extremity of grief wringed from him this hasty
speech. To which a correction or recalling was presently added; The same
veheme^cy drew from him the present memory of the heavenly decree; At length
he concludes, that Christ was so amazed with fear at the judgments of God as
he was drouen to despair, at least in outward words. For obiecting to himself
how absurd it should seem that a speech of desperation should fall from
christ, he answers: The solution is easy, for although the sense of flesh
did apprehend destruction, yet faith remained stable in his heart: as though he
should say his tongue uttered words of despair although his heart were still
fixed in God. Where the son of God is thus blasphemed can the Mother of God
be free from disgrace? the venomous wretch very seldom discourses of that
heavenly Queen, but by a word which he utters you may throghly ghesseat his
malicious spirit. Upon that question of our Ladies to the Angel Gabriell, how
shall this be done etc. he makes this comment: The holy virgin seems no
less spitefully to restrain the power of God then before Zacharias did etc.
Neither ought we to labor much to free her from all vice. I omit how he
terms many other Saints, Goblins, or Night-ghostes, shadows, Butchers and
beasts. The filthiness I have already discovered is more then enough to iustifye
our Majesty's prohibition Aegidius Hunnius in libro cui titulus inscribitur
Caluinus iudaizans, etc. Illiricus in defens. confess. Aug. c. 7. Osian. in
Enchirid. cont. Calvin. c. 7. page 198.
of such devilish works, and to terrify all Christians from reading of them,
which men of his own sect (if Protestants combine in one sect) have already
detested and proscribed as full of Iudaisme, Arianisme, and other most
execrable heresies: whereof Aegidius Hunnius a Lutheran doctor and professor
of divinity in the university of Wittenberg has printed a book, whose title
begins thus Caluinus Iudaizans etc. Calvin Iudaizing, or playing the Jew,
and Illiricus a prime sectary of their profession gives testimony that Caluins
liturgy is defiled not with one only sacrilege, and that it has carried
innumerable souls into eternal perdition. Luke Osiander another Protestant
confuting certain assertions of the Caluinists calls them a gulf,
whirlepoole, or hell of Caluinian doctrine.

Besides these Lutherans Castalio a Sacramentary Humfred. de rat. interpret. l.
1. page 26.
much commended by M. Doctor Humfrey, so far abhors the opinion of Calvin
in feigning God to be the author of sin, and damnation in the reprobate, as
he distinguishes that supposed God of Castal. in l. ad Calu. de praedestin.
Calvin from the true God described in the scripture: his words are these: The
false God (that is the God which Calvin frames to himself) is slow to mercy,
See the judgment of Protestants concerning Caluins holding God to be the
Author of sin, and damnation.
prone to anger, who has created the gr^atest part of the world to
destruction, and has predestinate them not only to damnation but also to the
cause of damnation. Therefore he has decreed from all eternity, and he will
have it so, and he does bring it to pass that they necessarily sin; so that
neither theftes, nor murders, nor adulteries are committed but by his constraint
and impulsion. For he suggesteth unto men evil and dishonest affections, not
only by permission but effectually (that is by drawing them to such affections)
and does harden them in such sort that when they perpetrate evil they do
rather the work of God then their own: he makes the devil a lier, so that
now not the devil but the God of Calvin is the Father of lies. But that God
which the holy scriptures teach is altogether contrary to this God of Calvin
etc. Imediatly after, for the true God came to destroy the work of that
Caluinian God: and these two Gods as they are by nature contrary one to
another, so they beget and bring forth children of contrary dispositions, to
wit, that God of Calvin children without mercy proud etc. Hither to Castalio.
To whom I add the like censure of Stancarus a Protestant also of no small fame
who writing to Calvin saluteth him thus: What devil Stancarus cont. Calu. K.
4. Vide etiam lib. de Tri. K. 8.
O Calvin, has seduced thee to speak with Arius against the son of God,
that thou might proclaim him to be deprived of his glory, and now to
entreat to have it given him, as though he had not always had it? That
Antichrist of the North whom thou do impudently adore, Melancthon the
Grammarian has done this. At length he concludes with this earnest
admonition: Beware (O Christian Reader, and especially all you Ministers)
beware of the books of Calvin, and principally in the articles of the Trinity,
Incarnation, Mediator, the sacrament of Baptism, and predestination: For they
contain wicked doctrine and Arian blasphemies: In so much as the spirit or
soul of burned Seruetus may seem according to the Platonists to have entered
into Calvin. So he. Whose caveat, or serious admonition, together with the
prohibition of our Sovereign, and censures of Gods Church, willbe a warning I
hope to my dearest Countrymen, to abhor the writtings of that Aria^,
Seruetian, Judicial, Simonian, Manichean Sectary, whom Heaven and Earth, God
and Man, Cathelikes and Protestants, Lutherans and Sacramentaryes, justly
condemn of such hateful impietyes.

THE PROEME.
THE most sublime and weighty subject of this present Discourse, is of such
importance, as it is the principal ground, on which depends the whole
decision of all other debatable controversies. For the Church of God, is (as
Epiphanius writes) the kings high way, by Epiphan. haeres. 85.
which a man is sure to travail toward the truth. And Eusebius Emissenus:
The faith of the Catholic church useb. or Eucherius hom. 2. de Symbolo.
is (says he) the light of our soul, the gate of life, and the ground of
everlasting salvation, whosoever forsakes this, does follow his own head, as
a most bad guide, whosoever does think, that by his own wit, and
understanding, he can attain to the secrets of supernatural misteryes, he
Origin ho. 8. in Liuit. tract. 29. and 30. in Matthew. and hom 6. in Ezech. Iren.
l. 3. c. 3 and 4. Augu. in psalm. 103. l. 7. cont. Crescon. c. 33. and ep. 118.
Field in his epist. dedicatory before his first book.
does just like unto him, who without a foundation would build a house, or
letting pass the door, would enter by the roof, or like unto him, who in a
dark night going without a lantern, does with closed eyes cast himself
headlong into a deep dungeon. Origin, Irenaeus, and S. Augustine inculcate the
same. In so much, as M Field ingenuously avouches, There is no part of
heavenly knowledge more necessary, then that which concerns the Church. For,
seeing the controversies of Religion in our time, are grown in number so many,
and in nature so intricate; that few have time and leisure, fewer strength of
understanding to examine them, what remains for men desirous of satisfaction
in things of such consequence, but diligently to search out which among all the
societyes of men in the world, is that blessed company of holiness, that
household of faith, that spouse of Christ, and Church of the living God, which
is the pillar and ground ^f truth, that so they may embrace her communion,
fol^ow her directions, and rest in her judgments. I would to God al Protestants
would yield to the advice of this Protestant writer, in seeking and adhering to
the true Church, which that they may the easier do, I address this Treatise
unto them, wherein I will first lay open, what the Church is, and who are of
it, Then that it is one, visible, and apparent, never hidden, or obscure; That
it cannot fail or err; That it is the mistress of faith, or supreme judge of
all our spiritual debates; That no salvation can be hoped out of it; Lastly,
that there be certain marks, whereby it may be infallibly known. By all which,
I will manifestly decipher the Roman Church, spread through the world, to be the
only house of God, and haven of salvation, and no conuenticle of Protestants no
assembly of sectaryes whatsoever.

This controversy I should have laid in the beginning as the corner stone or
marblestay of al other disputs; yet because the adversary complained of the
advantage we took, in ouerswaying him still with the power of the Church, and
that we declined to enter within the listes of holy Writ: I omitted to oppress
him with her authority, until in other main questions, I had given him the
foil by the testimonies of scripture. God of his infinite mercy give him grace
to see his errors, and acknowledge his fault, least by swelling pride, and
stubborn Isa 6. v. 9. Marc. 4. v. 12.
rebellion, he be forsaken with them, who seeing saw not, nor hearing
understood the embassye of life delivered unto them.

CHAP. I. Wherein is examined, what the Church is, and who are of it.
TO begin with the Etimologie of the Churches name (ever fearful and fatal
to Heretics) the latin word Ecclesia, a Churth, is derived from the Greek
word (...), which signifies to call, or assemble together, because the
members of the Church are called by God from infidelity to faith, from error
to truth, from impurity and uncleanness, to sanctification and holiness. Whereupon
S. Paul writes to some of them by this title, 1. Cor. 2. v. 2.
to the sanctified in Christ Jesus called to be Saints: and S. Peter, He that
called you out of darcknes to an admirable light. The end of this happy
calling is to enrich us here, with the blessings 1. Pet. 2. v. 8.
of Christ, to reward us hereafter with the sight of his countenance, with the
glory of his king dome. Both which the foresaid Apostles lively express. S. 1
Pet. 3. v. 9. 1. Tim. 6. v. 23.
Peter, Unto this you are called, that you may by inheritance possess a
benediction. S. Paul to Timothy, Fight the good combat of Faith, apprehend
eternal life wherein thou art called. Not that all who repair unto the Church
arrive unto this immortal happiness, but that it is the intent and purpose of
God to set us in the way and direct us thereunto, when by him 1. Cor 1. v. 8.
we are called (as Paul says) into the society of his son Jesus Christ our
Lord. Whereupon a great question here arises between Ambr. in co^m. in c. 2. 2.
Tim. Aug libel. de haeres. haer. 88. Aug ibid. haer. 69. and l. 3. contra Parm.
c. 2. VVicklif. apud walden. tom. 1. l. 2. c 8. and 9. Husse art. 1. 2. 3. 5.
6. vt habetur in Council. Constant. sess. 15. Whitaker. contro. 2. q. 1. c. 3.
Fulke in c. 3. 1. Tim. sect. 10. Whitaker. contro. 2. q. 1. c. 3. Whitaker.
contr. 2 q 3. c. 3. Ibid. q. 1. c. 3. 4. 5. 6. and cap. 7. Quaest. 5. page 301.
q. 1. c. 10. and q. 3. cap. 3. fol. ^12. and 213. and q 1. c. 6. and 7.
us, and our adversaries. First what makes us of this society of the son of
God, for seeing the maine army of this selected company is so great, as it
fills the whole world, is dispersed throughout all nations, is distinguished
by diverse languages, laws, rites and customs, the chief difficulty is what
linketh and combineth them together in the band or family of Christ

2. The Nouatians taught as S. Ambrose notes, that is was entire purity, which
made this conuinction, affirming the pure, only, and entirely just to be of
the Church. Of which opinion the Pelagians also were, who required hereunto the
full complement, and absolute perfection of all kind of such virtues, unto
which by their labor and industry they presumed to atteyne. Secondly, the
Donatistes craved not so much; they indeed exacted grace and justice, receiving
only the good and just into the fold of Christ, and excluding all grievous
sinners; yet not the weak and imperfect as the former did. Thirdly, Wickliffe
and John Husse desired neither complete sanctity nor any dram of inward grace,
but the outward election and predestination of God, auouching all the
predestinate, and none else to appertain to the true Church which is the body
of Christ. Of this triple generation of prodigious broodes Whitaker, with
whom Fulke seems to agree, begettethone hideous monster formed and composed
of them all together, saying: The Catholic Church consists not of any
wicked and reprobate, but only of the elect, just, holy, and predestinate. Yet
if you believe his words, he differs from the first opinion, because he
takes neither just men as the Nouitians, nor perfect as the Pelagians, for
such as have not their faults and imperfections; he dissenteth from the
second, because he excludes none once justified by true belief, let the^s all
into never so detestable crimes: He varieth from the third, because he
requires internal faith in the predestinate, before they can be admitted into
the lap of the Church. And then he cunningly complyeth with the^ all again,
affirming no faults, or imperfections to be imputed to the holy and
regenerate, nor any grievous crimes, to be hurtefull to the just, or make them
loose their justice, all the faith full to be righteous, and just, and none
truly faithful, but only the elect. Thus he plaieth fast and loose; and uses
many iugling tricks which I shall most plainly discover hereafter.

3. Now I declare, that not the perfect, just, and elect only, but that the
wicked reprobate and much more the imperfect are lodged in the house of God, as
S. Augustine largely proves by ma^y parables of holy scripture, Aug. l. 3. c.
2. 9. 12. 28. contra Petil. and Dona. post. collat. c 4. and 6. Matthew. 3. 13.
15. 25. 2. Tim. 2.
where Christ speaking of his Church, resembles it to the floor of our Lord,
in which there is wheat and chafe, To the net cast into the sea, in which
there be good and evil fishes, To the kingdom of heaven, in which there are
wise and foolish virgins, To the Field in which the cockle grows with the
good seed, until the harvest, that is the wicked and reprobate are mingled
with the just until the end of the world, To a great house wherein there be
some vessels of honor, some of contumely. The Church of the Thessalonians, the
Church of the Corinthiains S. Paul acknowledges to be 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1. Cor. 4.
1. Cor. 1. 1. Cor. 6. 1. Cor. 3. Whitaker. con. 2. q. 1. 2. Fulke in c. 22.
Matthew. sect. 2. August. tract. 6. in Joan. Cypri. l. 4. ep. 2. Hieron. in dial.
cont. Lucifer. Fulg. l. de fide ad Petra c. 43.
true Churches, in which there were some not withstanding walking inordinately,
some puffed with pride, some contentious, some injuries and frauds, some such
fornication, as was not to be heard of amongst Gentills. M. Whitaker and M.
Fulke in defense of themselves and their patrons answer: All these things are
understood of the particular visible Churches, not of the Catholic Church, in
them the good and bad preseuer together, not in this. But either the Catholic
Church, is also visible, or else no society can the good have, no communication
together, which is essentially required to the nature of a Church. Besides S.
Augustine expressly says: We confess in the Catholic Church, both the good
to be, and the evil, but so as corn and chafe. The same is confessed by S.
Cyprian, S. Jerome, and S. Fulgentius, of which more in due time.

Again, if the just only be of the Church, the sacrament of penance could
not be administered to grievous sinners who are out of the Church, the Pastors,
and prelates, who fall into sin should fall from the Church and as Wickliffe
dreamed loose their Prelacy and government of their subjects; the subjects
should be discharged of their obedience, and a sea of confusion would ensue.
The like would follow if the elect only be members of the Church. For how
should we know who be elect, whom to hear, whom to obey, to whom we should
lincke and co^ioyne our selves; yea what company or society can the
predestinate make, who have no band, or combination the one with the other. For
S. Thom. 1. part. q. 23. art. ^.
predestination (as S. Thomas teaches) produces nothing in the predestinate,
but is only a decree, and ordinance in the mind of God. Further if the elect
be always incorporated in the body of Christ, how could S. Paul say to the
Ephesians, you Ephesians. 5. v. 7. 1. Pet. 2. 9. Romans 8. v. 9.
were once darcknes but now light in our Lord. Or S. Peter, sometime not a
people, now the people of God. Or S. Paul to the Romans, if any man have not
the spirit of Christ, the same is not his. But many of the predestinate follow
the desires of the flesh, live in error, and ignorance, have not the spirit of
Christ, therefore they are not as yet his. Whereupon our Savior says, I have
other sheep who are not of this fould; who Joan. 10. v. 16.
stray abroad and are not as yet called to the fould of my Church, and many are
called, and continue therein, whom he in the end will utterly forsake, and
say, nescio vos, I know Matt. 25. v. 12.
you not. In fine to quench the coals of this already covered, and raked-vp
heresy, he again reports of a reprobate person found at the marriage feast
of his spouse, at the banquet of his Church, who bound hand and foot was cast
into utter Matt. 22. v. 13.
darkness. And he seals up the parable, and mouths o^ our adversaries with
this terrible conclusion, Many are called and few elected, that is, many are
called and truly remain in the bosom of the Church, who are not chose^ and
elected of God. Therefore to understand what it is S. Joan. 1. ep. cap. 4.
Three Unions with Christ in this life.
which incorporateth in the outward body of Christ, yo^ must know that there be
three unions with him in this life, two internal, the other outward or
exterior. The first and perfect internal conjunction is by grace an^ charity,
of which S. John: He that abides in charity dwells i^ God, and God in him.
The other internal is by Faith, which (...) spark of heavenly breath, an
imperfe^^ spi^^tuall beginning, or supernatural habit tending to eternal
life, yet not able to justify without the flame of charity. The third is
merely exterior in outward profession and show of faith by reason of our
external, and Catholic Commnnion with true belieuers. And albeit the first
conjunction of love, be necessary to make us lively members of Christ, yet the
last is sufficient, to billet us in the house, or outwardly conioyne us to the
fellowship of his militant Church, which may be thus defined.

5. It is a society, or company of men, linked and combined together, The
Church defined.
in the same profession of Christian faith, and use of sacraments under lawful
Pastors, chiefly under one head, and vicar of Christ the Pope of Rome. More
briefly S. Cyprian, The Church is the assembly of people united to the Priest,
and the flock adhering to the Cypr. l. 4. ep. 9.
Pastor. Whereby it appears that all who openly participate in her service,
sacraments, and communion, under the obedience of a head, be they heretics,
infidels, or ne^^r so grievous sinners, so long remain of this visible body,
until either by public Apostasy they reuolte, by heresy rebel, by schism
depart, or by ecclesiastical censures are banished her society. The
Catechumens notwithstanding are only (as S. Gregory Nazianzen writes) Greg.
Nazian. in vestibulo pietatis.
in the p^rch of piety, and not as Whitaker surmizeth, in the lap of the
Church, until they be incorporated by baptism, no more are public
Apostatas, open heretics, schismatiks, and excommunicate persons. They because
they voluntarily forsake, rebel, or break the bands of this united company:
These, because they are utterly rejected and cassiered her followship. Howbeit
if they be unjustly banished, and persevere in the favor of God, they may be
saved, as the Catechumens are by their fervent desire of being of it. So
likewise the predestinate not yet called, are not actually of the fould of
Christ, but only in potentia, Field in his first book of the Church c. 8. fol.
17.
in power according to the full designement and intent of God, which
distinction with certain sentences out of S. Augustine, M. Field borrowing
from Cardinal Bellarmin, and D. Stapleton, vaine-gloriously cites and urges
against them, thereby to make the simple believe, he refelleth the ^ayings of
those worthy men, when he repeateth the lessons he learneth of them. That the
elect are not actually of the Church before they be called, is proved already:
That naughty Christians are, the parables before mentioned do witness: That
secret heretics and schismatic dissemblers likewise are, this place of S.
John perspicuously insinuates: They went out from us, but they were not of us.
1. Joan. 2. v. 18.
Where S. Augustine has these words: All heretics, all schismatikes have gone
out from us, that is, have gone out of the Church etc. If before they went out
they were not of us, many are within, they have August. Tract. in ep. Joan.
not gone forth, and yet are Antichrists: and then; And they that are within,
are truly of the body of our Lord Jesus Christ etc. They are so in the body,
as ill humors, when they are vomited forth, the body is eased. And Origin:
Here in Jerusalem (that Origin ho 21. in Iosue
is in the Church) there be certain Iebuseans, who both in faith, and manners,
are perverse, and wicked.

6. Our sectaryes object, that the Church is holy, The first objection.
therefore it cannot harbor in her bosom, either the wicked or hidden
heretic. I answer it is holy, by reason of the just, and virtuous, who are
the principal portion of the Church, albeit she abound with too many
Hypocrites, and therefore uses these words of her self: Cant. 1.
I am black, but fair. Black through the multitude of sinners, fair through
the beauty of the just. She did not say (as S Augustine notes) I have been
black like the tabernacles Augu de doct. Chri. l. 3, c. 3^.
of Cedar, I have been fair like the skins of Solomon, but both ^he avouches
her self to be, by reason of the temporal unity and conjunction of good and
evil fishes within the same net.

7. How can they (say the adversaries again) be The 2. objection.
members of Christ, who are slaves of sin, and servants of the Devil? I
answer, they may be slaves of sin in one respect, and dead members of Christ
in another, they may outwardly belong to him, and inwardly to Satan, August.
in psalm. 47.
witness S. Augustine, who says: They who participate of the sacraments, and
want good manners, are said to be Gods, and not to be Gods. They are said to be
his, and to be as strangers: his for the form and show of pretty: not his for
the loss of virtue, or his n^mer^ non merit^, that is, his by tale and
account, not his by worth or merit. In another place the same S. Augustine: Of
the holy Church every De vnitat. Eccless. c. 1^.
Christian acknowledges it to be spoken, as the lilly amongst thorns, so my
beloved amongst daughters. Wherefore does he call them thorns? But for the
malignity of their manners. Wherefore daughters, but for the communion and
participation of sacraments. Therefore when S. Augustine, or others deny the
wicked to be members of Christ's Church, they mean they are not lively, but
dead, and withered members, like ill humors, superfluous excrements, putrified
and decayed parts, which so long clean unto the body of man until they be
separated o^ c^t away, who although they partake not the benefit of life,
although they reap no fruit themselves, by reason of their society and
communication with the just, yet the holy Ghost may use their office and
jurisdiction, if they enjoy any, to the profit and commodity of his servants.

8. Other objections they make, some out of scripture, some out of S. Augustine
where the predestinate are The third objection. Joan. 10. and 11. and 2. Tim.
out of Augu. l. 5. c. 27. de bapt. cont. Donat. l. de correp. and gra. c. 9.
called the sheep of Christ, and sons of God before they be called, and
whilst they remain blinded with error. I answer, one may be the son of
God, either formally according to present grace, or finally according to the
prescience, and predestination of God. The scriptures and S. Augustine call
them sheep, and sons not after the form^ but after the later manner. After
which sort S. Augustine often denies the just not predestinate, to be either
members, sons, or sheep of Christ, but rather goats, or wolfes, because God
foreseeth, that for want of perseverance, to such final misery they will
precipitate themselves. His words are these: According to prescience, and
predestination, Augu. tract. 45. in Joan.
how many sheep without, how many wolfs within etc. What is that I have said,
how many sheep without? How many live wantonly how, who will become Christians:
how many blaspheme Christ who shall believe in Christ etc. And how many praise
God within, who will blaspheme him: are chaste and will play the wantons: are
sober and willbe hereafter ouercharged with wine: stand and will fall: and
they 2. Tim. 2^ v. 18.
are not she. For I speak of the predestinate, of them I speak whom our Lord
knows who be his. So he. Auouching plainly, that many reprobate be with in
the precinctes of the Church, by profession of faith, although they be without
in forefight of God, and diverse of the predestinate without by conversation and
peruersity of manners, who are notwithstanding within in the hidden prescience
and decree of his election, and will in due time by real admission retire
themselves to the camp of his chosen flock.

CHAP. II. Wherein is discussed, whether the Church be one, or many: one
visible which we ought to obey, another invisible, which we ought to b^lieue:
against D. Whitaker, and D. Fulke.
ALBEIT M. Field distasting the doctrine of his masters, who faign two distinct
and several Churches, labors with all art to gloze their sayings and writh
them to some right construction, yet the words of Whitaker no art can delude,
Field in his first book chap. 10. Whitaker. cont. 2. q. ^. cap. 14. fol. 125.
no dawbing hide, no cunning ouercast. Hear him speak: We say (quoth
Whitaker) there are two societyes of men in the world, that is, two Churches
etc. To the one the predestinate belong: To the other the reprobate. The same
he prosecuteth in diverse places, both before, and after, affirming one of these
Churches to be wholly inuisi^^^* the Cont. 2. q. 2. c. 1. and q. 1. c. 3. 7. 8.
19. and q. 4. c. 1. 3.
^ther visible. The one comprising the sole company of elect, the other,
consisting of good, and bad mingled together; the one against which no
tentation, no persecution, no not the gates of hell can prevail, the other,
which may perish, decay, be drowned with errors, and ^uerwhelmed with
tempests; That only he supposes to be holy and Catholic, this not so; that
known to God alone, this also to men; that the true Church mentioned in the
Creed which Ibid q. 1. c. 13. and q 2. c. 1. Quaest. 4. c. 3. Fulke in c. 3.
Matthew. sect. 3. and in c. 22. Matt. sect. 2. Cant. 6. Joan. 10. 1. Cor 12. 1.
Cor. 10. Ephesians. 5. Ibid. Aug. in illud. psalm. 21.
we are taught to believe, this the outward assembly whose communion we ought
to observe, whose commandments to follow. To be brief, the former he seuereth
into two parts, into the tri^mphant and militant etc. In the triumphant (says
he) are only good, no reprobate, so likewise in the militant: the triumphant is
invisible, the militant also invisible. The later he deuideth into sundry
particular Churches, as into the Church of England, Geneua, Zurike, etc. of
which he composeth one ^^iuersall visible Church. This is VVhitakers confused
Church, which Fulk his colleague, following Calvin, in many points ^tifly
maintayneth against the whole current of holy Scriptures.

2. For they every where inculate one Church, one spouse, one camp, one
heavenly city, and house of God. The holy ghost in the Canticles says vna est
columba mea, me is my done, Christ makes it one fould. S Paul, We are all
baptized into one body. And when he speaks of the Church he uses always the
singular number, Be with out offense to the Church of God: This is a great
sacrament I say in Christ, and in his Church. Again, Husbands love your
wives, as Christ also loves his Church. S. Augustine to this purpose
interprets that verse of the Psalm, ^rue de manu canis vnicam meam, deliver
my only one from the clawe of the By the dog Eusebius understands the
Devil, whom the Heathens feigned to be the three headed Cerberus. Cypr. de
unit. Eccle.
dog. Where by his only one he understands vnicam Ecclesiam, his only
Church. S. Cyprian proves it diverse ways, and illustrateth it, with many fine
similitudes. By the fountain which is only one although divided into many
rivers, By the root, or tree, which is one, albeit it brauncheth into diverse
bows, By the light of the sun, which is one notwithstanding is casts forth
sundry beams; so the Church is only one, howbeit ^he stretches her dominions
into innumerable Counteryes. The same he confirms by the Coat of Christ
without seame, which figured his one and undivided Church. But I will not
depart from the oracle of the Apostle.

3. When S. Paul calls christ head of the body of the church, Of what Church
I pray is he head? of the invisible, Coloss. 1. v. 17.
or of the visible? If of the invisible, the visible is without a head, if of
this, that is a headless monster, or if of both, one head you prodigiously
join to sundry bodies. Likewise the same Apostle says, I have despoused you
to one man 2. Cor. 11. ^. 2.
to present you a chaste virgin unto Christ. Where I ask which is that chaste
virgin and spouse of our Lord? your invisible Church? Then your visible is a
harlot, a concubin, no virgin of Christ; and yet it was a visible Church, to
which S. Paul wrote, visible which he converted, and preserved in chastity of
truth, which he, undefiled, despoused unto Christ. Therefore if your visible
also be made his spouse together with the invisible, two spouses As Christ
cannot have two spouses, so neither two churches.
you betroth unto him, not one virgin, as the Apostl^ writes, pure, and
incorrupted, but two, one which cannot be defiled with adulterous error, the
other which may dishonor her husband, and play the harlot. And ar^ we bound to
believe the one, and converse with the other* believe in the chaste virgin and
follow her that may fall into aduoutry, believe in her that cannot beguile us,
and embrace her counsels, that may lead us into pernicious and damnable
deceits. O God what in jury were this to thee, what abuse to men? For to what
end did thou grant such privileges unto thy Church? why did thou build it
upon a rock, guard it with thy Angels, endow, it with thy spirit, assiste and
protect it with thy daily presence, but that we might securely converse and
communicate with it? Did he afford these prerogatives to one Church, command
us to believe in it, and after guide us, govern us, nay deceive us with
another? as Laban deceived Jacob, promising Rachel, and beguiling him with ^ia.
Genesis 29. v. 19. and 23.


4. Is not the Apostolic Church, is not the Catholic Church, the true
Church, which y^^ believe (...) what Church is Apostolic, but that which the
Apostles planted with their preaching, edified with their lives, watered with
their blood? What Catholic but that, which beginning at Jerusalem increased
and spread it self in the view of all men throughout the world? And i^ not the
same the visible Church, mother of us all, in whose womb we were conceived, in
whose lap we have been nourished, and from whose dugges we have sucked the
sweetest milk of heavenly doctrine? The Church which we believe is, (as you
confess) the house of God, not built upon the sand, but upon a rock, against
which the winds Matt. 7. v. 29.
blew, the rain beat, the floodes came, but would not batter to the ground;
And yet the same in S. Paul's judgment is the house in which we should live and
converse. These things I write to 1. Tim. 3. v. 14. Fulke in c. 3. 1. Tim.
sect. 10.
thee etc. that thou may know, how thou ought to converse in the house of
God, which is the Church of the living God. Fulke avouches, and Whitaker will
not deny, but that their invisible holy Catholic Church is the Church for
which Christ ^yed, that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it by the lauer of
water in his word: Notwithstanding if it were not ^^so the visible Church, by
which we are directed, and ^ouerned, how could S. Paul exhort the Priests or
Pastors Art. 10. v. 28.
thereof, Take heed to your selves, and to the whole flock wherein the holy
ghost has placed you Bishops to rule the Church of God which he has purchased
with his own blood?

5. Moreover what Church do we believe, but that which is the communion of
Saints, of which it is said in the Creed I believe the holy Catholic
Church, the communion of Saints, therefore the same we believe The
Protestants evasion answered.
with which we communicate. I know you will say, there are two sorts of
communion one visible in giving and receiving the outward seals, and
sacraments of the Church: in preaching and hea^^ng the word, in external
profession of faith, and many mutual offices of charity: another invisible,
which consists in the inward regenera^ion, and fructification of the word* in
the inward and saithfull belief, that you observe and honor in the visible
church, this you truly acknow^edg and believe in the invisible. What? Are the
sacraments ministered (...) another? Is the outward lotion and preaching in one
^ (...) ^^istred (...) one Church and give grace in another.
the inward regeneration and belief in another? And wh^ more absurd then to
divide the sacraments from their effects, the instruments of grace, from
grace it self by diversity of Churches? what more absurd, then to make the
pastor pillars and foundation in one Church, and the true fabric of the
Church in another? Is it possible is should not be the same Church, where
baptism incorporateth us in Christ, and where the body of Christ is, where
Paul planteth, Apollo waters and God gives the 1. Cor. 3. v. 46.
increase? Although, I yeald unto you, that the outward lotion and preaching be
visible, the increase of grace and true belief invisible, yet may not the same
Church consist As man consists of a visible body, and invisible soul, so the
same Church may have some visible other invisible parts.
of diverse parts, some visible, some invisible, some seen, others believed.
Is not every particular man one and the same composed of a visible body and
invisible soul, i^ not Christ one and the same, whose humanity was seen and
divinity believed? Therefore as you do not make two men of one, nor two
Christ's of the son of God, although he comprehend parts visible and
invisible, on^ thing that is seen, and another believed; so neither tw^
Churches, but one and the same, which compriseth some visible, and some
invisible parts.

6. But to lance this sore a little deeper. The visible Church (say you)
consists of good and bad, elect and reprobat mingled together, the invisible
only is composed of the elect, just, and holy. See you not how this very
distinction Many absurdities ensue of devising two churches.
choaketh it self, how one member fightet^ diverse ways against the other. For
first separate the elec^ from the society of the reprobat, to frame your
invisible you destroy the visible Church: leave them conioyne with the
reprobat, to make your visible, and the inuisibl^ visible only the true and
real Church, the true mystical body of Christ, which is exercised here in
the warfare of this life. Thirdly, this you cross again, and say, the visible
Church is no true Church, but only as it contains the invisible, that is the
sacred number of the elect, who make no society, and consequently no Church.
Fourthly, the elect by this means, are in two Churches, in the visible, and in
the invisible, whereas the reprobate only are in the visible, yet because their
reprobation is as hidden, as the others election, why should not these make an
invisible assembly as well as they. Fifthly, when the elect are separated, to
make your invisible, who remains in the visible, but a rabble of reprobate, a
rout of infidels, and shall they compose your visible Church? Shall Christ's
visible body on earth be wholly compacted of the reproved vessels; and members
of Satan? O intricate confusion, which confounds also me in rehearsing it! O
monstrous paradoxes, which implies so many contradictions, ^^ ^any
absurdityes; against which if I should cite the ^^thorityes of the Fathers, I
should never make an end. They all jointly praise, magnify, and extol, one
visible, and Catholic Church, one and the same, whose prerogative we believe,
and fellowship must embrace, the same by whose preaching we must be born, and
by whose spirit we live. S. Cyprian the glorious Bishop and Martyr Cypr. de
unit. Eccl.
says: One Mother there is, by the fecundity of her issue copious and fertile,
by her increase we are borne, with her milk we are nourithed, we are animated
with her spirit. The spouse of Christ cannot play the aduoutresse, she is
immuculate and undefiled, she knows one house, she keeps with chaste
bashfulnes the sanctity of one bed. This Church preserves us in God, this
aduanceth to the kingdom the children she has brought forth: whosoever
divided from the Church, cleaves to the aduoutresse, is separated from the
promises of the Church.

7. S. Augustine also often auerreth, That the true Catholic Church
conteyneth in it good, and bad, reprobate and elect: That the kingdom of Christ
is but one, one great city, one mountain comprehending the whole world: The
authority (says he) of the Catholic Church etc. i^ establi^hed until this
day by the line of Bishops succeeding one another, Aug. cont. Faust. l. 11. c.
2.
and by the consent of so many people. By which succession, consent, and power
of miracles, he testifies that he is held in Catholica Ecclesia, in the
Catholic Church: Then that the whole multitude of belieuers gathered together,
by miracles is the Catholic August. cont. epist Funda. c. 3. and 4. Aug. de
vtil. credendi c. 16.
Church. Therefore the Catholic Church is the same, whose succession is
visible, propagation visible, consent visible, miracles visible, multitude
visible, and which it self is also visible: the same is the Catholic Church,
which we believe, and visible multitude to which we ought to link in
fellowship, and communion, which appears so clear in M. Fields sight,
howsoever those his former Coronels Whitaker, and Fulke were blinded with the
contrary, as he writes thus: We say that all they are of Field in his first
book of the Church c. 2. fol. 23.
the Church, that outwardly hold the faith of Christ, and that that society
wherein the sincere outward profession of the truth of God is preserved, is
that true Church of God, whose communion we must embrace that happy mother in
whose womb we are conceived, with whose milk we are nourished, and to whose
censures we must submit our selves. After assigning diverse considerations of
the Church and some different conditions of her members, he adds:
Notwithstanding all which differences, for that they all concur in the same
holy profession, and use of the same happy means of salvation, they make one
holy Catholic Church, in which only the light of heavenly truth is to be
sought. So he, flying the noueltye of his first Reformers, and varying from
them in a Field dissentethfro^ Whitaker in apoint fundamental.
point fundamental; for what more substantial variance then to differ about
the Church we ought to believe, as an article of faith? About the Catholic
Church, in which the happy means of salvation are only to be found? Whether
that be visible or invisible?

8. Peradventure some will excuse M. Whitaker, that he means not that the
true Church should be wholly invisible not seen to any, but so latent,
scattered, and compounded of so few, as they can hardly be discerned amongst
them selves, much less to strangers and enemies. Whitaker. contr. 2 q. 2. c. 1.
But this excuse will not cover his fault. For Whitaker avouches that indeed,
but of the visible, not of the Catholic Church, he flatly protests the whole
Catholic Whitaker. ibidem q. 3. c. 1. fol. 178. Fulke in c. 5. Matthew. sect. 3.
and i^ 2 Thessalonians. 2. sect. 5. Sparks in his answer to M. John D. Albins page
54. and 126.
Church to be invisible, both militant and triumphant. The visible also, says
he, may sometime consist of a f^w, and they scattered, obscure, unknown, who
hide themselves in corners. Which although M. Field stoutly gainesayth (as
shall be declared) yet because Fulke, Sparks, and others uphold the same, to
underprop the paper walls of their new founded Synagogue, it will not be
labor lost, to convince the falsity thereof.

CHAP. III. In which is declared, that the true visible Church is apparently
known and famous to the world, against D. Whitaker, D. Fulke, and D. Sparks.
THE first authors, and beginners of Protesta^cy, departing from the known
band and unity of Gods people upon earth, and not finding any predecessors or
mantayners of their new hatched fictions, to whom they should lincke and
conioyne themselves in profession; not finding any Country, Province, City,
Village, Temple, or Oratory, who communicates with them infayth service and
public sacraments, wretchedly imagined, besides their Catholic, and wholly
invisible Church, another visible assembly of faithful belieuers, who are some
so hidden as they are not known to D. Whit. contro. 2. q. 3. cap. 1. f. 178.
179. Whitaker. adu^. Du^. p. 274. D. Sparks in his answer to M. Io. d'Albin p
54. 126. Fulke in c. 5. Matt. sect. 3. and 2 Thessalonians. 2. sect. 5. Isa. c. 61.
Genesis 2^. v. 17. Genesis 28. v. 14. Matt. 24. v. 23. Hiero. in comm. cap. 24. Matt.
Aug. lib. 9. c. 16. cont. Petil. Aug. de unit. Eccl. c. 6. 7. 8. 9. Matt. 5. v.
14. Art. 1. v. 8 Dan. 2. v. 44. Psalm. 88. v. 38. Matt. 5. v. 14. Aug. in psalm.
47. omnibus terrarum partibus nota. Aug. l. 3. c. 5. cont. Parm. Isa 2. v. 2.
Psalm. 44. v. 16.
any strangers, sometimes so latent, as they are no way aparent to the world:
We confess (says Whitaker) a certain number of them who piously worship
Christ, to be always on earth, but we say that this number is not always
visible. It may come to pass that no certain and true visible Church may be
known, or sound out in the world. Likewise we all clearly know the visible
church to have perished, a^ thou know a man to be dead. D. Sparks and D.
Fulke tr^ce the same steps, how beit God witnesses of the progeny of his
Church, by the mouth of Isay: Their seed, and generation shall be known
amongst the Gentills, and amongst the people, all that see them shall know
them, that these are the seed, which our Lord has blessed: I will multiply thy
seed like the stares of the heaven, and like the sands of the sea: Thou shall
be dilated from East, to West, from South, to North. In so much as Christ
himself fore warns us not to give ear to them who avouch his Church to be at
any time latent or restrained to corners: If any man shall say unto you, lo
here is Christ or there do not believe him. Whereupon S. Hierome: Do ye not
go forth, do ye not believe, that the son of man is either in the desert of
Gentills, or in the closets of heretics, but from the East to the West his
faith shines in the Catholic Church S. Augustine: Do thou think the sheep
of Christ are so deprived of all sense, to whom it is said, do ye not
believe, that they will hear the wolse, affirming, behold here i^ Christ,
and will not hear the Pastor, saying, that he is throughout all Nations,
beginning at Jerusalem? And in another place he wills us not to credit him,
who draws Christ, or his Church from the communion or fellowship of all
nations christened to one corner, town, or Country. For this cause Christ
calls his shepherds, the light of the world, the witnesses of his truth to
the most parts of the earth. He compares his Church to a renowned kingdom,
that shall break in pieces and consume all other kingdoms, To a magnificent
throne, as resplendent as the sun, To a lofty City, placed upon a mountain,
which as S. Augustine affirms, cannot be hid, but shall be known to all the
coasts of the earth, To a mountain, prepared in the top of mountains,
elevated above the little hills, unto which all Nations shall flow, to the
Temple of a king, to a tabernacle seated in the sun. Whereupon S. Augustine,
he put his tabernacle Aug. in in eundem psalm.
in the sun, that is, his Church in manif^station or open view, not in a
corner, not such as is hidden, as if it were covered etc. In the sun he put
his tabernacle, what do thou mean, O heretic to fly into darkness? What
do thou mean to hide the light, to deface the thorn, to dispeople the
City, to shroud in corners the kingdom of thy Lord, the most famous monarchy
of the world? Three reasons why the Church must be always visible.


2. The reasons why the empire, or monarchy of the Church must be always so
manifest, or resplendent are diverse, but chiefly three. First for the
instruction of the faithful for to guide; and direct them to the port of
salvation, to teach them the truth, and preserve them from the wiles of error.
For to this end pastors are appointed in the Church, they are commanded to
take care of their flock, to govern, and feed them, to defend them from the
wolves, the people are charged to hear, and obey them, not to give care to the
voice of strangers, to receive from the^ the food of life. Therefore both the
one, and the other must be always visible, or else, they cannot mutually
perform these offices. And because these faithful servants of God shall
continue in the most famous countries of the World; this visible Church must
needs persevere in the view of al. Secondly it must also abid openly known for
the extirpation of heresies, and correction of delinquentes, for the amendment
of these, and avoiding of their company, because S. Paul wills us to shun the
heretical person and not to join league with infidells; We are also
commanded Tit. 3^* v. 10. 2. Cor. 6. v. 14. Romans 16. v. 17. Matt. 18. v. 17.
to note such as breed scandalls among us, and to tell the Church of them that
be in corrigible. Which were to no purpose if the Church at any time lay
hidden. Thirdly it is necessary it should be always conspicuous, and
manifestly apparent, not only to the members, but even to strangers, and
enemies there of (to wit) for their conversion, and vocation of gentills. Hence
Isay prophesies: Thy gates shall be open continually day and night, they shall
not be shut, that the strength of Isa. 60. ^. ^1.
the gentiles may be brought to thee, and their kings may be brought. Which
cannot be fullfilled if the Church be couched in darcknes, if it be not always
a mountain in the top of mountains Isa. c. 2. v. 2. Cap. 62. v. 6. Melan. in
praef. l. corp. doct. Christ. in Eccl. Sax. etc. impr. Lipsiae anno. 561. See
him also in Repe. conf. Aug offerendae synod. Tri. c. de Eccle. and in resp. ad
impios art. Baua. inquis. q. ^. D. Humf. Jesus. par. 2. rat. ^. page ^41. item
page 281. Field l. 1 c. 10. fol. ^1. Whitaker. contro. 2. q. 3. c. 1. Con. 2. q.
2. c. 2. cont. 2 q. 3. cap. 1. Perkins in his exposition of the Creed page 400.
Fulk. in c. 2 Thessalonians. sect. 4.
unto which all nations may flow, and say, Come let us go up to the Mount of
our Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways,
and we shall walk in his paths: If it be not always true which God himself
foretold, Upon thy walls Jerusalem, I have appointed watchmen, all the day,
and all the night: for ever they shall not hold their peace.

3. These reasons weighed so much with Melancthon, as he bitterly inueigheth
against such as impugn them saying: Whereunto tends this monstrous speech,
which denies the visible Church? It abolisheth all testimonies of antiquity;
It takes away all judgments; It causes an endless confusion, and induces a
common wealth of unruly Russians, or Atheists, wherein no one cares for
another. And our English Protestant Doctor Humfrey; Obscure or hidden
retirements etc. are not Christian assemblyes. Likewise It is a most manifest
conclusion that the Church ought to be conspicuous. Who is seconded also by M.
Field: That there is, and always has been a visible Church, and that not
consisting of some few scattered Christians without order of Ministry, or use
of sacraments we do most willingly yeald unto. But how many more will yeald
besides? you having no rule of agreement so strangely dissent in every
assertion, as I know not who else will subscribe hereunto. Sure I am that
Whitaker as mainly contradicts it, as words can express, saying: The Church
may sometimes consist of a few; and they scattered, obscure, unknown, who hide
themselves in corners. Therefore he answers to the former testimonies of
scripture, that many promises are made of the glory, and splendor of the
Church, under the Messiah, but none that the state of the Church should be
perpetually such. For it may come to pass, that no true visible Church, may be
found out in the world. Perkins says in his exposition of the Creed: Before
the days of Luther, for the space of many hundred years, an universal
apostasy ouerspread the whole face of the earth. Fulke: There was a certain
general apostasy of the visible Church. And a little before: The revolt spoken
of before by S. Paul is called by Calvin, A certain general defection of the
visible Church, which being hardly builded was by the tyranny and subtilty of
Antichrist overthrown, as a house with a sudden tempest, and lay long in the
ruins. Again: The visible Church may become an adultersse, Fulk in his
answer to a counterfeit Catholic p. 79. VVilet in his Synop. pa. 54. Sparks
in his answer to M. John d' Albins page 53. 54. 126. etc. A gross and absurd
answer of one who^ the Lord de la Ware brought to dispute with a Catholic
Gentleman
and be divorced from Christ. M. Willet and D. Sparks have many sayings to
the like purpose. By which M. Field may see how far his fellows are from
agreeing with him, or yiedling to us in this substantial point of faith,
especially they who pressed to describe where their Church has held the
scepter of her reign in former ages, retire to the hidden story of invisible
conuenticles, as a Puritan Champion of my Lord de la VVares did (in a set
conference appointed by him, and others, for the discovery of truth) who being
urged by a Catholic gentelman, that the Protestant Church could not be true,
because it has not always continued since Christ his time, not always
visible as he then disputed, nor always invisible, nor sometime visible, and
sometime invisible; The Lords Champion answered, that it continued sometime
invisible. To which the Catholic replied, that during the time in which it
was invisible, it could not be the Church of Jesus Christ; for he argued thus:

That is the true Church of Jesus Christ which he comaundeth us to obey, and
pumsheth us if we obey not.
But he cannot command us to obey an invisible Church nor punish us if we obey
it not.
Therefore an invisible Church, cannot be the true Church of Jesus Christ. He
might have asked him of whom his invisible church consists of men or Devils,
Fayries, Goblins, or what other night-Ghostes, who would not be seen or heard
to speak. God not excused from tyranny by the Protestants answer.

The Minor denied was proved in this manner:

God cannot command, much less punish us for a thing impossible.
But it is impossible to hear, impossible to obey an invisible Church.
Therefore God can not command, much less punish us for not obeying an
invisible Church.
4. Here the defendant granted, that God commanded a thing impossible, and
punished men for not performing that which was impossible: whereupon when the
disputant inferred, That God must needs be in that case a tyrant in punishing
without desert; he after much stammering and struggling which himself answered,
No, because that impossibility fell out by their own default. At which reply,
the Minister his assistant began to leap for joy, and brake off the dispute
without more ado, as if the Argument had been satisfied, or the divine goodness
exempted from prodigious cruelty by a fault of his creatures, which when they
incurred no man knows, nor can yet devise, what fault it should be, nor why
the harmeles of spring should be everlastingly tormented for their
predecessors offense, of eclipsing the Church, and making The Lord de la War
his false report and vain boasting of a disput held betwixt a Catholic and a
Protestant in his own presence. Melanct. D. Humf. D. Field in the places above
cited.
it invisible, which they neither actually committed by their own proper will,
nor originally contracted from the will of another. Yet such answers run
current in Protestants judgments, and the good Lord himself was not ashamed
vauntingly to report, that his defendant departed enobled with victory, when he
flinched away notoriously disgraced with the ignominious blot of one most
monstrous absurdity, even in Melancthons, D. Humfreys, and M. Fields divinity
court, that the Protestants Church was sometimes invisible, and another
vnauoidabl^ blasphemy in the high tribunal seat of all Divines, tha^ God does
command, and eternally punish us for not performing things impossible.

5. Both these odious barbarismes the Puritan wel^ perceived, and although as
he ignorantly, or unadvisedly rolled into the^; so he vaingloriously (after the
fashion of heretics) defended them for a while: yet immediately after at the
same conference, the same argument being proposed by another, he durst not
stand to the same manner of answering, as I shall here relate. At the closing
up of the former dispute, another learned Catholic entered the room, and being
urged to allege some reasons, why the English Protestant Church could not be
the true Church of Jesus Christ (not hearing what had passed before) he thus
began.

THE CATHOLIC.
The true Church of Christ has always perseuered.

(...) Church ha^h not alwaye^ (...).

Therefore the English Church is not the true Church of Christ.

THE PVRITAN.
I deny the Minor, I say the English Church has always preseuered.

THE CATHOLIC.
I take the time from Gregory to Luther, for the space of 900. years.

If your Church was extant in these ages, either is was visible, or invisible,
but neither can be said.

Therefore it was not then extant.

THE PVRITAN.
I answer it was visible as it appears out of M. Foxes Chronicle, in which
the Acts and monuments of our Church in all those ages are recorded, and
wherein it is clearly demonstrated that some egre^ious Martyrs and confessors
of our Church flourished in every Coun^^ey, who courageously opposed themselves
against the Roman errors, (...) superstitions.

Behold the inconstancy of this fellow who first ^raunted that the Protestant
Church was sometime invisible, and scant having breathed since he defended it
to have been in every age, or Country visible, from S. Gregory to Luther. For
when was is latent? When invisible? If in none of those ages? Before S. Gregory
you all confess it was conspicuous (although most falsely in the Fathers of the
Primitive Church.) Since Luther we will not deny, but some Lutheran sect has
been always visible. Where then is the latency? Where the inuisibility? To
which you fledd before, and found such relief as you had a Lord your Herald
to blazon it abroad with praise, notwithstanding this second evasion was thus
very pithily refelled by the forenamed dispute.

THE CATHOLIC.
No known and apparent Heretics can constitute the Church of Christ.

But all these your Martyrs, and Confessors which Fox names were known and
apparent Heretics.

Therefore they could not constitute the Church of Christ (such a^ you suppose
your Protestant Church to be.)

THE PVRITAN.
I deny the Minor, they were not known heretics.

THE CATHOLIC.
I prove the Minor.

Fox names the Waldensis, Albigenses, Lollardes VVicklifists and such others.

But all these were known and apparent Heretics.

Therefore all those whom Fox names, are known and apparent Heretics.

THE PVRITAN.
I deny the Minor.

The Waldensis, Albigenses etc. were true and faithful Catholics.

THE CATHOLIC.
The Waldensis and Albigenses etc. held many articles of Faith which you
condemn as heresies and many other damnable doctrines against both you and us,
which both our Churches justly burn with the note of heresy, as all
Historiographers testisy who lived about the same time and relate their
particular errors.

Therefore the Waldensis, Albigenses etc. were known and apparent Heretics.

THE PVRITAN.
Peruse the Acts and Monuments of M. Fox, and you shall see our holy Martyrs
evidently freed from these slanders of Papists.

THE CATHOLIC.
If Fox therefore either says nothing in way of purgation, or produces not
witnesses worthy of credit, for that which he does say, it is manifestly
proved, you had no Church for those 900. years.

THE LORD DE LA WARE.
Let us therefore see Foxes Chronicle.

The Conclusion of the Conference.
6. Foxes Chronicle of Acts, and Monuments being brought, after much tossing
and turning, could be found not any one Author of credit, but Foxes bare
denial to disprove all those writers who registered in express terms the
infamous heresies of those forenamed sectaryes. Yet least Foxes assertion take
place with some partial companion before so many faithful witness^^, no way
interessed in our quarrel, I shall bring in hereafter the verdict of
Protestants themselves, who attach the Albigenses, Waldensis VVicklifistes
etc. of the same heresies of which our Catholics endite them.

7. In the mean while, consider I pray what cause the Baron had to vaunt of
his soldiers triumph, who in both these encounters ran out of the field so
shamefully overthrown, as many who were present can witness, and pity withal
the beggary of Protestants, who are faigne to gather the miserable rags,
either of some invisible spirits or open Heretics to patch up the coat of
their misshapen Church.

CHAP. IIII. In which it is argued, that the true visible and apparently known
Church can never fail.
WHEN I note the admirable consent, and perfect harmony which the Prophets and
Apostles, the old and new law, uniformly make, in establishing the perpetual
and never ceasing reign of Christ's visible Church, I cannot but wonder at the
former blasphemous speeches of these, and many other, not wholly unlearned
Protestants. For in the old Testament it is called an everlasting kingdom: A
kingdom that shall not be dissipated f^^ ever. Daniel. 7. Dan. 2. Luc. 1.
Micheas 4.
In the new: of his kingdom there is no end. In the old: Our Lord shall reign
over them in the Mountain of Sion, from hence forth now and for ever (where he
speaks of the visible mountain of the Church, because, to it (he says) all
people shall flock. In the new: he shall reign in the house of Jacob Luc. 1.
for ever. In the old the Prophet testifyeth: God founded his City for ever.
Upon which place S. Augustine writes: Perchance Psalm. 47.
the City which replenished the world shall be over thrown? God forbid, he
founded it for ever. In the new: Upon this rock will I build my Church, and
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Where the pronowne
demonstratiue Matt. 16. v. 18.
(this) and the gates of hell striving, and not preuayling against the Church,
argue a sensible foundation, and visible Church. S. Chrysostom comparing this
promise Chrysostom. in hom. quod Christus fit Deus.
of Christ made to Peter for the continual building, and perseverance of his
Church, with that prophesy of his touching the destruction of the Jews temple,
there shall not be left a stone upon a stone, after a long and eloquent
discourse, he has these words: Do tho^ see how whatsoever he has built,
no man shall destroy, and whatsoever he has destroyed, no man shall build: He
builded the Church and no man shallbe able to destroy it: He destroyed the
temple, and no man is able to build it, and that in so long a time, for they
have endeanoured, both to destroy that, and could not, and they have attempted
to build up this, neither could they a^chieue it. In the old: I will make a
league of peace to them, an everlasting covenant, shallbe to them: Ezech. 37.
v. 26.
and I will found them, and will multiply them, and will give my sanctification
in the midst of them for ever. And to signify that he means a visible
covenant, establishment, or multiplication, Ibid. v. 28.
it follows, and Gentills shall know that I am the Lord, the sanctifyer of
Israel. In the new: Behold I am with you all days, even to the consummation
of the world with you, preaching, Matt. 28. v. vltim.
christening, and ministering Sacraments, therefore the Church shall never cease,
exercising these visible acts until the end of the world. Yet because some
sectaryes restrain that passage to the Apostles; hearken what S. Aug. in psalm.
47.
Augustine writes directly against them: Neither did he say this to the
Apostles only, who were not to persevere to the c^^um^ation of the world, but
to them he spoke, and us he signified: Because, as he avouches in another
place: To all Christians these words appertayned, who were to come and
continue to the end August. sermon. 45. de verbis ^emini.
of the world. They appertain as he affirms to al, because by the teachers,
and baptizers all the shepherds, by the instructed and baptized, all the
people or sheep of the fold are denoted, who could not be taught, instructed,
nor baptized, if they were not visibly known one to the other.

2. Finally in the old testament, I have sworn to David, Psalm. 88. v. 4. Matt.
13. v. 30.
his seed shall remain for ever. In the new testament, The good seed sowed in
the field is said to grow until the harvest. But by whom is it sowed, how
does it increase? By visible pastors, and preachers of the word: amongst whom?
Amongst the faithful: how long? Until the harvest, until the consumation of
the world: Where? In the Field of our Lord. And what is this field, in which
the cockle grows with the wheat, the reprobate with the elect? ^ut the
visible Church of Christ. In which visible pastors shall plant, water, and sow
the seed of heavenly, doctrine, and visible flock shall increase, and fructify
by in ward faith, and outward profession, outward obedience, outward
subordination and comunication of sacraments, until the end of all things:
notwithstanding if any here expound with the Donatistes, the Field for the
world, and not for the Church, I answer him, with S. Augustine; The world is
named, and put for the Church, because the Aug. post collat. c. 6. and cap. 8.
church is foreshewed, that it shall be dispersed throughout the world, which he
proves by these evident textes of holy scripture: God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself: who truly (quoth he) reconciled not any but
his Church unto him. And then: The son of man came not to judge the world,
but 2. Cor 5. v. 19. Joan. 3. v. 17.
that the world might be saved by him, howbeir he saved none but the faithful
of his Church. Therefore by the world his Church is understood.

3. I hope you will not cavil again, That although the seed be visibly sowed
in all the world, yet it shall not visibly so continue. If you do, the voice of
our Savior cries against you, That it shall grow unto the harvest, which
cannot be without the visible ministry of pastors, and submission of people
without the visible preaching, and converting of natious. Likewise S. Augustine
beats back this objection made by the Donatistes, both by this very place of
S. Matthew, and by that of S. Paul to the Collossians, The truth of the
gospel is in the whole world, and fructifyeth and grows, even as in you,
alleging Coloss. 1. v. 5. and ^.
these passages especially the former, disputes thus: What new doctrine do
you preach unto us? What is the good seed Aug. de unit. Eccl. c. 17.
to be sowed again, whereas since it was first sowed it increases until the
harvest: if you say it has perished in those places wherein it was first
sowed, by the Apostles, and therefore ought to be sowed again out of Affrike
(out of Germany by Luther, out of The like he has de vnitat. Eccles. cap. 15.
France by Calvin) read us this out of Gods divine oracles, which truly you
cannot read, unless you first convince that to be false, which is written, the
seed there sown, increases, and fructifieth even until the harvest. Eusebius
Caesariensis, Cyrillus Alexandrinus, S. Ambrose and S. Jerome confirm the same
in most plain terms, but none better then my forenamed S. Augustine, De unit.
Eccl. c. 25. Eusebius. Caesar. de Demon. Euan. l. 4. c. 9. Cyril. Alex. l. 5. in
Isa. c. 54. Amb. l. 4. Hexa^. c. 2. Ierom. in c. 4. Isa. Aug. in psalm. 101.
conc. 2. Aug. ibid. Augu. in eundem psa^m.
who in another place exclayming against the former cauillation of our
Reformers, prosecuteth it thus: The Church which was of all nations now is not,
it has perished: this they say who are not in it. O impudent speech! she is
not because thou art not in her. Beware therefore least thou art not: For she
shall be although thou be not. This abominable and detestable speech, full of
presumption, and falsity, under propped with no truth, enlightened with no
wisdom, seasoned with no salt, vain, temerarious, rash, pernicious, the
spirit of God foresaw; and disproueth according to him by many testimo^ies of
scripture, by which he witnesses the continuance of the Church in the
universal world, until the consummation of all things, whereupon he
concludes: What is this thou say, the Church to have perished out of all
nations, when as to this end the gospel is preached, that it may be in all
nations? Therefore even to the end of the world the Church is in all nations,
and this is the shortness of her days. Which he avouches not of the invisible,
but of that visible Church in which Emperors promulgate laws against
heretics, o^ that Augu. de unit. Eccl. c. 25. non aliqua terrarum part, sed
vbique notissima est.
church which assembleth people into one, of that which draws kingdoms to
serve our Lord; of that which preaches the gospel in the whole world in
testimony of al nations; of that which not in any part of the earth, but every
where is most known; of that which is so huge a mountain as it spre^eth it self
over all the earth, and they are blind who do not see so great a mountain: who
shut their eyes against a candle placed upon a ca^dlestik; Of that whereof he
writes: how will thou believe Christ whom August. tom. 9. in ep. Joan. Tract.
1. 2. item epist. 166.
thou see not, if thou believe not the Church which thou see?

4. But let this savage fiction take place, that the visible society of Gods
children has perished; the kingdom of Christ has been overthrown (as
Calvin doteth) religion abolished, the Church destroyed, and all hope of
salvation utterly extinguished. Let it be, that all the fountains of Gods word
Calu. in resp. ad Sadol.
have been stopped, the divine light wholly put out, in so much, as no spark
there of has remained. From whence then I pray did ^^otestantes receive the
light of their gospel? By whom The Apology of the Church of England f. 4. 5.
6.
Were they instructed in faith, fed with the milk, nourished with the food of
celestial doctrine: by scriptures? But faith is by hearing, neither do the
Scriptures expound themselves, or express the meaning of their hidden
misteryes, but every where sendes us to our pastors, and teachers, to hear
from their mouths, and suck from their lips the streams of life, yea
Calvin himself says: Because says is by hearing, there will be no says unless
there be some Call. in 1. ad. Tim. 3. v. 15.
that preach. Who preached then to Luther? Who to Zuinglius? Or to any other
Protestant, when he first began? How crept they into the world? Children
without parents? Scholars without Masters? With this argument S. Augustine
triu^phed against the Donatists: If the Church was not etc. From whence is
Donatus (or Luther) come unto us? Out of what soil is he sprung? Out of what
sea has he peept? From what Augu. l. 3. de Bapt. cont. Don. c. 2. Lib. 3. c.
2. cont. epist. Parm.
heaven is he fallen? Again: Why do you labor in vain? Why do you boast
that you have a Church, if the Church in former times has perished? Let them
tell me by whom Maiorinus, or Donatus (Luther or Calvin) were begotten, that
by them Parmenian, and Priminianus (Lutherans and Caluinists) might be borne
etc. But if not finding h^^ they might have their being of them selves, let
them cease to brag that the Church has remained with them, which they
affirm to have wholly perished in former days.

5. Lastly they that admit a defection of the Church do not only despoyle
themselves of the benefit of sanctification, and fruit of new birth, but rob
Christ of his glory (as S. Augustine affirms) bereave him of his inheritance,
August. De vnitat. Eccle. c. 12. and 13. de ciuit. Dei l. 20. c. 8. and in
Psalm. 85. 60. 70. Hier. dial. aduer. Lucifer.
cast him out of his possession, defeat him of the whole price, ransom, and
purchase of his precious blood and passion. And S. Hierome says, that impious
speech of the Churches failing does euacuate the cross of Christ, and makes
the Son of God subject to the Devil, it plucketh him as it were from the
right hand of his Father, and casts him down from his thrown of bliss, for
as long as he is exalted above the heavens, so long the glory of his Church is
over all the earth, according to the fornamed S. Augustine his most learned
discourse.

6. But what is that which dusketh the eyes of our Aug. in psalm. 56.
Reformers from discerning this perpetual luster and ever flourishing state of
Gods eternal City? It is the thick and misty Web of some perverted places of
Scripture, which they detorte to their own perdition, as that the visible
Church was wholly hidden in the days of Elias, when he lamented the slaughter
of the Prophets in the persecution of Iesabell, and said: I am left alone, and
although God answered: I will leave in Israel seven thousand men, whose knees
have not been bowed before Baall: Yet they were all secret 3. Reg. c. 19 v.
14. and 18.
and unknown to Elias. Therefore the Church may be sometimes hidden.

7. I answer the faithful of Israel, that is of the kingdom of the ten
tribes, subject to the King of Samaria, The objection of the latency of the
church in the time of Elias answered.
of whom Elias spoke (as appears by the reply of God expressly adding in
Israel) were then unknown to him, yet those of Jerusalem and of all the
kingdom of Judah, where the law of God at the same time was openly professed,
were manifestly conspicuous, both to him and all the world, for there the
servants of God abounded in such plenty, as besides the Priests, and other
people, the v^^y Souldi^rs were numbered above ten hundred thousand. Yet 2.
Paral. 17. v 14. Although the Synagogue had failed yet the same reason holds
not of the Church. Luc. 18. v. 8.
grant that he spoke of all the people of the Jews, grant their Sinagogue had
wholly failed, the like with no c^^^urable reason could be inferred of the
Church of Christ because that was a particular, this a universal Church, that
limited to one people, out of which Melchisedech, Job, and many just were
found: This comprehends all nations, out of which none can be saved; That
erected for a time; this established for ever; That to be abrogated and
disanulled; This warranted by the mouth of God, and infallible promises of
Christ never to be altered, never destroyed. Again, They are blinded with
these words August. De unit. Eccle. c. 13. Hier. dial. aduer. Lucifer. Theoph
in eum locu^. Aug. vbi supra. Dan. 9. v. 26. and 27. Augu. ep. 8. ad Esich.
Chrysostom. in c. 24. Matthew. Clem. Alexan. lib. 11 Strom. Tertul. l. con. Iudeos c.
15. 2 Thessalonians. 2. August. de ciuit. Dei l. 20. c. 29. Tert. l. de resurrect.
carnis.
of S. Luke: The son of man coming shall he find trow you faith upon earth?
Which S. Augustine against the Donatists, and S. Hierome against the
Luciferians by urging this place truly interpret, not of want of faith
absolutely, but of want of most rare and perfect faith: Which although it
should not be extinguished, yet it will be found in few, and those most eminent
persons. For the Infidells according to Theophilact in the time of Antichrist
will grow so many and Christians wax so few, as they shall scant appear in
respect of them, yet never want the pro^ection of God, nor the visible
preaching and profession of his word. Besides S. Augustine affirms, that our
Savior uttered those words, as it were doubtfully, by way of interrogation,
not resolutly by way of assertion. The adversaries sight is not yet cleared,
but that which Daniel prophesied of the euersion of Jerusalem, and cessation
of the sacrifice of the Jews, as S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom, Clemens
Alexandrinus, and Tertullian expound, he perniciously wresteth to the ruin and
desolation of the Church of God. That which S. Paul writes of the revolt from
the Roman Empire, as pleases S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, Tertullian, and S.
Hierome, or of Antichrist himself, who is termed a defection, a revolt by the
figure Metonomia, because he will be the Author of the revolt of many, as S.
John Chrysostom, Theodoret, and Oecumenus think, he wrongfully misconstrueth
of the fall, and Apostasy of the Roman Church. That which the Prophets, and
Apostles figuratively pronounce reproving all instead of some, as S. Augustine
very singularly Augu. de unit. Eccl. ^. 13.
declares, he absolutely draws to the condemnation of all. As: you have all
forsaken me says our Lord. Moreover the flight of the woman into the desert,
mentioned by S. John, which troubles them sore, does not signify the latency
Apoc. 12. v. 6.
of the Church, but is properly meant of the great persecution or desolation
she shall suffer in the time of Antichrist, which shall endure for a time, and
times, and half a time, that is, Verse. 14.
for three years and half, yet it may be also understood of persecutions and
grievous tempests which Nero, and other Dan. 7. v. 25.
Emperors raised against the Church, even from her infancy; or mystically of
the spiritual retirement which the spouse of Christ always makes in the wild
desert of this world, from the vain pleasures and solaces thereof.

8. Lastly the complaint which Whitaker urges out of S. Hilary, Mountains
and lakes, prisons and dungeons are more secure then Churches, is particulerly
uttered Hilar. l. cont. Auxent.
of the Church of Milan, where Auxentius the Arian (though reputed by many for
a Catholic) usurped the Episcopal chair and preached in the public Temples.
In regard of which mischief, S. Hilary had reason to account it far better to
repair to dens and woods, then to be present at such heretical and infectuous
Sermons. Therefore notwithstanding these particular storms and pressures,
notwithstanding many other vices reprehended by S. Bernard in the flock and
Clergy, yet the Church always (to use S. Augustines phrase) in suis
firmissimis eminet, August. epist. 48. paul^ post medium.
shines in her steadfast and immovable foundations, her Sun was never set,
nor Moon went down, but spread her beams through those cloudy vapors to all
parts of the world.

CHAP. V. Wherein is maintained, that the true Church cannot err: against D.
Reynoldes, D. Fulke, and D. Whitaker.
MANY sober, and well minded Protestants (as I have found by experience) can
hardly be persuaded, that any of their Ministers should dote so much as to
acknowledge the true Church to be subject unto error. And yet M. John
Reynoldes, once their chiefest Oxonian professor, and M. Whitaker their Prime
(as they account Reynoldes in his six conclusio^s annexed to his confer,
conclu. 2.
him) Cantabrigian light, both attended with huge troops of followers, teach
and diuulge that heathnisse and most barbarous fiction. For Reynoldes fronteth
his second conclusion thus: The Militant Church may err, both in manners and
doctrine, then explicating this inscription, I undertake (says he) to show it
may err in doctrine against the Papists, who for a defense and shield of their
errors hold forth this bugge to fright us out of our wits. The Church cannot
err. After he opens him self further, and avouches, that not only the
flock and people, but the guiders and Pastors also etc. yea the Bishops, and
Prelates, representing the whole in a general Council may err. At length
bringing either false, or weak instances, he sounds for an vpshot this
retreat: Wherefore to make an end, since it is apparent by most clear
proofs, that both the chosen, and the called, both the flocks, and the
Pastors, both in several Fulk in his answer to a counterfeit Catholic p. 89.
by themselves, and assembled together in general Counsels, may err, I am
to conclude with the good liking (I hope of such as love the ttuth) that the
militant Church may err in manners and doctrine. Fulke: The whole Church
militant consisting of men, who are liars may err altogether, as every part
thereof. Whitaker in like manner affirms: that the whole Church
representative, all Pastors D. Whit. contro. 2. q. 4. c. 3. f. 282. 283. and
284. Ibid. fol. 274. 271.
and general Counsels also may err. And some leaves before: That whole
company which is the Chucrh may err, in so much as if all that are in the world
were assembled together in one place, yet the reason would hold. I have
faithfully alleged their words, which if any go about to construe in a
favorable sense, that their meaning is, the whole Church may err in rites,
observations, or other matters of small moment, but not in points of faith
necessary to salvation, Reynoldes and Whitaker both plainly infring that
feigned construction: Reynoldes in auouching, it may err in manner and
doctrine, and Whitaker Ecclesia adtempus etiam in fundametis quibusdam errare
potest.
expressly saying, The Church for a time may also err, in certain foundations,
or fundamental points. Again; Every visible and particular Church may err,
and be over whelmed with errors and fail, but those errors which destroy,
dec^aue, and ruin the Church, be damnable and cannot stand with salvation,
therefore into such errors in his opinion the Church may fall. Moreover the
very Whitaker. contro. 2. q. 5. c. 17. fol. 490.
arguments they all bring, infer the same. For Whitaker argues thus: All
Churches have embraced Ariamsme, therefore all have erred. Likewise: The
universal Church is compounded of particulers, and that which appertains to
every member, must needs Whitaker. contr. 2. q. 4. c. 3. fol. 282.
also appertain to the whole. Therefore whereas all particular Churches may,
it follows of invincible necessity, that the universal Church may err. Fulke
insinuates one; but Reynoldes uses both these arguments, and instanceth in
the Churches of Galatia, of Corinth, of Pergamus, of Thyatira, of Sardis and of
Reynoldes in his second conclusion annexed to his confer. fol. 628. and 629.
Ephesus that they all have erred. The Church of Ephesus (says he) was shaken
first and crazed, afterward quite overthrown: But these Churches did, and all
particular severally taken may err in points fundamental necessary to
salvation. Therefore if that which befalls the particulers, may befall to the
whole, the whole according to their reasoning may ^rre in points fundamental
necessary to salvation. Such was Arianisme, of which Whitaker notwithstanding
at^acheth all Churches. The falsehood of this assertion, the vanity of their
former sophisme, I shall discover in the end of this Controversy. Now I prove
that the true militant Church upon earth cannot generally embrace, or
publicly define any error whatsoever, neither great not little, neither
repugnant, nor compatible with the rule of salvation.

1. The first Argument I produce in proof heerof, is The first argument for
the Churches infallibility.
gethered from the assistance of Christ, and direction of the holy ghost who so
sweetly move, guide, and inspire the hearts of the faithful, as they cannot
be entangled, or seduced with error. Our Savior promised his assistance
saying: Behold, I am with you all days, even to the consumation of the world.
With you baptizing, and teaching Nations to observe Matt. 28. v. 20. Ibidem.
Joan. 14. v. 16. and 17. Joan. 16. v. 13.
all things whatsoever I have commanded. He promised the concurrence, and
direction of the holy ghost: I will ask the Father, and he wilt give you
another paraclet, that he may abide with you for ever, the spirit of truth.
And, when he the spirit of truth comes, he shall teach you all truth. If all
truth, and that for ever, then no error at any tyne, in any article of never
so small account. Secondly, S. Paul witnesses: God gave some Apostles, and
some prophets and other some Evangelists, and other some pastors, and Ephesians.
4. v. 11. 12. 13. 14.
Doctors etc. Behold here four things. 1. Whom he appointed? Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Doctors. 2. To what function, did he enjoin
them? To the consumation of Saints, to the work of the ministry, to the
edifying of the body of Christ. 3. how long was it to continue? Until we meet
all into the unity of faith, and knowledge of the son of Other proofs that
the true Church cannot err.
God etc. To what end was this? That now we be not children wavering, and
carried about with every wind of doctrine in the wickedness of men, in
crastines, to the circumuention of error. If this be the end, and drift of
God, that we henceforth, according to your own translation, be not children
wavering and carried about with every wind of doctrine, how is God frustrated of
his intent and purpose? our pastors spoiled of their grant and priuiledg we of
our assurance, and constancy in faith? If they may circumue^t, or inueagle as
with enour? Hence we receive that warrant from Christ, he that hears you,
hears me, and h^ Luc. 10. v. 16.
that despises you despises me, but it were not all one to hear christ and
hear his priests, to despise their doctrine, and despise his, unless they were
infallibly inspired by God, to deliver in all things the same undoubted truth,
which he did. Some reply that this saying, and one, or two of the former was
Cypr. l. 4. Epist. Basil. constit. monast. c. 23.
spoken only to the Apostles. But S. Cyprian, S. Basil, apply it to their
successors; With whom Fulke the Protestants chief captain agrees saying:
It is all one to despise the minister of Christ's catholic Church, and to
despise Christ. So S. Augustine expounds the former of S. Matthew, Fulk upon
this place sect. 2. Aug. in psalm. 101. conc. 2. Hiero. l. 4. in Matthew.
and S. Jerome, he who promises that he will be with his disciples, until the
consumation of the world, both shows that they shall always live, as also
that he will never depart from the faithful. Which the very words both here
and elsewhere importe, all days; until the consumation of the world; until we
all meet* etc. for ever. And the ends also of granting this authority require
the same, which were the propagation of the truth, the edification of the body
of Christ, the confirmation of the faithful, and the conservation of the unity
of faith; these are at all times, and perpetually needful. Therefore the
perpetual asistance of the holy Ghost is always necessary thereunto.

2. Likewise the Prophet Osee in the person of God said unto the Church, I will
despouse thee to me for ever etc. and Osee 2. v. 19. 20.
will despouse thee to me in faith. Therefore this pure and imaculate spouse,
is everlastingly wedded to Christ in syncerit^ of faith, she can never be
stained with adulterous error, never separated by schism, or heresy, never be
divorced by any apostasy from her honorable bridegroom. The same was also
foretold by the Prophet Isay: Isa. 59. v. 21.
My spirit that is in thee, and my words that I have put in thy mouth, shall
not depart out of thy mouth, and out of the mouth of thy seed, and out of the
mouth of thy seeds seed, says our Lord, from this present, and for ever. Now
what spirit was there in the Prophet Isay, but the spirit of God; What words
in his mouth, but the words of truth? Therefore the spirit of God and words
of truth shall not depart, he does not say from the hearts only, but not from
the mouths of the Churches generation, from that present, and for ever: can
any thing be written more effectually? So effectual it seems to diverse
sectaries, as the public Glosers upon the English Protestant translation
confess the truth thereof Call. in c. 59. Isaiae in hunc verse.
in their marginall notes upon that place. And Calvin in his commentaries
explaning the same text: God promises (quoth he) that his Church shall never
be spoiled of this inestimabl^ good, but that it shall be governed by the holy
ghost, and underpropped with heavenly doctrine etc. and soon after: Such is
the promise that our Lord will so assist his Church, and will have that
protection and care of it, as he will never permit it to be deprived of his
doctrine. For if it once could be deprived of truth, and fall into any error,
this oracle were frustrated. If it could fall into error, the gates of hell,
which our Savior denies Matt. 16. v. 18. 2. Tim. 3. v. 15. 1. Joan. 17. v.
17. 2. Cor. 11. v. 2. Matt. 18. v. 17.
should prevail against it: if it could err, it were not, as S. Paul
witnesses, the pillar and firmament of truth. If it could err, in vain did
Christ pray to sanctify it in verity: If it could err, it were not that
unspotted virgin, of which the Apostle writes: I have espoused you to one man,
to exhibit you a chaste virgin unto Christ. Lastly if it could err, the Son of
God could not command every one to submit himself to the doctrine of his
Church, with that heavy commination: If he will not hear the Church, let him
be to thee as the Heathen, and Publican; that is, let him be like the
excommunicated or unbelieving miscreant, who is cast of from Christ, and
utterly abandoned to everlasting misery. But God could not threaten us under
this curse of damnation, to hear and obey his Church, if his Church could
beguile us with error. For the^ God should be the cause of that error; then
we might be beguiled by following his Commandment, which is impossible.
Therefore the Church cannot teach or deliver any error unto us, as a Priest
imprisoned at Dauentry urged M. Barbon the Minister at an appointed disputation
held of that matter, before many of the town, and other Gentelmen of the A
conference held at Dauentry in Northampthonshire between a Priest there
impisoned and M. Barbon a Minister.
Country, which Argument, the Minister first laboure^ to elude, by answering,
that the Church indeed could no^ err, as long as it heard, and followed the
voice of God but if it swarued from his word, it might precipitate i^ self into
error: whereunto it was then replied by the Priest: My argument (said he)
proves it cannot possibl^ swerve from the word of God. For to swerve from the
word of God is to err. I prove it cannot err, Therefore I prove it cannot
swerve from the word of God. Again to affirm that the Church erreth not as
long as it agrees with the word of God, is to grant her no priu^^edge above
any heretical or heathenish conuenticle. For no Heretic, Infidel, Jew, or
Turk, no nor the devil himself can err as long as he speaks conformable
to Gods word.

3. The Minister devised another slight and distinguished A fond distinction
which Protestants make of curable and incurableerrors.
two kind of errors, one curable, another incurable, one to probation, another
to damnation, and so answered, that the Church might fall herself, and lead her
children into curable errors, out of which they may afterward escape, not into
incurable or damnable, from which they shall never be delivered. But the Priest
resuming his former probation insisted again, that it could lead her children
into no error at all, because,

Whosoever hears the Church, follows the commandment of God.

But no error curable or incurable can we incur by following the
commandment of God.

Therefore no error curable or incurable can we incur by hearing the Church.

The Minor only questionable, was proved thus:

No offense to God can we incur by following Gods commandment.

But every error curable or incurable is an Material or formal.
offense of God.

Therefore no error curable or incurable can we incur by following Gods
commandment.

4. Here M. Barbon sweating and chafing, yet not knowing what to deny,
peruersly denied the argu^^^^ M. (...) breaks off the dispute cauilling at
the sillogisticall form, and yet could not discover any fault neither in
matter nor form. The former idle distinction of Protestants further refelled.
Whitaker. contro. 2. q. 5. c. 17. fol. 490. Ecclesia adtempus etiam in
fundame^tis quibusdam errare potest, and tu^ salua esse. Whitaker contradicts
himself in manifest terms. Si fundamentale aliquoddogma tollatur Ecclesia
statim corruit.
self, and carped at the Sillogisme, as if it had four ^^mes, the last and
only collusion which he, and his sect^^es, are wont to use to bleare the eyes
of the unlearned ^^en otherwise they are so pressed, as they know not that to
say, or whither to turn. I appeal to the whole ^^ditory, whether this was not
the sum of his reply, ^^d whether he did not hereupon abruptly end, and
cease ^ proceed any further, with much disgust of the standers ^ and small
satisfaction to his own fellow Ministers, ^ho came to assist him. Howbeit
seeing both Whitaker ^ Reynolds, distinguish in the same manner, as Barbon
has ^^one, and often affirm that the Church may slide in to ^^rours of
probation, not of damnation, curable, not in^^rable, I will a little further
lay open the falsity of that ^istinction. And first I would have the^ tell me
what these ^urable errors be? Gross and fundamental, such as cannot stand
with the principles of faith; or slight and indifferent, such as do not
prejudice the integrity thereof? ^^ such? We need not for the attayning of
salvation be cured of them, we may without loss of Gods favor here, or
hereafter persevere unto death incurably in them. In which case your new
Gospel was needles, your outcryes slanderous, your breach detestable in
making so execrable a schism, and division from us, for slender matters not
necessary to salvation. Gross then and fundamental they be, of which we shall be
certainly healed before we dye, therefore M. Whitaker affirms: the Church
may for a time err in some foundations, and yet be safe or sound. A crabbed
saying; for faith must be entiere, or else it is no faith, therefore if the
belief of the Church be failing in any one foundation, it is no way sound, but
wholly erres in faith, as M. Whitaker not many lines before directly avouches:
If any fundamental point of doctrine be removed, the Church presently falls.
A true speech, howbeit most contrary and repugnant to the former. And yet it is
impossible for the Church ever to be ruined, impossibly to perish or depart
from God at any time or moment, as has been disputed in the former Chapter.
Therefore impossible ^^ her to be ensnared in any substantial or fundamental
e^rour.

5. Besides, if curable errors be fundamental, wh^ be incurable? What greater
then fundamental? Or h^^ can any be counted incurable, when there is none ^
damnable, which may not be cured by the salve of grace When we daily see that
Arianisme, Iudaisme, Turcis^^ Apostasy, Infidelity etc. often cured with help
from ^boue? No error there is which may not be cured by grace.
Are they incurable out of which the Church ca^ never be recovered? But of this
never Heretic as y^^ made question. The Donatists who contended that the
whole Church crred and perished before their days, sai^ it revived again, and
took life in them; and so do all heretics or sectaryes whosoever, challenge a
recovery of the decayed Church. But what do I strive against mere fancyes? All
the arguments I have here proposed manifestly conclud that the true Church of
Christ is never obnoxious to any error at all, little or great, curable or
incurable, necessary or not necessary to salvation. For she teaches Why the
Church can fall into no error curable or incurable.
all truth, the spirit and words of God are always in her mouth. She is a
pure virgin, and cannot be stained with any spot of unchaste doctrine, she is
always directed by the holy Ghost, we are commanded by God always to give
care unto her. But as we can be led into no offense, small, nor grievous,
material nor formal, culpable nor inculpable, into nothing dissonant or
repugnant unto truth, by embracing the direction, or following Protestants are
e^trapped in their own affertions holding the true Church may err, and yet
themselus certain of truth.
the commandment of truth it self: so we can tumble into no error little or
great, curable or incurrable, by following the direction or safe conduct of the
Church. And truly I wonder at this witch craft of Satan, how he should
persuade our miserable sectaryes, that they alone have the purity of the
Gospel, the certainty of the spirit, the true reformed Church, and yet to
teach them withal that the true Church may err. For how can they be sure
themselves do not err in their faith, and in appeaching us of so many
superstitions, if their Church may err? How can their followers be sure they
are taught ^ truth, if their teachers themselves confess they may ^* O drunken
heresy, O malicious blindness! art thou ^ereft of the light of reason and
drowned in the pit of ^lful darkness as to produce no better witnesses for the ^
of ours and rising of thy Church, then such as may ^e, such as may lie and
beguile the people! S. Augustine Aug. in psalm. 63. v. 7.
^ braydeth the Jews for laboring to disprove our Sa^ours resurrection with
sleeping watchmen. And shall ^t I revile our Lutheran, or Caluinian strumpet,
for in^ing us of sundry falshoodes by the verdict of errable ^inisters,
deceauable Reformers? Who grant they may ^ blinded with curable errors? Of
such errors we ac^se them in all points wherein they disagree from us, and ^e
prove them guilty by the word of God, doom of an^^quity, and universal Senate
of all the faithful, who ^^nnot err. Let them by the like Jury acquit
themselves ^^fense their doctrine with the like authority, or else in ^^ine do
they brag of verity, or exclaim against our ^^perstitious abuses. Will they
run to the authority of Scripture? But either they are infallibly assisted by
the holy Ghost never to mistake, or interpret it amiss, and then their Church
can never err, neither curably, nor incurably which they deny; or they may
sometime swerve from the sense and meaning of the holy Ghost, they may fall
into the curable errors of which we attach them, and so are condemned by their
own mouths for insufficient witnesses or accusers of us. To go one. Iren. l.
3. c. 4. and 40. and l. 1. c. 3. Hier. l. 3. adue. Ruf. c. 8. in fine. Cypr.
epist. 55. ad Cornel. Aug. de unit. Eccl. c. 28.


6. As the scripturs before mentioned, so the ancient Fathers abundantly
testify the inerrable rule of the true Churches belief. S. Irenaeus says: The
Apostles have laid up in the church as in a rich treasure, all truth, that he
that will may from thence draw the water of life. Likewise: She keeps with
most sincere diligence the Apostles faith and preaching. In her (says Saint
Hierome) is the rule or square of truth. The Church (says S. Cyprian) never
departs from that, which she once has known. S. Augustine: Behold how
after the same sort he adds of the body, which is the Church, that he may not
permit us to err, neither in the bridegroom, nor in the bride. In another
place he affirms Aug. tom. 2. ep. 166. fol. 290.
that our heavenly Master forewarneth us to avoid schisms, In so much as he
makes the people secure of evil gouernour^ least for them the chayer of
wholesome doctrine should be forsaken, ^ which even the evil are constrained to
deliver true things for they a^^ Fox acts and monuments page 999. 464. 1401.
1436. 1286. The Puritans in their discovery in a sermon preached 1588. by
Bancroft page 34. The Protestants Apology tract. 3. sect. 7. n. 68.
not their own things which they deliver, but Gods, who has plac^^ the
doctrine of verity in the chayer of unity. We want not heerin the suffrages of
Protestants, of Fox himself, and sundry of his Martyrs, of M. Bancroft late
Bishop of Canterbury, the Puritans not forbearing to carpe and reprehend him
for it, and of others mentioned in the Protestant^ Apology for the Roman
Church, which in every Chapter so victoriously triumphs over our Reformers
innovation, by the irrefragable testimonies of Reformers themselves, as M.
Morton astonished with the evidence brought against him, was suddenly beaten
back from his rash attempt, which he never since had the heart to prosecute, or
any other presumes to take pen in hand to answer that excellent, and ever
unanswerable work.

7. The reasons which persuade the infallibility of the Church are sundry, and
they most forcible. For what could move any Infidel, or Atheist to forsake his
errors and come unto the Church if that might also beguile him with error?
what means had we to condemn an Heretic, or disprove his errors, if the
Church might err Diverse reasons which convince the infallibility of the Church.
in disprouing of them? How should we know where to rest, whom to consult in
doubts of faith, if the highest Judges might judge amiss? What assurance have
we of our belief, religion, scripture, sacraments of Christ himself, and all
other articles of faith, if the Church which teaches them might err in
teaching? The same inconveniences, the same confusion would ensue, supposing it
If the Church could err faith it self and all things else were uncertain.
were limited not to err only in fundamental points necessary to salvation.
For then the unconstant and wavering Christian might still cast as many
doubts, whether the things defined where fundamental or not? Whether
necessary, or not necessary to salvation? Then the people might call their
Pastors doctrine, and definition in question, they might examine whether the
ar^^cles delivered be substantial, and such wherein their ^^eachers be freed
from error or no? Then new schisms ^^d contentions would daily break forth,
and all things ^ill remain uncertain.

8. To prosecute a little further one of these reasons. For ^t were too much to
enlarge them all. The tradition or ^estimony of our Church in delivering the
whole canon of scripturs (upon whose authority also most Protestants receive
it) of what account do you make it? If fallible? the An argument unanswerable.
faith you gather from thence, the Religion you ground thereon must likewise be
fallible, uncertain, and no way autenticall. For the truth gleaned from the
scripturs cannot be more sure, then the Scriptures themselves from which it is
gathered. If infallible? You grant what we require. For the promises of God,
the assistance of the holy Ghost, which warranteth the testimony of our Church
to be of inviolable authority in this point, being general and without
restriction, must warrant it also in The same promises of God which assure the
Churches infallibility in one thing, assure it in all.
all other traditions, interpretations, and doctrines whatsoever, and so you
that forsake her sentence and renounce her definitions, renounce the Oracles of
truth, and decrees undeceivable, or else show what exception, what limitation
the holy Ghost has made where he restrained her privilege of infalibility, to
that particular more then to other articles of our belief. This is a Gordian
knot which break you may, vnty you cannot. For suppose you should reply as a
Protestant once answered me, that it appertayned unto the providence of God to
keep safe his holy writ, and challenge it from corruption: I would further
inquire of you, whether God has greater care of the letter or sense, of the
inward kernel or outward rine, of the bone or marrow of his word? Of the
marrow no doubt. Then he preserved that more safe in the hearts of his
faithful, then the other in the rolls of paper: and so, as you take the bark
and outward letter from the tradition of our Church, much more ought you to
borrow from her the true sense and sap, and heavenly juice. Finally, to what
end do Protestants strive so much Protestants according to their own grounds
have neither any faith or religion.
for the Churches erring, but only to deprive themselves thereby of Church,
faith, and religion? For whereas neither religion, nor Church can stand without
supernatural faith, nor supernatural faith be atteyned without infallible
certeinty of the things believed, if their preachers, their, Ministers, their
Church be not undoubtedly fenced from all danger of error, the articles they
believe have not that inerrable warrant which is necessary to faith. Faith
(says S. Bernard) has nothing ambiguous, or doubtful, and if it has any
thing ambiguous it cannot be faith. Whereupon it is defined Heb. 11. v. 1. Aug.
l. 13. de Trinit. c. 10. and tract. 79. in loan. Chrysostom. in bunc locu^ (...).
Basil. in explicat. psalm. 115. Chrysostom. in hunc locu^ Dyonil. c. 7. de divine.
nom.
by the Apostle to be the substance etc. the argument of things not appearing,
that is, a demonstration or conviction by which our understanding is
acerteyned, and conuineed of the truth, or as the greek imports, it is the
basis, ground, or foundation, firm, sure, steadfast, and imoueable, either of
the hoped, and revealed verities, as S. Basil with S. John Chrysostom,
indgeth; or of them that hope and believe fastening them in the truth, and the
truth in them, according to S. Denis and S. Augustine, from whence the common
school of divines gather this principle: that faith cannot be subject to
falsity, no nor to any fear or suspicion thereof. This infallible ground of
assurance Protestants have not, believing only upon the credit of their Church
which may beguile them. Therefore howsoever they brag of their all-sauing
faith, not any faith have they, or Church, or religion at all. August. tract.
7^. in loan. Fidei non potest subesse falsum.


9. Here my adversaries cavil with us, that they have as much faith, as we,
who rely upon the definitions of our Popes, and Prelates: for they are men, and
every man is a liar (as the scripture reports.) I answer our supreme Bishops
are by nature men, by infirmity subject to lies and deceits, yet as they are by
faith Christians, by inward unction heirs of heaven, so they are by Pastoral
authority governors of the church, officers of God, organs of the holy ghost,
by whose perpetual assistance they cannot err, they cannot in their public
decrees, or general assemblyes deliver unto the faithful what is subject to
uncertainty, because that which they speak, Christ speaks in them; that
which they deliver, the spirit of God delivers. 2. Cor. 1^. v. ^* Psalm. 8. ^
Hier. l. ^. comm. in 6. ^. ad Gal. D^os eos esse manifestum est: qui aute^ Dij
sun^ tradunt Dei Euangelium non hominis.
In which respect, S. Jerome doubts not to call S. Peter, S. Paul, and such
as enjoy their priuiledg after the phrase of scripture, by the name of Gods,
and thereupon makes this illation: But they that are Gods, deliver the Gospel
of God, not of man.

10. Yet let us view some other allegations, which these erring, and lying
Ministers bring in, to find the church guilty of error. Marry, Whitaker and
Reynoldes depose, that which befalls to one, may befall to the whole: but
every one in particular may err, therefore the whole may err; which is a most
false deposition, and plain Sophisme, arguing from each divided member of the
Church to the whole body jointly considered, as if a cauiller should say; This
stone it self cannot be sufficient to raise a tower, nor this, nor that,
Whitaker. contr. 2 q. 4. c. 3. fol. 274. Reynoldes in his second conclusion fol.
628. as it is printed together with his conference.
nor any one a part, Therefore a whole, and huge heap together cannot suffice.
It is a mere sophistical kind of reasoning. For we see, that many do raise
that which one, or a few cannot: Many forces of men united are able to draw
that, which no man in particular can move. A whole Army of soldiers
vanquisheth a kingdom, which on one the most valiant captain can annoy. So the
whole Church may preserve the truth unspotted, which no p^rticuler can do.
Chiefly because the whole is guarded by Gods promise, assisted by the holy
Ghost, the shield of her defense, which divided Churches want, but the holy
ghost (says Whitaker and Fulke) is also promised to every one in particular,
Christ prayed to sanctify every one, and confirm him in D. Whit. contro. 2.
q. 4. c. 2. f. 168. Fulk. in c. 16. Joan. sect 5. and in c. 3. 1. Tim. sect. 9.
verity, as he did for the whole; for the laity, as well as for the Clergy, for
the people, as much as for the Priests. It is true he prayed for all, and each
particular, promised the holy ghost to every one, but in a diverse manner
according to every ones several state, and degree; he prayed for the Apostles,
and Bishops their Successors, he assured the^ the holy ghost, as to parents,
masters, and shepherds of his fold, to the laity and every one of the
faithful, as to children, scholars and sheep to be directed by them. They
have the holy ghost (...) their mouths to teach, preach, instruct, an^ How the
spirit of God in ^^^^ised to the whole Church, and how to (...), particular
member. Whitaker. cont. 2. q. ^. c. ap. 3. fol. ^8^. Seueru^ l. 2. Theod. c. 19.
Ream linguam non facis nisi rea men's. Witness S. Athan. epist. ad ^ranc^s.
^^^erne; these in their hearts, to obey, believe, keep unity peace, and
submission. They his public assistance, for the public function, and profit
of the Church; these, his priuar direction, for their own private comfort, and
particular salvation. Therefore as the Pastors, and Governors cannot err in
teaching, defining, or publicly condemning false opinions; so neither any one
of the faithful in believing, obeying, or shunning those whom the Church has
censured. Thus the whole and every part securely, trauayleth toward the coast
of heaven, with the safe conduct of the holy ghost, for the edificatio^,
complement, and full perfection of the mystical body of Christ.

11. Whitaker obiecteth again, that all Churches Arianized, and consequently
erred, when the whole world, a^ S. Jerome reports, groaned, and wondered to
see ^ self an Arian. But S. Jerome by the figure Synecdoche uses the whole
for a great part, who were deceived in the Council of Arimine, partly by the
fraud of Valens the Arian Bishop, partly by imbecility of wit, yet diverse of
them materially only. Wherefore seeing it is ^n Axiom in the law, that the
tongue it not made guilty, but by the guilty mind, they reteyning the true
Catholic faith in their hearts, and formally also in open profession; yielded
not properly to Arianisme, but still preserved the true state of the Church,
which was likewise at the same time inuiolably maynteyned in the West,
especially in those renowned Bishops and their flock, S. Hilary, S. Ambrose* S.
Eusebius of Verselles, in Athanasius, and others of Greece. And that boisterous
tempest continued but three years, for then as S. Hierome relates, the beast
dyed, and there succeeded Hier. dial. aduer. Lucifer.
a calm. From the Church our adversaries fly to the Counsels representing
the Church, and draw bills of enditement to convict them of error, but their
allegations are void, and insufficient. For such Counsels as they mean, were
either unlawful conuenticles, tumutuously assembled, or if lawfully gathered,
not lawfully continued, or not wholly approved, or falsely accused, or they erred
only in some matter of fact, not in any point of doctrine or article of belief.

12. At least (say they) the old Church, and Synagogue of the Jews wholly
erred, when Aaron, and the Two other objections of adversaries answered. Exodus
3^. Mar. 14.
whole multitude adored the golden Calfe, and when Caipha^ the chief Bishop
and whole Council of Priests adiuged Christ to death. I answer, that Aaron
was not then invested with the authority of high Priest, but that office was
imparted long after unto him, as appears out of the last of Exodus. Then the
Leuits never consented to that Idolatry, nor Moses in whom the supreme
Priestly dignity still remained. To the second objection, I answer, The
infalibility of the Sinagogue when christ bad established his Church.
that the Council of the Scribes and Pharisces, was tumultuously gathered, not
to interpret the law, or teach the people, but to pronounce sentence in a
matter of fact against the Son of God; or if they did err in a chief point
of faith, it makes nothing against us; for Christ had then planted his Church,
preached his doctrine. Therefore the infallible assistance of the Holy Ghost was
no longer tied to the Synagogue, Christ being present the head of his Church,
and having sufficiently promulgated his Gospel.

13. Therefore to draw to an end, seeing the true Church never did, or ever can
stray from the truth, as the Scriptures, The Protestants Church cannot be the
true Church of Jesus Christ by their own confession.
Fathers, reasons convince: And seeing Protestants confess that their Church
may err, or go astray for a time, we must needs conclude that their Church is
not the inerrable spouse of Jesus Christ, but the harlot of Satan, the Temple
of Baal, the Stews of an aduoutresse, or if they now recant, and yield unto us
that the true Church cannot step awry in any one generally received point of
belief, it necessarily follows that all their pretended reformations of her
errors, have been innouations of their own heads, their accusations
forgeryes, their separation horrible schism and open rebellion against the
kingdom of Christ. It follows also that the Roman Church universally spread
over the face of the earth, which once was must needs continue the true
Catholic Church free from Apostasy, free from heresy, free from superstition,
or any other false doctrine of which she is accused.

CHAP. VI. Wherein is demonstrated that the Church is the supreme Judge of
Contr^uersyes: against D. Whitaker, D. Fulke, and all Protestants.
THAT the holy Scriptures can neither by themselves, nor by any rules our
Sectaryes assign, determine the strifes, which fall out in matters of
Religion, In the first part, and first Controversy-
has in the first part of this treatise bin proved at large: now that the
Church is the only infallible and suprem Judge which decideth those debates,
our Savior himself fully testifyeth, when he refers all matters
controuerted to her sole and high tribunal, saying: Dic Ecclesiae, Tell the
Matthew. 18. v. 17.
Church, if he will not hear the Church. Where he teaches, after that private
correction and public admonition will not serve, the guilty party is to be
summoned before the Prelates So Saint Chrysostom here takes the Church for her
Prelates.
or chief Pastors of the Church, and without further examination, despute, or
appeal to stand to their sentence, or else to be cast off as an Heathen or
Publican. Whitaker seeks to avoid this place two w^^es, first by Whitaker.
cont. 2. q. 4. c. ap. 2. and 3.
^xpounding it of Ecclesiastical censures, not of doctrine. Secondly, that the
Church is to be heard, but in those things only in which she hears and
obeys Christ. Very frivolous and idle, for in such things even the Jewish
Synagogue, the Turkish Alcaron, and the Devil himself is to be heard as has
been urged before: this were not to end Controuersyes without further appeal,
but to enter a new court of strifes, to commence new examinations, to call the
Church in question, whether she hears, and obeys Christ in the things she
commands or no.

2. Besides, if we ought to obey the Church in her Ecclesiastical censures, of
excommunication, suspension, or the like, much more in her condemnation of
heresies, If the Church cannot err in censuring much less in defining.
or public definitions what we ought to believe. If in sentences of fact,
much more in explications of faith, and determinations of doctrine: if God has
appointed her our supreme judge in chastising, and correcting us with her
spiritual punishments, much more without doubt in curing our souls, and
preserving them from all spots of errors. And therefore our Savior restreyned
not this precept of obeying his Church to any particular matter, but enlarged
it to all, and straight way gives her that universal commission: Amen I say
unto you, whatsoever you shall Matt. 18. v. 18. Ibid. v. 19.
bind upon earth, shallbe bound also in heaven, and whatsoever you shall loose
upon earth, shallbe loosed also in heaven. And, Concerning euerything,
whatsoever they shall ask, it shallbe done to them. Away then with M.
Whitakers restrictions, away with men's abridgementes where the Son of God
imparteth so ample, illimited, and universal a privilege. In like manner he
did not use any limitation, but absolutely said: Luc. 10. v. 16. Matthew. 23. v.
3. Whitaker. contro. 2. q. 4. c. 2. fol. 267. 268.
He that hears you hears me, and all things whatsoever they shall say to
you, observe ye, and do ye. Which two places Whitaker again after his
ridiculous fashion with this caution understands, He that hears you,
teaching true, and prescribing just things, and whatsoever they shall teach
according to the law dee ye. As though the Son of God dallyed with us, and
said the same thing, which was nothing, but hear the truth wheresoever the
truth is spoken: yet S. Augustine by these later words, attributes a great
prerogative to the chayer of Moses, In which verily (says he) he figured his
own, for he Aug. con. litt. Petil. l. 2. c. 61.
warns the people to do that which they say, and not to do that which they
do; and that the holiness of the chayer be in no wise forsaken, no^ the unity of
the flock divided, for the naughty persons. Howbeit if our Sectaryes cautio^
may take place, he figured the chayer of pestilence as much as his own, we
might follow their doings which Christ forbids as well as their sayings, to
wit, whatsoever they do conformable to the Law. Moreover S. Paul after a long
dispute, and many alleged reasons, refers the last resolution of the
matter debated 1. Cor. 11. v. 16.
to the practice of the Church: If any man seem to be contentious, we have no
such custom, nor the Church of God.

3. In the old testament God also appointed, that in case inferior Officers
dissented in their opinions, we should have recourse to the consistory of
Priests, as to the chief and infallible Tribunal: If you see that the words
of Deuteronomy. 17. v. 8. and ^.
the Judges within thy gates do vary, arise and go up to the place which our
Lord thy God shall choose: and thou shall come to the Priests of the Leuiticall
flock etc. and thou shall do whatsoever they that are Presidents of the place,
which our Lord shall choose, shall say, and teach thee according to the Law.
Which later words do not inuolue At one time there was but one chief President
called the high priest diverse successi^ely.
(as Protestants wrangle) any condition, if they shall teach, but an absolute
warrant that, they shall teach according to his Law, else then their judgment
and determination were fruitles, and the matter remained as doubtful as
before: for exceptions might be taken that sentence is not given according to
the law, of which some other must be co^stituted Judge, whose decision is
infallible, or else the same doubt arises of him, and so without end. Then our
adversaries answer again, that this place is understood of civil, and
politic affairs, not of doubts of religion. But if Gods wisdom so
carefully provided for the composing of civil matters, much more for
ecclesiastical where the doubts are more intricate, and contentions more
dangerous. Therefore God said of his Priests by Ezech. 44. v. 24.
Ezechiel: When there shallbe a controversy, they shall stand in my judgments,
and shall judge my laws and my Prece^tes. By Malachy: Mala. 2. v. 7. The
Protestants false translation of such places as make against the^.
The lips of the Priest shall keep knowledge, and the law they shall require
of his mouth, because he is the Angel of the Lord of hosts. A Text so
forcible as Protestants not enduring the pregnancy thereof, for shall keep
knowledge, corruptly read should keep, contrary to all Originalls. In Hebrew it
is ^ismeru, In Greek (...), In Latin custodient, shall keep, fortelling not
what they ought or should but what they shall infallibly do.

4. Likewise, wheresoever there is question of the law of the commandment, of
ceremonies, of Iustifications, show it them. I meciatly Paral. 19. v. 10.
after there is a distinction made between spiritual and civil affairs,
between spiritual and temporal authority. Ananias the Priest and your Bishop
shable chief in these things, Joseph. l. 2. cont. Apion. Philo l. 3. de vita
Moysis. Aelian. var. hist l. 14. c. 34. Strabo Geor. l. 17. Cicero l. 2. de
leg. Eusebius. in Chron. Casar. de bello Galli. l. 6. Joseph. antiq. lib. 14 c.
16. To the Church belong all the conditions necessary in a Judge.
which perteine to God. Moreover Zabadias the son of Ismael, who is the
Prince of the house of Judah, shall be over those works, which apperteine to the
kings office. And Josephus witnesses; That the Priests were appointed by
Moses, to be overseers of all things, judges of controversies, and punishers
of the condemned persons: whereby it is evident, that it belonged to them, not
only to decide Civil (of which Philo also makes mention) but much more
Ecclesiastical matters touching the law, the commandment, and
iustifications: neither was this only ordained by God, amongst his chosen
people, (the Jews) but by ingrafted persuasion of nature, agreed upon amongst
all nations. For Aelianus writes that amongst the Aegiptians, their priests
were Judges, and determiners of all debates, and that the most ancient of them
had the chiefest voice. Strabo testifies the like of the Aethiopians, Cicero
of the Romans, of the Persians Eusebius, Caesar of the Frenchmen, that their
Priests called Druidae had the same authority; Josephus of the Athenians,
affirming that their Priests were Judges, and the chiefest among them gathered
the suffrages of the rest.

5. Moreover all conditions necessarily required in a suprem Judge confirm
unto the Church her sovereignty of judgment, for the Judge must be able to
hear, understand, examine the matters in strife, give a clear, and resolute
sentence, whereby he acquit the innocent, and condemn the guilty; these
propertyes appertain to the Prelates of the Church. They (and not the
Scriptures nor the private spirit) have ears to hear, skill to know, She can
hear, examine and determine debates.
means to examine, a lively and intelligent voice to pronounce such a sentence
of approbation, or condemnation, as all may discern on whose side it is given.
Again, the Judge ought to be public and openly known, that all who are
desirous may have access unto him, of infallible authority not only in
himself but also in respect of us; that we may safely rely, and build the
foundation of faith upon him; He ought to be autenticall, warranted by God,
and indewed with power, that the humble may with awful reverence embrace his
decrees, and the stubborn by due constraint and punishment be forced to
submit, otherwise his tribunal were un profitable and judgment She is public
and known to all.
frivolous. The Church is so conspicuous, patent and generally known, as there
are few Jews, or Turks, no Christians who are ignorant of it, howbeit many
are ignorant of the holy scriptures. Her sentence is certain and infallible,
She cannot be inueigled with error, nor She is infallible.
corrupted with gifts, nor seduced with favor, because she is the faithful
spouse of Christ and pillar of truth. The scriptures although they be certain
in themselves, yet in respect of us they may be adulterated, suborned, changed,
and misconstrued.

6. The Church has the seal of Gods warrant whereby we are bound to obey it,
bound to follow, and embrace her final resolution; If he will not hear the
Church, let him be to thee like the heathen and publican, yet we are no way
tied She is authentical, and warranted, by God. Matt. 18. v. 17. 1. Cor. 5. v.
3. 4. and 5.
to the written word, any further then it is delivered and expounded unto us.
The Church has power to excomunicate, suspend, degrade, and enforce by her
censures, compel us by her punishments, to conformity and obedience, as S.
Paul did the incestuous Corinthian: I indeed absent in body, but present in
spirit have already judged as present, him that has so done: in the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, you being gathered together, and my spirit with the
^ertue of our Lord Jesus 2. Cor. vlt. v. 10. and v. 2.
Christ, to deliver such a one to Satan. By this and many other places it is
plain, that the pastors of the Church have a coactiue power of constrayning
the rebellious, to submit themselves unto her trial and definition, which the
Scriptures have not.

7. Many other proofs may be brought to strengthen this high tribunal of the
Church: For she is the mother She is the first Mistress of our faith.
which first begets us, which seals us in baptism with the character of
Christians, She teaches us the first elements of our belief, the articles of
our Creed, She spelleth unto us the meaning of Christ, of Jesus, of Savior, of
God the author of grace, of his Sacraments, sacrifices, faith and gospel,
which from the written word, without her instruction, we could never learn.
To which purpose very true is that sayng of M. Hooker, Hooker. 2. book of
Eccle. poli. fol. 118.
The scripture could not teach us the things which are of God, unless we did
credit men, who have taught us that the words of scripture do signify those
things. Therefore the men of the Church and not the scripture are the first
masters of our faith. Yea (say you) but after, our first reformers did more
copiously partake The Protestants idle evasion rejected.
the beams of light, they found the scriptures perverted, not rightly
expounded by such as had them before in custodye. Is it so? Were their
expositions false, and scriptures true. Must we believe on their word the
canon of scriptures, and learn of you the interpretation of them? as though
they who canonized them with authority in regard of us, could not open their
meaning better then you? or he who preserved by them the dead letter
uncorrupted, did not more diligently preserve the lively sense and meaning
inviolable? Can any guide us more safely in the way of salvation, in the pathe
of Christ, then such as teach us there is a Christ, and means of salvation?
Egregiously S. Augustine reasons with the Aug. l. de vtil. crede^. c. 14.
Manichees as we may now with Protestants: Why should I not most diligently
inquire amongst them, what thing Christ commanded, by whose authority
persuaded, I have now believed that Christ commanded some thing. VVilt thou
better tell me what he said whom I would not think to have been at all, or
to be, if I must Aug. com. ^. cont. ep. Manich. c. 5.
believe because thou s^^est is. What madness is this? Give credit i^ them that
Christ is to be believed, and learn of us what he said. In Another place. If
thou do hold thy self to the gospel, I would hold my self to those by
whose commandment I believed the gospel etc. Whose authority being
infringed and weakened, I could not now There is no ra^son we should believe the
authority of the Roman Church in delivering scripture, and Protestants in
expounding it contrary to her authority.
believe even the gospel itself. Imediatly before, If thou say, Believe not
the Catholics, it is not the right way by the gospel to drive me to the
faith of Manichaens (of Protestants) because I believed the gospel it self by
the preaching of Catholics.

8. Yet if against all sense and reason, if against both God and man, you
should persuade us to believe your new constructions of S^riptuee, against the^
who taught you both Christ and Scripture, do we not believe the authority of
men, the voice (as you account your selves) of the faithful, and so submit our
judgments to the exposition of the Church?

9. Further more the Church is the treasury or storehouse of God, to which he
commits all his heavenly ministeryes: All things which I have heard of my
Father, I have made known to you. It is his mouth or oracle, which opens the
same to others, his trumpet or crier, which promulgateth The Church is the
storehouse of truth. Joan. 15. v. ^^.
them to the world: Go and teach all Nations etc. teaching all things which I
have commanded you. It is the messenger which reuealeth his will, The witness
which gives testimony of his words, and sayings, The Vicegere^t which
supplyeth the room of his beloved: You shall be witnesses to me in Jerusalem,
and in all lury etc. As my Father has sent me, so I also do send you. But
Christ was sent from Matt. vlt. v. 19. Act. 1. v. 8. Joan. 20. v. ^2.
the throne of his Father, with most ample power, to decide all doubts, in
matters of faith, Therefore the Church succedeth him in this sovereign
authority, she baptizeth now in his person, sacrifices in his person, teaches
in his person, governs in his person, exco^municateth in his person, so she
determines with infallible assistance, and judges all Controversies in his
person. If we be commanded to hear her, obey her, believe her, be ruled by
her; If we must open our own faults, complain of our brethren to her, be
bound or loosed The Church judges of the writings of the Apostles, she
co^poseth the Canon of Scripture, she judges of the true sense and
interpretation of scripture.
of our sins by her, if she must clear out doubts, examine our causes,
redress our scandals, quiet our contentions, she (no doubt) is the supreme
judge of all our spiritual affairs. When any doubt is made of the writings of
the Apostles, whether they be theirs or no, as whether the Epistle of S. Paul
to the Laodiceans be his or not, it belongs to the Church to decide the
matter, to receive, or reject it. Therefore she judges of the Apostolical
doctrine, of the sacred Canon, she judges what is consonant to the divine
spirit of God, and what is dissonant thereunto. When any heresy springs from
the false interpreration of scripture, she also censureth, she condemns it.
Therefore she is the judge not only of the scriptures, but also of the true
sense and exposition of them. And thus in all times, and places, whenever
occasion has been offered, the Church has exercised her judicial power.

CHAP. VII. Wherein is manifested the conformable practice of the Church; other
authorityes alleged; and the imagined circle objected against us avoided.
IN the Apostles days a controversy arose concerning the observation of the
legal Ceremonies; it was diligently argued, discussed, and judged by the
Church with this divine and Act. 15. v. 28.
infallible resolution: It has seemed good to the holy Ghost, and us etc. Some
few years after, a great debate fell out, about the celebratio^ of the feast
of Easter, whether it should be kept always on the Sunday, or on the 14. day
of the first month, the matter was referred, examined and judged by the
Church, with such an uncontrollable sentence, as they who resisted were
absolutely censured and condemned for heretics, called Quartadecimani. Witness
S. Augustine, Epiphanius, Tertullian and others. In all succeeding ages some
such doubts, questions, or heresies have sprung up, and have been Aug. haer.
^6. Epiphan. haer. 50. Tertul. in Praescrip.
always sifted, determined, and judged by the Church. From her the Nouatians,
Arians, Nestorians, Eutichians, Pelagians, Monothelites, and the rest have
still received their final doom, and irreuocable damnation, in such judicial
manner as no appeal, no dispute, no further examinations of their opinions
has been after Hooker in the preface to his book of Eccles. poli. page 24.
25. 26. 27. Couel in his defense of M. Hooker.
permitted, as not only M. Hooker, and M. Doctor Couell two modern
Protestants, but S. Athanasius also testifyeth of the Churches decrees in the
Nicen Council against the Arians: Let no man think a matter discussed by so
many Bishops, and confirmed with most clear testimonies, may be called again
in question, least if a thing so often judged be reuised and known again, the
curiosity of knowing utterly want all end of knowing. And Martian the Emperor:
He does wrong to the judgment of the most reverend Synod, who contendeth to
rippe up, or publicly argue and dispute of such things as be once judged and
rightly ordered. Theodosius Athan. in decr. Nice. Syno. Martian. in rescript.
ad Pallad. Prefect. Preto. C. desum. Trin. l. 5. Cod. l. 1. tit. leg. damnat.
also and Valentinian those two Catholic Emperous who held the Imperial
Scepter in the year of our Lord 428. have most catholikely enacted a law,
allowing the Churches definitive sentence in sundry Councils: Whosoever in
this holy City, or other where do follow the profane peruersity of Eutiches
condemned in the late Council gathered at Chalcedo^, and do not so believe in
all points of faith, as the 318. holy Fathers of the Nicene Council and as the
150. venerable Bishops assembled together in the Council of Constantinople,
or the other two Cou^cells following of Ephesus, and Chalcedon, let them know
that they are heretics. But as the Churches tribunal in condemning heresies,
so in establishing true doctrine in all doubtful cases, has been esteemed
infallible. Hence that common saying of S. Augustine: Whosoever fears to be
ensnared Aug. l. 1. cont. Cres. c. 33.
by the obscurity, or hardness of this question, let him consult the Church
thereof, which the holy Scripture without all ambiguity does demonstrate.

2. Hence S. Paul immediately instructed from the mouth of God when false
seducers sought to caluminate Gal. 2. v. 2. Tertul. l. 4. contra Marc. c. 2.
his heavenly doctrine, had recourse unto the Church, for approbation of his
Gospel: Least perhaps in vain I should run, or had run. Whereupon
Tertullian: If he from whom S. Luke received his light, desired to have his
faith and preaching authorized by his predecessors, how much more reason have
I to desire the like for the Gospel of S. Luke, seeing the same was so
necessary for the Gospel of his Master. And S. Augustine: The Apostle S.
Paul Aug. tom. 6. cont. Faust. Manic. l. 28. c. 4. Hier. ep. 11.
called from heaven, if he had not found the Apostles with whom by conferring
his Gospel, he might appear to be of the same society the Church would not
believe him at all. S. Hierome has the like, whose authorityes together with
the president of S. Paul so pinch our adversaries, as they have nothing to
answer which deserves confutation. Notwithstanding A cauil of the adversary
reproved.
against the former recited examples of the Church, they cavil, that she
pronounced judgment in the beginning out of the written word, and so made the
scripture judge rather then her self, of all doubtful occurrences. We grant
that the Scriptures were the outward law, the The scripture is the outward law
and needs a lively judge or interpreter.
compass, or square, which the Church followed in giving her sentence both
then and ever since: yet as the law is dumb and needs an interpreter, the
compass and square not able to direct without the guide of the Architect, to
level it aright; so the Scriptures can never give a diffinitiue sentence, to
compose debates, unless they be managed, guided, and interpreted by the Church.
The scriptures are the dead, and silent, the Church the lively speaking and
intelligible Judge, more easy then the scriptures, more ancient then the
scriptures, more necessary Iren. l. 3. c. 4. Hilar. de Syno. aduer. Arian.
then the scriptures; more necessary, because many sucking babes who dye after
baptism, many ignorant people, as Ireneus, and S. Hilary note, are saved
without scriptures but not without the Church; more ancient because the
scriptures were penned by the holy Prophets and Apostles, The last resolution
of faith is diversely made, by which we avoid the circle objected against us by
many Protestants
members of the Church, more easy and perspicuous, because that which the
scriptures in sundry dark, hard and general terms obscurely contain, the
church in open, plain, and particular declarations applyable to the sundry
exigentes of special occurrents clearly expresses. Therefore although the
scriptures have a kind of judgment (as the inanimate law can judge) together
with the Church, yet the Church has the principal, primary, supreme and most
irreprouable voice in this spiritual consistory, or court of religion.

3. Howbeit the last resolution of our belief is not so referred either to
scriptures, or to the Church, but that the prime verity, and other prudent
motives, have also their special concurrence: whereby we easily avoid that
idle and impertinent circle, with which Whitaker, and First it is resolved
into the authority of God.
his fellows, would seem to disgrace us of proving the scriptures by the
Church, and Church again by scriptures. For when it is demanded why we believe
the scriptures, the infallible authority of the Church, the mystery of the
Trinity, or any other article of our belief, we reply that if you ask the
formal reason which wins the assent of our understanding to believe; we
believe Secondly into the proposition of the Church.
them for the divine authority, which is the formal object of faith, and of
infinite force and ability to persuade immediately by it self, without the help
of any other formal inducement whatsoever; if you demand what warranteth or
proposes unto us this or that article to be credited by the testimony of God.
We answer it is the Catholic Church, guided by the holy Ghost, which cannot
propose, or deliver any falsehood. If you demand what moves our will to accept
this Church for an infallible witness in sealing those articles? We answer they
are arguments of credibility, which prudently induce Thirdly into certain
motives of credibility.
and stir us up to credit her report; the arguments are these, glory of
miracles, consent of Nations, perpetual succession, interrupted continuance,
admirable propagation, and increase of the Church, force of doctrine, conversion
of souls, change of manners, fortitude of Martyrs, unity, sanctity, antiquity,
and the like; which prevailed so much with our most learned S. Augustine, as he
recounting those things which justly detayned him in Aug. con^ epist. Manich.
4.
the Catholic Church, says: There holds me in her bosom, the consent of
people, and nations, there holds an authority, begotten with miracles,
nourished with hope, increased by charity, Aug. de vtil. cred. c. 14. Populoru^
atque gentiu^ confirmatae opinioni ac famae admodum celeberrimae.
strengthened by antiquity, there holds from the seat of Peter the Apostle,
to whom our Lord after his resurrection recommended the feeding of his sheep,
even to this present Bishopric the succession of Priests. Lastly there
holds me the name Catholic etc. And in another place he says, that by no
other reasons was he induced to believe in Christ then by giving credit to the
approved opinion of people, and Nations, and to a most renowned and famous
report. These then were the motives of credibility which first persuaded him to
embrace both Christ and his Gospel.

4. Then the mouth which uttered, oracle which proposed them was the Church it
self: I for my part (quoth Aug. con. ep Fund. c. 5.
he) would not believe the gospel, unless the authority of the Catholic Church
moved me. But the formal ground or chief reason which won his assent was the
veracity, prime verity, or testimonye of God, who could not with such prudent
motives, and evident arguments of credibility testifye any thing, either by
himself, or others which was not sealed with infallible truth. Thus no round
or circulation is made, because the same thing is not proved but after a diverse
and several manner. Secondly we escap another way The second way of escaping
the circle.
the danger of circulation, if against them who deny the one, and grant the
other, we borrow arguments from the scriptures for example, which they grant
to establish the Church which they deny, or from the true Church, if that be
admitted, to authorize the scriptures which are wrongfully impugned. Thirdly,
that idle circle is declined The third way avoiding the same.
when we canonize the scriptures by the testimony of the present Church, and
prove the Church by the interpretation of scriptures not made by the same
Church which now is, or lately was in the Council of Trent, but so expounded
by the ancient Church in former days in the Council of Carthage, in the time
of S. Augustine, S. Ambrose and the rest of those Doctors: or so expounded by
the primitive Church, so expounded by the Apostles who received it from Christ,
and he from his Father: What round is here or circle committed?

5. Lastly it is no absurdity or begging of the question in hand if the Church
approve the scripture by her own testimony, and by the same also her
infallible authority The fourth way.
she has from God, if that which she says she confirm with such evident
reasons, or perswasible motives, as are prudently judged to proceed from him.
For so christ himself so Moses being sent with Commission from God by his own
testimony warranted with miracles, proved his Exodus 3. and 4.
Mission, and was accordingly received as a messenger, Captain, or Governor
imediatly designed, and appointed by his unsearchable wisdom. In like manner
albeit the Church give assurance of scripture, and by the scripture certify us
of her own authority, yet her certificate is infallible, and sufficient to
perswad without circular winding in and out, as long as it is confirmed by such
arguments of credibility, as in all wise men's iudgme^tes come from God, for
either his divine providence ouerruleth not humane affairs, and then as S.
Augustine infers: It Aug. de vtil. credendi c. 16. Nihil est de religione
satage^dum. Protestants run the circle they falsely object against us. Fullk
in his confu. of Purga. p. 434.
boots not a whit of what religion we be of, or he does preside and dispose of
all earthly things, and so cannot permit us to be induced by such weighty,
prudent, and incuitable reasons, to believe that which is subject to falsity,
or calumniation. Every one of these ways our Church is freed from that idle
circle, wherein all sectaryes notwithstanding wander without end, who descry
the scriptures by their own private spirit, and discern their spirit by the
analogy of scripture. This is a dotage gross, and absurd, to prove the
unknown word by a hidden motion, and the motion hidden by the word unknown:
This is to dance the round so often reprehended, and to labor in darcknes
without hope of delivery.

CHAP. VIII. Wherein is discovered, that out of the true Church there can be no
hope of salvation, in any Congregation or Sect whatsoever.
THE Prophesies of the old Testament, and peculiar titles ascribed to the
church both in the old and new, engrosse unto her all the blessings of heaven,
and only means of atteyning felicity: In mount Joel. 2. v. ^2.
Sion, and in Jerusalem shall be salvation, as our Lord has said, and in the
residue whom our Lord shall call: The Nation and the kingdom, that shall not
serve thee Isa. 60. v. 12.
shall perish. She is the City of refuge, or sanctuary of God (as Cyril
calls her) to which whosoever flies not for succor, cannot be saved. She is
the spiritual seed and Cyril. in Isa. l. 5. c. 54.
of spring of Abraham, which only partaketh of the blessings of our Lord. She
is the house of God and Tabernacle of our Lord, out of which whosoever eats
the paschall lamb, he is (as S. Jerome says) a profane person, an alien, or
stranger Hier. tom. 2 ep. 57. ad Damas^ Idem tom. 4. lib. 4. ^ commen. in cap.
11. Isa.
from the merits of Christ. She is the Ark of Noah, because (according to the
same S. Jerome) that which the Arc in the deluge, this does the Church affoard
in the world. If any one were not in the arc, he was drowned in the time of
the inundation: if any one be not in the Church, he perishes in the day of
destruction. And Gaudentius a little more Gaudent. tract. 2. de lect. Euan.
ancient then Jerome: It is manifest that all men of those times perished,
excepting only such as deserved to be sound within the Arc, bearning a type or
figure of the Church: For so in like manner they cannot be saved who are
separated from the Apostolic faith and catholic Church.

2. Moreover the Church is called the Temple of God, as appears by many
places of holy scripture expounded Orig hom. 15 in Mat. Aug. l. 2. quest. in
Euang. Theod. in c. 2. 2. ad These. Ephesians. 1. and Coloss.
to that purpose by Origin, S. Augustine, and Theodoret, to signify unto us
that whosoever is not in this holy Temple, is in the Chapel of Satan, in the
den of devils, he cannot have his prayers heard, or sacrifices acceptable unto
God. She is termed the body of Christ, to signifye that none can enjoy the
benefit of life, unless he be a member of this mystical body. I am not the
first Author of his gloss, or paraphrase. S. Augustine does analize and
expound it in the same manner: The Catholic Church only is the body of Christ,
whereof he is head: out of this body the holy Aug. epist. 50. ad Bon. prope
fine^.
ghost quickneth no man etc. Therefore he that will have the holy ghost, let
him beware he r^mayne not out of the Church, let him beware he enter not
faignedly into it. Again, To salvation it self, and to eternal life, no man
arriueth, but he that has Christ his head: But no Idem de unit. Eccl. c. 16.
Ephesians. 5. Psalm. 44. Ezech. 16. 2. Cor. 12. Apoc. 19. and 21. Aug. de alterca.
Eccle. and Synagog.
man can have Christ his head, unless he be in his body, which is the Church.
She is also styled the wife and spowse of Christ, because as S. Augustine
teaches, she has promised and vowed to keep pure and entire his faith and
doctrine, as in a corporal marriage the wife plighteth her faith, and fidelity
to her husband.

3. By this comparison we learn that as no children can be legitimate which
are not borne and conceived by the husbands true and lawful wife; that al
others are either bastards, or chaungelinges, so none can be the sons of God,
none partaker of the inheritance of his children, unless he be newborn, and
nurtured by the Church his spouse. The harlotry sects and congregations of
heretics may propagate themselves, they may vaunt of their viperous issue, they
may insult for a time and despise the spouse of Christ, the hand-manyd (as S.
Augustine discourses) may do wrong to her Mistress. But when A^raham shall
hear the complaints of Sara, when he shall take compassion of her
sufferinges, and receive her into rest, then thou (says he, speaking to the
Arian, as I Genesis 21. v. 10. Gal. 4. v. 30. Aug. tom. 9. de symb. l. 4. c. 10.
may now to the Protestants heresy) thou shall be cast forth, as the hand maid
with thy bastardly brood, because the sons of the b^^d woman shall not be
inheritours with the children of the free. One, holy, true Queen Catholic
shallbe acknowledged, to whom Christ has given such a kingdom, as dilating
it through the whole world, cleansing it from all spot and wrincle, he has
prepared it wholly beautiful against his coming. Agreeable to this title, it
is likewise named the Mother of the living, because none can receive life,
except they be conceived in her womb, and cherished in her lap, from whence
that common ^ying of S. Cyprian: No man can have God his Father, ^nles he have
the Church his Mother. The Church is the Psalm. 2. Luc. 1. Joan. 18. Apoc. 5.
Aug. l. 20. de ciuit. Dei. Hier. q. ad Edibiam.
kingdom of Christ wherein such as refuse to live, are rebels, and traitors
to God. It is the house Orig. in Jesus Naue hom. 3. Cypr. de simplicitate
Praelat. Ambr. lib. de Salom. c. 5.
of ^aha^ from whence whosoever departs is guilty of his own death. It is the
Joan. 21. Luc. 5. Ambr ser. 11. and l. de Salom. c. 4. Council. Later. c. 1. Vna
est fidelium vniuersalis Ecclesia, extra qua^ nullus omnino saluatur. Aug. tom.
7. concione ad plebem de Emerita post medium. Cypr. epist. 62. ad ^omponium.
Iren. l. 3. aduer. haeres. c. 40.
Ship of Peter, out of which whosoever sayleth, suffers ship wrack. Therefore
the Counsel of Lateran has truly and carefully defined: There is one
universal Church of the faithful, out of which no man is saved. This decree
of that most holy and general Council, the uniform consent of the Fathers
ratify and confirm: a few with such as I have alleged shall speak for the
rest. S. Augustine: Out of the Catholic Church a man may have all things,
excepting salvation; he may have orders, he may have Sacraments, he may sing
Alleluia, he may answer Amen, he may have the Gospel, he may have and preach
the faith in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
but he can by no means obtain salvation but in the Catholic Church. S.
Cyprian: Neither can they (writing of excommunicated persons) live without,
since the house of God is one, and no man can have salvation but in the Church.
Irenaeus: In the Church God has appointed Apostles, Prophets, Doctors, and
the whole operation or ministry of the spirit, of which they all are deprived
who repair not to the Church. Where the Church is, there is the spirit of
God, and where the spirit of God is, there is the Church, and all grace. Then
he interreth that such as do not partake of that spirit estranged from truth,
are justly tumbled into every error. Lactantius: it is only the Catholic
Lactant. l. 4 divine. instit. cap. vlt.
Church that has the true worship and service of God, this is the well spring
of truth, the dwelling place of faith, the temple of God, into which whosoever
enters not, and from which whosoever departs, is without all hope of life
and eternal salvation. Thus Lactantius. With whom our chiefest adversaries
likewise accord. Field confesses one holy Catholic Church in which only the
light of heavenly Field in his first book of the Church c. 2. fol. 23.
truth is to be sought, where only grace, mercy, remission of sins, and hope
of eternal happynes are found. And to maintain this he cites the aforesaid
sentence of Lactantius.

4. Calvin also speaking of the Church our Mother says: There is no other
entry into life, unless she conceive us in her Calu. l. 4. instit. c. 1.. 4.
womb, unless she bring us forth, unless she feed us with her breasts, finally
unless she keep us under her custody and governance, until such time as being
unclothed of mortal flesh, we shallbe like unto. Angels. The reason hereof
is the secret and unchangeable will of God, who sent his Son into the world
to erect one Church, one faith, one religion, one house and chosen company, to
whom he bequeathed the keys of paradise. That only Church he purchased with
his blood, that only he loved, for that he delivered himself to sanctify her,
cleansing Act. 20. v. 28. Ephesians. 5. v. 25. and 26.
her with the lauer of water in the word of life. In that only Church he has
left (as Irenaeus observed) his Pastors and Doctors; In that his word, and
Sacraments, in that the embassage of reconciliation, and benefit of remitting
sins. To that only Church he communicates his spirit, To one only Church
does God commit the keys of heaven and benefit of reconciliation.
promises his assistance, imparteth his grace, virtue, and spiritual
endowements, therefore whosoever is divided or separated from that, is wholly
bereft of Gods celestial comforts. Most of the learned Protestants consent
with us, That out of the Church there is no salvation, yet this covert they
seek to save themselves, That they are of the Church, either of the same with
us (as some imagine) or of a distinct by themselves (as others uphold) or at
least that every one is sufficiently in the Church of salvation, as long as he
believes the Trinity, Incarnation, Passion, and other principle mysteryes of
faith. But that they have no distinct Church planted by Christ, watered by his
Apostles, and perpetually continued until their days, which is necessary for
the true Church, I shall demonstrate hereafter in the eleventh, twelueth, and
thirtenth Chapters of this book. Now that they are not any part of the Roman
Church, nor all one with us I manifestly convince.

5. Because they abhor our sacrifice, condemn our Fulke in c. 5. Ephesians.
sect. 3. In cap. 13. Apoc. sect 2. Fulk. in c. 24. Luc. sect. 4. and 1. Joan.
2. sect. 9. Whitaker. contr. 2. q. 6. cap. 1. ibidem c. 3. Reynoldes in his
fifth conclusion. Fulke in c. 13. Apo. sect. 2. and in c. 5. ad Ephesians. sect. 3.
Rogers in his book 39. articles of Protestancy.
Sacraments, forbear all participation with us, and we with them in faith and
religion, we excommunicate and cut them off from the communion of our Church,
which they also renounce as superstitious, blasphemous and antichristian. It is
certain (says Fulke) the Church of Rome cannot be the true Church of Christ.
Again: The whole religion of Popery is nothing but blasphemy against God, and
Christ, and his Church. For this cause he calls it the whore of Babylon, the
seat of Antichrist, the malignant and Antichristian Church of Rome. Whitaker
disclaymeth from it with the like reproachful terms, and adds: That the
Papists are Idolaters and their Church Idolatricall. Besides he reckons up
eighteen fundamental points, by which it ouerthrouweth (in his conceit) the
grounds of true religion. M. John Reynolds laboring to discover the like
entitleth his fifth conclusion after this manner: The Roman Church not the
Catholic Church, nor a sound member of the Catholic Church. Yea he, Fulke,
Rogers and others recount together with those which Whitaker names, above
four and thirty articles, in which the Roman Church has damnably erred, and
in every one shaken the fabrike and razed the foundation (as they blaspheme) of
true belief. Therefore it is impossible any Protestant should think his
religion the same with ours shall substantial points, impossible he should
look to be saved in the lap of our Church, which his r^rest men and stoutest
patrons so spitefully traduce, and purposely detest, as the most contagious,
heretical, and idolatrical Church that ever was. As impossible it is that every
sectary should hope for the blessings of heaven in his own sect, by embracing
only the principal grounds of religion, as the ensuing Chapter shall further
declare.

CHAP. IX. In which it is proved, that no Sectary can be saved by believing the
chief heads of Religion.
IN the hearts of such as reuolte from truth there breeds like a canker this
cloaked Atheism, that it imports little of what religion a man be of, so he
acknowledge one God, receive the Apostles Creed, and believe to be saved by the
merits of Christ. An Atheism I call it, because it secretly tends to the
utter overthrow of all Christian faith, and due worship of God. The gainsaying
of any one article disposes to a plain Apostasy and denial of all articles of
faith.
For as the taking away of a few stones by little and little disposes to the
ruin of a stately building, so the remouall or not admittance of some points
of faith most dangerously makes way to the denial of all after: which manner
I shall demonstrate by and by, how that he which gaynesayth the least article
of faith, has quite lost hi^ faith without which it is impossible to please
God. But first I will begin with some other arguments.

2. According to this Atheistical opinion that every one may be saved in his
own sect, the Pelagians, Nouatians, Donatists, Eutichians, Monothelites, and
sundry other plagues of the Church who embraced the Trinity, Incarnation,
Passion of Christ etc. might be put in some hope of future happynes, which no
Christian I think will now confess. Likewise those sectaryes who after the
definition of the Church maintained S. Cyprians, and other holy Bishops error
of rebaptization, consorted with Catholics in all other points of belief,
notwithstanding for that alone they were accounted heretics and so deprived of
the benefit of life. Of whom Vincen. Lirinensis Vincen. adu. prof. haeret.
nouit.
makes this exclamation: O admirable change of things! the Authors of one and
the same opinion are esteemed Catholics, and their followers are judged
Heretics! Because they without breach of peace before the decree of the
Church, these after with proud stubbornes presumed to defend it.

3. The Quartdecimani who lived about the year 186. believed all the
substantial heads of faith. They believed whatsoever was publicly taught,
and received in the primitive Church, but only one particular thing as it
should seem of small importance concerning the celebration of Eusebius. l. 5. c.
22. Nicep. l. 4. cap. 39.
the Feast of Easter, whether it should be celebrated on the fourteenth Moon,
and then the fast of Lent cease upon whatsoever day it fell, or upon a Sunday
according to the general custom of Christians. And yet for this only point
they are enrolled in the catalogue of heretics, excluded here from the banquet
of the Church, and supper of the lamb hereafter. For S. Austine in his book
of heresies Aug. haer. 29. Epiphan. 50. Hier. dial. a^^er. Lucifer. c. 1.
Haereticos quoscumque christianos non esse. Tit. 3. v. 10.
rehearsing them by another name* and sundry more, among whom many believed all
the forenamed principles of religion he notwithstanding concludes of them and
the like: other heresys besides these may be, any one of which whosoever shall
hold cannot be a Christian catholic. S. Jerome presupposes this as a certain
ground, Heretics whatsoever cannot be Christians, and bargayneth with his
colloquutor to speak of an heretic as of a gentile. S. Paul charge us to
shun the company of every heretic in what point soever he runs astray,
saying: A man that is an heretic after the first and second admonition
avoid; knowing that he that is such a one is subverted, and sins being
condemned by his own judgment. And he casts all Gal. 5. v. 20. and 21.
sectaryes with fornicatours, murderers, and drunkards out of the kingdom of
heaven.

4. Moreover the Donatists disagreed from the Catholic Church in a matter not
specifyed in the Creed, no nor expressly mentioned as S. Augustine auoweth in
holy writ: This (says he) neither you, nor I do read in express words. Aug.
l. de unit. Eccl. c. 19. Aug. l. 1. cont. Cres. c. 33. Lib. 11. de baptis con.
Donat. c. 4. l. 5. cap. ^4.
And in another place: Although no example of this matter be found in holy
scriptures, yet do we follow in this the truth of the scriptures, when we do
that which is agreeable to the universal Church commended unto us by the
authority of the same scripture. Likewise: The Apostles have commanded nothing
concerning this matter: But the custom which was alleged against S. Cyprian
is to be thought to have descended from their tradition, as diverse other things
have done which the universal Church does observe, and are therefore with
great reason believed to have been commanded by the Apostles, although they
be not written. So that the Donatistes alteration was about a^ unwritten
verity; They inuocated one God (as S. Augustine affirms) with him they
believed in the same Christ, Augu. in explicatione psalm. 54.
they had the same gospel, sung the like psalms etc. they agreed which him in
baptism, in keeping the feasts of martyrs, in celebrating of Easter: In these
(says he) they were with me, and yet not altogether with me, in schism not
with me, The belief of the Trinity, and other chief articles auayled not the
Donatists because they denied some unwritten traditions.
in heresy not with me, in many things with me, in a sew not with me: these
few in which not with me, the many could not help them in which they were with
me. Behold the Donatists could not be helped, they could not receive any
benefit, or fruit from God by believing the Trinity, the mediatio^ of Christ,
the Creed, the sacraments, and the rest, because they dissented from the
Church in some few traditions not recorded in scripture; and can our sectaryes
look to enjoy the treasures of life, denying both unwritten traditions and
diverse other articles clearly expressed in holy writ, as I have proved in the
two former parts of this treatise?

5. Besides although the belief in God, in Christ, and in the articles of the
Creed were sufficient to salvation, yet this belief ought to be one and the
same in all the faithful, for truth is one, uniform, and constant, falsehood
^arious, discordant, and chaungable. But diverse sects di^ersly understand
these heads of religion. Therefore they ^^nnot all have the true uniform and
saving faith. To instance in the dissension of Protestants from us. They
believe that their God does truly purpose, determine, and The Protestants
belief in God is not the same with the true belief of Catholik^*
^o operate unto sin, yet as a righteous Judge, not as an evil ^^t^ur. We
believe that our true God no way at all with no right intention can concur
thereunto; They believe a dissembling God with a twofold will, one revealed and
detesting, the other secret and intending sin. We teach that our God has but
one will, which wholly disliketh ^^ hates sin. They believe a God so weak or
vnmer^^full as there be some sins he will never forgive. We ^^leeue ours to
be so powerful and good as there is no sin, ^ot that against the holy ghost,
but he is ready to pardon i^ if we truly repent. They believe a cruel God who
commands and eternally punishes us, for incurring sins which of necessity
we incur: or not fulfilling laws which we cannot fulfill. They believe an
unjust God an ^ccepter of persons, who detesteth all other men's defiled works,
but accepts theirs as if they were fair; imputes to other, not to them the
heynousnes of their ^biding faults; captiueth others to sinful servitude, but
indeweth them with the freedom of will to shun iniquity, The true belief of
Catholics* quite opposite to that of the Protestants.
gives to them efficacious, to others not sufficient means to salve their
souls: In all which points we believe the contrary: We believe that our true
and merciful God neither commands nor punishes but only such things as
are in our power to perform or avoid, equally abhors the evil works of
his elect as of the reprobate, Imputes to each as long as they remain in
sin defaultes alike, Imparteth to every one the liberty of free will and
sufficient means to purchase heaven. Wherefore if that saying of S. Augustine
be worthily approved in the judgment of the learned, Whosoever imagines God
such Augu. q. 29. super Iousue.
^^ God is not, he carries every where another God, a false God in his ^ind,
seeing Protestants and we frame diverse imaginations o^ God, one of us
believes in a str^ung God, or hat^ a false belief of the true God, and whereas
false belief avails no more to salvation then no belief at all, we cannot
have both that one faith of God which is requisit^ for our eternal safety.

6. The like argument may be made of Christ. For Our ghospellers believe not in
the same Christ in which the Catholic Church belieueth.
our Reformers acknowledge a Christ who died not for all but for his elect
alone: We one, who quoad sufficientiam, died for all: They a Savior, who made
mediation according to his divinity; we one who performed that office
according to his humanity only. They a Savior who enriched himself, but left
his servants in beggary, naked, and deuoyde of merits. We one who abounds
himself, and deriueth also unto us the riches of his treasures. They, at least
the Caluinists and their followers, imbrace^ Christ who died not only in body,
but also in soul; A Protestants believe not the Articls of the Creed in that
sole true sense, which is necessary. to salvation. Not his descensio^ into hell.
Christ subject to ignorance, oversight, desperation, and the lamentable fits
of the very damned wretches. We ^ Savior who dyed only in flesh, and not in
soul (whose death is sin) a Savior always perfect in knowledge, forsight,
peace, tranquillity, and who from the first moment of his conception was ever
blessed with the sight of God. So that they believe not in the same Christ with
us, nor yet do they receive the articles of the Creed in that sole, single, and
constant sense, which is only true. For touching Christ's descension into hell,
some deny it utterly, others interpret it of his descending in power, virtue,
and efficacy, not of his true presence, neither in the lowest hell of the
damned, which many Catholics, nor Not his coming to judge the quike and the
dead.
in limbo patrum, which all Catholics approve.

7. Concerning Christ's judging the quick and the dead, We hold that he will
judge uprightly every one according to the merit of his works: you exclayme
against it as injurious to his death and passion. Concerning the Catholic
Church, we believe it to be the visible society of such only as profess the
Roman faith dispersed Not the Catholic Church.
throughout the world; you believe it to be the whole company of Gods elect,
comprehending all the faithful which ^ither be, has been, or shallbe.
Touching the ^^mmunion of Saints, we grant a mutual intercourse Not the
communion of Saints.
^^d participation of benefits from one member to another, not only in the
militant but also in the triumphant and purgant Church: you impugn these later
two as ^mpious, and sacrilegious. Lastly touching remission of sins, we
believe a true remission of all sins by inherent Not the remission of sins.
justice, even in this life: you deny it to be possible, as long as we are
clogged with humane infirmityes: you only confess an imputative pardon, and
imputative righteousness, most blasphemous to the merits of Christ, and verity
of holy Scriptures. By all which I may conclude, how impossible it is we should
both be saved by the same belief of the Creed, since our belief is so
repugnant, and true belief but one.

8. Further, to pass from the Creed to any other con^rouerted question of
Priests absolution, and penitentes ^onfession; If that, as we interpret it
with the ancient Church, be the second table after shipwreck, and necesary to
all such as have mortally offended after baptism, because it is written: Whose
sins you remit, they are remitted Joan. 20. v. 23.
unto them, and whose sins you detayne, they are detayned: Then every
Protestant who neglects to submit himself to this judgment seat has his
sins detayned, his sins fast bound which enchaine his soul to the fetters
of hell. If it ought to be other wise expounded of preaching the word, and
denouncing only remission to the faithful, and detention to the unbelievers,
then we are guilty of sacrilege, guilty of imposing a pharisaicall yoke on
the consciences of our subjects, which eternally casts us out of the favor
of God. The same argument I might frame of Confirmation, of extreme Unction
etc. but I will only instance in the holy Eucharist, wherein suppose as needs
you must that solemn oath and protestation of Christ: ^nles you eats the flesh
of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you Joan. 6. v. 54.
^^all have no life you, to be properly understood of the cor^orall eating of
his true flesh; and all Protestants are estranged from the fountain of life,
they cannot have life in th^^, who disdain to approach to this heavenly for
but take a shadow or sign in lieu thereof. Suppose (a^ God forbid) it should
not be so interpreted, and all C^tholikes together with Lutherans make
shipwreck of salvation, who with horrible idolatry worship a creatur^ instead
of the Creator, a morsel of bread as the body of their Lord. For this only
variance concerning the real presence, Luther (whose memory, according to
Whitaker, Whitaker. in his answer to M. Campians third reason. Luth. lib.
contr. Sacramenta. Confess. Tiguri. tract. 3. fol 108. Luth tom. 2. 263.
shall ever be sacred among all good men) accurseth all Caluinistes as arrant
Heretics, saying: We do seriously censure all Zuinglians, and Sacramentaryes
for heretics, and out of the Church of God. Which censure of his, and
detestation of their opinion he gloryed to carry to the tribunal seat of
Christ. And then most agreeable to the matter now in hand: They believe in God
the Father, and in the Son, and in the holy Ghost in vain. All these things
(said I) avail them nothing, for as much as they deny this article of the real
presence, and attach him of falsity who said of the Sacrament, this is my body.
So Luther flatly acknowledges that the denial of that one article, the
disagreement in the interpretation of that one place in such a^ accept the
other heads of religion, is sufficient to plung them into the pit of hell.
Zanchius and many learned Protestants Zanchius in his epistle before his
confession page 12 13.
are of the same mind agreeing therein with the ancient Fathers, with S.
Athanasius, who has defined in his Creed, that whosoever does not hold the
Catholic faith who and inuiolate, he shall perish for ever. With S. Hierome
who witnesses, that for one word or two contrary to the says, many heresies
have been cast out of the Church. With S. Gregory Nazianzen, saying: Nothing
can be more dangerous then th^se heretics, Hier. l. 3. Apolo. cont. Ruf.
Nazian. tract. de fide.
who when as they run through all things uprightly, yet with one word as
with a drop of poison, corrupt and stayne the true and sincere faith of our
Lord, and of Apostolical tradition. With Saint Basil who being solicited by
the persecutours to relent a little to the time, stoutly answered (as Theodoret
reports) that such as are instructect in the divine doctrine, do not suffer
Theod. l. 4. hist. c. 17.
any syllable of the divine decrees to be depraved, but for the defense of it,
if need require, willingly embrace any kind of death.

9. And not to stay longer in reciting the testimonies of (...) when the Son
of God avouched, he (...) Marc. 1^. v. 16.
not shall be cond^mned. Of what belief did he speak? (...) of believing the
whole Gospel, the whole corpse of Christian doctrine, whereof he there said:
preach the Ibid. v. 15.
^hosp^l^ to all creatures, which Gospel comprehends many other articles
besides the Trinity, Incarnation, and Passion of Christ. Therefore he that
belieueth them not all shall be condemned. Likewise when Christ avouched, He that
despises you despises me, he that hears not the Church etc. Luc. 10. v. 16.
Matt. 18. v. 17.
he does not add in this or that point, but absolutely in whatsoever, Let him
be to thee as the Heathen and Publican. And for this cause the custom of the
Church has been in her public definitions and general Counsels to strike
with the thunderbolt of Gods heavy curse, to threaten with anathema all such as
refuse to believe any one decree or definition of hers, concerning any point of
faith whatsoever it be, which the Church could not do without erroneous
faultines in her self, and wrong to her children, if every Canon she makes
and fenceth with that Anathema, were not necessary to be believed under pain
of damnation. Besides, not only the Church, but sundry zealous and forward
sectaryes of all sorts, are ready to yield their lives in behalf of any one
article of their belief: wherein although they err concerning the particular
object, yet this general agreement in such several sects, is an apparent
token, that Nature it self teaches every special point of true religion, and
not the principal only to be necessary to salvation, wherein the Athenians
were so precise, as they punished without remission Test Iosepho cont. Appion.
any little word less warily uttered against the received opinion of their
Gods. The Jews also were severely chastised, for the transgression of any one
of the ceremonial laws, given unto them by the disposition of Angels. And God
himself threatens, that he shall take Apo. 22. v. 19.
^^ay his part out of the book of life, who shall diminish any word of S.
John's revelation. What wonder then, though ^e be blotted out of the register of
heaven, though he be eternally punished, who either gainesayth, alters, or
not believes expressly or infoldedly every point of doctrine the Son of God
himself, or the holy Ghost, whom he after sent, publicly teaches or
inspireth to his Church.

10. The chiefest reason why faith must be whole and entire is the infallible
authority or veracity of God upon One principal reason why faith must be
entire in all points.
whose testimony we believe, which being once suspected or doubted of in any
one point of never so small importance, the like doubt or suspicion may creep
into others, and shake the whole foundation of Christian Religion. Therefore S.
Thomas and many other learned Deuines profoundly teach, That he has no
supernatural faith, he believes not any thing moved by divine authority, S.
Thomas 2. 2. q. 5. art. 3. He that belieueth not every article of faith
belieueth none at all. Tertul. l. de praescri.
who believes not every thing little or great, fundamental or not
fundamental, proposed unto him to be credited by the same authority. Whereupon
they infer, That no sectary who makes choice upon his own liking, or upon
the judgment of his Ministers, to believe some articles and not the rest, does
truly believe any one article at all. After which manner Tertullian long since
disputed against Valentine the heretic saying: Some things of the law and
Prophets he approves, some things he disalloweth, that is, he disalloweth all
whilst he disproueth some. In like sort I may argue of our Protestants, and
other Sectaryes, that they make choice to believe some things, not to believe
other, and so whilst they believe not all things, they believe nothing,
nothing upon the authority of God, but upon their own election, as humane
motives incline and persuade them, which is humane only, not divine or
supernatural belief. For faith being an assent of our understanding to
things not evidently seen or convinced by reason, but only credited for the
testimony of another, it cannot be more certain then he that testifyeth, and
delivers them unto us, who if he be subject to error as all men are in
Protestants conceit, they that believe the revealed mysteries or
interpretation of Scripture, either upon their own or such men's credit, cannot
attain to the certainty of faith, no more then the Turk, who although he
believe in God, Creator of heaven and earth, yet he belieueth not in him with
divine faith, because he relyeth upon the authority of his Alcaron, or Turkish
Muphtyes, who as in other things do, so might deceive in Muphty is the name of
the chief Interpreter of the Tu^kish law. Cuspin. in descript. Magistrate.
Turcici.
that. And whereas without true and divine faith it is impossible to please
God, they cannot hope for his favor, who do not believe every article as the
inerrable testimony of his true Church proposes them to be believed.

11. Hence it is, that even as we are bound to observe and fulfill the whole
law of justice, every precept, all things whatsoever Christ commanded, or else
we forfeit our whole grace, forfeit our right, and title to heaven, because he
that offends in one, is made guilty of all: So we are bound to believe all
whatsoever either Christ by himself, Matt. 28. v. 20.
or the holy Ghost teaches us, by the mouth of his Church, or if we deny any
one point we are utterly deprived of the habit of faith, we have not any faith
at Jacob. 2. v. 10.
all.

12. At length it is not enough, that we steadfastly believe every point, all
the heads, and branches of catholic faith, we must also communicate, and
join together in society with the faithful: For he that does not gather with
me, scatters, he that is not with me is against me, as Cypr. de unit. Eccl.
S. Cyprian to this purpose uses these places of scripture: Therefore although
every well minded sectary believe all things with the true Church,
notwithstanding as long as he seuereth himself in communion from it, that very
separation, that dissension alone, is enough to cast him headlong into ever
lasting fire. S. Cyprian writes of Chore, Dathan and Abiron, that they
believed in one God, Cypr. lib. 1. epist. 6.
worshipped one God, called upon him, and lived in the same law and religion,
as Moses, and Aaron did; howbeit because they divided themselves by schism
from the rest, and resisted their Priests, and Governors, Gods heavy hand
lighted upon them. More notable are the words of S. Aug. l. d^ unit. Eccl. c.
4.
Augustine: All those that believe as has been said, that our Lord Jesus
Christ is come in flesh, and risen from death in the same flesh, in which he
was borne, and has suffered, and that he is the son of God* with God, and
one with the Father, and the only immutable word of the Father, by whom all
things were made; but does dissent notwithstanding in such sort from his body,
which is the Church, that their communion is not with all them with whom the
Catholic Church does participate, but are in some divided part, it is
manifest that they are not in the catholic Church. And if not in the Church,
if not in the body of Christ, they cannot be quickened with the spirit of
Christ. For whosoever (says he again) Aug. ep. 152. ad Donatist.
is divided from the Catholic Church, how laudable so ever he seem to live,
for this only crime that he is separated from the unity of the Church, he
shall be excluded from life, and the wrath of God shall remain upon him. With
whom S. Fulgentius accords, saying: Hold for most certain, and doubt not,
that no heretic, or Fulgent. de fide ad Petriem c. 29.
schismatike baptized, in the name of the Father, of the son, and of the holy
ghost, if he be not united to the catholic Church, although he he give never
so great alms, and shed his very blood for the name of Christ, yet can be in
no wise be saved.

13. By all this which I have said it appears, first how much they are
deceived who sooth themselves with A deceit of some who think it enough to
believe the common principles in which all Sectaryes agree.
this fond conceit, that although every obstinate sectary cannot enjoy the
treasures of life, yet if any be so indifferent that they hold and believe the
common principles in which all Christian sects, and companies accord; they at
least may be in the state of salvation. These men, I say are much deceived,
because Faith must be whole, and entire in every point; and besides integrity
of belief in all points, communion with the true Church, and participation of
sacraments is also necessary. Then they are mistaken with a false surmise that
they agree with all in their general grounds; For as all meet together in
some common articles of one God, one Christ, or the like: So they all, and each
sect uniformly consents that those common principles, are to be limited and
contracted by a special faith, to his particular sect: Therefore they cannot
agree in all general points with every divided conuenticle, unless they join
in this to draw these ge^eral heads to some one society, or one particular
faith, as every sect though in a different manner conformably does.

14. Secondly as pernicious a flattery it is in many, who think it sufficient
to obey their king, and laws of their Country, exacting their corporal
presence at the Another flattery of such as deem it sufficient to co^form
themselu^ to their Princes laws in matters of conscience.
public service which is appointed in the Realm, whether it be true or
false: For although obedience to Princes be not only commendable, but according
to us necessary to salvation, in all such things as they have authority to
command, yet in matters of faith, and religion, which apperteine to God,
wherein soever they swerve from his divine laws, no subject can be excused in
obeying his Princes precept, or highest consistory, to the violating of his
conscience, and breach of Gods commandment: no more then the Jews who
committed Idolatry at the compulsion of Jeroboam, and Eastern Bishops who
embraced Arianisme by the constraint of Valens the Arian Emperor, or any other
such like, were to be acquitted of most detestable sacriledg, in neglecting
their duty to God, for obedience unto men. Neither ought this seem straung to
Protestants, for since it is lawful among them, to disobey the voice of Gods
Church, to disobey the decrees of Gods general Counsels, (which are warranted
by God never to err) as often as in their private judgments, they stray from
the written word; how can they blame us, who humbly crave pardon of not obeying
our temporal How far Catholik^ are ready to spend their lives in any of their
Princes quarrels.
Sovereigns (who have not the like warrant) in such things only as the whole
Christian world, and Gods highest tribunal upon earth, infallibly judges the^
to depart from the scriptures. In all things else we vow all homage and duty to
Princes: we are ready to offer our lives, lands and goods in their behalf; we
are ready to defend the right of their title or of other causes wherein they
shall be engaged against any inuader temporal or ecclesiastical whosoever:
Only we desire to keep our consciences vnoppressed, our religion entire unto
God.

15. Thirdly as Protestants flatter themselves to the (...)dice of their
souls, so they cry out against us for ^^nt of charity, in condemning so many
moral good men, of other religious besides our own, blameles i^ their lives,
in conversation modest, zealous in prayers, alms, hospitality, and many other
virtuous works. I answer, that as it is no want, but an evident token of
perfect charity to for warn sinners of the peril of damnation, 1. Cor. 6. v. 9
and 10. (...), Which Protestants falsely translate worshippers of Images. Gal.
5. v. 19. 20. 21. Romans 16. v. 17. Tit. 3.
to inculcate with the Apostle, That neither fornicatours, nor seruers of
idols, nor aduowtrers etc. shall possess the kingdom of God: So it is no
presumption or defect in us, but zeal of Gods honor, and love of souls, so
dearly purchased with the blood of Christ, to give the same warning and
judgment of those, who run into schism, heresy, or any sect whatsoever: seeing
they are reckoned by the mouth of the same Apostle, in the number of such as
are excluded heaven: The works of the flesh (says he) are manifest,
fornication, uncleanness etc. serving of idols etc. dissentions sects etc.
which I foretell you, as I have fortold you, that they which do such things
shall not obtain the kingdom of God. Mark them th^^ make dissensions, and
scandalls contrary to the doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them, for
such do not serve Christ our Lord. A man that is an heretic after the first
and second admonition avoid, knowing that he that is such an one is subverted
and sins, being condemned by his own judgment: In which case it skilleth
not with what heresy he be infected as S. Cyprian intimated to Antonianus
curiously demanding to know the heresies, Cypr epist. 502.
which Nouatianus taught, No matter (quoth he) what heresies he has or
teaches, when he teaches without, that is, out of the school of Gods holy
Church. In the same case his moral life, modest carriage, chastity, prayer, or
alms deeds avails him nothing to the gayning of heaven, as you may read in
these words of Saint Augustine: Let us (says he) suppose a man to be chaste,
continent, not covetous, not serving Aug. l. 4. con. Dona. c. 8. Constitua^us
alique^ etc.
idols, ministering hospitality to the needy enemy to none, not contentious,
patient, quiet, emulating none envying none, sober, frugall but yet an
heretic; truly no man makes doubt, but for this alone that he is an heretic,
he shall not possess the kingdom of God.

16. My adversaries perehance will reply. That they are not to be accounted
Heretics, because they do not with contumacy defend any falsehood, nor
stubbornely deny any known truth. But I answer that they are not only
heretics who with pertinacy maintain their perverse, and ^rased*opinions, but
such as doubt, waver, or call in question any matters of faith, such as
wilfully follow the heresy of others, such as slouthfully defer, or
fearfully put of the embracing of truth, when it is sufficiently opened and
proposed unto them. Al these if not in the strict acception or outward bench of
the Church, yet in the inward Court and chancery of conscience, are attainted
for the crime of heresy, and for such arraigned before the face of God.
Nevertheless, let it be (although it be very hard) that some few may quit
themselves from the imputation of that horrible crime, yet if they once commit
any other mortal sin, (into which they fall so often) as Fulke auerreth:
That there is no man which lives Fulke in c. 3. Apo. sect. 2.
after Baptism, but he commits sin worthy of death every day) they cannot
receive forgiveness out of the bosom of the Church; There only are left the
Sacraments of reconciliation, the conduits of grace, the salues for sins, and
medecines for our souls, which whosoever refuses to participate, is justly
deprived of all celestial favors, not for his heresy, but for other offenses,
he has incurred.

17. Let no man therefore of what sect soever feed himself with the hopeful
solace, or expectation of bliss; who having heard of the true Catholic faith,
is negligent in searching and finding it out, or having found it out, does not
sincerely embrace and entirely believe, every branch and point thereof, or
believing every point, does not also communicate in outward profession and
participation of Sacraments, with the members of that Church; or communicating
with them, and flying the society of all others, does not renew his life, in
sanctification and holiness, in the pursuit of virtue, and hatred of vice, as
the divine precepts of God, and laws of his Church, direct and teach him.
These be the steps of Jacobs ladder by which only we ascend to the mount of
heaven, and whosoever slippeth from any one of them, slideth down to the
bottom of hell.

CHAP. X. Wherein is disproued the false Marks which Protestants allege to
find out the Church: Against D. Whitaker, and M. White.
B^CAVSE the true Church is the holy sanctuary of God, and only port of
salvation, out of which none can escape the gulfes of sin, billows of
dissension, and miserable shipwreck of eternal perdition, therore all
Sectaryes make to this harbor of rest, all challenge to themselves (as
Lactantius notes) to be the true flock of Christ. The waspes (says
Tertullian) make honey combs, and the Marcionists Churches. To Lact. l. 4. c.
10.
which purpose they commonly describe that heavenly camp, by such general, or
hidden signs, as every one may pretend a like clay me unto it. Such is M.
Whitakers Tertu. l. 4. con Marc.
and our Protestants fraud, who delineate, and set it forth by these two
marks: By the sincere preaching of the word, and lawful administration of
Sacraments. And what Heretic is Cont. 2. q. 5. cap. 17. fol, 489.
there, or ever has been, who does not vaunt of these? The Anabaptists now a
days, the Brownists, The Arians, and Nestorians give out, that they alone have
the true preaching of the word, and administration of Sacraments, which they
all prove by testimonies of Scripture, by conference of places, and by the in
ward motion (as they are persuaded) of the holy Ghost, as good Records as any
Protestant Minister can bring for the truth which Whitaker. contr. 2. q. 5. cap.
18.
he preaches: yet if they be deceived by false persuasion, if they abuse the
Scriptures (as Whitaker often answers) may not we justly suspect the like
abuse in him?

2. Secondly, the sign ought to be more known, The sign ought to be more
known to us, the^ the thing it signeth and not only Natura notius.
then the thing signed, because by discerning that, I must come to the
knowledge of this: but the true preaching of the word is more secret, and
unknown then the Church it self; Therefore it cannot be a mark to descry the
Church unto us. And when Whitaker replyeth: That the purity of doctrine, is
more hidden to us, yet more known in it self, or more known in the nature of
the thing; he rather fortifyeth then weakneth the force of my argument. For
that which must be a sign to us, to discover the unknown Church, must be more
sensibly known and apparent to D. Whit. contro. 2. q. 5. c. 18. f. 500.
us, or else we may seek long enough before it lead us to the knowledge thereof.
Whitaker denies my consequence because to espy the Church: Is not (says he)
the knowledge of sense, but of faith, it appertains not to the eye of the
body, but to the eye of the mind, that is to faith. What shall I call this,
treacherous, Whitaker. ibidem fol. 501.
or foolish dealing, to answer one thing, when another is demanded? we now
dispute of the sensible marks, to discover the visible Church, of such marks
as may be seen, and perceived by sense, and not of the act of faith, or thing
believed, wholly in that respect invisible and obscure, because faith according
to the Apostles definition: Is the argument of things not appearing. Which
Hebr. 11. v. 1.
to confound with the precedent motives, inducing us to accept these things,
as the misteryes of belief, is knauish treachery, or notorious folly. For as
the natural reasons which the Philosopher alleges, to persuade the Atheist
there is a God, are not the thing he belieueth, or object of his faith, but as
it were the outward Ambass^dours he uses to win him, to accept that first
ground of belief, so the visible signs which lead us to the knowledge of the
Church, are not revealed articles embraced by faith, but the forerunning
messengers which The outward marks which lead us to the Church, must be
apparaot to sense.
propose unto us that article of believe. They appertain to the eye of the
body, to the manifest feeling, and touch of sense, or else they could be no
signs at all to give notice unto us of a true visible, and sensible Church.

3. M. White harpeth upon another string, but with as false a stroke, as
Whitaker. For he teaches: Faith is the cause of the Church, and therefore
more known then the Church it self etc. as every cause is more apparent to
our vnderst anding, and better known to our judgment then the effect. I grant
that faith is the cause of the Church, but that causes are more apparent,
White in his way to the church. 26. fol. 112 113. Whitaker. loc. citat.
to us imprisoned in a Cottage of earth, and wintered amongst the clouds of
sense, then their effects, is evidently false, contradicted by Whitaker,
disproued also by many experiences, of the eclipse of the Moon, of the ebbing
and flowing of the sea, of the Remora his hindering the course of a ship, and
of a thousand such natural effects, whose causes are unknown, from whence
the knowledge of Philosophy had her first being. For many learned men woundring
at these and the like effects, began to search out the hidden causes and
reasons of the^. And what? Is Aristotle of another mind, whom M. White White
in the same place.
so boldly quoteth, as countenancing his absurdity? I am fully assured, he has
not so much as any syllable sounding that way. For he distinguishes two kind
of knowledges, one in respect of us, the other in the nature of the Aristotle
no where teaches causes to be more known to us then their effects, as White
falsifyeth him.
thing in it self; that is, the thing in the perfection of his own nature, is
more intelligible, although by reason of our imbecility we cannot reach unto
it. Thus Aristotle in the very places objected by White only teaches that
causes are both before their effects, and better known (to wit) in nature, but
not to us, not to our understanding, not to our judgment, as he wretchedly
applies and abuses his words, whether of malice, or of ignorance, I will not
judge; but although he had been wholly unacquainted and ignorant in Aristotle,
yet Whitaker his master, who affirms the same, and with the same
distinction as Aristotle does, might have taught him the truth, if some evil
humor had not possessed his heart.

4. Thirdly, the true preaching of the word and doctrine of salvation, is the
very being it self or essence of the Church, it is the only thing we require
in searching it out. Wherefore to assign that for a mark, is to delude the
seeker, and to give the substance as a figne of Protesta^t^ marks mere
collusions.
the thing required. For example, if a stranger should demand where the Mayor
of the City, or chiefest Magistrate lodges? Were it not a mockery to say?
Where he dwells, who has the whole command of the town; or were the
stranger any whit the nearer by this reply? No more is any Protestant the near
of finding the Church by these her essential Marks, which do not openly
appear or shine in her forehead, but are closely hidden in her secret bowels.
For so S. Augustine says: That truth remains Aug. in psalm. 57.
in the womb, or bosom of the Church, as all essences are couched under the
veyles of accidents: and by us who borrow our knowledge from outward senses,
must needs be understood before we understand the natures themselves. Therefore
we must first repair to the Church, before we can find the truth enclosed
therein.

5. M. White admits with S. Augustine, that true faith is in closed in the
bosom of the Church, but as a White in his way to the true Church. 28. fol.
118. 119.
light (says he) in a watch tower, as a candle standing in a lantern, which
by it own light can guide us infallibly to the Church etc. as the firmament is
seen by the light of the sun, though it self hold out the sun unto us: These
be his examples as far wide from his purpose, as he from sincerity in
alleging of them. For the light manifests it self without the help of the
tower, the sun uses not the working of the firmament, to cast forth his
beams. They both do naturally shine, and give light unto us, the truth not
so, that cannot be seen, unless it be manifested, and opened by the Church;
Faith is Romans 10. v. 17. Psalm. 118. v. 130.
by hearing, heard it cannot be without it be uttered, uttered it must be by
the Preachers of the Church, the Preachers then are they that give notice of
the Truth. Therefore the Royal Prophet does not say that Gods truth of it
self, but that the declaration, and opening of his words illuminateth, and
gives understanding. Again, By the light we discover the parts of the tower,
by the sun the firmament quite contrary in our case; for we arrive not first by
beams of faith, to take notice of our preachers, but by our preachers we are
instructed in all points of faith, which order of proceeding is manifestly
expressed by the Prophet Isay, speaking Isa. 2. v. 3.
in the person of such as travail to learn the truth: Come let us go up to
the mount of our Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach
us his ways, etc. Lo they first knew the mount of the Church to which they
ascended, and knew it to be the mount of our Lord, the house of the God of
Jacob, and then were taught and instructed in his laws. The sple^dour of the
Church guided them to the light of truth: not her revealed light to know the
Church. For this cause our Savior termed his Apostles and their successors,
not the towers, or houses, only which hold, and b^ opening the window (as
White imagines, deliver us this ligot but he terms them the candles
themselves, and lights of the world, White in the place before cited. Matt. 5.
v. 14. White as before.
which guide and enlighten us in the heavenly path of true belief. Wherefore
if a light upon a watch tower in the darcke night, may (according to White) be
the only mark whereby to find the tower, the doctors, and Pastors of Christ,
which our Savior avouches to be his glorious lights shining in the dark
night of this world, must by Whites own allusion be the only marks to find out
the faith of Christ. They to whom Cornelius, to whom S. Paul, (called from
heaven) to whom all the ignorant are perpetual sent by the voice of God to
learn the truth of his doctrine, Act. 10. v 5. 6. Act. 9. v. 7. and 17.
and way of his commandments.

6. Fourthly either the sincere preaching of the word in some particular points
is sufficient to descry the Church, or it is necessary it be sincere in all
points of faith; both Whitaker, and White agree, that it must be sincere in all fundame^tal Whitaker. cont. 2. q. 5. cap. 17. White in his way to the true
Church..
points necessary to salvation, because diverse heretical conuenticles have the
sincere preaching in some particulers, either of Trinity, Incarnation, Passion
or Resurectio^ of Christ, yet that suffices not, therefore it ought to be
sincere in all. But how shall the ignorant be assured, what Church it is which
is pure in all these articles, who do not understand the articles themselves,
neither which be fundamental, nor how many, nor wherein the chief foundation
of every article consists as necessary to salvation? How shall they (for
example) be certainly persuaded, whether the Protestant sect syncerely teaches
the article of imputative justice, of original sin, of predestination, and
of many such, in which diverse learned men, have fowly erred and strayed from
the truth? They (I say) who cannot examine these points by the analogy of
holy writ, or if they can, are not able to judge of the verity of such deep and
unsearchable mysteries, what course shall they take? believe their ministers,
who confess they may deceive them? believe their private spirit? who have no
means in this case to make trial of it whether it accord or disagree from the
rule of faith? M. Field has set down a prudent course, which if his own
followers would now embrace, we might join hands Field in his epistle
dedicatory before his first book.
t^gether concerning this point. Seeing the controversies of religion in our
time, are grown in number so many, and in nature so intricat, that few have
time and leisure, fewer strength of understanding, to examine them, what
remains for men desirous of satisfaction in things of such consequence, but
diligently to search out which amongst Iren. l. 3. c. 3. and 4. Lact. l. 4.
divine. insti. cap. vlt. Ambr. ep. 32. ad Imper. Vale^t. Aug. de vtilit.
credend. c. 37. White in his way to the church. 26. fol. 119. Augu. in psalm.
57.
all the societies of men in the world, is that blessed company of holy ones,
that household of faith, that spouse of Christ, and Church of the living God.
which is the pillar, and ground of truth, that so they may embrace her
communion, follow her directions, and rest in her judgment. Hither to he. I
might produce the words of S. Irenaeus, Lactantius S. Ambrose, and S. Augustine
who exhort us also to repair to the Catholic Church to believe her, to set
up our rest in her, and from her Masters and teachers to learn the truth.

7. But White obiecteth the authority of the same S. Augustine seeming to
teach the contrary, when he says: By the face of truth I kn^w Christ the
truth it self; By the face of truth I know the Church pertaker of the truth. So
he perfidiously translateth S. Austines words and detorteth his meaning from
the scope of his discourse. For S. Augustine disputing against them, who
confined the Church within the borders of Africa, proves out of the holy
Scriptures, out of the word of God, and author of truth, that it is
universally spread over all the earth. After this he infers out of the mouth
of truth (not as he treacherously englisheth it by the face of truth) I know
Christ the truth it self, out of the mouth of truth, I know the White falsely
tra^slateth S. Augustins words.
Church pertaker of the truth. that is as by the clear testimonies of the word
of God, I know Christ the truth it self, so by the like clear testimonies do I
know the universality of the thurch, partaker of the truth, which the
donatistes denied: This one property of the Church he learned from the mouth of
truth, not the true Church it self from the pure preaching of the word in all
necessary points of faith, as White misconstrueth his meaning. For S. Augustine
expressly teaches some few leaves after, that Christ himself the foundation and
ground of all, and consequently his Incarnation, his death, and Passion, cannot
Christum ignoret necesse est, qui Ecclesiam eius nescit in qua sola cognosi
potest. Aug. in psalm. 69.
be known but by the Church: It is necessary (says he) he be ignorant of
Christ who is ignorant of his Church in which only he may be known. Therefore
the notice of the Church leads us to the knowledge of Christ, and not e
contra, especially seeing we cannot rightly spell the words and tell the sense
of scripture, nor know that scriptures are; nor understand and believe what is
signified by the name of Christ, unless we were first instructed by the Church.

8. Lastly, if before we come to the knowledge of the Church we must learn her
faith, why do we after seek to the Church, when we have already obtained the
treasure of truth, for which we sought unto her? if before we give credit to
the Church, we must examine her doctrine whether it be true or false; if before
we accept her interpretation of scripture, we must try whether it agree with
the sense, and connection of the self same scripture; if after such collation
and diligent conference, we may lawfully renounce, or follow the Church,
whereinsoeuer we deem it suitable or disagreeable to the written word: we must
be examiners and judges both of the Church, and Scripture, private men must
censure public, unlearned sheep control their Pastors, the ^reatest and a
city, confusion, and absurdity that can be imagined, White in his way to the
church. 30. fol. 127.
which yet is nothing the less by VVhites coloring of it, and saying, that:
They examine and judge not by their own private humors, but by the public
word of God which in the Scripture speaks. Or as he says in another place,
By the spirit of God in the scripture; because his spirit, his public Idem. 27
fol. 116.
word speaking in the Scripture, is not any way distinguished from the
Scripture it self, no more then the mind of a Prince, set down in his law, or
diuulged in See more of this matter in the first part of the Antitode, and
first Controversy.
his proclamation, is any way different from the proclamation, or law. Therefore
if the Scripture cannot open by her self the true sense of the Holy Ghost,
neither by the spirit of God, as it precisely speaks by the Scripture.
Again, his divine spirit manifested in the Scripture, is challenged by the
Church, which has pablike authority to expound Scripture, and so to be
preferred before the judgment of her hearers: or if they presume to draw it to
their private construction, they by their own private Ciccro in oratione pro
domo sua. Quid est tam arrogans qua^ de religione, de rebus diuinis and
ceremonijs sacris pontificum collegium docere conari.
humors (or which is all one in substance, though expressed in smoother
terms) they by their in ward imagined motions of the holy Ghost, judge of the
public word contrary to their Pastors judgment; they examine, censure,
reject, approve whatsoever seems good unto them, not making Gods public
word (as they falsely give out) but themselves judges, parties and vmpiers of
all. Which Cicero, and Metellus amongst the Heathens, S. Gregory Nazianzen
amongst Christians seriously reprehend as a most insolent part. Neither do
Protestants only make themselves judges and supreme controllers, but which in
every art and science is most ridiculous, They are (as Tertullian in the like
case derideth others) first perfect Catechumens before they be taught, doctors
before they be scholars; Metellus apud Titu^ Liuium decade 3. Nazian. in
orati^ne, qua se excusat quod ^^ Ecclesiae abstinuerit functione. Vos inquit
oues n^lite pas^ere pastores, neque super ter^inos ^or^^ eleuamini etc. Nolite
iudicare iudices, neque legem feratis legis-latoribus. Tertul. de praes. cont.
haer. ^. 41. ant^ sunt prefecti cathecumeni quam edocti.
for when as they cannot be catechized, nor instructed in faith, but by the
true Church, by her Pastors and teachers, if to descry and know the Church,
they must be first acquainted with all necessary articles of belief, her
essential and inseparable marks, they must first become Masters in their
Catechism, before they be admitted into the school of Catechumens; first
arrive to the perfection of Doctors, before they be taught the Alphabet of
Scholars; that is, sufficiently to know and understand the mysteryes of faith,
before they can receive or learn them from the faithful. And seeing Faith
alone iustifyeth the believing Protestant, he by this dotage is truly justified
in the sight of God, is pardoned his sins, is inwardly sanctified and united
unto Christ before he be incorporated in his body the Church.

9. In sum, although our Reformers notes were allowed as good, vet for the
finding out of their Church (especially before Luthers days) they would be as
far to seek, as ever before; because the pure doctrine cannot be taught
without some men to teach it, and people to hear it, without it fructify and
increase in the hearts of some. But no Protestants can be discovered before
that incestuous Friar married a Nun, who either preached or believed the
Protestants Ghospel, as I shall manifestly show in the Chapters ensuing:
Therefore no Church can they decipher by their own devised marks.

CHAP. XI. Wherein is showed, That our Sectaryes had not any Preachers of the
Word, nor Administration of Sacraments, nor any Church at all before Luther
began: Against D. Fulke, and D. Spark.
MOST true is that oracle of holy scripture: Every one that does ill hates the
light, and comes not to the light, that his works Joan. ^. v. 20.
may not be controlled. Which very fitly describes the condition of our
Sectaryes, who in all their chiefest controversies between them and us,
cunningly shun the open field of public trial, and fly to the ambush of
dark, and hidden, and deceitful answers. For in expounding of Scriptures,
whom make they their last and final Judge? Their own private and secret
spirit. Who faithful belieuers? The elect and predestinate, only known to God.
What marks do they assign to find out the Church? The true preaching Fulke in
c. 2 Thessalonians. 2. sect. 5. c. 12. Apo. sect. 2. in c. 20. sect. 6. Tertul. de
resur. carn.
of the word etc. more hard to know, then the Church it self they labor to
find. Where do they say their Preachers were, or Church continued? Marry for
many hundred years, Hid in corners (says D Fulke) chased into the desert,
even amongst the ruins of the visible Church. Are not these the Lucifugae,
shunners of light, of whom Tertullian speaks? Are they not afraid to appear
in the sight of men, least their treacheries be discovered?

2. We proceed, and entreat them to set down in what particular Country,
under what climate, or sign of the heavens, these their dumb Pastors, not
able to bark, this their ruined house, and decayed Church, lay hid so long? We
desire to know who were the men? In what places, and after what fashion they
lived? Spark Sparks in his answer to M. John d' Albins page 122.
makes answer unto us: You do our Church, and her Ministers double wrong.
First, in thus chasing them into wilderness, there to save themselves from your
fury: and then yet exacting at our hands, the names of them whom God by thus
hiding them, preserved to continue his Church. Yea? Was God so impotent as he
could not preserve them without hiding of them? Is this no wrong Matt. 5. v.
14. Dan. 12. v. 3. Matt. 5. v. 13. Act. 1. v 8. Eccles. 19. v 12. 13. 14. 15.
and Eccles. 39. v. 12. 13. 14. 15.
to God? Do you no wrong to Christ, in drawing his dominion from the largenes
of the world, in hiding his Church, which he absolutely said could not be
hidden. And do we wrong you, in defining to know, in what corners you hide it?
Did not Christ to continue his Church appoint visible Sacraments, visible
Pastors, visible Governors, who should be lights of the world, stars of
heaven, salt of the earrh, witness of his name, interpreters of his word, whose
wisdom many should after extol, whose memory should not decay, nor glory be
extinguished, whose names should be rehearsed from generation to generation,
and whose praises the Church should continually set forth. And do we wrong you,
in asking the role of these men's names? Such wrong Tertullian, S. Pacian,
Optatus, Tertu. l. de praesc. Pacian. ep. ad Sempr. Optag. l. 2. con. Par. Aug
in psalm. cont. part. Don. Sparks in his answer to M. John d' Albins page 53.
S. Augustine, and diverse others have done to the heretics of their days in
challenging them to set down the row of their predecessors, and such wrong
the Church of God has taught us to offer to all new Sectaryes.

3. Why then M. Spark do you complain of wrong? Forsooth (quoth he) because
there is no reason in requiring that in the decays, and ruins of the Church,
which accompanyeth always the Church in her prosperous and standing estate.
And then: When in the just judgment of God, the Churches shallbe oppressed, as
now a long time they have been, under the tyranny of Antichrist, then, and
after such a time, such a thing graves to many, not only hard, but also
impossible. Lastly, through continuance of time, force Page 53.
of your Antichristian persecution, distance of place, lack of writers etc.
especially you being always watchful to blot out their memoryes quite, to
deface their names, makes it very hard (yea if impossible no Page 54.
marvel etc.) for us to name from time to time, the places and persons, that
have always succeeded one another, for the continuance of our faith and
Church. Thus he.

4. To repeat his words, is to reprove his folly. For if we have razed the
names, and quite blotted out the memories of their preachers, if their Churches
have been ruined, decayed, and so long oppressed by us, they cannot be the true
Church of Christ, which the gates of helloan never Matt. 16. v. 18. Psalm. 128.
v. 1.
ouercom, not that of which the royal Prophet said, They have often assailed me
from my youth, but could never prevail against me. Concerning which matter,
read S. Augustine upon that psalm, S. Chrysostom, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Tertullian, Chrysostom. in demonst. quod Christus fit Deus. Clem. Alexand. 6.
Strom. Tertu. l. ad Scapula^ and in Apologet. ^ustin. in dialo. cum Tripho. S.
Leo. ser: denat. Aposto. Amb. l. ^. cap. 20. in Lucam.
Iustine, S. Leo S. Ambrose, who prove the flock of Christ to be exercised,
not oppressed, not diminished, but increased by affliction: The more (says
Tertullian) we are cut and moved, the more we are multiplied, because the blood
of Martyrs, is the seed of Christians. As the Vine (says S. Amrbose) whiles it
is tied is extended, and lopped is not decreased but augmented, so the holy
flock whiles it is bound, is spread abroad, whiles it is humbled, is
advanced, whiles it is cut, is crowned. But your sheep, and sheepheards have
not only been diminished, but abolished, and oppressed (as you say) a long
time, by the rage of persecution, therefore you are not that fruitful vine, or
heavenly plant, which flourishes by the waters of affliction.

5. Will M. Sparks companions afford him any help, in satisfying this demand?
Will Fulke tell us, where their doctrine was preached, or sacraments ministered?
will he name the places, and describe the persons, who professed their faith in
former ages? They were (says he) most cruelly persecuted in those, who were
called albigenses, Waldensis, Paupe^^s de Lugdune, Picards etc. And a little
after, they were often Fulke in c. 20. Apo. sect. 6.
driven into the mountains, and desert places of the Alps, Apennine, Hyrcinia
sylua, and other corners of the world, or else dispersed, and kept close in all
regions of Europe. O pitiful Church, O miserable flock, which from Boniface
the third until Luthers days, had no other professors them vanquished and
condemned heretics, no other places of abode then woods, hills, rocks, and
mountains, and they not far distant one from the other. For Hyrcinia silua is
a wood in Germany, The Apennine divide Italy, and the Alps inuirone it on the
one side (to use Tullyes words) as it were with walls. A small compass to
contain the whole Church of the world, which the Prophets for told, should Dan
2. v. 44. Psalm. 71. v. 8. 9. 10. 11. Dan. 7. v. 14. Zacha. 13. v. ^. Psalm. 9.
v. 7. Genesis 2^. v. 17. and 18. Isa. 60. 61. and 62. Psalm. 44. v. 17.
subdue all kingdoms, ouerrule all nations, be adored by Kings, and served by
all sorts of people, which should destroy the Idols and Cittyes of Satan,
possess the gates, and rule with great glory, in the territoryes of her
enemies, whose children should be multiplied like the sands of the sea, and
pastors reign like princes over the whole face of the earth. Have all these
prophesyes been written in vain? Or have they been all falsified, at least
for these thousand years space? have all the famous men, learned writers,
noble Princes, and potentates, all Countries, kingdoms, towns, and Cities
been made tributary to the devil, and Christ dispossessed of all his
patrimony? Has he had no other place so long a time to be honored in, then
savage woods, and rocky hills? No other followers, them base, ignorant, and
desperate vagabondes?

6. Jeremy calls the Church the seat or throne of Christ's glory exalted.
Malachy prophesied of it in the person Jeremy. 17. Mala. 1. v. 11. Hier. in
dial. aduer. Lucifer. Psalm. 9. v. 7. A notable sentence of S. Hierome.
of God, From the rising of the sun, to the setting, my name is great amongst
nations in every place etc. And bath the greatness of his name, the magnificence
of his glory, in the universality of all places, been all this while
restrained to a few uncouth, and forlorn deserts? S. Jerome makes a most
vehement inuectiue against the like peruersity of ancient heretics. The speech
(says he) of the Father is fulfilled: I will give thee gentills to thy
inheritance, and the borders of the earth to thy possession etc. The Psalmist
full of God sings: The forces of enemies have failed in the end, and their
Cittyes thou have destroyed. And* VVher be these men too too religious? yea
(...) prophan^, who affirm more synagogues then Churches? How are the Cittyes
of the devil destroyed? and in the end, that is in the consumation of the
world, how have their idols perished? If Christ has not his Church, Or if he
has it only in Sardinia, he is become to-too poor. Behold if Satan possess
the Islands of Britain, the Countries of France, the East, the Indian people,
and all the world, how are the trophyes of the Cross translated to a corner of
the earth? Marry the potent adversary has yealded up unto Christ the Country
of Iberia, and pale faced men of Biscay, and the province of the Aethiopians he
disdayneth to inherit. Thus S. Jerome, with whom I may with far greater
reason mourn and bewail It is incredible that the Devil should drive Christ,
and his church to such narrow corners as Protestants imagine.
the losses of my Savior, if Satan has domineered in East, West, in all
parts of the world, and driven him to the miserable exigentes of such narrow
straites* as our adversaries feign? Alas how poor a king is he become? how
mean a conqueror after so many trihumphes? When the potent and puissant enemy
scorning the untrodden Alps, and Apennine hills, disdayning to lodge in
Hyrcinia woods leaves him these forlorn deserts to harbor his flock?

7. What? for the honor of your Savior, for the glory of his Church, for the
credit of your cause, and comfort of your friends, could you not have
stretched a little further the space of his dominions? Could you not have named
and afforded him the wilderness of Egypt? the Tartarian deserts, or dens of
Arabia? some unknown Caesar in his Commentary. Protestant forunners have left
no memory of their Church, and yet our Church has been always. perspicuous.
coasts in the air, or crookes in the sea? Was the devil so greedy (and you
so religious) and careful of his prey, as to engrosse the right of the whole
world unto him? Or you knew full well, that the Hyrcinia wood, which is nine
days journey in breadth, and forty in length (as Caesar reports) was of too
great exte^t for your perfecuted company of elect. Inded the least molehill or
mouse hole there might comprise them all whom no author names, or chronicler
records, who have left no mark or memory behind them of their noble
exploytes. Our Church in her infancy through the storms of persecution has
been driven to lurk insecret vaultes and ca^es underground, and yet her sheep
and shepherd, their oratories, their sepulchers, their assemblies, their
preachingea, their deaths their bannishmentes were publicly known, the
pedigre of her Bishops, the names of her Priests, the catologue of her Martyrs,
and innumerable monumentes are yet extant of her faith and profession. And has
your predestinate flock been so often ravished in spirit, and rapt into the
heavens, as they have left no earthly sign or token of their being, not in
those consecrated Alps and Apennine hills, hallowed no doubt with their
presence, and daily perfumed with the spiritual incense of their deuoutest
prayers.

8. Note therefore a wily trick of his double dealing, he does not resolutely
avouch the members of his Church were chased into these desert places, but they
were often driven into the monntaynes etc. or else dispersed, and kept close in
all Fulke in the place above cited.
Regio^s of Europe. Why use you this wavering and unconstant speech? Were they
kept so close as you know not in what corners they lurked, what places they
inhabited, or who they were that hid themselves? How shall we then believe
there were any such, if no mention be made of them? How do you know they
taught your Protestant faith? If both themselves and their doctrine be wholly
unknown? S. Augustine writes: If any man shall say, there be perchance Aug. l.
de ouibus c. 10.
some sheep of God I know not where, which God takes care of, and I know them
not, he is too too absurd to humane sense, who thinks or imagines such
things. Yet Fulke is so absurd, Spark so absurd, all protestants so absurd,
who dream of preachers of the word, and administratours of the sacraments, of
sheep and shepherds, whose names they know not. Again, were they kept close
in all regions of Europe only? Had you none in Africa, none in Asia, Brasilia,
India, America etc. When the Donatistes affirmed the like, and confined the
faithful to the straites of Africa, S. Augustine and Optatus rebuked them in
this manner, That with you (says Optatus) in Optat. l. 2. cont. Par.
a particle of Africa, in a corner of a little region the Church may be, with us
in another part of Africa shall it not be? In Spain, in Italy or France
where you are not, shall it not be? If you will have it (...) with you, in
^a^^onia, in Dacin, Mi^ia, (...), in all Greece where you are not, shall it not
be? that it may ^ with you, in Pontus, Galatia, Capadocia, Pamphilia etc. where
(...) are not, shall it not be? and innumerable other Islands and pro^^ces
where you are not, shall it not be? Where then is the propriety of (...)
Catholic? which is so termed because it is nationa all, and every August.
in. psalm. ^1*
^here diffused? Saint Augustine reproves them as sharply saying, Saint Paul
affirms that in every place, the faithful are the ^^eet odor of Christ, and
is it contradicted? Africa only yealdeth a good ^ent, all the world stincketh
etc. A little after, What tellest thou ^e O heretic? The whole world is not
the price of Christ's blood, if Ibidem.
Africa only be redeemed: Thou dare not say the whole world was not ^^deemed,
but that it has perished. And who^ did Christ suffer to invade ^^s dominions,
and deprive him of his right? Thus they against ^he Donatistes, and yet the
impudency of our adversaries ^^ far more exorbitant. They had in Africa 270.
Bi^hops Aug in coll. Cart.
of their faction, as Saint Augustine reports, and their ^omplices called
Montenses had a certain succession in ^he dens by Rome which Optatus recites.
And these our ^ectaries imprison the Church within the Regions of Optat. l. 1.
and 2. cont. Parmen.
Europe, where they name not any Priest, or Bishop, or ^ine of succession, for
the space of a thousand five hundred years, as shall be manifestly showed by
discarding them which they injuriously shuffle into the pack of their
Professors.

CHAP. XII. Wherein is disproued the Claim which our Reformers make to certain
pretended Protestants, and to men of our Church: Against Doctor Fulke, and
Doctor Spark.
ALBEIT many Sectaries after a long search and great confusion to satisfy our
importunity, begin to draw ^ Catalogue of their professors, yet those very
men they name, cannot any one of them concur to build their Synagogue: for
some whom they rehearse, were manifest and known Catholics wholly of our
Spark in his answer to M. John d' Albins Chap. 1. and 4. Illiricus in catal.
test. Gifford in his sermon upon the reuela. Simo^ de Voyon in his discourse
upon the (...). ^^il^ in his 3. book chap. 1^^
Religion, as Alcuinus Master to Charles the great, Gregory of Arimini an
Augustine friar and Prior general of their order, Saint Catherine of Siena a
canonized Saint and professed Nun of the order of Saint Dominicke, Ocham,
John Gerson, Saint Thomas of Aquine, Picus Mirandula, and S. Bernard.

1. The rest were notorious heretics, as Aerius, Iouinian, the Albigenses,
Waldensis, Picardi, Petrus Abaylardus, Berengarius, Constantin^^ Copronimus,
Wickliffe, Husse, who could not contynu^ the succession nor maintain the true
preaching of the protestants Gospel, first because Whitaker Whitaker contr.
2. q. 5. cap. 18. fol. 506. 507.
confesses with all Catholic Doctors, that no heresy c^n ^^sist with the
true says, nor that the Church ca^ be any Church which ^^ach^th an heresy. But
these forenamed miscreants obstina^ly ^aught sundry heresies condemned by
Protestants the^solues, therefore they could not be professors or members
Epiphan. haeres 75. Aug. l. de here is. 82.
of their Church; for Aerius denied the consubstantiality of the son of God
with his Father, Iouinian held that man after baptism could sin no more.

2. The Albigenses gallenged by Doctor Fulke and Doctor Spark to be
vpholders of Protestancy, are notwithstanding By Fulke in cap 20. Apoc sect. 6.
and in c. 12 sect. 2. By Spark in his answer to M. John de Albins pa. 58.
Osiand. ce^t. 13. l. 1. c. 4. page 329.
condemned by Osiander another Protestant writer, for approving two Authors or
Beginners of things, one good another evil, with the wicked Manichees for
denying Baptism, denying matrimony, denying the resurrection of the flesh, as
Antoninus likewise testifyeth with him. To whom I add the censure of Master
Cooper the once intruded Bishop of winchester who records of them: Albigenses
were heretics which began by To^^use in France the year of our Lord 1207.
which held the heresies of the Albanenses, touching the soul, Baptism, God,
and the general Resurrection, wherein they taught (as he a little before
me^tioneth) That the soul of man after his death was put into another body,
That Baptism was of none efficacy, That there were two Gods, Anton. 4. Sum.
ti. 11. cap. 7.
^^e good and another evil, and that of the good proceeded good things, and
of the evil God evil things etc. That the body should not eft soones rise ^^
the day of Judgment. These heresies they renewed of the Albanenses. They held
moreover (says Cooper) That it was Cooper in his dictionary the word
Albigenses.
^^t lawful for Christian men to eat flesh.

3. The Waldensis or poor men of Lions were the ^^me with the former, but
diversely termed upon diverse occasions. 1. They admitted no Judicious sentence
or corpo^all punishment of death to be lawful, because it is writ^^n Nolite
iudicare, do ye not judge, and non occides, thou shall At the word Albanenses
^^^ediatly before. Who where all one as some think with the Albigenses.
Alfonsus de Castro lib. 11. aduers. bar. verbo. ^ccid^re. Guido and Antoninus
de waldensibus.
^ot kill. 2. They allowed laymen and women to consecrate the Sacrament, and
preach the word of God. 3. Permitted Illyr. in ca^. testium verita^is pa. 731.
729. 747. 735. 755. Antonin. p. 4 tit. 1^. cap. 7. Fulke in c. 12. Apoc. sect.
2. Luther de 10. praeceptis in explicatione 1. praecepti and eodem Tom. in
resolutionibus de indulge^t. conclus. 25. impres. VVittebergaeanno Domini 1582.
Mihi inquit-certissimu^ est purgatoriumesse.
Clergy men to enjoy no possessions or proprietyes. 4. Condemned oaths,
Princes and Judges as Illiricus a zealous Protestant witnesses of them. And
lastly they contemned the Apostles Creed as Antoninus testifies. The Picards
whom Fulke accou^teth in the number of his faithful, are disclaymed by Luther
as infaelices haeretici, unhappy heretics. And because their first Author
denied Purgatory, which Luther embraced (saying: It is most certain to me that
there is a Purgatory) he inueigeth against him after this manner. Must we
therefore believe an heretic scarce borne 50. years ago, and contending the
faith of so many ages to have been false, especially when he does nothing else
then that he says, I believe not, and so proves all his own things and
disproueth all ours: Thus Luther exclaymed against the Protestant Picardus for
impugning Purgatory, and with the same outcry pursues him for disallowing many
articles, as strongly warranted by antiquity as that.

3. Petrus Abaylardus banded himself (as we read in Saint Bernard) with
Arius, and Nestorius concerning the Trinity, and the person of Christ: he
indeauored by many reasons to prove that christ was not delivered to death by
the will of his Father. Constantinus Coproniuus whom Illyricus mentions
amongst his witnesses of truth, agreeeth I confess with protestants in
breaking of images and disauowing their worship: But he was otherwise such a
damnable heretic, and hellish Idolater, as he denied our Lady to be mother of
God with the Caytife Nestorius. He worshipped Venus, and offered humane
sacrifices unto the Devil, as Suidas reports. Wickliffe also their great
Ber. epist. 192. and 188. M. Simo^s upon the Reuela. pa. 142. gives instance
among o-others of this Abaylardus. Illyr in Catal. testium page 836. 837.
Suidas in lexico. Melancton epist. ad Frider. Mycon. quae praefixa* est veterum
sententijs a se c^llect. de caena Domini.
Patron is discarded by Melancthon Luthers scholar, because (says he) he
foolishly confou^deth the Gospel with politik affairs. He contendeth it
unlawful for Priests to possess any thing proper or as their own: he will
have no Tithes paid but to Teachers. Of which propositions Melancton delivers
this censure: Pernicious and sediditious (...) is that VVicklifian superstition
which forces the Ministers of the Church to beggary.

4. Secondly, besides these heresies which they held, anathematized both by
Protestants, and us; they maynteyned other articles of Faith, conformable to
our Catholic doctrine, and disagreable from Protestants in points
fundamental. For this cause Luther rejects the Waldensis, or poor men of
Lions, as halting in the article of Luther. in resolut. ca. de Suerm.
Justification, the principal ground, life and soul of Protestancy. They err
(quoth he) in that they believe not only ^ayth to justify without works, but
that it must be confirmed with Charity; of imputative Justice they know
nothing. Melancton records of Wickliffe, he understood not a whit, nor held
the Justice of faith. Melancto^^* loco citat.
And why so? because he believed with us Justification and merit of works. He
acknowledged also with us the adoration of Relikes, the worshipping of Images,
the behoofull patronage and intercession of Saints. Which according to Calvin
does race the foundation of religion, stop all way VVicklif. de Euc. c. 9. in
decal. super primo ma^dato ca. 15. Item in ser. de assump. Mariae he says, hi^
videturmihi quodim-possbile est nos praemiari fine Mariae suffragio. Call. l. 1.
instit. cap. 20. Luther in coll. Germ. cap. de Sacram. altaris and cap. de
Antichristo Fox in Apocalip. cap. 11. page 20^. VVhytaker cont. ^. q. 5. c. 27.
fol. 489, Call. l. 4. insti. cap. ^.
and entry to God. Luther abandoneth the Hussites, and warns his followers,
to forsake their communion, because they say private Masses, and because John
Husse departed not (as he testifies) a fingers beadth from the Papacy. Fox
also affirms of him that he taughr and practiced the same with us, the same
which i^ taught at Rome concerning transubstantiation, Mass, vows of
Chastity, free will, predestination, informed faith, the cause of Justification
and merits of good works. Of Iouinian and Berengarius I might show the like,
that they defended many Ca^holike points of doctrine, which overthrow the very
Tower of Protestancy. For if the Church presently falls according to
Whitaker, Calvin, and all learned Protestants and Catholics also, as soon as
she teaches any fundamental error; how long has the Protestants Church
lain buried in her own ruins, which has embraced so many and such
essential blasphemies?

5. Thirdly, although these false supposed Protestants, had all accorded in
Protestants profession, yet they could not have been sufficient to underprop
the Although the Waldenses wicklifistes and the rest had agreed in one belief,
yet they could not continue the never interrupted succesion of the Protestant
faith.
walls, or unite the building of their discorded Babell, because the most of
them lived at diverse times, in diverse Countries, without any mutual Society,
or lineall descent, and with the interruption of many years one from the
other. For Wickliffe was furnished with no authority, instruction, or
consecration to preach, or administer Sacraments from the Waldensis, nor the
Waldensis from Berengarius, nor Berengarius from Iouinian, nor he from Aerius.
They all started up of themselves, maynteyned their seueuerall sects in
several ages* without knowledge, or agreements, without deriuation of faith
and ecclesiastical power from those their Predecessors, which is necessary to
vphould and continue the perpetual and mediate succession of the Church. Nay
they were so far from composing an hereditary pedigrece, or line of descent
amongst themselves, as they were all for the most part, or Epiphan. and Prat.
l. 1. Elenchi. v. Aeria^. Aug. haer. ^2. Prat. in Eieae. verbo Berengar. Fox in
his act. and monuments. fol. 628. Stow in his Annalls. page 464. M. Jacob in
his defense of the Churches and Ministry of England page 13. Georg. Milius in
explicatione Conf. August. Art. 7. page 137. 138.
their chief beginners and prime founders, of our religion, before they brake
forth into schism and heresy. So Aerius was a Priest, and disciple to
Eustachius Bishop of Sebasta in Pontus. Iouinian a Monk of the City of Rome
in Italy. Berengarius Archdeacon of Angiers in France. VValdo a rich and
Catholic Merchant of Lions. Wickliffe a sacrifying Priest the Parson of
Lutterworth in Leicester shire, who said Mass (if Master Jacob an earnest
Protestant may be credited) e^e^ to his dying day. Therefore they had no Church
in which they were borne, none from whence they were propagated but only ours:
the Protestants Church had no being when they began, no being in England*
when wickliffe: in Lions, when VValdo: in any other Country, when the former
sectaryes peeped up; neither of late had it any being in Scotland when Knox, in
France when Calvin, in Suitzerland when Zuinglius, in Germany when Luther,
first preached his gospel. For as Georgius Milius wisely observes: grant
that Luther had any predecessors, and Lutherans reformation will be altogether
needles.

6. Finally if Protestants had any accomplices, or vpholders of their sect in
Morauia, Bohemia, Calabria, (...) (the largest tractes M. Fulke names for the
openly Fulke. in cap. 12. Apoc. sect. 2.
^nowne continuance of his Church,) they should have gone, and derived from
them the pedigree of their Pastors, their power and commission to preach the
gospel. They (as all other preachers in former times have been accustomed
when their authority has been called in question) should have asked of them
Litteras formatas, dimissory, or testimonial letters, to give testimony of
their calling, which Our ghospellers had no testimonial letters from any
church or Pastor before their days. Iero. ep. 89.
we have so often convinced to be surreptitions, and usurped. For if Saint Paul
had not had (as Saint Hierome says) security of preaching the gospel; if it
had not been approved by Peter's sentence, and the rest that were with him, who
were undoubtedly embraced as true Apostles, how durst you without any
allowance, and approbation of your ancestors, ^eginne to preach your
Ptotestant faith? Was it enough ^ou gathered it by your own diligent, yet
deccauable interpretation, out of the holy Scriptures? And was ^t not enough
for him to have his Gospel by infallible re^elation immediately from God? Had he
lost his labor, and run in vain, without the attestation of the Pastors of
the Church? And do you think to reap any fruit by preaching, without any
evidence or approbation from Christ's vicegerentes upon earth? If he (who had
his doctrine from heaven at least (as Reynoldes grants) to ad Galat. 2. v.
2. Reynoldes in his conference c. 4 diuis. 2. fol. 134. Theophil. l. 2. de
paschat.
stop the mouths of false seducers, who disgraced him, ^s lately crept into
the Apostleship) did confer with ^^ter and the rest of his predecessors, why
did not you ^^stly accused by us, as wrongefull intruders, as wolfes, and
usurpers, put your doctrine to the like trial, conference ^^d examination of
your forerunners? Theophilus Bishop o^ Alexandria anoucheth of Origin, that he
was possessed with the spirit of pride, because he conferred not his faith with
his ancestors, as Saint Paul did: and were you hin^ered with the like spirit
from putting your doctrine to the approbation of the Church? Or was it because
you had not indeed any Church in the world, any Bishop to impose hands upon
you, any Temple, Oratory, Judge, or Tribunal to have recourse unto, not any
man living to approve your faith, or give testimony of your calling, but such
as you had first seduced, and bewitched with your follyes.

CHAP. XIII. Wherein is overthrown the like Claim which Protestants make to
the Professors of the Roman Church: against Doctor Field, and Master White.
MASTER Doctor Field and Master White not finding sufficient stones amongst
the forenamed heretics to raise the Temple of their Sectaryes, not finding any
public assemblies in Morauia, Bohemia, Calabria etc. nor any latent and hidden
resortes in the Hyrcinian woods and other parts of Europe proper to themselves,
they lay hold on the chiefest Rocks and pillars of our Church, to stay up their
ruinous sheepcote. And as the harlot before Solomon having killed her ^. Reg. 3.
own, pretended right to another child: So they in behalf of their barren
and harlotry Conuenticles, deprived of true parents and maynteyners of their
belief; entitle themselves to the noble issue of our fruitful Mother, to the
right of her ordinary succession, and lawful ^a^ours. For Field auerres of the
Protestant Church that, Before Luthers days it was the known and apparent
Church in the Field in 3. book of of the Church ca. 6. page 72. VVhitein his
defense of the way to the true Church ca. 44. fol. 424. Fulke in c. 20. Apoc.
sect. 6 Field ibid. page 73. White in his way to the true Church. 45. fol 338.
and. 50. fol. 372. in his defense of the same way. c. 44. fol. 420. Whitaker.
cont. 2 pa. 165.
world, wherein allour Fathers lived and dyed, wherein Luther and the rest were
baptized, received their Christianity, ordination, and power of mynistery.
Which White acknowledges saying: For the first 600. hundred, we assign the
Church wherein the Fathers lived, and for the rest to this day we will assign
no other catalogue, then the Church of Rome it self. Thus the Protestants
Church, which in the opinion of their greatest Clerks, was latent and
invisible; or which continued in desert corners before Luthers appearing; is
now by their followers made at the same time famous and apparent, even the
glorious and renowned Church of Rome it self: so ill do the scholars agree
with their Masters, the children with their Fathers. But when we oppose
against the^ that the Church of Rome is that superstitious and Antichristian
Church, which perverted (as they falsely avouch) the very foundations themselves
of Christian religion: They answer that the stiff professors and maynteyners
of Popery, were not the true Church, but a dangerous and wicked saction
tyrannyzing over men's consciences. A disease, a contagion outwardly cleaning to
the Church or breeding as a gangrene within, and corrupting the pure doctrine
but by a little and little: under which faction notwithstanding, and even in
the midest thereof the true Church continued. In which manner say they the
Church was in the papacy, but the papacy was not the Church.

2. This is their last and most deceiptful mask by which they think to duske
men's eyes, and amaze their wits with disguised words, when they cannot
satisfy their Aug. l. de bapt. cont. Donat. ca. 6. and 7.
consciences with any substantial answer: for although the contagion of the
papacy by little and little corrupted the pure doctrine, yet it came to be
deadly and damnable according to them, in diverse points, for many years ago.
Whereupon I dispute, although not altogether with the same words, yet with
the same force of reason as Saint Augustine does against the Donatistes. When
that contagion or the Roman errors came to be deadly, either they contaminated
the Church, or did not contaminate it? Choose which of these you will? say they
contaminated An unavoidable dilemma co^cluding against Protestants.
it (that is, defiled it with such heretical and blasphemous doctrine as could
not stand with the being thereof) and the Church has perished as Saint
Augustine infers, Christ's promise has failed, there was no means left for
you to be propagated, or newborn in Christ, no means of catechizing or
instructing you. Say they defiled not the Church, neither could they have
defiled you by remaining in it: why then did you separate your selves from
August. in same place.
it? Why erected you an Altar against the Altar of the world? Why with the
sacrilege of most heinous schism presumed you to divide the unity of the
Church? How comes it to pass, that, whilst, by shunning the small faults,
Aug. ibid.
which your selves do faygne, you run into the sacrilege of schism more
grievous then all other faults? For is not this sacrilegious and schismatic
division to preach new doctrine, to minister Field in his third book of the
Church ca. 6. and 7. fol. 72. 73. 74. 75.
new Sacraments, and not to participate with your mother Church in faith and
communion?

3. Both Master Field and White make answer, that the errors of the Roman
Church defiled not the whole but some part of Christ's mystical body, as a
canker which corrupts not the whole but some part of man's flesh: after which
manner they call it a faction, a disease White in his way to the true Chu..
45. and 50. In his defense of the same chap. 44. page 420. The Protestants
cannot say they communicated with the Papacy.
which infected the papacy, but not the Church; and so pretend that they have
separated themselves from the co^tagious faction, not from the true Church. But
they still walk in mystes out of which we must lead them with this second
dilemma. Either the true Church whose Society our Protestants challenge, did so
continue with the papacy, as it participated with it in sacrifice, and
Sacraments, in public faith and open communion? Or did not participate, but
made a Church by it self mynistring Sacraments and preaching the word apart
from the Papists? If it participated with that preuayling faction, they were
contaminated with their heresies, defiled with their errors, and so the papacy
was not only a contagion outwardly cleaning to the Church, or infecting it in
part, but inwardly canckering, and corrupting the whole, all ^ere made
partakers of her disease, who openly admitted and professed her doctrine.

4. Again, if the Protestant Church communicated with the Papacy, and
submitted her self to the tyranny of her faction, at least for fear, and in
outward show, howsoever they believed aright in their inward hearts, they were
all either hypocrites, or base dissemblers, all open idolaters and deniers of
Christ; they were all deprived Luc. 9. v. 26. Romans 10. verse. 10.
of the means of salvation: For he that shall be ashamed of me and of my words,
him the Son of man shall be ashamed of, when he shall come in his majesty. And,
with the heart we believe to justice, and with the mouth confession is made to
salvation* Which as I have already confirmed by the testimony of Calvin, so now
I Field. l. 1. c. 10 fo. 1^.
strengthen with the authority of M. Field. Seeing (says he) the Church is the
multitude of them that shall be saved, and no man can be saved unless he make
confession unto salvation (for Faith hid in the heart, and concealed does not
suffice); It cannot be but they that are of the true Church, must by the
profession of the truth, make themselves known in such sort, that by their
profession, and practice they may be discerned from other men. So he.

5. Moreover, if the true Church of the elect did communicate with the Papacy in
preaching of the word, and administration of Sacraments, from Saint Gregory the
great till Luthers days, for almost a thousand years space, either the Papacy
it self was the true Church, or Christ had all that while no true Church, no
spouse upon earth, because the true Church cannot possible be without the true
preaching of the word and administration of Sacraments; which are even in our
adversaries opinion the essential marks and properties of the Church; and
where they cease, the Church according to them must perish Whitak. in his
answer to the third reason of M. Campian.
and decay. We ascribe (quoth Whitaker) those properties to the Church, which
comprise the true nature of the Church, whose presence make a Church, and their
absence mar or destroy a Church. Wherefore since no other truth was preached
in the Papacy, then the Roman Catholic faith; either that was true, or no
other true faith was openly professed upon earth. On the other side, if our
adversaries do answer, They cannot answer they communicated not with the
papacy.
that they communicated not in faith, and Sacraments with the Papacy; but made
a separate Church by themselves, distinct from it, in which the true word was
preached, and Sacraments mynistred: Then that pure and Protestant Church,
needed not the reformation of Protestants, from that Luther should have learned
his faith, to that he and followers should have joined themselves: Then if they
challenge such a Church, they are engaged to name the persons who maynteyned
their doctrine, the people who embraced it, the times and places in which it
was Protestants urged to show their temples councels and countries converted by
them.
taught; they must show us what Temples they built, what Counsels they
gathered, what books they wrote, what heretics they condemned, what Countries
they have converted and instructed in the faith: For it is impossible their
Church should continue so many ages distinct from the Roman Papacy, and no
monument be left, no steps remain, no notice taken of it; at least by the
preuayling faction as they term it of the Roman Church, which diligently
recorded the names and heresies of every particular person, who at any time
stood up or defended any doctrine contrary to hers. If the Roman faction
tyrannyzed over them, blotted out their names, defaced their Spark in his
answer to M. John d' Albins page 53. 54.
works, razed their Churches, burned their Records (as Spark fayneth) some
Chronicler or other, some friend or enemy, some Protestant or Catholic, would
have registered those ransackinges, or mentioned the utter abolishments our
Governors made of them: Otherwise what warrant have Protestants to believe,
what evidence to show they had such professors? To believe without ground in
ciull matters is unadvised lightness, in matters divine, rashness inexcusable. I
proceed.

6. Two other seeming answers some of our late Reformers are wont to coin.
First, That seeing the Papacy Other euasions of our sectaryes rejected.
preserved the kernel of religion, believed the Trinity, the Incarnation, and
passion of Christ etc. their Protestant Church might be saved in it, although
it separated not it self in communion from her. But this cannot be: For the
Pelagians, the Donatistes, the Circumce^^^^, held these and many other grounds
of true religion, yet no man could be saved participating with them; nor with
the Quartadecimani, nor with any heretical Congregation, although it disse^ted
from the true Church but in one heresy alone. Therefore although the papacy
embraced the Fulke in c. 1^. A poc. sect. 2.
forenamed principles of faith, yet beccuse it was defiled according to you,
not with one, but sundry heresies, which undermined the castle of heavenly
belief; the maynteyners of Protestancy could not be members of the true
Church, abiding in the false; they could not be united to God in the house of
Belial, partake with Christ in the seat of Antichrist, as has been other
where more largely discussed.

7. Their second evasion is, that ignorance might Ignorance cannot excuse our
sectaries ancestors in communicating with us, if we danably erred.
free their confederates from the danger of damnation, in communicating with
our Church until the truth of their Gospel was revealed, and our errors
discovered unto them. But I answer that the plea of ignorance of matters
necessary necessitate medij, as the only means to atteyne salvation, in
justification and other articles of like tenor, on which the sum of religion
in Protestants opinion depends, cannot be admitted in the Court of
conscience, before the tribunal of heaven. For of such ignorance sentence is
pronounced by the Apostle: If any man know not, he shall not be known. And,
Whosoever have sinned without the law, without the law shall perish. Again,
albeit 1. Cor. 14. v. 38. Romans 2. v. 12.
the Church of God may for a time be inuincibly ignorant of some truth not
necessary to salvation, yet never of any necessary truth. Wherefore if
imputative justice, if only faith without merit of works, and many such like
protestant articles, be necessary to be believed; the ignorance of them must
needs cause al their ancestors to forfeit Field in his first book c. 10. p.
19.
eternal bliss; especially since Field therein subscribeth to the Apostle:
That no man can be saved unless he make confession to salvation etc. and by
profession of truth make himself known.

8. Besides, as the Church cannot be ignorant of a necessary article, much
less can it generally profess any damnable error, any pernicious falsehood,
as all latent Protestants openly did living in the Papacy, and publicly
professing (as they account it) our erroneous doctrine. This the promise of
Christ, the assistance of the holy Ghost, the protection of God would never
permit his Church to do.

9. This were to frustrate the coming of Christ, the price of the blood, his
preaching of his Gospel. For why did he take such pains to preach the truth,
if ignorance might excuse us? Why did he suffer death to abolish Matthew. 28.
Ephesians. 4. Joan. 14. and 16.
all errors if his people have been so long over whelmed with them? How does
he raygne for ever in the Kingdom of his Church, if that for these many ages
has been subject to Satan? Did not he promise that when he should be exalted
he would draw all things unto him? Did not he promise to cooperat with his
Pastors baptizing and teaching to the consummation of the world, that neither
they might err nor we be carried away with the Tertullia. de Praes. c. 28.
vain blastes of error? Was not the holy Ghost sent to teach all truth and
that for ever? Did not God forewarne us that the preachers of the new Testament
should never be silent from praising his name, enjoying his spirit, and
delivering his words from generation to generation everlastingly without
interruption? Upon these assurances Tertullian deemed it so great a blasphemy
that the whole Church of God should be spotted with errors as he thus Tertul.
ib. cap. ^9.
provoke Vale^tinus the heretik. Age nunc etc. Go to now, have all Churches
erred etc. has the holy Ghost had regard to no one, to lead it unto truth;
sent for that end by Christ, demanded for that end of the Father, that he
might be the Doctor of truth? (Forsooth) the Steward of God, the vicar of
Christ has neglected his office, permitting the Churches otherwise to
understand, otherwise to believe t^en he by his Apostle preached. A little
after he scoffeth at him and others in this sort. The truth expected some
Marcionistes and Valentinians (Lutherans and Caluinistes) to be infranchised by
them. In the mean time the Gospel has been wrongfully preached, wrongfully
believed, so many thousand of thousands wrongfully Christened, so many works of
faith wrongfully administered, so many miracles, so many gifts wrongfully
employed, so many priesthoods, so many offices wrongfully executed, in fine so
many Martyrdomes wrongfully crowned. If Tertullian thought ^t a calu^niation so
infamous to affirm this of the Church for a little more then a hundred years
space, how monstrous is the report of our Reformers who venture to attach it of
superstition, ignorance, and idolatry during the long tract of a thousand
years?

10. Lastly, although ignorance may now and then excuse the not believing of
some particular mysteryes, yet the ignorant who otherwise incur the
displeasure of God can never gain his favor, or recover felicity, unless
they be pardoned their sins, and become members of the true Church. Out of
the Church no pleading for pardon, no excuse can be heard, to put a sinner in
hope of salvation. Otherwise the Jews, the Turks, the Pagans, and al such as
have been misled by heretics might plead this excuse. But the hidden
Protestants who lurked in the Papacy, were not members of the Church: They made
not the true Church, where remission of sins is only to be had; apart by
themselves, nor together with us, unless they acknowledge our church to be true.
Which if they grant (as needs they must, unless they precipitate their
forefathers into hell by dividing them from the band of Gods spiritual camp)
they ought to return their chiefest ringleaders and all their accomplices for
blasphemous slaunderers, in calumniating the spouse of Christ, in calling his
Virgin with a sacrilegious Hieron. in dialog^ ad. Luciferia. cap. 8.
tongue (for these be Saint Hieromes words) the strumpet of the Devil: the
whore of Babylon, the seat of Antichrist, the ^inagogue of Satan etc. They are
bound as Field counsayleth them to embrace her communion, follow her
directions, and rest in her Field in his dedicatory Epistle to the Arh^bishop
of Canterbury.
^^dgements. They are bound to believe Transubstantiation, ^^rgatory, inherent
Justice, Intercession of Saints, worship of Images, ^^ all other articles which
she in her general Counsels, out of the word of God, by lawful authority
has publicly enacted, or else they are to be accounted heathens, and
publicans, who obey not the Church: they are to be ce^sured as heretics who
rebel against it.

11. If ours were the true Church, howsoever they imagine it to be stained with
errors, yet their separation from her is an Apostasy from Christ, a divorce
from his spouse, a dismembring from his body, and a most execrable disunion and
schism from the unity of Gods chosen flock. Which cannot by any ignorance be
excused in you, nor by any ill lives of our Prelates, tyranny of public, or
abuses of our private men, be warranted to be lawful. For Saint Paul
reprehe^ded Aug. l. 3. co^t. ep. Par. cap. 4.
Incests, Contentions, and many other faults in the church of Corinth. The
Prophets did the like in the church of the Jews, yet they never presumed to
separate themselves from them in fellowship and communion. Moses h^^h cried,
(says Saint Augustine) Isay has cried, Jeremy has cried, let us see whether
they divided the people of God; how ^oatly did Jeremy rebuke the wicked livers
of his people, yet he was amongst Aug. l. 2. cont. lit. Petil. c. 51.
them, he entered the Temple together with them, he frequented the same
Sacraments, in that Congregation of the wicked he lived. In another place,
writing of the Prelates faults which ought not to cause any schism in the
people, he thus challenges the Donatist Petilia^ (the Caluinia^ Protestant)
Why do thou call the Apostolic chair the chair of pestilence? If for the
me^, why? Did our Lord Jesus Christ for the Pharisees any wrong to the Chair
wherein they sat? Did he not commend that Chair of Moses, and preserving the
honor of the Chair, reprove them? For he says They sat upon the Chair of
Moses, that which they say do ye. These things if you did well consider, you
would not for the men whom you defame blaspheme the Sea Apostolic wherewith
you do not communicate. Ibid ca* 61.
And a few Chapters after: Neither for the Pharisees (i^ whom you compare us
not of wisdom but of malice) did our Lord command the Chair of Moses to be
forsaken. In which Chair verily he figured his own For he warns the people
to do that which they say and not to do that which they do, and that the
holiness of the Chair be in no case for^saken, nor the unity of the flock
divided for the naughty pastors. Calvin. lib. 4. instit. c. 1.. 12. 14. 15.
16. 17. 18. 19.


12. Yea Calvin also discoursing of this matter, says, There may some
faultines creep into the Church in the administration of the doctrine, and of
the Sacraments, which ought not to estraunge us from the communion of it. A
little after, For as much as there is no man which is not wrapped with some
little cloud of ignorance: either we must lean no Church at all, or we must
pardon a being deceived in such things as may be unknown without violating the
sum of Religion. Where he proves by the testimony of S. Cyprian by the former
example of Saint Paul, of the Prophets, and of Christ himself, That neither
the pestilence of vices, nor corruption of manners and doctrine in matters of
such moment as do not endanger salvation should ever withdraw us from the
fellowship of Christ's flock, yea he there auerreth, that, the departing from
the Church is a denying of God and of Christ etc. Neither can there be imagined
(says he) a fault more Calvin. ^b* cap. 1.. 10.
heinous then with wicked breach of faith, to defile the marriage which the only
begotten son of God, has vouchsafed to contract with us. Hitherto Calvin.

13. By which you see, that if the Roman Church was at Luthers rising, the true
Church of Christ, he should not have forsaken the band of her communion. If it
was not, no Church remained by which he might be ^^^ne, or you propagated, none
in which the truth was ^^eached, and Sacraments ministered; and so no Church can
^ou find by your own essential propertyes of finding the Church. In liew of
which I shall display such evident and ^^parent marks, as al both rude and
learned, simple and wise, ^ay manifestly discover the true Church of Christ.
And ^^rst I will handle four most honorably mentioned both ^n the Nicen and
Constantinople creed that it is one, holy, Ca^holike, and Apostolical; wherein
unity and consent in faith, san^^ity in doctrine and manners, the name
Catholic, with ^^e sense and meaning thereof, Apostolical succession, are
^lainly intimated as the undoubted notes and badges of the Church.

CHAP. XIIII. In which Unity is explayned, and strongly proved to be a mark of
the Church: Against Doctor Whitaker, and Doctor Field.
AS the sovereign and incompatable goodness, the prime verity and truth it
self, is one, the same, constant and unchangeable: So whatsoever par^^keth
most of unity, constancy, and integrity, that approaches nearest to the
perfection of truth, and whatsoever is variable, chaungeable, severed by
schism, and rent by division; that proceeds from obliquity of error that i^
infected with the corruption of falsehood. Hence it comes that unity is a
clear and manifest token of the true Church, a note of Christ's Kingdom,
whereas division schism and variance, is the brand of heresy, a proper and
peculiar blot of the perverse wicked and Sathanicall synagogue: by which it
falls upon a sudayne to irreparable ruin, and utter desolation, as our
Savior divinely witnessed, saying: Every Kingdom divided against it self
shall be made desolate, and house upon house shall fall. So we read that discord
and rebellion has been the general destruction Luc. 11. 17.
and bane of common wealths; and union, peace, and concord has been always
the stay and preservation of them.

2. I speak not here of that which the Philosophers call numericall or
individual unity, by which the Church is on it self, and divided from all
false or heretical assemblies; but of the unity of consent, and agreement, by
which the members of the same Church, though of diverse nations, languages,
customs, dispositions, yet are all united in the same faith, laws, sacrifice,
religion. They are all careful as Saint Paul exhorts, to keep the unity of
the spirit in the band of peace: To be of one accord and one judgment. For
which cause Christ earnestly prayed and used many other effectual means, he
ordained us all to one end and goal of felicity: You are called in one hope of
your vocation. He taught us to acknowledge as Saint Paul writes in the ^ame
place, one Lord, one faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of Ephesians. 4. v. 3.
Phil. 2. v. 2. Joan. 17. v. 11. Ephesians. 4. v. 4. and v. 5. 1. Cor. 10. v. 17. 18.
all. He nourishes us with one bread, his own sacred flesh. He incorporateth
us in one body. He guides us with one and the same spirit, and that all
things might be orderly disposed, he submits us in his absence to the
obedience of one head, his vice gere^t upon earth: by which the p^erogatiue of
unity, is principally maynteyned, and ^^^refore Saint Augustine terms the sea
of his residence, C^^hedram vnitatis, the Chair of unity. And Saint Cyprian,
Aug. ep. 166. Cypria^ ep. 73. Optat. l. 2. con. Parm. Iero. con. Iouin. and
cont. Lucif. Leo ep. 84. Bernard l. 3. ad Eug. Irae. l. 1. c. 3.
(...) Peter upon whom our Lord built his Church, he instituted and ^^wed the
beginning of unity. The like has Optatus, the like S. ^^rome, and Saint Leo.

3. By the assistance of Gods holy spirit, and ^y the subordination of the
people, Priests, Pastors, and Bishops, to this supreme head, the Pope of
Rome, which Saint Bernard resembles to the subordination of the Angels,
Archangells, Cherubims, and Scraphims to Almighty God, there is preserved in
the universal Church spread over all the world, that admirable peace, and
perfect argrement as if it dwelled (to use Saint Irenaeus words) ^^ one house,
enjoyed one soul, and one heart, she preaches, teaches, and delivers the
things she belieueth so conformably as if she spoke with one mouth. For says
he, Although there be different languages, yet the virtue of tradition is one
and the same. Neither do those Churches which are founded in Germany, believe
otherwise, or otherwise deliver; Nor those that are amongst the Hiberians, nor
those that are in the East, nor those that are in Egypt, nor such as are in
Libya, nor such as are planted in the midest of the earth. But as the sun,
that workmanship of God, is one and the same in the universal world; so the
light, the preaching of truth, every where shines, and enlighteneth all, who
will come to the knowledge thereof.

4. This conformaty of doctrine which Irenaeus marked in the universal Church
of his time, where can we now discover but amongst the Professors of the Roman
faith? Go into Asia, Go into Africa, sail into India, pass into Iaponia,
compass the East, and return into Al Catho like professors are vnius Labij,
of the same speech or language.
the West, and you shall behold all Countries, all provinces, all Cittyes,
every professor of our Religion vnius Labij, of one language, of one heart, and
soul, in Sacraments, sacrifice, and all Articles of faith. The reason is
because they all as I ^outhed above, submit themselves to the judgment of one
soueraygne, and supreme head: who guided by Gods spirit, infallibly governs,
and vn^^^th the whole body. From whom if any dissent, he is seu^red, and cut
of from the rest of the members.

5. Amongst Protestants no such thing, nothing but schisms, iarres, and
mutual discordes, such as Sa^^t Aug. l. 18. de ciuitat. Dei ca. 41 Iraen. l.
1. Tertull. de praes. Hill. l. 7. de Tri. Chrysosto^. Hom. 20. operis impersect.
in Matthew. Parkes against VVillets Limbomastix.
Augustine discovered amongst the heathen Philosophers; ^ such as Irenaeus,
Tertullian* S. Hilary, and S. Chrysostom, amongst ancient heretics. For
example, travail into these ou^ Sectaryes dominions, one faith shall you find
in one Country, another in another, one in Saxony, another in Germany, another
in England. This at Geneua, that at Zuricke etc. What shall I speak of Cities
and countries* examine the favorites of any particular sect, no agreeme^^
amongst them, no town, no village, no, man perseuereth long in the same
belief. But they often change and vary from themselves, coining, as Saint
Hilary reports of the Arians, yearly and monthly faythes. Every man (says
M. Parkes) makes Religion the handmaid of his affections. We may say now that
there are so many faithes, as wills, and so many doctrines, as manners of men,
whiles either we write them as we list, or understand Beza ep. 1. and Andr.
Dud. repeateth his words. M William Reynolds in his preface before his
refutation of M. Whitaker reprehen. Cauils.
them as we please, in so much that many are brought to their wits ends not
knowing what to do. Which Duditius an emine^t Protestant in the fight of Beza,
obiecteth against his own brethren: which Master William Reynolds our
Catholic writer notably declares, in the changes and alterations of our
English gospellers, in the days of Queen Elizabeth: and I might further
specify in many particulers since the raygne of our gracious King James.

6. For in her days the real presence was Whitaker cont. 2. q. 5. c. 7. page
89. Reynoldes in his fifth cont. folio 657. Sparks in his answer to M. John de
Albins fol. 235. See these words of the Bishop of Ely allowed by Casaub. in
his aforesaid answ. to Car. Peron ^^. 16. Causab. page 33. In the conf at H^mp.
court. Reynolds in his 4. co^lus. Field in his ^* book. c. 10. and 11. Field in
his third book of the Church c. 22. fol. 118. Illiricus in clauo Scripturae de
varia etc. tract. 6. dupl. iustit. and instific. Field in the place before
cited.
impugned as implying contradiction, and destroying the humane nature of
Christ. Now it is allowed as nothing impossible. We agree with you (says the
Bishop of Ely) concerning the object, all the strife is above the manner: etc.
we believe the presence, we believe I say the true presence as well as you etc.
Then yearly shrift, or auricular confession was an antichristian and popish
bondage, a butchery of men's consciences: now the Fathers who ordained it had
their reasons why they thought that such manner of confession would further the
easier atteyning to salu^^tion. Then to pray for the dead that their souls
might thereby be reliued, was new, fantastical and superstiti^us popery; Now
to desire of God rest for their souls was an aun^^ent custom, and is referred
by his Majesty to the head of things pro^^able or lawful. Then when a woman
was head, a woman might lawfully baptize, and Christen infants; Now the
midwifes christing is vnallowable and of no force at all. Then the holy
Catholic Church which we believe was the whole company of Gods elest etc.
which is hidden and invisible. Now it is the visible society wherein the
sincere outward profession of the truth of God is preserved. Then all works of
man performed in grace, were so stained with sin, as they could not deserve
any reward at the hands of God: Now a distinction is found of two Courts, The
one of exact trial, the other of new obedience, in which God sitting gives
commandment of works of righteousness, and duly rewards them. When we are
justified, says Field, God requires of us a new obedience, judges us
according to it and crowns us for it. Diverse other articles I might recount
in which our adversaries pressed by Catholics have slidden out of the path
which their predecessors have trodden. But of their variances more hereafter.

7. This inconstancy and disagreement of theirs, proceeds not from that they
come single into the field to encounter with us well seco^ded by our friends,
(as a worthy knight of the Protestants religion would once have excused the
matter to me) but it arises (as another writer of their Sir Edwin Sands in his
relation.
own bears witness) for want of some one Patriarch or more, to have a common
superintendance and care of their Church, for correspondency and unity. For
want of some ordinary way to assemble a general Council of their part, the
only hope remaining ever to assuage their contentions. From want of due
subordination, that the Cypria^ l. 1. Ephesians. 3. ad Cornel.
Priest of God (as Saint Cyprian teaches) is not obeyed, nor one Priest in the
Church for the time, nor one Judge in liew of Christ is had in mind. From want
of one supreme, certain and infallible rule of deciding debates, which fall
out among them. For although the scriptures upon which they seem to rely, be
(as Whitaker urges) constant sure, and inflexibl^ in themselves, yet they
embracing their own constructions Whitaker. cont. 1. and cont. 2* q. 5. cap. 8.
pa. 407.
and interpretations of them, what marvel though they be shaken with as many
winds of contrary doctrins, as there be several humors and affections of men?
Whilst every one (as Tertullian notes) does form and fashion that which he
receaueth, according as of his own mind he devised it. Whilst nouices have
liberty to control their superiors, and scholars (says Irenaeus) may boast
and glory to be reformers of their Tertull. in praes. adu. haer. 42. Iren. l.
c. 5. and 8.
masters. For as the forenamed Tertullian pithily discourses; The same is
lawful to the Valentinians which was lawful to Valentinus; to the Marcionists
which to Marcion, (to the Caluinistes which to Calvin) of their own to frame
or reform their faith. Because every one may challenge the same spirit, the
same gift of interpreting as his forerunner did. This pretense Tertull. in the
same place.
is often alleged by every Puritan and Protestant, who varieth from the
opinion of his first author or beginner. Luther for example, and his chief
disciples are Whitaker. co^t. Durae* page 28. Whitaker. cont. Sand. page 92.
Whitgift defens. tra. c. 7. p. 20. in my opinion. ib. page 291.
cited against Whitaker. He answers. What is that to me? I care not what
they misliked. And Whitgift of Calvin says, I am not so wholly addicted unto
him, that I will contemn other men's judgments etc. When as in my opinion,
they come nearer to the true meaning and sense of Scripture then he does.
Others he rejects saying: They were men, and therefore though otherwise very
watch full, yet such as slept sometime. Thus with show of modesty if they can,
if not, The spirit of God (say they) is not tied to any man but breaths where
he lists, and therefore he that imagines he is carried with this gale has
sufficient warrant to ruffle in Scripture, and expound it as his own private
persuasion seems to lead him. From hence spring such floods of dissentions,
as I may verify of Protestants, that which a diligent historiographer noted in
the Turks, only changing the words Touching the law, The Alcoran, and
Septeme. cast. 20*
Mahomet himself, there is that discord and difference amongst them, as if a
hundred of them be asked what they hold in these points, not on^ will answer
to the mind of another. Examen when you will your Mynisters apart, or confer
their works and wri^^ngs one with another; and you shall not need any further
^^oofe. You shall see no two in the world, consorting to^^ather in all
essential points of faith; if (I say) they be ^el sifted by interrogatories,
on every point and examined ^ part.

8. But two things are here opposed by our adversaries; The one against our
unity, The other in excuse of their divisions. Against us, Field obiecteth the
unity and agreement of the Armenians, Aethiopians and Christians of Field in
his 2. book c. 7. page 54. Whitaker. cont. 2. q. 5. cap. 8.
Muscouia and Russia. Whitaker the accord and co^spiratio^ of ^he wicked in
evil, of Pirates in Piracy, of Rebels in rebellion. Therefore unity (say they)
is no sign of truth. I answer not any unity or accord, in some one point
whatsoever makes this mark; for all heretics agree in rebelling gaynst truth,
and many may accord in some one schism or heresy, as they whom M. Field
rehearses do. Likewise a small number of desperate fellows, upon a set plot,
in some one or two designements, in hope of gain or preferment, may (as
Whitaker urges) for a short time combine together. But without any such hope
league or co^bination, for innumerable millions, so far dispersed, in so dark
obscure and manifold mysteryes of faith, to the prejudice of their estates, and
loss of their lives, so many ages, so uniformly to agree; notwithstanding such
alienations of mynds, diversity of factions, by people and Prince;
notwithstanding so many other strifes, and debates, so many Joseph Hal in his
book entitled the Feace of Rome. Read of this S. Aug. l. ^8. de ciuit. Dei ca.
41. Field in his 3. book c. 4^. and in app 1. part. fol. 23. 24. White in his
way to the Church. 33. Whitaker. cont. 2. q. 5.
chaunges, alterations, and reuolutions of common wealths; notwithstanding such
alteration and variety of opinions, which M. Joseph Hall heapeth together in
matters indifferent, or then not defined (for in all the great and idle muster
he makes not one essential variance does he mention, that ever was amongst
the Professors of our Church) This I say, is an evident and irreprouable token
of some divine and heavenly spirit, in breathing, guiding and uniting the hearts
of Roman Catholics.

9. In excuse of their divisions Field, White and Whitaker reply, that they are
likewise but verbal, upon mistaking not material or essential, not in
substantial or fundamental points. And Field most hypocritically adds: I
dare confidently pronoun^^ that after full and due examination of each others
meaning, there sha^^ no difference found touching the matter of the Sacrament,
the vbiqu^tary presence, and the like, between the Churches reformed by Luth^^
ministry in Germany, and other places; and those whom some men malice call
Sacramentaries. Has this Sectary any dram o^ modesty or spark of syncerity
left? who dares confidently pronounce no difference among them, amongst whom
all Protestants heretofore lament a difference? Were their word never scanned?
their meaning never sifted? until this sycophant bolted it forth? Weigh their
sayings, peruse their writings, and you shall see heaven and hell could not be
in diverse things more opposite, then they whom he would seem to accord.

CHAP. XV. In which sundry variances are reckoned up, wherein Protestants
dissent amongst themselves in essential points of Religion.
LEAST I should be thought to exagerate old or devise new strifes, which have
always broyled, and continually persevere amongst our Sectaryes; Apol. d. 3.
a. b. Luth. l. cont. Sa. and these. 27. In ^raefat. confess ort. Tigur. fol. 3.
4.
I will relate such as are either manifest in their writings, or by their own
accusations one of the other, are apparently convinced and known to be true.
To begin with Luther and Zuinglius whom our English Protestant Apologer
terms, two excellent men sent by God to enlighten the world, they vary so
much one from the other, as Luther anothematizeth him, and all his associats:
saying, I censure in earnest all Zuinglians and Sacramenta^ies as arrant
heretics. Whereof the Tigurine deuines com^layne Luther. in Genesis c. 47. fol.
633. Zuinglius Tom. 2. expo. Chri. fidei ad Gal. regem fol. 559.
in this sort, he inueigeth against them as against obstinate ^eretikes, etc.
prophaners of the Sacraments, and the most vile and pe^^ilent men that go on
the ground. He pr^scribeth* and condemns all ^he faithful. Doctors and
Mynisters of God, Oecolampadius, Zuinglius and their disciples etc. And
touching another point* Luther accuses Zuinglius Of abolishing all faith, all
Christianity; in that ^e makes Scipi^, Numa Pompilius, and other heathenish
dolaters compartners with Peter and Paul and other Saints in the Kingdom of
heaven. Which if it be true how was it necessary (says Luther) Luther vbi.
supra. Zuinglius Tom. 2. Kesp. ad Luther lib de Sacra. f. 411. Ibid. fol. 401.
Tom 2. Resp. ad Luther. conf. fol. 458. Art. apud Regem Daniae. pa. 8^. 87.
Beza in apol. ad act. conuentus quind. Theolog. Torgae habiti. tem Epist. 5.
and Momp. and in Respon. ad Brentij argument. Conra. in Theolog. Caluinist l.
2. fol. 8. 14. 20. Test Beza in ^. volu. tracta. Theol. pa. 313. 315. lb p.
324. 325. Calvin admo. ^. ad VVestphal. Hunnius in papis. Hunnius in his book
entitled, Caluinus ludaizans etc. Albertus Grauerus in libro cui titulus.
Bellum Caluini and Jesus Christi.
for Christ to die? Why should Christians be baptized? Zuinglius on the other
side enditeth Luther, of many damnable and accursed heresies, of the heresy of
Marcion, for which Zuinglius calls him ipsissimum Marcionem even Marcio^
himself. Of the heresy of the Vbiquitaries, of the wicked blasphemy of those
who held the divinity of God to be passible, and consequently mortal. And
other Sacramentaryes affirm Luthers opinion of the real presence to be
manifestly repugnant to the article of Christ's ascension, and to the truth of
his incarnation. And it destroys (says Beza) the property of his body. The
same Beza calls Lutherans flat Eutichians, and Nestorians. Conradus on the
other side attaynteth Beza, of Satanicall blasphemies, whom he styles an
impure Atheist, and Devil incarnate. And Heshusius another Lutheran testifies
of him and the Caluinists, That they teach wickedly of predestination. That
they extenuate so much the merit of Christ, as they deserve to be abandoned to
the lowest part of hell. Calvin so far enrageth against the Lutherans as he
calls them, a proud saction of Giantes, mad beasts, prodigiously blind,
desperately impudent. Yea he and his faction account them, as Hunnius
reports, no better then Manichees, Marcionistes, and Monothelites. Hunnius on
other side is even with Calvin, showing how he plays the Jew, and favors
the Arians in sundry deprauations of holy Scripture. And (to let pass many
others recounted by the learned author of the grounds of of old and new
religion, whose book still remains unanswered) Albertus Grauerus Rector of
the university of Eislebium in Germany, about the year of our Lord 1597.
published a book against Calvin, which he entitled, The war of John Calvin
and of Jesus Christ God and man, that is, an antithesis or opposition of the
doctrine of the Caluinistes and Christ, in which the most horrible blasphemies
of the Caluimstes especially concerning sour articles, the person of Christ,
the supper of our Lord, Baptism, and Predestination, are faithfully showed
from the eye to the eye, out of their own proper writings and books, and are
briefly and soundly reselled out of the word of God. Thus has the title.

2. Stancarus also besides the warning he gives Stancar. li. de Tri. and
mediat.
for all men to beware of Caluins works, elsewhere mentioned, writing in
another place of him, Bullenger, and Peter Martyr, once an opinian professor
of new divinity in the days of King Edward; he calls them deploratissimos
haereticos, most execrable and forlorn heretics. As main oppositions, in
matters as weighty, in manner as vehement, might be showed betwixt Melancthon
and Illyricus, Osiander and his Antagonistes; if I should not cloy my reader,
and over whelme Master Field, already oppressed with too many witnesses. One
more shall serve to speak for the rest.

3. Sturmius a memorable sectary ingenuously Sturm. l. derat. con. ineundae.
protests, and complayneth; saying, By these hateful dissentions, and puerse
opinions the foundations of our religion are euerthrowne, the chiefest articles
are called in question, many heresies are brought into the Church of Christ,
and the highway to Mahometisme Ibid. l. 2. p. 2. and 24.
and Atheism is apparently prepared. He also says, The Lutherans do hold, the
Protestant Caluinian Churches of England, France, Flanders, and Scotland, for
heretical, and their Martyrs for Martyrs of the Devil. A dreadful censure
against our new reformers, and an undeniable testimony of Fields
unfaithfulness. For will he say these were but verbal quarrels. He may say
as well, to impugn the essence of God, the mortality of the soul, the
Ascension, the Incarnation of Christ, to blaspheme with Marcion, with Arius,
with Nestorius, are no essential but verbal variances. Will he anouch (as he
guilefully seeks another way to temper the matter) that all the former iarres
issued from passion, from some hasty and inconsiderate humor? He must then
confess Field in his 3. book ca. 24.
his men to have been the most passionate villans, and devilish calumniatours,
that ever lived; who not once, but often, deliberately auow, and set in print,
such horrible accusations, I might say conuictions, who abandon the company,
burn the books, condemn the doctrines, accurse the persons, and per^e^^^e
unto death in this deadly schism, and irreconcilable hatred the one against
the other. To leave foreign contentions and speak of domestical, Whitaker.
contro 2. quaest. 6. c. 3. Fulke in cap. 11. Matt. sect. 5. Hooker its in his
Eccl. poli. lib. 2. pa 101. Co. in his def. etc. art. 7. page 54. Perkins in
his refor. Catholikp. 55. Abbot. in his def. etc. c. 3. se. 8. 9. and 10 Spark
in his answer to M. John d'Albins f. 281. 28^ 283. Whitaker. vbi supra. Field l.
3. cap. 22. fo. 118. 119. Ouerall in the confer. pa 41. 42. Fulke in c. 3.
Ioa^. sect. 2. and in 2^. Actorum sect. 10. VVhitak^r contro. 1. quaest. 6. c.
3. Whit. ibid. 57. Bills. in his true difference etc. p. 4. p. 586. 587 Casaub,
in his answer to Card. Per. p. 20. in eng. M. Jacob in his def. p. 88. Harm.
p. 80. 81. 82. White in his way to the true Church. 33. fol. 138.
of our gospellers amongst themselves, in such points of says as they
confess to be substantial.

4. Whitaker and Folk peremptorily define the commandments of God impossible
to be kept, and the former of them ^eg^^^eth this as a fundamental point. M.
Hooker and Doctor Council eagerly gain lay it, and sincerely hold they may be
kept. May^^er Perkins, Doctor Abbot and Doctor Spark maynteine, that the
faithful once instifyed cannot fallout of the state of grace: with whom
Master Whitaker agrees, and sets it down as a fundamental point. And
Spark says the contrary is a most dangerous error. Doctor Field
notwithstanding, and Doctor Oueral now Bishop of Couentry and Lichfield,
defend they may by grievous sins fall from grace, into the present state of
wrath and damnation: whose opinion his Majesty approved with his royal assent
in the conference at Hampton Court. Fulke sucketh from Calvin, and Whitaker
engrosseth it as a point fundamental, That the Sacraments are not necessary
to salvation; That they signify only, but they cause no grace: And of Baptism
by name Whitaker says, Our safety depends not of the outward lotion, but on
the meritts of Christ, on the mere election and promise of God. Master Hooker
and Master Bilson contrary wise, affirm the Sacraments necessary to
salvation, and that they do cause grace, and that our safety so much depends
on the outward lotion, as infants (quoth Bilson) cannot enter the Kingdom of
heaven, nor be heirs with Christ, before they be engrassed into Christ by
Baptism. A little after. The Church absolutely and slatly may not assure
salvation to children unbaptized. Which Casaubon also in his Majesty's name
allows as most true. Master Jacob with the harmony of confessions, (which
Master white honors as the touchstone of his belief) approves a disparity
of sins, ^ome to be venial, not all to deserve eternal death. Fu^^^ ^ulke
(...). Matthew. sect. 6. (...) in c. Romans sect. 11. Whitaker. vbi su. fol. 58.
58^. Willet in his Synop. printed anno Domini. 1600. contro. 20. Whitaker. in
his ans. to M. Ca^pians 8. reason, and l. 8. aduer. Duraeum. ^. Bilson in his
sermon. Of the full redemption. etc. Hugh Sanford l. 3. de desc. Domini. nostri
ad infero^ s^^. 91. 92. 93. 94. etc. Reynolds in his second conclusion annexed
to his confer. Whitaker. cont. 2. qu. ^. cap. 3. f. 274. White. 14. fol. 79.
Bancroft in his sermon preea had the 8. of ^^br. 1588. Willet in finop. p. 48
Field in his first book of the Church c. 20. Hook. l. ^ sect. 8. p. 141. and l.
2. p. 103. 12^. Couell in his defense art 8. p. 49. 50. 51. 52. Reyn. in his
fifth conclu. Will. in his medit. upon the 122. psalm. Hook. l. 5. p. 140.
Will. in sinop. anno Domino 160. p. 789. and 788. Bills. in his survey of
Christ sufferings and of his des. to hell. Perkins in his treatise of that
mattter. San. l. 3. de des. Domini. nos.
and Whitaker so bitterly in^eigh against that Popish asserti^^, as Whitaker
protests it does not only overthrow the true, ^^t establish a false
foundation. Willet and Whitaker blasphemously deny the full suffic^ency of our
Redemption by Christ's cor^^rall death, without his feeling of eternal
damnaation. M. Bilson confuteth that diu^^ (...), error, and truly teaches
(as we do) out of the Scriptures, and Fathers: That he fully redeemed us with
his death on the Cross, and never felt no^ ^o much as dreaded any death of
foul, or ^orrour of damnation; how beit Master Sanford labors to answer
all his arguments, and raking the former heresy out of hell, defends it with
such impiety, as I wonder so detestable a work is permitted in a Christian
common wealth.

5. It were an infinite labor, to recount all their infinite differences. For
touching the Church, Reynoldes Whitaker and White, affirm the whole militant
Church upon earth may err in manners, in doctrine, in points of faith. Master
Bancroft holds it cannot err, in matters of faith. Willet says it is
sometimes invisible; Field it is always visible. Touching Evangelical
Counsels: That a man may do more then he is bound under precept, is avouched
by Master Hooker, and Doctor Couell: rejected by Doctor Reynolds and Master
Willet as impious and presumptuous. Concerning Christ, Hooker defends he died
for all: Willet he died not for all but only for the elect. Bilson says he
descended into hell; M. Perkins and Master Sanford he descended not into the
local place of hell, but only into his grave or scpulcher. Touching their
Mission, some will have it ordinary, some ^xtraordinary, one from the people,
another from the Prince, or house of Parliament; A third from the Catholic
Clergy, which they account false and Antichristian. Field l. 3. c. 3^, fo. 156.
158. etc. Barlow in his Sermon preached September 21. 1606.
In which kind Field auerreth, and endeavors to prove, That Presbiters (to
wit Priests and not Bishops) may in case of necessity ordeyne Presbiters, and
Deacons; and he grants many of the reformed Churches, namely those of France
and others to have had no other ordination. But William Barlow late Bishop of
Rochester, in his Sermon concerning the antiquity and superiority of Bishops,
preached before the King at Hampton Court, affirms and proves; That Neither
the Apostles, nor Church of Christ succeeding, would admit any other but
Bishops to that business; as not justifiable for Presbiters either by reason,
example, or Scriptur. Again he adds, If any of the inferior rancks under
Bishops presumed to do it, his act was reuersed by the Church for unlawful.
Lastly concerning the Regiment of their Church, the consistory of Geneua in the
confession of their faith, approved by Calvin and Beza, detest the Papisticall
hierarchy of the Church of England, as usurped and diabolical. All English
Puritans abhor the same accounting the Protestant Doctor Whitgift against
Cart. Hooker in his book of ^^pol^^y. Mason in his 4. books. 1. King Iam. in
his premonitio^ page 44. The Auth. of the 12. Arguments reasons well against
the Protestants.
Bishops titulary and antichristian Prelates. Doctor Whitgift notwithstanding,
Master Hooker, and Francis Mason strengthen and confirm it, as proceeding
from God. And the Royal Wisdom of King James, delivers: That Bishops ought
to be in the Church, I ever maynteyned it as an Apostolical institution, and
so the ordinance of God. Which is so mighty a dissension, as the one party must
needs gainesay the other in a point fundame^tal. For either this ecclesiastical
gouerme^t used in England, by Archbishops, Bishops and other inferior
ministers, is de iure diuino, ordained by God or not? If it be? Then, as the
Puritan author of the twelve general arguments reasons well. The Churches
of Scotland, France, low Countries and other places (the precisians of England)
who account it Antichristian, cannot be a true Church, but the signagogue of
Satan, contradicting therein both Christ and his gospel. If not? Then
according to the rule of Protestants, who appeach all public and
ecclesiastical administration, as sacrilegious policy, which is not warranted
by the word of God, the Puritans will convince them of tyrannical usurpation;
who establish ^n their Church an ecclesiastical hierarchy, which God ^euer
willed nor commanded them to do. These and many other such tragical
divisions, in matters essential, ^aygne amongst them: which the Protestant
Relatour says, tend mainely to the increase of Atheism within, and of
Mahome^isme Relatour in his relat.. 45. printed at London anno 1605. D. Couell
in his just and temper. defense art. 11. page 67. In their Christian and modest
off. etc. p. 1^. published anno Domini 1606. Ibid. p. 16. Willet in his medit.
upon the 122. psalm. p. 91. ante medium.
abroad. And Doctor Couell a Protestant more modest then Whitaker, more
sincere then Field, plainly protests: Least any man should think our
contentions (with purita^s) ^^ere in smaller points, and difference not great,
each side has charged one the other with heresies, (if not infidelityes), nay
even with such as quite overthrow the principal foundation of our Christian
faith.

6. The Puritans iumpe with him, affirming their disagreement from the
Protestant Bishops, to be of that nature in sundry propositions, as if they
should not co^sta^tly hold and maynteyne the same against all men, they cannot
see how possibly (by the rules of divinity) the separation of their Churches,
from the Church of Rome, and from the Pope the supreme head thereof can be
justified etc. A little after they add. Wherein if they (the Puritans) be in
error, and the Prelates on the contrary have the truth, they protest to all the
world, that the Pope and the Church of Rome (and in them God and Christ Jesus
himself) have great wrong, and indignity offered unto them, in that they are
rejected, and that all the Protestant Churches are schismatic, in forsaking
unity and communion with them. Thus they. Master Willets testimony rehearsing
diverse of the forenamed variances, and adiudging the^ blasphemous, were too
long to repeat: the alleged will declare, First what small trust is to be
reposed in Whitaker, Field, White, etc. in other matters, who in a thing so
manifest are convicted of falsehood. Secondly what hatfull quarrels and cruel
debats this new religion has bread in England, in so much as the poor
ignorant people know not whom to follow, or what to believe when their
greatest masters and chiefest guides, are at this deadly war amongst
themselves.

7. Wherefore as Saint Augustine mourned the unhappiness Aug. l. 18. de ciuitate
Dei ca. 41.
of the Athenians and vanity of their City, who harbored and gave countenance
to sundry iarring Philosophers, directly opposite and fiercely disagreeing one
from the other: Not (says he) about lands, houses, or money matters; but
about those things by which the life of man is either miserably or happily
lead. In like sort, I may co^miserat and bewail the dangerous estate of my
countrymen, and woeful calamity of our distressed Island, which now fostereth in
her lap, and nourishes in her bosom, so many factious ministers, divided
(as you see) far worse then the Athenian Sophisters, not in Civil brawles,
or politic divisions, not in moral precepts of life and manners; but in the
deepest affairs of conscience, of faith, of religion: which they cannot
discuss without danger, nor up hold without infamy, nor teach without
infection, nor long maynteyne, without the viperous distraction of themselves,
and endless ruin of innumerable souls. Yet, So s^ (to seal up my discourse
with the same authors words) it is necessary that rent and divided into small
pieces they perish, who Aug. con Parmen. l. ^. cap. 4.
have preferred the swelling pride of their haughty slomake, before the most
holy band of Catholic peace and unity.

CHAP. XVI. Wherein is declared how Sa^ctity or Holiness is a note of the true
Church: Against Doctor Whitaker, and Doctor Field.
MANYFOLD and various is the signification of this word Sanctum, holy, and so
it diversely entitleth and denominateth the Church of God. First she is called
holy, because she is purchased and sanctified by the precious blood of our
innocent and unspotted Lamb Christ Jesus, which Saint Peter 1. Pet. 2. v. 9.
insinuated when he styled the faithful, A holy Nation, a people of purchase.
Secondly it is holy, because it is wholly dedicated and consecrated unto God:
whereupon he said to his people, You shall be holy because I am holy. Thirdly it
is Leuitic. 11. 1. Pet. 1.
holy, for that it consists of holy laws, holy precepts, holy ceremonies,
holy Sacraments, all things holy. Fourthly it is holy by reason of her purity
and holiness both in doctrine and manners, and this all Catholic writers
acknowledge as a proper badge and token of Christ's chosen flock: yet not in
that sort as purity of doctrine, or sincere and true preaching of the word, is
challenged by the Protestants; and refuted by us, a note more hidden, then the
thing it denotes; but in a far different sense. For Protestants take the
universal purity of A differet acception of sanctity of doctrine used amongst
Catholics and Protestants.
doctrine, and true preaching of the word, as it is opposite to all errors, in
every dogmaticall and essential point, to be a Mark of the true Church. We a
particular purity or sanctity, or sanctity only, not as it excludes all
fundamental errors, contrary to truth; but as it excludes all gross, or
palpable absurdityes repugnant to the principles of nature, or rules of common
reason known to all men: this we assign as an undoubted recognizance of the
immaculate and ever, beloved spouse of Christ, Wherein Master Whitaker has
inexcusably iniuried Cardinal Bellarmine, in traducing him for challenging
Whitaker. contr. ^ q. 5. ca. 9. fol. 415. 416. Field in his 3. book ca. 44. f.
^76.
this not to have forsaken his standing, and to have cowardly fled to their
protestant camp. And Field more main part and saucy then he, says: A lier
should have a good memory etc. Bellarmine divides his tractes of the notes of
the Church into two parts: In the first he says truth and sanctity of doctrine
is no note of the Church: In the later he reckons it amongst the rest. But
let us pardon him this over sight. It was no over sight M. Field in Cardinal
Bellarmyne, but it is rashness in you, (to speak the least) or too much
officiousnes, to offer pardon where none is required, or fault committed. For
that renowned Prelate using sanctity in the aforesaid sense, does no way
decline to the in ^^^icate darkness of your cloudy notes; because although it
be an endless and insuperable difficulty, S. Aug. de Genesis ad lit. cap. 14.
to the most part of men, to severe the purity of doctrine from all
substantial errors: yet it is no great matter (as S. Augustine auerreth),
then to discern the spirit, when it arriueth or leads to some such things,
which are against good manners, or Catholics believe many things above but
nothing repugnant to the light of reason.
against the rule of says. For then it is espied of many. To such enormityes
leads the beguiling spirit, and belief of our Gospellers; but the Religion
of Catholics is sincere and holy, pure from such misguiding errors. For
albeit we teach and believe, many obscure and supernatural verityes, above the
reach of humane capacity, as the Trinity, Incarnation of Christ, resurrection
of the flesh, with others of like sort: yet nothing manifestly discordant to
the common ^ynderisis or light of nature; as Tertullian, Arnobius, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Saint Augustine, and Saint Thomas have plenteously demonstrated
against the Pagans and heathenish Philosophers. Neither do we teach any lesson
of liberty pernicious to good manners, but all things which tend to piety,
devotion, Sanctity, and perfection.

2. Our doctrine for example, of the freedom of will and powerfulnes of grace
to fulfill the law: Of reprobation and damnation, that it proceeds from our
selves not from God: That we may do some good works pleasing Many points of
Catholic doctrine specified which wholly te^de to the increase of piety and
reformation of manners.
to his Majesty, and meritorious of heaven: That his favor once gotten may be
lost: That concupiscence, or evil suggestions without consent, be not sins,
but stoutly resisted occasions of merit: That we have a steadfast hope, yet no
assurance of salvation. All these articles and diverse other which I omit to
recount, are conformable to Scripture, agreeable to reason, suitable to the
goodness and bounty of God, and most auayleable to the purchase of celestial
riches; to which all our precepts also of manners and admonitions are aimed.
For we exhort to the mortification of our passions, abnegation of our selves,
contempt of honors, riches, and worldly pleasures. We preach voluntary
penance, chastisement of our bodies, watching, fasting, contrition,
confession, and satisfaction for sins. We incite and stir up our followers
not only to the performance of Gods commandments, by the help of his
Protestant doctrine either disposes to all wickedness or stops the course of
virtue.
grace, but to the imbracement also of his Evangelical counsayles, to
Religious poverty, consecrated chastity, vowed obedience: To such union with
God, to such contemplation of heaven, to such neglect, separation and
perpetual diuorcement from all earthly affairs: as those who zealously
embrace, and fervently put in practice, the exhortations of our Church, seem
rather to live in mortal flesh, Angelical then humane lives.

3. The Protestants Gospel venteth the quite Fulke in c. 27. act. see. 3 ad
Gal. 5.
contrary doctrine: For firstit denies the liberty of freewill. Every one
(says Fulke) is free from coaction, but not from the thraldom and slavery of
sin. Secondly it Whitaker. contr. 1. q. 6. ca. 3. fol. 580.
teaches the commandments of God impossible to be kept, and therefore
Whitaker infers; That no man ought to hope for justice or salvation
(expressly against the words of Christ) by the obedience he yealdeth to the
law, both which stops the race of virtue, and clippeth the wings of all
honorable attemps. For who will ever assay to do, which he has power to will
or possibility to perform? Who ca^ with any courage undergo to ask, he
knows before hand to be above his strength? Thirdly our Gospellers hold,
Protestant doctrine injurious to God making him to hate his own who breeds
love in all others to ^he rish their ofspringe.
That God does purpose decree and cooperate to the blindness, and obstinacy of
the wicked, and that whatsoever he wills and decreeeth, must of incuitable
necessity infallibly ensue: that he creates some, and ordeyneth them to
destruction and hatred, which are (as I have exactly handled heretofore) the
greatest blasphemies that ever were brayed forth against the tender bowels of
infinite mercy. For he that ingendreth a natural affection in all creatures to
love their of spring, cannot himself hate the works he produces.

4. Fourthly, they defend all our good works even our best duties exacted by
God, to be stained with sin, and severely weighed to be displeasing to him,
and merit damnation. An assertion repugnant to the very light of nature,
reason, and voice of God, often reiterated in holy writ. They, many of them
at least directly Whitaker. contr. ^ q. 5. page ^01.
teach, That a man once justified cannot loose his justice, what mischief
soever he wilfully incurreth: That David was the child of God when he committed
adultery: That sinn^ are not hurtful to him that belieueth: That God does not
impute to the faithful the uncleanness of their dishonest lives. Fulke in c. ad
7. Romans sect. 6. and in c. 5 ad Gal. sect. 2. Fulke ibid
Could any Epieure or Mohammedan desire more pleasing dreams to flesh and
blood. Ffthly, They allow not distinction of venial and mortal sins, but
all sins even the sudayne in voluntary motions of concupiscence, to be of
their own nature damnable and deadly, yet if they have true faith there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Do you not perceive what rufull
gappes, these passadges open to a flood of iniquity? How they plain the way to
al licentious riot? For he who persuades himself, That no ambition, pride,
voluptuousnes, or other offenses, can be hurtful unto him, that they cannot
procure the wrack of damnation; he who knows the first motions or evil
suggestions, to be deadly and mortal, as well as the consent or consumation of
them: what preuayling bar or forcible restraint, should this man have from
the satisfying of his violent passions, or full accomplishing of his carnal
desires? Especially if he should reason thus: Since I am already caught by the
waves of sin, it imports little to be more or less carried away, as long
as I am sure to be brought back to the shore again; sure to have no
imputation of one or other, of consent or surreption laid to my charge? do you
not perceive; (O you dear souls so unhappily misled) do you not perceive, to
what mischief and dissolution these assertions make way?

5. To be brief, your assurance of pardon and A heap of other impietyes which
necessarily ensue on the doctrine of Protestants.
forgiveness of sins frustrateth that petition of our Lords prayer. Your
inherence of sin in the souls of the regenerate, lesseneth the price, and
dishonors the ransom of Christ's precious blood. Your mere imputative and
outward righteousness, wrongeth the true righteousness and justice of God. Your
euacuating the merit and worthiness of works, blasteth the buddes of all
virtuous endeauours. Your anulling of satisfactions, kills the fruits of
wholesome penance. Your denial of sacrifice, and prayer for the dead, choketh
the remembrance and diminishes the hope of future resurrection; your certeinty
of salvation, rocketh men a sleep in careless security. The bondage in which you
enthrall the reprobate, that they How the same takes away the very Bulwark^ of
piety and brings in a dissolutio^ of all good life.
neither will nor can believe, throws them headlonge into the pit of
despair. These be the lessons of impurity dishonesty, and heathenish impiety,
taught in your schools. To which I might score up sundry more, tending to the
like havoc and corruption of al good manners: For you abolish Confession the
bridle of vice, you neglect restitution the lock of Justice, you renounce
prescript fastes, watchings, hair clots, and such lik chastisements of their
bodies, the death and extirpation of many untamed passions. Catholic
exhortations co^ferred with Protestant.
You contemn religious vows of Poverty, Chastity, and obedience. You admit no
tie in conscience of ecclesiastical and temporal laws, the sinews of
religion, the stays of piety, and chiefest rampires of all well ordered
discipline.

6. Therefore as we for the establishment of the Psalm. 35. v. 12.
former bulwarks, or fortresses of good life, allege such places of Scripture
as exhort hereunto. They on the other side produce and misapply diverse
passages, which seem 1. Pet. 2. verse. 13. Joel. 2. v. 12.
to patronage their libertine gospel. We urge for example, Vow you and render
your vows to your Lord God. Be subject to every humane creature for God,
whether it be to King as excelling, or to rulers as sent by him etc. Return to
me in all your hearts in fasting and in Coloss. 3. v. 5. 1. Corin. 9.
weeping and in mourning. Mortify your members which are upon the earth. I
chastise my body and bring it into servitude. If thou will be perfect go sell
the things that thou have and give to the poor and come and follow me. There
are eunuchs which have gelded themselves for Matthew. 19. v. 11. Ibid. v. 12.
the Kingdom of heaven. The Kingdom of heaven suffers violence and the
violent bear it away. Thus we.

7. They in their private conferences, and public Sermons inculcate other
textes which make show to the August. de virgin. cap. 24. interprets this
gelding of them that vow chastity for the love of heaven. Matthew. 11. verse. 12.
unlearned of a more pleasant law. As: We are not the children of the bond
woman, but of the free, by the freedom wherewith Christ has made us free. All
things are lawful for me, but I will be brought under the power of none.
Increase and multiply. Marriage is honorable in all. Let no man judge you in
meat or in drink, or in part of a festival day. Eat such things as are set
before you. All that is sold in the shambles eat. Not that which enters the
mouth defiles a man. No man ever hates his own flesh, but he nourishes and
cherishes it. Christ is the propitiation for our sins. He by his death and
passion has discharged us from penance satisfaction or other corporal
afflictions as either necessary to salvation or pleasing to God. So they.

8. If we go forward and compare the effects of Gala. 4. v. 31. 1. Cor. 6.
verse. 12. Genesis 1. v. 821. Hebr. 13. v. 4. Col. 2. v. 16. Luc. 10. v. 8. 1. Cor.
10. v. 25. Matthew. 15. v. 11. Ephesians. 5. verse. 29. 1. Joan. 2, verse. 2.
these exhortations with the fruits of ours, you shall see our soueraygne
counsayles, move the inward hearts and The good fruits of Catholic doctrine
confro^ted with the^ il weeds of Protestancy.
minds of sinners, persuade some to admirable conuersions, promote others to
extraordinary sanctimony, to such sorrow for their offenses, love of their
neighbors, peace of mind, tranquillity of conscience, union with God,
contemplation of heaven, neglect of earth and earthly comforts, as they strive
to imitate as near as they can that blessed Apostle who was crucified to the
world and the world to him. Some you shall see before they repair to us,
miserably tormented with the fits of remors, with a hell of disquiet: and after
they have been instructed in our schools of perfection, Galat. 6. v. 14.
always enjoy the paradise of rest: before tossed with the waves of ambition,
and after sailing with the calm tide of humility: before surfeting with the
draffe of uncleanness, and after delighted with the clear brooks of chastity,
with the waters of purity, Read these things most eloquently expressed and
dilated by Lactantius that Christian or divine Orator. How much the precepts
of God prevail in the minds of men daily experience bears witness. Give me a
man that is angry, a backbiter, an untamed or savage person, and with a few
words of God, I will make him as mild as a lamb. Give Lact. l. 3. de falsa
sap. c. 26.
me a sparing, covetous or niggardly fellow; and I will restore him unto thee
liberal, and distributing his money with a bountiful hand. Give me one
fearful of death, thrinking at pain, and he shall presently contemn both
crosses, fires, and all danger etc. Give me a leacherous wanton, an adulterer,
a Russian, and by and by thou shall see him sober, chaste, continent. Give me a
cruel miscreant, a sucker of blood, and his sury shall be turned within a while
into vnfaygned clemency. Hitherto he. Cast your eyes abroad and you shall see
^his sentence of Lactantius verifyed in many vici^us livers recovered from
their naughty courses. In ma^y re^chles sinners, become vnmatcheable Saints. In
di^ers others who without any note of former infamy, ^aue arrived to the height
of such eminent sanctity, as ^hey have been either enobled by God with
extraordi^y miracles, or canonized by the Church with solemn ^riumphes for
their singular virtue.

9. Look back upon the band of Protestants (...) ^eedes which spring from
the faith of Protestants.
no such men can you single forth: some they have I will not deny who live
among them moral good lives, as many Pelagian heretics and heathenish
Philosophers have done heretofore, yet none have ever deserved any special
renown, not any Plebeian or Superintendent of theirs whose life for sanctity
has been worthy the printe, Calu. l. de. scanda. qui habetur inter eius
tract. Theologica.
much less to be graced from heaven, or published to the world as a myrrour to
imitate: nay their chiefest Patriarchs and first authors Luther, Calvin, Beza
etc. have been blasted with ignominy, partly for incestuous, partly for
sodomiticall, partly for adulterous, all for their riotous, voluptuous, and
scandalous lives: and of their progeny Luther. in cap. 5. ad Galat.
Calvin testifyeth: Whereas so many thousands greedily as it seemed gave their
names to the Gospel, how few I beseech you have retired from their vices* Yea
what other has the greatest part pretended then that casting of the yoke of
superstition, they might more freely run into Luther in postill. sup. Euang.
do^. primae Aduentus. Reynolds de Eccles. Romans idol. l. 1. cap. 2. Eras. Ep. ad
Vult.
dissolution and wantones. Luther accords with him, affirming of his brattes,
That they are seven times morse vnde^ the name of Christia^liberty then they
were under the Pope. Li^kwise* Men are now more reuengefull, covetous,
licentious, then they were ever before in the Papacy. Therefore Erasmus whom
Master Reynoldes commends as a man well deserving of the Church of God,
wisely said of the Lutheran doctrine, Bring me o^^ whom this Gospel has of a
glutton made sober, of fierce mild, of covetous liberal, of an ill speaker
well spoken, of an unchaste shamefast. I can show them many who are made worse
then they were. The like was as prude^tly observed by the Earl of Salisbury
Lord A wise observation of the Lord Cecill late Earl of Salisbury.
Treasurer lately deceased, who was wont (as I have been very credibly
informed) often to admire and say, What i^ the cause that if any Catholic or
Papist be converted to us. he become^^ always more deboyst and dissolute then
before, and yet if any of our Ministers repair to them, they are so changed in
behavior, as we ca^ take no exception against their lives? The reason hereof I
hau^ assigned before and shall confirm by and by with the testimony of Sir
Eduin Sands: howbeit the adversary obiecteth, That much deboystnes and
misdemeanure ^s noted also amongst us: whereunto I entreat him to receive this
answer from Saint Augustine. Now I admon^^h Aug. l. ^. de moribus Eccl. cap.
34.
you of this point, that you surcease to speak evil of the Catholic Church,
blaming the manners of men whom the also condemns, and whom she as evil
labors daily to amend. The conversation of Christ and his divine preaching,
was most efficacious and heavenly; yet it could not prevail to mollify the
heart of a tray tours Judas. So although our laws and precepts, be in every
respect most holy; yet they cannot hinder and extirpate all kind of iniquity.

10. Nevertheless there is a fourefold difference, between the wicked of our
side, and those of the Reformers. Note a fowerfold disparity between the
naughty Catholics and evil Protestants.
For the naughtines of our men wholly springs, either from their own evil
dispositions, or infirmity of nature; and no way from the prauity, and
largeness of our doctrine, as it partly does in the profession of sectaryes.
2. Compare number to number, and quality of persons in like degree together;
ours are incomparably fewer, and less enormous then theirs; as the yearly
records of Assizes and Sessions confronted with those of ancient times do
report. 3. Our disordered persons, are Sir Edwin Sands in his relat. sect. 48.
more narrowly sought out, and bound to satisfy more exactly then their
malefactors. 4. We have far better helps to reclayme them; and stays to
keep them in the way of godliness, then protestants have. Witness Sir Edwin 2.
Pet. 8. verse. 19. Matt. 7. v. 13. and. verse.
Sands saying: Let the Protestants look with the eye of charity upon them (of
the Papacy) as well as of severity, and they shall find some excellent orders
of government, some singular helps for the increase of godliness and devotion,
for the conquering of sin, for the profiting in virtue. Contrariwise in
themselves looking with a more single 14. 2. Pet. 2. verse. 10. Romans 13. v. 1.
1. Pe. 2. v. 11, 2. Pet. 2. v. 12. and 13. Jude v. 4. 1. Pet. 2. v. 3. verse.
18. Romans 6. v. 11.
and less indulgent eye, they shall find there is no such absolute perfection
in their doctrine and reformation. So he. This is the cause of the loosenes of
their, and strictenes of our professors. Wherefore if we should examine by this
mark of holiness, who are the lively members of Christ, we or you, it is
evident that you are the false Prophets, promising liberty, and we the true
preachers exhorting to piety, You the guides of Satan, showing the broad way
which leads to perdition; and we the watchmen of the holy Ghost,
demonstrating the narrow gate which opens the life. You the lying Masters
which walk after the flesh in concupiscence of uncleanness, and contemn
dominion: And we the humble subjects, who obedient to higher powers, strive to
refrain from carnal desires, which war against the soul. You the
unreasonable men etc. coninquinations and spots flowing in delicacies, and
transferring the grace of our God into riotousnes: and we the reasonable
hosts, victimes, and sacrifices offered unto God, mortified certes in the
flesh, but quickened in spirit, dead to sin but a live to God, in Christ Jesus
our Lord.

CHAP. XVII. In which Sanctity or Holiness is another way explayned, to be a
badge of the true Church.
THIS word Sanctum holy, besides the former significations as it is derived
from the verb Sancio, sancis, betokens that What Sanctum derived from the
verb Sancio does import.
which is firmly ratifyed, consecrated, and established: That which is stable,
unchangeable, sacred, and inviolable. So laws are termed holy, Temples holy,
Kings, Ambassadors, Priests, and Bishops holy, and sacred persons; they
ought to be fenced against all force and violence. Thus true religion is holy
and inviolable, not to be altered or changed, not be vanquished or subdued by
any assaults whatsoever: but to prevail vanquish, and overcome all such, as
fight against it, and grow always more mighty by their encounters. For as the
Esquire of King Darius affirmed, Truth abides and grows strong for ever,
and lives and preuayleth for ever and ever. Edras 3. c. 4. verse. 38.
So the true Church and her belief still flourishes and waxes great; and as
Justinian in the civil law discourses: Nothing i^ less subject to decay then
true Religion. But of false and Iusti. l. Int. claras l. de su^ma Tri^. Sap. 4.
v. 3. 4. Matthew. 15. verse. 13.
new devised sects the holy Ghost delivers by the mouth of Solomon: Bastard
plants shall not take deep root, nor lay sure foundation, and if in the
boughs for a time they shall spring, being weakly set, they shall be moved of
the wind, and by the vehemence of the blastes they shall be extirpated. And our
Savior Christ: All planting that my heavenly Father has not planted shall be
rooted up.

2. By this mark you shall see that the profession of our new gospellers, is a
bastardly slip; and the Roman Four notes or branches of stability, by which
the Roman Church is proved to be the true Church of Christ.
Faith, the only stable and unconquerable truth. First if you consider how this
Roman faith alone has been ever impugned by all kind of adversaries, yet
still remained victorious. Secondly how by it self it maynteyned her right
against them all, without any forrayne help or succor. Thirdly how it has
always orderly proceeded, by subduing them as a Queen or Empress, by
absolute authority, and iuridicall power. Fourthly how in these encounters it
has never altered or changed her faith, never relented or yealded to her
enemies in any point little or great, but has still flourished and prevailed
against them.

3. Every one of these notes, are prerogatives of The Roman Church showed to be
true because that alone is impugned by all false and heretical conuenticles.
the true Church. For all vices and errors though contrary in themselves,
agree in this, that they are opposite unto virtue, opposite unto truth: So all
sects and heresies though never so repugnant one from the other, yet all join
to make open war against the true faith, and Church of God. The Sadduceans,
Pharisees, and Herodians were at deadly foe amongst themselves, notwithstanding
they made league, and linked together in persecuting of Christ. Thus the Roman
Church only and no other has been ever pursued, by all the rebellious sects,
that ever were. Against her the Simonians, Cerinthians, Micolaits, Eutichians,
Nacedonians, in former times. Against her the Anabaptists, Brownistes,
Lutherans, Caluinists, Armenians, Gomotistes, and all Protestants bid battle
now a days. Against her the Turks, Jews, Pagans, Politicians, and Atheistes
pitch their tents. Against her the heathenish and other wicked Emperors have
bent their forces, Dioclesian, Valens, Julian, Constantius, Leo Isaurus,
Constantinus Copronymus, Fredericus etc Against her all the powers of hell and
might of Satan has opposed, yet could never prevail. She is therefore the
house of God built upon a rock, on Matt. 7. v. 24. 25.
which the rain fell, the floods came, the winds blew, but cold not overthrow
it. She is the Camp of Israel assaulted by all her bordering enemies, yet
never vanquished by any. The 2. Reg. 7.
throne of Solomon established for ever. The Kingdom of Christ often impugned,
yet victoriously triumphing Aug. inps. 47. The Roman Church the vnco^querable
truth because it resists and overcomes by it self without help of others.
over all the Kingdoms of the earth.

4. Secondly the Roman Church has thus defended her self, and gotten the
victory without the association, or confederacy of any Church. She by her self
under the protection of God, has stoutly achieved these wonderful conquests.
She by her own men, by the Bishops, Prelates, and other secular and religious
persons of her own profession, has maynteyned her Catholic and Orthodoxall
faith, with patience against the storms of persecutours, with reasons against
the subtility of Philosophers, with Scriptures against heretics, with
prophecies against the Jews, with prescriptions against the Turks, with
Christian prudence against the Macihuelians, with natural arguments against
the Atheists and Pagans, with miracles against the weak, with consent fame and
authority against the proud, and haughty. Against these and all others our
Church alone has in all ages, ever since Christ his time, with vnmatcheable
wisdom, and power uncontrollable, vpholden the right and glory of her cause; by
helps taken out of her own armory, with weapons of her own. Whereas her
adversaries have still aided one another, still called upon forayne Sect aryes
and false Churches are forced to borrow help one from the other.
succors, to support and back them; as our sectaries now implore the aid of
sundry heretics, to make some m^ster or show of pretended Gospellers to
encounter with us; not unlike to Cataline the rebel, who associated himself
with all the dissolute, ruffianlike, vicious and forlorn refuse, of what kind
soever they were, to war against his Country. For so our English Protestants
link in communion, first with their fellow Puritans, whom one of their own
brethren terms Apostolikes, Aerians, Tull. orat. 1. 2. and 3. in Catal.
Ormer. dia. 1.
Pepuzians, Petrobusians, Florinians, Cerinthians, Nazarens, Beguardines,
Ebionites, Catabaptides, Catharists, Iouianistes etc. Then both Puritans and
Protestants band with the Lutherans, Caluinists, Hussites, Wickelifists,
Albigenses, As heretics beg men so likewise munition from forrenners.
Whitaker. in resp. ad Sand. Col. l 4. just. c. 9.. 8. Fulk in his confutation of
Purgatory Beza epist. Theo. 81. VVhitg. in his def. Hooker in his preface to
his eccl. pol. pa. 24. 25. 26. 27. The Bish. Confer. at Hampt. Court.
Picards, with other such monsters, more hideous and misshapen in profession,
then ill favored in names. With them they join friendship to fill up the
number of their mutinous and disloyal Army.

5. Neither is it enough for the^ to beg the supply of forrayne soldiers, but
their weapons also they steal from others. For when the Protestant would annoy
the Puritan, he puts on the armor of our doctors, Counsels, ordinances,
and prescriptions. When he defends his quarrel against Catholics, he flies
to the secret ambushes, and retrayts of Puritans; he relieth wholly on their
hidden spirit; by it he will try the sayings of Fathers, and decrees of
Counsels. By that Whitaker cassieereth a full senate of Fathers; Calvin
examineth general Cou^cells; Fulke makes havoc of all antiquity. Far
otherwise does Beza with the Trinitaryes, Master Whitgift with Cartwright,
Master Hooker, Doctor Couell, and the Protestant Bishops, in their conference
with Puritans, disprouing them by our principles of tradition. Besides from us
they borow their Scriptures, their laws, their constitutions, their
ecclesiastical government, and hierarchy of their Clergy. With these rags of
popery (as both their and our enemies seek to disgrace them) with these
stolen feathers, they are wont to glory like the Horatian daw. In so much as
some of their own Protestants complain of the present Ministry, and Church of
England. That their Pontifical, whereby they consecrate Bishops, make ministers
and deacons, is nothing else but a thing word for word drawn out Admo. to the
Parlia.
of the Popes Pontifical,

6. Besides, as they embezell from us all that is laudable orderly or good
amongst them, so their dregs of Aug. l. de bar. cap. 53. Guido Carmelit. in
su. Coal. l. de histor. Hussi. Syn. Constann. sess. 8. Lat. l. ad Bere^g.
Nicep. in hist. eccles. l. 16. ca. 27. Bucching. in eccl. hist. Prat. ver.
Nouatiani. Ierem. lib. contra Virgilan. Euthimius in Panopl. par. 2. tit. 21.
Theod. l. 4. haer. fab. Dam. l. de cent. haer. Iero. in lib. ad Vigil. and
Ioui. Jonas Aurelia^ensis apud Sa^d. l. 7. de de visi. mo. Irae. l. 1. c. 20.
Epiph haer. 64 Theod. l. 4. haer. fab. Iero, in praefat. dia. contra Pel.
Damas. haer. 100. Field in his 3. book from the ^3. to the 33. chap.
heresies or puddles of naughtines, wherein they dissent from our true faith,
they severally suck from the poisoned fountaynes of sundry old heretics. From
Aerius their denial of sacrifice and prayer for the dead: Of Purgatory from
the Armenians; of Indulgences from the Hussits and Taborits; of the real
presence from Berengarius: of the worshipping of Images from Xenaias. They hold
auricular Conlession not necessary with the Iacobits: Priests Absolution
vnauaylable with the Nouatians: Adoration of Relikes superstitious with
Vigilantius: honor done to the Cross Idolatry with the Paulicians. With the
Audians they reprehend enjoined Penance: With the Lampetians the discipline
and order of Monks: With Vigilanlantius and Iouinian vowed chastity and
Priests single life: Pilgrimages to Saints bodies with Claudius Taurinensis.
From Simon Magus they take their sufficiency of faith without works to
salvation: From Proclus, and the Messalians their inherency of sin in the
souls of the regenerate. That man has not Freewill from the Manichees: That
all sins proceed from the determinat purpose and decree of God from the
Mahometanes. O loathsome sincke, O infectious dunghill, composed of so many and
such contagious heresies! All which have been heretofore anathematized and
accursed by our Roman Church. For although Field and some of his associates go
about to acquit their sect from sundry of these impieties, because the
aforesaid heretics maynteyned them, upon another ground then Protestants do:
yet seeing the ancient Church condemned not so much the grounds or causes
whereupon they relied, as the assertions themselves, our sectaryes must needs
be guilty of the same heresies who agree with them in the same positions.

7. Thirdly, As our Church by it self, so by orderly proceeding, has
vanquished her rebels. For first The Roman Church has always orderly
resisted and subdued her enemies.
she has sifted and examined their cause, showed them their errors, admonisht
the^ of their faults, given them time to repent, peace, and favor upon their
amendment. Then the obstinate she has summoned to appear at the publik
Court, or great Consistory of her Provincial or general counsels. She has
given the^ safe conduct to come and go, liberty to propose, dispute, and argue
their own cause; and after diligent study, examination, and discussion
thereof, like a supreme Judge and soueraygne Empress, she has pronounced
sentence, either for the^ or against the^ according to the direction of Gods
holy spirit. After this princely and iuridicall manner Arius was condemned in
the first Council of Nice, in the Counsel of Constantinople Macedonius,
Nestorius in the Ephesin, in the Calcedone Eutiches etc. Luther and his
co^plices in the Counsel of Trent.

8. Our Gospellers proceed not so with us, They disturb and cast us out of
possession, without examining The Protestants have used base and disorderly
proceeding in expelling is from our right.
our right, or admitting us to speak in our own behalf. They affoard us
neither leisure to propose, nor time, or place to argue our cause. A cause
universally sustained by so many Christian Princes and people, honorably
defended in such famous universities, supernaturally confirmed by miracles from
heaven, Consecrated with the blood of innunerable Martyrs, ratified by the
prescription of all precedent ages, and never as yet autentically censured or
reproved in any. Notwithstanding so great interest, in ^o renowned a cause
they never conuented us hitherto before any Provincial or National, much
less General assembly. They have admitted us to no indifferent and public
Conference, for which we have often supplicated heretofore, as the Protestant
Relatour testifyeth, saying; Relation of Religion c. 29.
Catholics cry maynly in all places for trial by disputation; Thus did
^ampian many years since with us. Thus as I passed through Zurick, did
Cardinal Andrea of Constance and his Jesuits etc. And thus do I now in
behalf of my brethren make humble suit to Nimble ^ute made to his Majesty for
trial of our cause either by disputation or other public conference.
his Majesty, to grant us at length that reasonable request which the
Ministers hertofore, have by all means possible labored to hinder, and in liew
of those honorable trialls, have incensed the clemency of our gracious
Princes, and procured their swords to be drawn against us: Their Parlamentall
laws, Edictes, and Proclamations; their dreadful anger, and heauiest
indignation, to bannish, imprison, or at least stop the mouths of innocents
unheard. Of whom Master Ormeroda Protestant truly auerreth; The Clinke, the
Gatehouse the White lion, and the Fleet, (he might have added the rackes
tortures and gallowses) Ormer. picture Pur. p. 1.
have been Protestants only arguments, whereby they have proved their cause
these many years. An evident token in the judgment of all prudent men of
their cowardly hearts, and guilty consciences. Protestants have been co^straynd
daily to refine and alter their new belief, but Catholics never changed any
point of doctrine.


9. Fourthly whereas Protestants notwithstanding their base and teacherous
courses, have been still forced by our men, to alter, change, relent and vary
in diverse fundamental articles, as has been discovered in explayning the
precedent mark: yet our Church in all the storms which either in this
present, or former ages have been raised against her; never shrunk, never
varied from the least jot of her belief. She has explicated sundry points
more plainly, more expressly defined some unsearchable misteryes; but she has
not at any time added any new, or changed any old article of her faith. She
has wisely polished, orderly carved, fairly burnished, righly adorned, the
precious stones (as Vincentius calls Vince^t in com. ca. 27.
them) of heavenly doctrine. But the same incorruptible stones she has still
unchangeably preserved. A faithful keepe^ and true interpreter she has been,
but no broker changer Vincent. ibid. c. 29.
or diminisher of the treasure committed to her custody. Posterity says the
same Vincentius) may congratulate it to have understood by her, which antiquity
not understanding did reverence and adore. Yet the same which she learned, she
so taught, as when she taught newly, she taught not new things etc. A little
after: Her doctrine followed these laws of increase that by years it was
strengthened, (...) time enlarged, advanced by age, and yet it still continued
inviolable and incorrupt. O triumphant and victorious Church, worthy to bear
the crown, and sway the scepter of Christ's Priestly and eternal Kingdom:
worthy to be that inconquerable, and fatal stone, on which whosoever falls,
according Math 21. verse. 44.
to our Saviors prophecy, has been broken, and which bruiseth them on whom
it lights. For have not all her enemies been broken, wasted and discomfited,
who have risen against her: and has not she bruised, shiuered into pieces, and
clean extinguished as many as she has striuen against? She censured and
condemned the Nouatians, Macedonians, Arians, Pelagians, Eutichians,
Nestorians, Donatistes, and diverse other sectaryes, and have they not been
ever since cassiered, hated as arrant heretics? Are any of their Monumentes
now extant? Is there any memory left of them, but only amongst the Catholic
writers who confuted them? For where I pray are the Psalms of Valentinus, and
his Sophia? The fundamental Epistle What is become of all the eloquent works
of former heretics?
of the Manichees? The Antithesis of Marcion? Where is Arius Thalia?
Apollinaris great volume of 30. books? Where are the Rules of Taconius, the
letters of Petilian, the eloquent writings of other heretics? Are they not all
trodden under feet and consumed by the Roman church? So in short time the
Protestants Harmony of consessions, Caluins Institutions, Bezas theological
treaties, Willets synopsis, Spalatens Stan. Resc. in Euang. sect. Cent.
Commonwealth, and all such modern writings with their professors will be
clean worn out by that ever flourishing and abiding Sea. For thus about a
hundred eyghty and one furious raging and principal sects, besides innumerable
branches springing from them (before Luther and his Protestant brood was
hatched) have been utterly vanquished and destroyed by her. And what hope may
these Gospellers have to stand in battle, where so mighty adversaries are
fallen to the ground? If it be a treachery to God, a disloyalty to his spouse,
to resist the Roman sea; how tremble not they who storm against it? If all
those whom she has hitherto censured, have ever after been adjudged for
heretics; in what case are The Roman Church never as yet condemned any for
heretics but always after they were held for such.
Protestants whom her highest and grauest Senate, has publicly condemned in
the Council of Nice?

10. If others who had Emperors to support them, Counsels to favor them,
Bishops, Patriarchs, and a great part of the world to aid them; are
notwithstanding quite abolished by the power of that Church: have not
Protestants reason to fear the like destruction and abolishment of their sect?
which by her own often chaunges, divisions, mutual disagreements, and endless
brawles, haste^^eth apace to ruin and decay: whilst our Roman Religion,
perpetually vpholden by Gods protection, stands inviolable, and ever
flourishing in the eye of the world, from the Sea Apostolic by succession of
Bishops, (heretics vain barking about it) has gotten (says S. Augustine)
the height of authority; has assembled so many Counsels, condemned so many
heresies, won so many victories, and so often Aug. li. de vtilit. cred.
vanquished the gates of hell. Wherefore to conclude this mark: Even as when
the Esquire of King Darius body had ended his discourse, all the people cried
out: Great is truth and it preuayleth; so all indifferent and judicious readers
will (I doubt not) give sentence wit^ me and say; Great is Esdras 3. c. 4.
the Roman Church, Great is the Sea of Peter, Great is that rock and highest
throne, and it subdueth all her rebellious adversaries.

CHAP. XVIII. In which, the Name of Catholic, is proved to a mark of the
Church: Against D. Whitaker D. Fulke, and D. Field.
Now I come to the great character of our glory, and renowned title of our
profession, the name Catholic: a name famous in the Primitive Church, famous
in the Apostles days, and inserted by them among the Articles of our Creed:
famous after in all succeeding ages, and used commonly by the Fathers, not so
much to make a difference, (which some think) betwixt the Jewish Sinagogue,
and the Christian Church; as to Casaubo^ in his answ. to the Ep. of Cardin.
Peron fol. 6. in Eng.
severe and distinguish the false named Christians themselves, from the true
and unfeigned believers. Which Pacianus that eloquent Bishop of Barcelona gives
us to understand in these words: When after the Apostles heresies sprung up,
and with diverse names endeavored to rend the dove of God, and tear his Queen
in pieces, did not the Apostolical people engraue a surname, Pacianus Epist.
1. ad Simpro.
which might distinguish the unity of the flock incorrupted least the error
of some divided into parts, should rend and disseuer the undefiled Virgin of
God etc. I entering (says he) a populous City, where I find the Marcionists,
Apollinaristes, Cataphrigians, Nouatians, who entitle themselves Christians,
how shall I know the congregation of my people, unless it were called Catholic?
And then he adds: Christian Ibidem.
stian is my name, Catholic my surname; that entitleth me, this shows who I
am. Likewise S. Cyrill of Jerusalem: If thou go into any City ask not where
the Church is, where the house of God is, for Cyril. cate. 8.
the very heretics challenge them, but ask where the Catholic Church is,
that is the proper name of our holy Church, of us all. And Saint Augustines
estimation hereof was such, as he avouches, The very name of Catholic keeps
we in the bosom of the Church. The testimony of these three Fathers, Whitaker
obiecteth against himself, and to the former two he answers: Cyrill and
Pacian in the name alone put no force. Has this man any conscience or regard
what he says? Peruse their Aug. con. Ep. Fund. cap. 4.
words, and pass your censure. To S. Augustine he replyeth more bathfully,
but as friuolously altogether, Augustine (says he) attributes something to
the name, but not so much as the Papists. And why not? Because Bellarmine
places that name Whitaker. contro. 2. q. 5 cap 2.
in the first rank, Augustine in the last. And is not the last place (good
Sir) as respectfull, and more honorable often then the first? Is it not a
precept also in Rhetorike, to propose the most forcible arguments in the last
place? Therefore Whitaker. Ibid.
Saint Augustine recounting the motives which held him in the bosom of the
Church, does he make less account of the name Catholic, because he places it
last? what childish stuff is this? You a divine M. Whitaber, and once Barl in
his Answer page 269. Iren. l. 1. c. 10. Ierom. contra Lucifer. ca. 7. Lactan.
li. 7. divine. c. 30. Atha. sermon. 2. co^ Aria. Field in his 2. book of the
Church ca. 9.
public Reader in Cambridge? You he, whose name though dead (as M. Barlow
braggeth) is a terror to Bellarmine, and yet dispute so idly?

2. To proceed. As the name Catholic, has been always a peculiar note of the
true believers, so to be styled after the names of men, as Lutherans of Luther,
Caluinistes of Calvin, has been ever as Saint Irenaeus, Saint Jerome,
Lactantius, and Saint Athanasius teach, a mark of heresy, a token of schism:
which M. Field likewise confesses saying: The name of a Cathelike was a note,
and distinctiue mark or character, to know, and discern a Catholic from an
heretic or schismatike by; and the naming after the name of any man a note of
particularity, and heretical or schismatic faction. The same he proves a
little after by the authority of S. Jerome. Wherefore least he and his
sectmates by the censure of S. Jerome, and by his own deposition should be
endited of heresy, he trauerseth the indictment in this miserable Field Ibid.
manner. As (says he) the honorable title of Catholic sometime a note of the
true and orthodoxall Church, is now ceased to be so: In like sort the naming
after the names of m^n, sometime a note of hersy, is now ceased to be so, which
to most true, the sundry manifold and diverse names of Dominicans, Franciscans,
Benedictins, Augustinians, Thomists, Scotists, and the like do make it most
apparent. This later instance because it is the same with Whitaker and Fulke, I
shall refute hereafter. Now if the name of Catholic which was once a note of
the true Church is ceased so to be; I demand how or by what means it ceased?
You say Field in the place above cited pa. 56.
M Field: when the maine body of the Christian Church divided it self etc, to
wit the Grecian from the Latin, then it began to be common to both the
moyetyes. To the false Church as well as to the true, Because the Christians of
the Greek and oriental Church, are, and have been as generally named
Catholics, as the friends and followers of the western. Which if he understand
of the true Christians in those parts, who communicated with the Romans in all
points of faith, it is true, but altogether impertinent; yea repugnant to his
purpose. If of the seduced Christians, who by schism or heresy were separated
from the rest, it is more then ordinary, it is intolerable falsehood, to say
that they were generally named Catholics, whom all both profane and
ecclesiastical writers, who were not parties in their broils, commonly
record, either by the general name of schismatikes of Greece, or by the
particular names of the authors who raised these factions; as Meletians,
Luciferians, Macedonians, Fields shamlesse devise of the ceasing of the name
Catholic to be a note of the Church refuted.
Nestorians, and the like, of Meletius, of Lucifer, of Macedonius, of Nestorius.

3. Again, suppose the glorious and triumphant name of Catholic, ceased, to
be a note of the true Church, by the Grecian schism: you should tell us M.
Field by what schism, or revolt, she first left that mark? Who robbed her of
it? What complaints were made of the wrong offered to so chaste a spouse? These
and many such points should be specified, which you of a guilty and teacherous
conscience wilfully omit. For will you avouch it ceased to be a note, at that
great division or open rebellion which See Baron ann. Chri 306.
the Meletians, the Arians made, about the 300. year of our Lord? But sundry
Canons of the Council of Nice, the writings of Saint Paicanus, Saint Hilary,
Saint Cyrill, and Saint Augustine: The decrees of Gratian, Valentinian, and
Theodosius, three worthy Emperors bear witness against Conc. Nic. can. 8. 10.
and 19. S. Pacian. ep. 1. ad symp. Hilar. l. ad Constan. Cyril cate. 18. Aug.
epist. 107. ^piphan. haer. 68.
you, who living some at the same time, some immediately after, do
notwithstanding acknowledge it a mark of the true Church. And chiefly
Epiphanius, who writing of the same schism records, that the true
Christistians, who at that time cleaned to Peter Bishop of Alexandria, fronted
their Churches with this inscription, Ecclesia Catholica, the Catholic Church.
Those that did adhere to Meletius branded theirs with this note, Ecclesia
Martyrum, The Church of Martyrs.

4. Will you pretend it ceased, at the time of that proud and presumptuous
breach, which John the Patriarch of Constantinople caused, when he did arrogate
to be sole and universal Patriarch? But I find in the writings of S. Gregory
the great, in the abiuration of the schismatic Greg. l. 4. indict. 13. ep.
2. l. 12. ep. 7. l. 10. indict. 5. ep. 31. Beda histo. l. 3. c. 29.
Bishops pronounced against heresy, at the same time: In venerable Bede, and
innumerable other modern authors, that it still continued a true note of the
Church. Moreover that this rash assertion, may manifestly appear, to be
nothing else but a clowdy fiction of yours, to hide the light of so fair a
mark; Reason teaches, and Doctor Whitaker often confesses, The marks and
propertyes of the Church, to be inseperable from the Church, whose marks they
are. Therefore that which once was must still continue a mark of the Church,
because the true Church albeit admit some accidental change, yet it is always
in Whitaker. contro. 2. q. 5. ca. 18. folio 505.
nature unvariable, in essence unchangeable: so that the propertyes which flow
from the essence thereof, as the name Catholic does, can no more be altered
changed or cease, then the power of laughing, a property which proceeds from
the nature of man, can ever cease to apperteyne to man.

5. Secondly the name of Catholic, was not as Saint Paicanus writes, ab
homine mutuatum, borrowed from a man, to be subject to change; but inspired by
the holy Ghost to be a permanent, and perpetual mark, to distinguish not for
a time, but for ever the people of God, from heretical assemblies. Whereupon
he says, This name Pa^ia^ ep. 1. ad Symp.
Catholic neither sounds Marcion nor Apelles, nor Montanus, neither does it
acknowledge any heretical authors. Lastly, i^ Field will have the name
Catholic now cease to be a note of Christ's flock, because it denotes not his
heard of sectaries: he must make an article of our creed (which is no less then
blasphemy) cease to be true, he must cease to believe the Church of the
Apostles, cease to believe the holy Catholic Church, and impiously translate
the honorable title Field vbi supra folio 57. prope finem.
(as himself terms it) of Christ's immaculate spouse, to the Satanicall
synagogue, and aduoutresse of the Devil: She must be also Catholic, she, the
harlot, must be graced with the style, trimmed with the ornaments, set forth
and known by the peculiar and celestial badge of her Ministers. To leave M.
Field and encounter with his fellows.

6. Fulke and Whitaker having not brewed that new devise of Fields, imitating
the Nouatians and other Fulke in c. 11. art. sect. 4. Whitaker cont. 2. q. 5.
heretics, apishly profess that they are the true Catholics, howsoever we
seem to boast of the name. Of the truth of the thing I shall speak in due
time. Now the whole question is about the name, who are commonly known
thereby, Protestants, or we whom they term Papists. Ask first the opinion
and judgment of all nations, in whatsoever books they read, that Catholics
are of this mind, Lutherans, Caluinists, Anabaptists of that: do they ever
stagger or doubt who are meant by the word Catholic, we or Protestants?
Inquire then of the Turks Jews and Infidells, when they speak write or hear
of Catholics, whether they understand not the professors of the Roman Church?
Consult the consciences of Protestants themselves, go into Germany, knock at
the gates of Geneua, appear at the Assizes and Sessions in England, profess
your self a Catholic: Will they not all judge you a Roman Catholic? And are
they not also often forced for distinction sake to style us by that name, Aug.
de vera relig. cap. 7. Aug. con. ep. fund. c. 4.
because they could not otherwise be understood, as S. Austine says,
especially when they discourse with strangers* who are unacquainted with the
nicknames they impose upon us: and therefore the same Saint Augustine notes it
in another place, as a secret and hidden judgment of God: That whereas all
heretics would have themselves called Catholics, yet to Sleidan lib. 7. fo.
96. Fox Acts and monu. page 613. Jacob inhis reasons p. 5. and 24. Fulke in
act. ^1. sect. 4. Humf. in vita Iuelli. page 102.
a stranger demanding where a man might repair to the Catholic assembly,
none of the heretics dare show their own conuenticles, or meeting place.
Travail through the free state of Germany, where our Religion and Protestants
are publikly permitted; propound this question to the Lutherans, Zuinglians, or
Caluinists there: ask where the Catholics meet at service? And they will
point you to our Churches. And not only in private talk, but in public
writings and discourses, some of our sectaryes attribute unto us, the
privilege of this name, as Sleidan, M. Fox, and M. Jacob often do. Doctor
Fulke terms it a vain sound; Doctor Humfery scornfully disgraceth it:
Others utterly renounce and discard it, as certain Lutherans did at the Synod
holden In col. Altemberg. in resp. ad accus. corr. fol. 154.
at Altemberge, who when their adversaries objected a saying of Luther against
them, in which the word Catholic was found, they rejected it as counterfeit;
saying, These words (Catholikely understood) sauournot of Luthers style.

7. And M. Abbot now supposed Bishop of Sarisbury: The name of Catholic was an
honorable name, and the Abbot in his answer to Doctor Bishopsep. to the King
fol. 16. and 17.
peculiar title of the children of the Church, but now by their abuse who have
unjustly taken that name unto themselves, it is become a name of course and
shame with the people of God, and the proper badge of Apostatas and heretics
etc. Then he denies it sectmates and attributes unto us that literal name,
saying: Let them have the shell, so that we have the kernel: Let them vaunt
themselves of the empty letter, so long as we have the true virtue and
signification of the name. But of the signification hereafter in the insewing
Chapter. Here it appears by his renuntiation and flat deposition, That we of
the Roman profession, and only we, are commonly designed by the name Catholic.
We only enjoy the lively badge, and are invested with the livery of the true
professors of Christ. Neither can M. Abbot or M. Whitaker dismantle us of that
royalty, by Whitaker. contr. ^. q. 5. ca. 2 fol. 295. Abbot loco citato
saying, Names may be falsely imposed to things, or unjustly usurped. For this
name is not imposed by man, not usurped by abuse, but imparted by God, inspired
by the holy Ghost, (as I have proved above) who cannot apparel us with any
faygned attire, nor can the devil take from Gods people their cognizance, or
nobilitate his vassalls with the colors of Christ. But such has been the
divine providence, in preserving the honor of this title to his Beloved
spouse; as there was never any schismatic or heretical assembly, commonly
called or styled Catholic; never any people generally of all parties known by
that name, who were not indeed the true flock of Christ. Heretics (quoth
Fulke) could never obtain to be so called by true Fulk in lo. citato.
Christians. Wherefore seeing Protestants for the most part, and all others
Christians, yea Jews and infidells discern us by this mark, we are the true
followers and believers in Christ.

8. Fulke, Field, and Whitaker object again, that Fulke ibid. Field l. 2. c.
9. Whitaker. contr. 2. q. 5. cap. 2. Field ibid. folio 58.
we are also called by several names; Some Benedictins, Franciscans,
Dominicans, etc. some Thomists, Scotists and the like. I answer these names
import not any difference in matters of faith, as Field testifyeth with me, but
in order of life, in courses (as he says) of monastical profession, or in
questionable matters not defined by the Church, in controversies of religion
(to use his words) not yet determined by the consent of the whole universal
Church. If the spirit of modesty, if the spirit of truth, guided his pen to
answer this in our behalf, imagine with your selves, what spirit of giddines,
what spirit of contradiction, incensed his heart to control his own speech,
and calumniate us without a cause. For as in the old law some were called
Rechabites, Iare. 35. 2. 5. 6. Number. 6. 2. 5. 13.
some Nazarites, so now we may have diverse names, as long as they argue not the
least change or innovation in any necessary point of belief: which none of
the former do, related by M. Field; nor any other by which he and his
associates scornfully miscall us. For the name Papist designeth not any
particular man, or new manner of belief, but only our submission and adhere^ce
to the Pope our head. The name Romanist so rife in the pen of M. Field,
declares the chief City or seat of his residence, and our communion with
it. Both which have ever been special tokens of faithful Christians.
Whereupon Saint Augustine said of Cecilian, that he needed Aug. ep. 162.
not sear the conspiring multitude of African Bishops, as long as he
communicated with Melchiades the Pope. And Optatus (to omit Optatus l. 2.
contra Parme.
Saint Jerome whose words I recited in another place) maynteyning league with
Siricius the Pope, with whom the whole world as he says was united, cassiereth
the Donatistes out of the number of Catholics, because they communicated not
with the Roman Church. Why our sectaries are called. Protestants.


9. But as the very nicknames our enemies devise to disgrace us, plainly bewray
both the equity of our cause, and truth of our religion: So all the titles we
give unto them, and such as they arrogate to themselves, burn them in the
forhead with the print of heresy. For some we call Sacramentaryes, for denying
the truth of Christ's presence in the Sacrament: Others Caluinistes, After what
manner they may be fitly termed Ghopellers.
others Lutherans, of the innovation and change which Luther, and Calvin first
invented in matters of faith: Protestants and Gospellers they all term
themselves, because they joined together to make open protestation, against
the whole body of Christendom in the Council of Trent: Gospellers because
they pretend (though falsely as other heretics are wont) to follow the gospel
and pure word of God. Yet in a contrary sense, they may enjoy the outward
splendor of that empty name, in that they offer violence to the gospel, in
writhing it to their phansies, and mangling with their corruptions the sacred
text. For as the two Scipios one was called Africanus, because he subdewed
Hanniball and the people of Africa, the other Numantinus, for subuerting
Numantia; so they maybe called Ghospellers, because they subvert, destroy, and
utterly extinguish by their false interpretations, the Gospel of Christ.
Finally being not able to glory with the native property or single name of
Catholics, they entitle themselves (for others mockingly only and by way of
derision give them that name) Christian Catholics, reformed Catholics, How
Protestants are no true Catholik^ by stiling themselves reformed Catholics.
reformed Churches; wherein by the very claim they make, they overthrow their
own plea, and show both their claim unconscionable, and title unjust. For if
they be Christian Catholics, if reformed Catholics, then segregated,
limited, and restrained by their new reformation, by their particular
Catholicisme; from the general illimited and absolute dignity of Catholics;
and consequently no Catholics, not such as without some fine trick, or
feigned addition, are deciphered by that name: but such as mask themselves
under the disguised vizard, or counterfeyte veyle of true and faithful
belieuers.

CHAP. XIX. In which the thing signified by the Name Catholic, to wit,
Universality, is showed to be a mark of the true Church: Against Doctor
Whitaker and Doctor Abbot.
You have heard how M. Robert Abbot in the precedent Chapter, giving us the
name Catholic challenges to his sect the thing signified by the nam; howbeit
I have evidently proved that the name and thing, are such individual and
inseparable companions, as they cannot be disunited or parted a sunder. Now I
am to declare what the thing is, and how exactly it delineateth the Kingdom
of our Church. The Aug. con. lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 38. and tract. 118. in Euang.
Iom. and. l. 3. c. 1. cont. Gaudent. Aug ep. 170. ad Sever. Cyprian li de vnita
ec. Cyril cate. 18. Basilep 72. and 75. Pacian. ep. 3. ad Symp. Opta. co^t.
Par. Iero. aduer. Lucifer. Beda in com. sup. Cant.
word Catholic (says Saint Augustine) is derived from the Greek word (...),
secundum totum, that is according to the whole or vniuetsall: Therefore he
teaches that the Church is called in Greek (...), Catholic, Because it is
spread and dispersed throughout all the world, which he strengthens by the
testimony of Saint Cyprian saying; the Church adorned with the light of our
Lord, stretches her beams throughout the world. With whom Saint Cyrill,
Saint Basil, Saint Aug. de unit e. and in psalm. 2. 18. ^1. 47. 7^; item ep. 61
ad Ho. Donat. ps. 2. v. 8. ps. 18 v. 5. ps. 21. v. 28. and 29. Isay 54. v. 2.
and 3. Isay 52. v. 10. Vbi non est freque^. tia multitudinis. Non in aliqua
part terraru^ sed vbique notissima est. Aug. devnit. ec. cap. 25. Aug. to^. 9.
de symb. l. 4. c. 10. Pacian ep. 1. and 3. ad symp. Opt. l. 2. cont. Parmen.
Iero. cont. Lucifer. in fine. Aug. to. 6. cont. Fulg. Donat. cap. 18 and l. de
past ^. c. 8. Aug in psalm. 21. in psalm. 44. in psalm. 47. and tract. 1. in ep.
Joan.
Pacian, Optatus, Saint Jerome and venerable Bede accord. This universality of
the Church in all places and Countries, Saint Augustine demonstrateth out of
sundry Texts of holy Scripture. I will give the Gentills for thy inheritance,
and for thy possession the ends of the earth. Their sound has gone forth into
all the eart^; and unto the ends of the round world the words of them. The
ends of the earth shall remember and be converted to our Lord, and all the
families of the Gentills shall adore in his sight. Enlarge the place of thy
tente, and stretch out the skins of thy tabernacles etc. Thy Redeemer, the
holy one of Israel, shall be called the God of all the earth. Our Lord has
prepared his holy army in the sight of all the Gentills: and all the ends of
the earth shall see the salvation of our God. From these and the like sentences
Saint Augustine gathers that the Church is not here or there, or in the
desert, where there is not a frequent multitude: but (quoth he) you have the
Church to be every where diffused, and to increase until harvest: you have the
City of which he that built it, said: A City cannot be hid placed upon a
mountain. She therefore is that which not in any part of the earth, but every
where is most known. And in another place: Every congregation of what heresy
soever sits in corners, she is a concubine and not the matron. She is a
strumpet which lurketh in private places, not the Queen or matron which
publicly raygneth over all the earth By this mark Saint Pacian conuinceth
Sympronian, Optatus Parmenian, Saint Jerome the Luciferians, Saint Augustine
the Donatistes of schism and heresy. Saint Pacian expressly terms, the
Catholic Church a full and solid body spread over all the world: and not like
the conuentieles of heretics whom he calls, an insolent portion, or
swelling bunche separated from the rest of the body. Saint Augustine (for
Optatus and Saint Ieromes words I have cited else where) compares, the Church
to a fruitful vine, stretching her branches far and near throughout all
nations, and heretics to broken boughs cut from the vine: he often auerreth
that the whole world is Christ's possession, all the borders of the earth his
inheritance. His Church a great mountain which replenisheth the whole face of
the earth. And thereby he infers that the Donatistes faction could not be
Christ's inheritance, because they possessed only Africa, or the confines of
Mauritania, which were but some parts of the world.

2. Wherefore if by this mark you seek to find out the true Church of
Christ, amongst so many which falsely bear his name, cast abroad your eyes into
al forrayn coasts and countries, in every place shall you find our Roman
Church, that is, such as be of the same belief and profession The Roman Church
spread over all the world and agreing in the same belief.
with us, in all points of faith, acknowledging one and the same head the Pope
of Rome. This Church now raygneth in Europe, Afrike, Asia, in Thracia, Syria,
Capadocia, Phrigia, Mesopotamia, in a great part of America, Megallanica,
India, Iaponia, Brasilia, China; yea in all the flourishing states, and known
Kingdoms of the earth. Whereas the Protestants are locked up in very narrow
straites, in respect of us, they are restrained within the mountanies of
Germany, Islands of Britany, borders of Denmark, within some Provinces of the
low Countries and Cantons of France. In those corners Protestants shut up in
narrow corners: and at perpetual bra^ls in points of faith.
they find some public harbor, yet there they are at perpetual strifes
amongst themselves, and so various in religion as they differ one from the
other in substantial articles of faith. So do the Brownistes, the Family of
love, the Protestants and Puritans in England, of whom M. Ormerod witnesses:
Puritans differ from Protestants in things fundamental and substantial:
Puritans do not agree with Protestants in all matters of faith. So the
Arminians dissente from the Orme. dia. 2.
Gomoristes in the law Countries. The Caluinistes of Geneua, from the Lutherans
of Saxony. The Lutherans of Saxony, from the Zuinglians of Tygurum: They from
the Aug. tom. 7. de unit. eccl. cap. 3.
Osiandrines of Prussia, the Osiandrines from the Anabaptists of Westphalia,
etc. as has been partly unfolded in the first note of unity.

3. Therefore as Saint Augustine disputed against diverse heretics of his age,
If the holy Scriptures design the Church in Africa only, etc. the Donatistes
alone counteyne the Church. If in a few Mores of the province of Cesarea we
must repair to the Regatistes etc. If in the Eastern people only, Amongst the
Arians, Macedonians and Eunonians etc. the Church is to be sought. After the
like manner if the Caluinistes have the truth, to Geneua and a few Cantons in
France we must all resort: If the Protestants, to England; if the Zuinglians,
to Tigurum: if the rigide Lutherans, to Saxony: if the soft, to Wittemberge
Lipsia and Magdeburge etc. For all these being so opposite cannot enjoy the
right faith, or if they could, they be but parts of the world; small tractes of
the earth, far less then Africa, far less then the East, to which the
Church of God (as Saint Augustine discourses) could not be confined. For he
goes forward in the alleged place: Aug. lo ci.
But if the Church of Christ, by divine and most certain testimonies of
canonical Scriptures, be described in all nations, whatsoever they shall Aug.
tom. 4. q. euang. l. 1. q. 38.
bring, or from whencesoeuer they shall write it, who say, behold here is
Christ, behold there; Let us listen rather if we be his sheep to the voice of
our pastor, saying; do you not belieeue, because his Church, quoth he, shall
manifestly shine, like a lightning from the east to the west, that is over all
the world.

4. Now if the Kingdom of the Messiah, be the greatest and largest amongst all
that profess the name of Christ: if it be the sole and universal Kingdom of
all nations, and if this be the thing signified by the name Catholic, not
only that title which M. Abbot allows us, but the thing also entitled, the
thing betokened thereby, the prerogative of Universality appertains to us.
For, we far exceed the Protestants and all other sectaries of our days in
multitude of people, in variety of nations, in troops of followers, in dignity
of patrons, in society of Princes, who link themselves to the body of our
Church. In so much as I may urge M. Abbot as Saint Pacian did Sympronian.
Number if you can our Catholic flocks, Abbot in his answ. to D. Bishops
epist. to the King page 16. and 17. Pacia^. ep. 3. ad Symp. sub finem.
Count upon your fingers the swarms of our people: not those now which are
dispersed throughout the world abundant in all countries, but those brother
Sympronian, which dwell with you in the allied provinces, in the neighbor
cittyes. Contemplate how many of ours thou alone beholdest: with how many of
our people thou alone meetest: Art thou not swallowed up by us as the eve
droppings by great fountaynes, as by the Ocean little bubles of water are
consumed?

5. If we should now compare Roman Catholics with Protestants even in these
regions of Europe, the same might we avouch of their paucity in respect of us.
Catholics are in all countries where protestants raygne openly known.
But if we should pass out of Europe, what towns or villages, what Chappells
or Oratoryes, can they reckon up, in Asia, Africa, America etc. how many
Indians, Ethiophians, Iaponians? How many of their sect, can they name in
China, in Brasilia, in Magellanica? Not any one, no public Church have they,
or Chapel out of Europe, of any other then such as traffike in these parts.
Notwithstanding as we abound with many of our religion, in all those remote
Protestants not hard of in a hundred Kingdoms where Catholics flourish.
and forrayne Countries, where the name of Protestants is unknown: So in all
the Provinces, in every corner which sectaryes in habit we want not those, who
openly defend and profess our faith. We have them in Germany, low Countries,
England, and the Cantons of France. To which purpose Saint Augustine speaking
of sundry heresies and of the Church, very fitly says; They in many nations
where this is are not found; but this which is every where, there where they
are is also found. Aug. de un. eccles. c. 3.


6. The first reason why God would have his Church so universal, was to
manifest his love to all creatures, that all people might partake of the riches
of his Isay 54. v. 5.
mercy: That all might receive the happy tidinges of their redemption, and
means of salvation. And that he who was God of Israel, might now as I say
prophesied, be God Prou. 14. verse. 28.
of all the earth. The second reason was for the honor of the Son of God, for
the glory of his name, for the reward of his merits. To which effect S. Austine
applies that saying Iero. dialo. aduer. Lucifer.
of Solomon: In the multitude of people the dignity of the King and in the
fewnes of people the ignominy of the Prince. Therefore Saint Jerome accounts
it a great ignominy to Christ, to have the Empires of his Church, the trophies
of his Cross, Optat. l. ^. co^tra Par.
(as he terms them) restrained to corners. And Optatus blames Parmenian for
the like, If so at your pleasure you bar up the Church in a narrow room, if
you withdraw all nations, where Psalm. 2.
is that which the son of God has merited? Where is that which his Father
willingly bestowed upon him, saying; I will give thee Gentills forthy
inheritance, and ends of the earth thy possession: Why do you violate such a
promise, that the latitude of Kingdoms should be shut up by you as it were in
a prison? How labor you to resist so great piety, what mean you to make war
against the merits of our Savior? Permit the Son to enjoy his legacies:
Permit the Father to fulfill his promises: Why place you bounds, why appoint
you limits?

7. The third and last reason is for the persuasion and stay of the faithful.
For what greater motive of credibility can we have, then the authority of so
many, and so learned men, the fame, celebrity, consent of all nations? This S.
Augustine often proposes as a weighty Aug vtil. credendi c. 14. and 17.
argument which first induced, and after strengthened him in our Catholic
faith. Others by the very light of nature esteemed it also as a thing most
worthy of credit. Seneca said: We are wont to attribute much to the
presumption Seneca ep. 118.
or opinion of all men, and it is with us a great argument of truth, that it
has been liked of all. Pliny likewise in his panegyticall oration to Traian,
has recorded this notable sentence: Better are all believed then each
particular: all Plinius in pa. ad Traianump. 125. Melius o^nibus qua^ singulis
creditur: singuli o^nes, decipere and decipi possu^t. nemo omnes, ^eminem o^nes
fefellerunt. Aug. lib. l. 22. de ciui. Dei cap. 8. magnum est ipse prodigium
qui mundo credente non credit. Great rashness in Protestants to believe one man
against al men. Luther Pres. l. de abrog. missa priuata. And the like he has
tom. 4 annot. breuis. Item tom. 5. in Gala.
particular men may deceive, and be deceived: No man has deceived all men: all
men have not deceived any man. Whereupon S. Augustine despises him as a
strange, and monstrous wonder who the world believing belieueth not. Strange
people then, (not to speak more hardly of them) strange people are the
Protestants of our age, who will not believe the articles of our faith, which
all the Christian world (excepting their little handful) constantly believes,
and for this thousand years by their own confession have vnuariably
perseuered in the same belief.

8. If all men never beguiled any, and yet if each particular man may beguile
and be beguiled, how can Protestants believe aright, who credited one Luther
(for there was not any other of his Religion when he first began) against all
the world? One man that might deceive them against al men that could not
deceive them? With this opposition of al men Luther at the first was so much
troubled as he testifyeth of himself, How often did my tre^bling heart pant
within me, and reprehending me, object against me that most strong argument,
Art thou only wise? Do so many worlds err? Were so many agesignorant? What
if you thou errest Fulke in c. 5 Math. sect 3. 2. ad Thessa. 2. sect. 4. and 5.
Whitaker. contro. 2. q. 2. ca. 2. 3. cap. 3. q. 5. cap. 3. Field in his 2. book
c. 8.
and drawest so many into error, to be damned with thee everlastingly? So
Luther with the same singularity of themselves and general contradictio^ of
others his followers were much daunted at the beginning. But since having
somewhat increased their number, they either answer, that truth does not
consist in multitude and largenes of extent, or that they have many others
besides themselves of their faith and religion, dispersed throughout the world,
who although they be hidden from the eyes of men, are notwithstanding well
known to God or to the Fathers, who often inculcat the large dominion of
Christ's flock; they reply that the Church did perspicuously flourish Aug: l. de
vtil. cred. and con. Ep. Fund. l. 1. contra lul. and l. 3. con. Crescon. c. 66.
l. item. 4. cap. 53.
every where, and was visibly spread thoughout all nations, in Saint
Augustines, Saint Jerome and Optatus days; but afterward it failed, at least
from being manifest and publicly known. These are the common shifts of M.
Fulke, M. Whitaker, and M. Field, our modern Protestants, and these were the
tricks of ancient heretics including the former arguments.

9. To the first therefore I answer, that not every multitude, but an holy,
learned, famous, Matthew. 8.
long continued, and united multitude, of all nations, in supernatural
points of faith, this is an evident Apoca. 7.
token of the true Church, as Saint Augustine urges Aug. loco citato and l. 2.
cont. aduers. leg. and Prophet. c. vltimo.
against the Donatistes, Manichees and other heretics: Who pretended that
truth was often among a few, and that it was the fault of many to err. This
was the objection of Cresconius the Grammarian, against whom he proves by the
many who shall come from the east and west and repose with Abraham in the
Kingdom of heaven. By that great, and innumerable multitude which Saint John
describes of all nations tribes people and tongues, standing before the
throne, that multitude is no hinderance to truth: and yet he often affirms,
That to vaunt and glory in paucity of followers, is the the property of
heretics and a sign of falsehood.

10. Their second evasion that they have many hidden ghospellers in all
Countries known to God, is Augustine libro de ouibus cap. 10.
ridiculous and absurd, as Saint Augustine terms it, to humansense. For how
shall we believe they have any such, unless they be seen and mentioned by
some men? Or how should their Universality be a mark of the true Church, if
they be not known nor marked by any? Then Saint Augustine declares that the
universal Church of which the Scriptures speak, is apparently seen and
known to the world. Read his explication upon that verse of the Psa^mist, Be
exalted above the heavens O God, and thy glory upon all the earth. O heretical
madness (says Psalm. 56. Aug. tom. 8. in ps. 56.
he) that which thou see not, thou belieuest with me: that which thou see,
thou den^est: thou belieuest with me Christ exalted above all the heavens,
which we do not see; and thou deniest his glory upon all the earth, which we do
see. Mark these words which we do see. Therefore the splendor of the Church
is visible and Aug. libro vnitate Ec. cap. 8.
conspicuous every where. In another place. From whence (quoth he) is his glory
upon all the earth, but because his Church is over all the earth? Immediately
after he presses his adversaries. VVVhy do you preach Christ exalted above the
heavens, and do not communicate with his glory upon all the earth? Whereupon
it follows, that if our Ghospellers had any such latent Protestants in other
Countries, as they feign, who agreed with them in their belief: yet that were
not enough to make their Church universal, unless they had some other
communication or society together: because for want of this alone, Saint
Augustine excludes Petilian, and al other Donatistes from being members of the
Church. First of him he says: I object unto thee the crime of schism Aug.
libro 2. contra Fetil. c. 16.
which thou will deny, but I will instantly prove it. For thou do not
communicate with all nations. Then he cassiereth the rest, and binds
Catholics in the unity of the Church, saying: We hold the inheritance of
Christ; they hold it not. For they do not communicate with the whole world;
they do not communicate with the universality redeemed by the blood of our
Lord, we are secure of his inheritance.

11. Their last retrayte used by Master Field, and often iterated by M.
Whitker, That the Church in Field in his 2. book of the Church chapter 8.
Whitaker. contro. 2. q. 2 cap 2. Ibidem q. 3. cap. 1. q. 5. cap 4 and 5
Saint Augustines and the rest of those Fathers days, was in her growth, Now
in her declining: Then flourishing in all parts of the world, Since retired to
some few particular and unknown coasts: Since perished out of view of all
nations; is heretofore resuted at large, in the fourth chapter of this
treatise. And Saint Augustine detesteth it, as a rash temerarious false and
abominable devise. He thinks it strange to be spoken of, and asks what
inuader Christ suffered to rob him of his goods? Of the whole world, the
price of his blood? Besides the places of Scripture, by which S. Aug. tomo 8 in
psalm. 101. conci. 2.
Augustine demonstrateth the Kingdom of Christ, to be every where extended; to
replenish the whole face of the earth, to possess all the ends of the world,
are not prophesies only of S. Augustines, of Optatus, of Saint Ieromes age,
they specify not their days, any more then ours: but they are indeterminably
Aug. Exp. 2. in psalm. 21.
written by the holy Ghost, for all times and ages. Therefore they are as truly
verified now, as then; as justly urged by us against Protestants; as by them
against Luciferians or Donatistes. And the exceptions taken by their
adversaries, are the same which are now pursued by ours.

12. Let me pose you M. Whitaker: Does he not deserve as great a curse, who
shall now deny the Passion and Resurrection of Christ, as any heretic should
do, in gaynsaying it in Saint Augustines times? And yet S. Augustine makes a
like comparison, between those mysteryes Aug. Ep. 48.
and this of the Churches universality. As (says he) he shall be anathema, which
preaches that Christ neither suffered, nor rose again, because we learn by
the Gospel that it behooved Christ to suffer and to rise again the third day:
So he shall also be anathema whosoever preaches the Church to be elsewhere then
in the communion of all nations: because by the self same gospel, we learn
in the words next following: And penance to be preached in his name and
remission of sins thoughout all nations. Wherefore as the former textes of
Scripturre touching his death and resurrection, so these concerning the
amplitude of his Church, are generally verifyed of all times and ages.

13. But Doctor Whitaker obiecteth that there Whitaker. cont. 2. q. 5. c. 6.
was a time at the beginning when the Church was not universal. I answer that
as there is a time, when a child newborn cannot actually laugh, or exercise
the function of man, yet is then a true man, and has the power or faculty of
laughing: So the Church in her infancy, was not actually dilated, and
propagated over all countries: yet it was then planted to be universal, and
had the property of universality belonging to it. Because Christ at the first
erecting of it said: Teach ye all nations. Going Matt. viti. v. 19. Marc. 56.
verse. 15. Act. 1. v. 8.
into the whole world preach the gospel to all creatures. You shall be witnesses
unto one in Jerusalem and in all Jury, and Samaria, and even to the utmost of
the earth. Therefore although not the actual extension, yet the prerogative of
Universality, apperteyned to the Church from the beginning; and after that she
should once obtain her universal and actual propagation, the divine oracles
often witness, it should so continue unto the end of the world: As has been
showed both here, and in the fourth chapter of this third part. Howbeit Master
Whitaker cease not to wrangle. For because he cannot challenge the right of
the thing, he picketh a quarrel at the etimology of the name Catholic: he
will not have it to signify universality of place, but only of the truth,
saying: That Church, is Whitaker. contro. 2. q. 5. c. 2. and q. 6. c. 2. Eulke
in. c. 24. Luc. sect. 4.
in name and deed Catholic, which Catholikely and truly teaches all the
points of religion, whatsoever ought to be learned and believed of a Christian
man. The same is also auerred by Doctor Fulke.

14. But how can it thus be a note of the true Church? The true doctrine in all
dogmaticall points as I have heretofore declared, is more obscure and hidden
then the Church. It is the inward substance or dowry of the Church. It cannot
possibly be discerned especially by the unlearned, nor consequently guide them
to the knowledge of the Church. It is constantly challenged by all heretics
whatsoever. Ask the Arian, the Pelagian, the Gnosticke, the Anabaptist etc.
Every one of them and whosoever else, will tell you that he alone has the
universal truth: and it would be a bootlesse labor, to go about by that
mark taken in that sense, to persuade him the contrary: Yet into this
labyrinth other heretics of former times have craftily retired. For Vincentius
the Rogatian, would have the word Catholic, to Aug. Ep. 48. ad Vincentium
Rogatian.
import the like integrity of faith, and universal keeping of the
commandments: whom S. Augustine refelleth in this manner. Thou seem to
have found out a witty devise, when thou do interpret the name Catholic,
not of the communion of all the world, but of the observation of all the divine
precepts and all the Sacraments; which devise of his new burnished now Aug. de
vt. credendi c. 7.
by our adversaries he utterly rejects, and immediately after alleges the
sentence before cited with this preamble whatsoever crooked trains, any man
weaueth against the simplicity of whatsoever he casts of wily falsehood; even
as he shall be ana thema, who preaches that Christ has not suffered, nor risen:
So he that shall Aug. in ps. 18. expo. 2.
deny the Church to be in the communion of the world. Because both are learned
out of the same Gospel. Besides, Saint Augustine flatly distinguishes this
not of universality, or amplitude, Fulke in c. 24. Lu. sect. 2. in 2. ad These
2. sectione 5. Whitaker. contro. 2.
from the verity of the Church in all mysteries of faith, saying, The Church is
one as algraunt, if you regard the whole world more stored with multitude, and
as they that know affirm, more sincere in truth then all the rest, but of the
truth it is another question: Lo M. Whitaker how you confound questions,
affect obscurities, lurk in holes, that you maynteyne a part in faction who
might hold all in peace and concord. Abbot in his answer to M. D. Bishop Ep.
to the King page 15.


15. The last objection repeated by M. Fulke, Master Whitaker, and
Rhetorically dilated by M. Robert Abbot, against our restraining the City of
God unto the Sea of Rome, has been often answered by our men: That we take
not the Roman Church for the particular diocese which belonges to Rome, but
for the latitude of all people and countries, who consort with the Pope in
Sacraments, faith and communion, acknowledging him for Christ's vicar upon
earth. And thus the Roman Church has been ever accounted all one with the
Catholic and universal Church. For Saint Ambrose writes of his Brother
Satyrus desyring in pilgrimage Ambrosius in sermon. de ob. fratris.
to receive the Sacraments; That he demanded of a Bishop. Whether he agreed
with the Catholic Bishops, that is, with the Roman Church. Iocundus also the
Arian, as Victor reports said to King Theodoricke: If you put Armogastes to
death, the Romans will proclayme him a Victor. Vti. de pers. Van. l. 1. Hier.
in ap. aduer. Ruf.
Martyr. Where by the Romans he understood Catholics. In like manner Ricemer
the Goth and Arian, wrote unto the Genneses: If he be a Catholic, he is a
Roman. Hence the Roman faith is termed the Catholic faith, the Romen Bishop,
Bishop of the Catholic Church, Bishop of the universal Church, Pope of the
universal Cypr. l. 3. Ep. 11. Con. Calce. act. 3. and in rela. Sanctae Synodi
ad Pap. Leonem. Poss. in vita Augustini. ca. 17. Justin. in Epist. Hormis.
papae. Cypo epist. 52. Leo ep. 82. Cypr. l. 4. ep. 2. Opt. l. 2. contra Parmen.
L. in vrbe Roma de statu hom. Aug. de ci. Deil. 5. c. 15. Art. 22. and 16.
Church. His sentence, the judgment of the Catholic Church. His definitions,
Catholic instructions. His Sea, the root or matrixe of the Catholic
Church. His solicitude, the care of the universal Church To communicate with
him, to communicate with the Catholic Church. To enter league with him, to
keep friendship or society of communion with the universal world.

16. In fine, as in ancient times all people subject to the Roman Empire, were
by a general decree of the civil law graced with the name of Roman Citizens:
After which sort Saint Augustine testifyeth of some, enobled with the title of
Roman Senators, who never entered the gates of Rome: And Saint Paul being borne
at Tharsis in Cilicia, professed himself a Roman borne: So in like manner, All
Churches that live in communion with the Roman Church: All that submit
themselves to the obedience of that Sea: All that acknowledge her their head and
mother Church, borrow from her the denomination of Roman Churches. Especially
since that generally denominations are derived from the most eminent and
principal part, and never any Church never any people in any part of the
world has been taynted with heresy, or touched with schism, which took the
name of Roman Church, or Roman people, by reason of their communion with the
Sea of Rome. Therefore as the name Catholic, and the thing signified
thereby: So the name Roman or Romanist, is a plain demonstration, that our
Church is the Genesis 13. and 22.
flock of Christ, and only seed which our Lord has blessed and multiplied
like the stars of heaven, and duste of the earth. The Kingdom of God whose
dominion is extended from one sea to another, and from the River to the
uttermost bounds of the world: The Lady or Queen which sits one the right
hand of her spouse, environed with Psalm 71. see S. Aug. upon that psalm.
Pacian. ep. 3. ad Symp. Malach. c. v. 1. v. 11
the variety of all tribes and Countries: The chosen people, which from the
rising of the sun even to the setting, every where magnifyeth the name of our
Lord. And the Protestants Sect is that divided faction, which rebelleth
against him: that segregated bunche, or festered boil: That harlotry
Synagogue, which shrouded in corners, lies in wait to deceive our souls, to
entangle them with fair words and flattery of lips etc. Whose house the
ways of hell, penetrating to the inward parts of death. Prou. 7.


CHAP. XX. In which Apostolical succession is declared to be an apparent note
of the true Church: Against Master Francis Mason.
AS the Church of Christ cannot possibly continue, without the preaching of
truth and administration of Sacraments: the Sacraments cannot be ministered, nor
truth preached, without pastors and teachers to deliver the same: The Pastors
and teachers not still remain, without a perpetual generation or propagation
of them, by succession, mission, and approved ordination: Tertullian libro de
praescrip.
There ore the ancient Fathers have always appealed to this lawful succession
of Priests and Bishops as to an illustrious note and mark of the Church, more
plain, more co^spicuous, more easily known, the^ the doctrine of truth, to
which notwithstanding it is inseparably linked. Augustine. psalm. contra parte^
Do. Tom. 7. libro contra Ep funda. Iraeneus libro 3. c. 1.
Therefore Tertullian thus provoked the heretics of his time: Let them set
forth the beginning of their Churches, Let them thew the rank or order of
their Bishops etc. Saint Augustine in like sort challenged the Donatistes.
Recount (says he) the Priests even from Peter's seat, and look who have
succeeded one another in the rank of those Fathers. After the same manner,
Saint Iraeneus discomfiteth the Valentinians, Saint Epiphanius Epiphan. haer.
17. Ieronymus dialog vlt. co^tra Lucif. Optatus l 2.
the Carpocratians, Saint Jerome the Luciferians, Optatus the heretic
Parmenian. And he particulerly names the Roman Bishops from Peter to Siricius:
Saint Augustine from Peter to Anastasius, affirming that by that succession of
Priests and Bishops he was held in the Church.

2. Whereunto least some Cauiller should take exception that they speak only
of the time past, of the Augustine Ep. contra Faustum Manich. cap. 4.
succession which was before their days, but they prophecy not of the time to
come, nor do they auow that the like succession shall still persevere, S. Austine
to encounter this objection notably writes in another place: The true Church
by most certain succession of Bishops, does persevere from the Apostles time
unto ours, and to times after us again. Which is a Augustine libro cont.
aduers. leg and Proph. cap. 20. Ecclesia ab Apostolorum te^poribus per
Episcoporum successiones certissimas vsque ad nostr u^ and deniceps tempora
perseuerat.
thing so clearly defined in holy writ, especially by Saint Paul to the
Ephesians, and so necessary for the instruction of the infidells, edification
of the faithful, consummation of the Saints, and true essence or being of the
Church, as no Sacrament can be ministered, word preached, faith embraced, or
Church remain, where the true vocation or ordinary calling of Bishops and
Priests is at any time wanting. Neither do the more learned of our
Adversaries make doubt hereof. But as the heretics in Saint Augustines time,
so these now brag of a certain figure or similitude of beginning, under the
name of Christians, but are indeed withered branches cut of from the vine. For
some of them endeavor to steal a beginning, or ordinary calling from the
temporal Magistrates, and suffrages of the people, as Calvin and his brats of
Geueua: Others from the temporal Prince only without the peoples voices, as
Brentius, and Musculus: Others from the Presbitery or mere Priests, that be
not Bishops, which Monsieur Calvin l. 4. instit. c. 3.. 1. etc. 4. 11. Brent.
in prol. Mus. in locis comun. Plessis in tract. de Ecclesia cap. vlt. Field in
his 3. book of the Church c. 39. page 156. 157. 158. 159. Spark in his
answer to M. John d'Albins.
du Plessis, and M, Doctor Field in some causes eagerly defend: Some fly to
extraordinary vocation and calling immediately from God, or from the privilege
of truth which they pretend to deliver, as M. Spark, D. Fulke and D. Whitaker
with diverse of the Puritan sect: Fulke against Stap. and Martial page 2.
Whitaker. contr. 2. c. 6 fol. 368. 371.
Some others to the letters Patentes of their Prince, and general consent of
the Parliament house, as many English Protestants did in the days of King
Edward, and at the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's raygne. But now their new
Attorneyes, finding the plea of their predecessors clean ouerthrown in all the
former cases, they lay claim to the pedigree of our Bishops, to the row of our
ancestors: So clear resplendent is this shining mark of our Roman
succession, as it makes the very children of darkness to run unto it, and
seek to sun themselves in the beams of her light; like forlorn traitors
who rebelling against their soueraygne, challenge his title to dispo^sesse him
of his throne. So Master Francis Mason M. Francis Mason l. 1. cap. 2. folio 10.
has set forth a book in folio, to authorize the ordinary calling of their
Protestant Ministry, by the Canonical consecration of our Roman Prelates. The
Mynisters of of England (says he) receive imposition of hands in lawful
manner, from lawful Bishops, indewed with lawful authority, and therefore
their calling is ordinary. Thus he. We ask by whom? He answers by the hands
of such Bishops as went before them: whom he confesses to be undoubted
Bishops of the Roman Church. And therefore tells us, Archbishop Cra^mer and
other heroycall (he should say diabolical) spirits, who^ the Lord used as his
instruments to reform religion in England, had the very self same ordination
and succession whereof you so glory.

3. A desperate case when heretics fly to Catholics tents, when mere
oucrastes either degraded or titularyes only, would beg nobility from the
stock of such as degraded them? But what hope can they have to draw their
lineage from them, from whom they derive Protestant Bishops and Priests have
neither true succession, election ordinatio^ or missio^.
not (as I shall declare) any Apostolical succession, canonical election,
true ordination, lawful mission, or authentical vocation? All which are
necessary to an orthodoxall, and Catholic Clergy. And yet neither of these
(maugre M. Masons large bulk to the contrary) can be found amongst
Protestants. For first, to an Apostolical succession (besides Election and
Ordination, of which hereafter) two things are requisite. 1. A place A
privilege in chartamagna, by which Catholic Priests are exempted from all
secular power.
void either by deprivation, voluntary resignation, or natural death.
Secondly a conformity in faith with him that went before. But when Young, for
example, Grindall, Horn, Pilkinton, Bullingham etc were intruded in the days
of Queen Elizabeth into the Bishoprics of York, London, Winchester, Durham,
Lincoln, the true Bishops of those Seas, to wit, Heath, Bonner, White,
Tunstall, Watson, were living, not resigning their dignityes unto the^, nor
yet lawfully deprived of them: Therefore the former had no vacant piaces wherein
to succeed, but were wolves theefes and usurpers of other men's chayres. That
Hebr. 13. verse. 17.
they were not lawfully deprived I prove, because Queen Elizabeth her Peers
and other officers who concurred to their disposition were of the layty, not
co^petent Judges Matthew. 18. v. 18.
either of ecclesiastical Prelates, or of their causes. For such persons were
even in criminal matters by the laws of the Realm, by the immunityes of
Charta magna (not Luc. 10. v. 16.
then repealed) exempted from subjection to secular Tribunalls, until they
were adjudged and given over unto them (as none of the former were) by the
authority of the Matthew. 23. v. 3. Joan. 21. v. 18. Nazian. in or at. ad
ciuestimore perculsos.
Church. Then the Apostle commands all secular people and Princes also (for
his words be general without restriction) to obey their Prelates and be
subject unto them: Christ charge us to hear them under pain of damnation;
To hear them as himself; To do what they shall prescribe; To be fed and
governed by them. Whereupon Saint Gregory Nazianzen speaking of Emperors
says: The Law of Christ has subjected you to my jurisdiction, and to my
tribunal: For we Athanasius Ep. ad soli. vitam agentes. Ambros. Ep. 32. ad
Imp. Val. iuniorem Hosius ap. Atha. loco citato.
have also an Empire, yea a greater and more perfect then that of yours,
unless it be fit to prostrate the soul to the body, and heavenly things to
earthly. Saint Athanasius, Saint Ambrose and the learned Hosius of Corduba
testify the same, in such serious manner, as Saint Athanasius calls it the
abomination of desolation, foretold by Daniel, for an Emperor to preside in
ecclesiastical affairs.

4. Yea many zealous and godly Emperors have wholly disclaymed from all power
of intermedlinge with the decision or judgment of ecclesiastical matters, as
Valentinian the first, Theodosius the younger, and Constantine the great, whose
words are these related by Ruffinus: Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 7. Theodorus Ep. ad
syn. Ephesians. Bar. Tom. 1. page 732.
God has made you Priests and has given you power to judge us, and therefore
are we rightly judged by you: But you cannot be judged by men. How clear then
is our case that the foresaid Catholic Bishops, could not be judged by Queen
Elizabeth, and her Council; much less have sentence of deposition pronounced
against them, without which the Protestant intruders could not be invested in
their rooms, nor be lawfully installed in their Episcopal dignity.

5. Secondly, as those pretended Bishops had no vacant Seas to inherit, so
they wanted conformity of doctrine, which is likewise necessary to true
succession; they swarued from the faith of their Catholic predecessors in
sundry essential points. And the lineall descent of persons, the possession
of place if it were truly vacant, or resigned, is of no force unless it be
joined with continuance of doctrine: which made Saint Irenaeus to Irenaeus l.
4. aduer. haere. c. 42. Tertullian l. de praes.
forewarne us with this caveat: You ought to obey those who together with the
succession of their Bishoprike charge have received the gifts or privileges
of truth. And Tertullian avouches the Church to be called Apostolical, not
only by reason of her personal succession of Bishops; but propter
consanguinitatem doctrinae, by reason of the consanguinity or conformity
Ambrose l. 1. de poeni. c. 6. Gregorius Nazianze^ oratione 21.
of doctrine. Because, as Saint Ambrose says, They enjoy not the inheritance
of Peter who retain not the faith of Peter. He, says Saint Gregory Nazianzen,
who maynteyneth the same doctrine is also partaker of the same chair: But he
who imbraceth a contrary or adverse faith, is to be reputed an adversary while
he sits in the throne. And Saint Paul directly teaches that the personal
line and continual propagation of Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and
Doctors was instituted by God for the perpetual succession and continuance
Ephesians. 4. v. 11. 12. 13. Ibid. v. 14.
of truth, That now we be not children wavering and carried about with every
wind of doctrine etc. Therefore the true personal succession, cannot be where
the succession of doctrine wauereth, much less where it fails; which M.
Reynolds, M. Whitaker and sundry of our Protestant Reynolds in his conference
ca. 7. diuis. 9. Whitaker. contr. 1. q. 5. cap. 6. folio 271.
adversaries earnestly auowe, and diligently demonstraty to our hands, thereby
to defeat, if they could possible the prerogative of our succeeding Bishops.
But albeit it makes nothing against us, nay vpholdeth the right of our claim,
who agree with our ancestors in all points of faith, yet it utterly
ouerthrowneth the usurped title, they newly challenge to the pedigree of our
Bishops, from whom they dissent in the very many articles of our belief. For
by their own arguments no participation can they have with them in chayres, no
affinity or succession in Priestly thrones, against whom they bray forth
defiance in doctrine.

6. Now as touching Election, the third thing which is defective in the
Protestant ministry, that is a privilege only due to ecclesiastical persons,
For although secular Protestant Bishops want the election of Deane and chapter
and of all clergy persons.
Princes or such as have auowsans might sometime present, and nominate their
Prelates; although the consent and approbation of people for greater union and
peace has been also required: yet the Election which interesseth the elected,
entitleth him to his dignity, and gives him a certain right to his calling,
This is, and ever was only proper to the Pope, to the Deane and Chapter, or
some other of the Clergy; and flatly forbidden to the laity under pain of
excommunication in In Council. gener. 8. can. 22. ap. Great. distinc. 63. c.
Hadrian. In Syno. Ni^. 2. can. 3.
the eight general Council, under Basil the Emperor, and Adrian the Pope.
Likewise in the second Nicen Synod it is declared: That, every Election of
Bishop, Priest, Deacon made by secular powers, let it be inualide and of no
force. And amongst the Canons of the Apostles, the thirtith Canon has these
words: The Bishop who by the favor of the Princes and Potentates of the world
has gotten his Church, let him be deposed. But our English Protestant Bishops
have invaded their Seas by the favor of Princes, by their letters patents,
without the canonical election of Pope, Deane and Inter can. Aposto. ca. 30.
Chapter, or any ecclesiastical person: Therefore they are to be deposed as
wolfes and usurpers, entering in at the window, and not at the door. This defect
is not feigned by conjectures, as Barlowes consecration is by Master Mason, nor
proved by secret partial and unknown Records, Maso^ l 3. c. 4. page 127.
as he does the ordination of others: But it is publicly set down in the
common received laws or Statutes of the Realm. For in the first of King
Edward the 1. Edward chapter 2.
sixth an Act of Parliament was made, for disanulling the election of Archbishops
and Bishops by the Deane and Chap. and taking away the writ of Conge-deslier
granted to that purpose. The words of the Statute are these. The writ of
Congedeslier was not to be granted in King Edwards dais whose laws Queen
Elizabeth reestablished. 8. Eliza. 1.


7. Be it enacted by the King, with the assent of the Lords spiritual and
temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled and by the
authority of the same, that from henceforth no such Conge-deslier be granted,
nor election of any Archbishop, or Bishop by the Deane and Chapter made, but
that the King may by his letters Patentes at all times, when any
Archbishopricke or Bishopric be void, confer the same to any persons to
whom the King shall think meet. Can there be a more evident proof that the
Bishops of King Edwards days when this Statute was in force, wanted their
canonical election? And after when his laws repealed by Queen Mary were
reestablished by Queen Elizabeth at least in the beginning, how beit since
they make show of returning to the ancient custom; Can there be likewise a
more vehement suspicion wilful forgery in M. Masons registers which testify
the Writ of Conge-deslier to be granted forth when by the tenor of that law
it could not be granted?

8. Notwithstanding, although their Bishops election Mason lib. 2. chap. 10.
fol. 88. 89. The ordination of Protestant Priests and Bishops unlawful,
inualide, and noneat all.
was inualide and succession of no account, yet M. Mason stiffly urges that
their ordination or consecration was good, unless we can name some defect,
either in the consecrated, or consecratours. I answer that the consecratours
after their reuolte from the Catholic Church and obstinat persisting in
schism and heresy were excommunicated and suspended from the due execution and
practice of their functions. So that although they had been before true and
lawful Bishops, as none (excepting Cranmer) were of the whole Protestant
rank; yet then their authority being taken away by the Catholic Church, which
as she had power to give, had power also to restrain and disanull their
jurisdiction; they could not lawfully communicate unto others that which was
suspended in themselves. For this cause Saint Athanasius accou^teth them not in
the number of true Bishops, who are consecrated by heretics saying: By what
right can they Athanasius in Council. Arimi. and Seleuc. Quae aute^ Seie^ciae.
be Bishops if they received their ordination from heretics as they themselves
accuse them to be? Likewise writing in another place in the person of Pope
Julius: It is impossible (quoth he) that the ordinations made by Secundus being
an Aria^, could have any force in the Catholic Church.

6. But M. Mason our Protestants Attorney will reply Apol. 2.
that S. Athanasius is to be understood of the legitimate and lawful use, not
of the validity of ordination. For that every Bishop communicates, not by
reason of his inherent grace, or out ward union with the Church, but by virtue
of his episcopal character which no schism (quoth he by deduction out of our
writings) no sin, no Mason l. 2. c. 10. fo. 88.
heresy, no censures of the Church, no excommunication, suspension,
interdiction, degradation, nothing, nothing at all saving only death, if death
can dissolve it. Thus he: I grant that the character is indeleble, and that
alone is sufficient in the consecratour if his intention also be right, and if
he use the true matter and form essentially required thereunto. But our
English Superintendents after their fall from the Roman Church, neither intended
to give those holy orders which were instituted by Christ, neither did the
ordained intend to receive them, nor yet did they use the true matter and form
prescribed by him. Therefore notwithstanding their character, their ordination
was nothing else but a profanation of that Sacrament. For to instance in the
order of Priesthood, so intrinsecally presupposed in Episcopal dignity, as
the Catholic Athanasius Apolo. 2. in Episc Council. Sa^d.
Council of Sardis wondered at the Arians impudency, because they gave (says
the Council) to him the title of Bishop who was not so much as a Priest. The
Priesthood instituted by Christ, was a Priesthood ordained to sacrifice; A
Priesthood to which a judicial power was given by the holy Ghost, to pardon
and remit sinne^ in (...) Penance. The form of the Priesthood was partly
that, Receive the holy Ghost, whose sins you shall forgive they are forgiven
them: and whose you shall retain they are reteywed: partly this other 10. 20.
verse. 23.
mentioned in the Council of Florence, Receive power to offer sacrifice in the
Church for the living and dead in the name Council. Flor. in litter is Eugen.
Luc. 22.
of the Father, and of the son, and of the holy Ghost. Which words although
they be not set down in holy writ in plain terms, yet the substance of them
is gathered out of S. Luke: and that kind of form, as likewise the form of
Baptism is delivered by tradition as proceeding from Christ. The matter
necessarily accompayning this later form, is the reaching of the chalice with
wine, the paten with the host to the party consecrated; specifyed also in the
aforesaid Council of Florence. So that two acts or functions are included in
our Priesthood, or a The power of Priesthood co^tayneth two functions, the one
about the true, the other about the mystical body of Christ.
power twofold. The one apperteyning to the true and real body of Christ, to
consecrate and offer it to God; which is the chiefest act or faculty of
Priesthood, and first also imparted. The other over Christ's mystical body
the members of his Church, to remit their sins, which necessarily presupposes
the former. This order of Priesthood, these two functions, all Protestant
superintende^ts disclay me and deny; this the consecratours intend not to
give, nor do the consecrated Mynisters purpose to receive: they have not then
that sacred ordination which was prescribed by Christ.

10 Yet says, M. Mason, that holy Priesthood which Christ ordained we have
pared from the corruptions of sacrificing and shrift, which you have added to
the institution Mason lib. 1. c. 2. p. 11. and libr. 2. c. 11. p. 94. In the
first part of the Antidote in the 4 ad 5. contro.
of Christ. Well then, the whole question is brought to this issue; whether our
Savior instituted a sacrificing Priesthood, to which authority is also given
to remit sins in the Sacrament of Penance or no? But both these points I
have sufficiently convinced in the first part of my Antidote; The one in the
controversy of the Sacrifice of the Mass, the other in the controversy of
Auricular Confession; and the former I shall touch again in the Chapter
ensewing. Therefore if Protestant have pared away these Priestly functions, they
have rejected the whole substance, and pared of the very pith of Christ's
heavenly Priesthood.

11. Or if they will needs usurp the name of Priests, let them tell me, I
beseech them, in what order do they rank them selves? In the order of Aaron,
or of Melchisedech? The order of Aaron was to offer bloody sacrifices, bulls,
calves, rams and heyfers: which neither they Primas. ad Heb. 5.
callenge for any thing I see; nor yet do they practice that abrogated
function; much less the function of Melchisedech, whose office was to offer
bread and wine; and Eusebius. l. 5. de demon. Euang. c. 3. Oecum. ad Heb. 5.
Geneb. l. 1. Chronog. Gal. l. 10. c. 5. Iero. in ep. ad Marcal. Cyp. ep. 63.
Aug. in ps. 33. Primas. in cap. 5. ad Heb. Arn. in ps. 109. Pulke in c. 7. ad
heb. sect. 8. and in cap. 10. ad Corinth. sect. 8.
not any of the former victimes. Melchisedech (says Primasius) was not a
Priest according to the legal precepts, but accorning to the dignity of a
certain singular Priesthood, offering bread to God, not the blood of bruit
beasts. Melchisedech, says Eusebius, never seems to have used corporal
sacrifices but wine only and bread. Melchisedech, says Oecumenius, was the
first who offered an host without blood, to wit bread and wine. Which
Genebrard and Galatinus also prove out of the ancient Rabbines. And therein
Melchisedech was a perfect type and figure of Christ. Witness Saint Jerome:
Melchisedech even then in token of Christ, offered bread and wine. Saint
Cyprian: We see in the Priest Melchisedech the Sacrament prefigured of our
Lords sacrifice. Saint Augustine: Christ instituted a sacrifice of his body
and blood according to the order of Melchisedech. Primasius: In the order of
Melchisedechs Priesthood, Christ is made not a temporal, but an eternal
Priest, not offering legal victimes, but like unto him bread and wine, to wit
his flesh and blood. Arnobius: Christ by the mystery of bread and wine is made
a Priest for ever. But you say (quoth Fulke) that Christ offered not bread and
wine, therefore not that which Melchisedech offered. Did ever man reason so
foolishly? For must the sign and thing signed, the figure and the truth be al
one? Was not the Pascall lamb infinitely more base and inferior in condition
to our blessed Redeemer the Lamb of God? Yet was it not a perfect type and
figure of him? In like manner the bread and wine offered by Melchisedech,
although meaner in quality, and different nature, from Christ's body and blood
which ^^mselfe sacrificed, is the true tipe notwithstanding, and re^^^blance
hereof, because this is made of the substance, and offered under the accidents
of bread and wine: and so the same in quality, the same in appearance, the
truth, and full accomplishment of that typical sacrifice, which Melchisedech
offered.

12. This kind of oblation and office of Priesthood Luc. 22. v. 19. Do this
for a commemoration of me. Aug. libro 1. cont. ad. leg. and prophe ca. 20. l.
16. de ciuit. cap. 22. Amb. in psalm. 38. Epiphan. haer. 59. Theo. in c. 5. ad
heb. Leo 2. de a^niuers. suae assump. Euche. l. 2. c. 18 in Genesis Prim. in c. 5.
ad heb. Fulke in c. 7. ad heb. sect. 8.
by the express warrant, example, and commandment of Christ his Church, the
Church of Rome now practices under him. And by this (he being chief Priest
and principal sacrificer) the eternity of his priesthood is most properly
continued; according to the doctrine of the an^ient Fathers. Of Saint
Augustine: They know that read what Melchisedech has offered: such a
sacrifice they now see offered to God throughout the world. Also: There first
appeared the sacrifice which now is offered to God by Christians, and that is
fullfilled which long after this, is spoken by the Prophet to Christ who was
to come in flesh: Thou art a priest for ever according to the order of
Melchisedech. Of Saint Ambrose: Christ is declared to offer in us, whose speech
sanctifyeth the sacrifice which is offered. Of Epiphanius: The Priesthood of
Melchisedech now florisheth in the Church. Theophilact: Christ is called a
Priest for ever, because there is daily offered, there is perpetually offered
an oblation by the mynisters of God, having Christ our Lord, both the Priest
and sacrifyce. Of Saint Leo, Eucherius, Primasius, and the rest, whose
testimonies, together with the Priestly function of Melchisedech which they
maintain, M. Fulke and his felow-protestants utterly contemn. Insomuch as
Fulke says, this bringing forth of bread and wine was no part of
Melchisedeches Priesthood: therefore those Fathers were deceived, that judged
that act to pertayne to his Priesthood. Mark the arrogance of this
yesterday-vpstart in censuring the Fathers, for allowing a Priesthood which he
with his adherentes flatly detest. Well then, seeing they renounce both these
orders, I know not in what rank to place them, unless it Tully in Philip.
be in the order of Asinius the voluntary Senator, as Tully iesteth at him,
himself being made by himself. Or of the order of Don-Quixote knighted in an
Inn by the good fellow his host. For so they are either voluntary Priests,
arrogating that dignity without commission: or created at the Nags-head in
Cheap, by them that had as much authority to make them, as the Inkeeper to dub
a knight. Or at the most they can be no other then Parlamentall Priests,
ordained by the new devised form of that temporal Court; and authorized by
the letters patents, first of a Child; then of a woman: which although it may
give more show and countenance to the usurpation of their titles; yet it gives
no more right then the former to the dignity of their functions.

13. Moreover, no secular Princes or temporal Magistrates No secularprinces
have power to co^ferre ecclesiastical orders.
have authority to confer Ecclesiastical orders. But the order of Mynistery
which our ghospellers challenge, was both in King Edward and Queen Elizabeth's
days, wholly devised and primarily conferred by the is secular and temporal
authority. It was therefore no true Episcopal, Priestly or Ecclesiastical
order. The Mayor or first Proposition is apparent in nature. For no man can
imparte unto others, that which he has not himself. Secular persons neither a
part, nor assembled together in public Parliament, have any ecclesiastical
order, or jurisdiction, much less can they communicate it unto others: Then
Civil Magistrates have only Civil power, in Civil affairs, ordained to
Civil and natural ends. The Episcopal or Priestly order, is a spiritual
dignity, touching spiritual functions, directed to a spiritual and
supernatural end, which can no more be derived from a Civil Magistrate, then
white from black, day from night. The Minor or second Proposition, I prove by
the Parliament laws and other testimonies unanswerable. In the first of King
Edward a Statute was made, That Archbishops and Bishops should not send out
their sommons, citations, and other processes in their own names, but in the
name and style of the King: Seeing (as the law it self speaks) that all
authority of jurisdiction spiritual Edward 1. chap. 2.
and temporal is derived and deducted from the Kings Majesty, as supreme head
of these Churches and Realms of England and Ireland, and so justly
acknowledged by the Clergy of the said Realms. Then you heard before how by
the Kings letters Patentes Archbishoprickes and Bishopprickes were conferred.
And Fox testifyeth that King Henry 8. imparted to the Fox in his Monu. page 522.
1. Eliz. 1. c. 1.
Lord Cromwell the exercise of his supreme spiritual regiment, making him in
the Church of England, vicegerent for, and concerning all his jurisdiction
ecclesiastical. In the first likewise of Queen^ Elizabeth's raygne, a Statute
was enacted, whereby all spiritual or ecclesiastical power or authority is
united and annexed to the Imperial crown of her Realm etc. all sorrayne
usurped power, jurisdiction, pre-eminence clearly extinguished etc. and by
solemn oath renounced and forsaken; in so much as Doctor Whitgift placed in
the Queen the fulness of VVhitg. tract. 8. c. 3. d. 33.
all ecclesiastical government, from whom all ecclesiastical power and
authority is derived to Bishops and mynisters, she having in her, as he
writes, the supreme government in all causes, and over all persons, as she does
exercise the one apportayning to matters Civil and temporal by the Lord
Chauncelour: So does she the other concerning the Church and religion by the
Archbishops.

14. As this power was strange and never heard of before, in any Christian
heathen or Turkish commonwealth: So the manner of consecrating the mynisters of
those days was new and before vnasuall. For another Act was made in the third
of King Edwards reign 3. Edward c. 12. fol. 15.
wherein it is said. Be it therefore enacted by the Kings Highness with the
assent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the Com^ons of this present
Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, That such form and
manner of making, and consecrating of Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Deacons,
and other Mynisters of the Church, as by six Prelates, and six other men of
this Realm learned in Gods law, by the Kings Majesty to be appointed and
assigned, or by the most number of them shall be devised for that purpose, and
set forth under the great seal of England, before the first day of April next
coming, shall by virtue of this present Act, be lawfully exercised and used,
and none other: any Statute, law, or usage to the contrary, in any wise
notwithstanding. Further when this new devised form of consecrating Bishops,
Priests etc. bred many doubts of the inualidity of their consecration and
ordering, Queen Elizabeth in public Parliament decreed, that all persons that
have been or shall be made, ordered or consecrated Archbishops, Bishops, Priests
after the form and order prescribed by King Edward, in the same form and
order be in very deed, 8. Elizab. 1.
and also by authority hereof declared and enacted to be, and shall be
Archbishops, Bishops, Priests etc. and rightly made, ordered and consecrated:
Any Statute, law, canon or other thing to the contrary notwithstanding.

15. What means this Statute? Were your Bishops lawfully ordained and
consecrated before? Why then are they not only declared as M. Mason would
excuse the manner of speech, but enacted to be, and shall be Archbishops etc? In
vain was this Act if they needed it not, and Mason lib. 3. c. 4. p. 122.
if they needed it, it auayled them nothing, as I have already proved. Or to
speak more clearly, Either the Lords of the Parliament with their Queen had
authority to install their Bishops in Episcopal dignity and make their
inauguration lawful in case it had been inualid; or they had no power to do
it? Which of these M. Mason will you grant? For one you must needs. Had they
authority? Then no other ordination at that time to the validity of their
orders was essentially required, in their opinions, but the royal assent of
the Queen and approbation of her Nobility. Had they no authority or power to
do it? It was an unjust act the^ of usurpation in that honorable assembly, a
great want of Wisdom, to make a law not appertayning to their office, and
nothing Mason pa. 132. 8. Eliz. c. 1.
profitable to their cause.

16. The like absurdityes ensew of the dispensation her Majesty used to make
good the consecrations of D. Paprker and other intruders ordained in the second
or third of her reign. For if their consecrations were sound (as Master Mason
obiecteth to himself) why did the Queen in her letters patentes directed for
the consecrating of them use diverse general words and sentences, whereby she
dispensed with all causes or doubts of any imperfection or disability that
could or might be objected in any wise against the same, as may appear by ^^
Act of Parliament referring us to the said letters Patents remaining upon
record. Whereupon I conclude, that seeing no man can dispense in the
disabilityes of holy orders, but such as have authority to give and confer
them; either M. Majesty who graciously dispensed (to use Master Masons words)
with Mason l. ^. c. 5. p. 132.
all causes or doubts in their orders, was the chief collatour and giver of
them, or she injuriously challenged to her self, that which no law, neither of
God, nor man could possibly affoard her. All the dawbinges which M. Mason
applies to cover these faults are pithily and iudiciously cast of by Master
D. Champney. For whereas he one while says that the Queen dispensed with the
trespasses Doctor Champney in his answ. to Master Mason c. 13.
against her own laws: It is answered that there were no laws of hers
transgressed in consecrating of any before that time, she having repealed in
her first Parliament the laws of Queen Mary, which disanulled that new
inauguration devised by the twelve deputed by King Edward; and having enacted
no new laws her self any way violable in that kind, before she practiced
that supreme power of her spiritual soueraygnty in granting dispensations,
which was about the second year of her raygne. Then when Mason dallyeth that
she dispensed not in essential points of ordination, but only in accidental,
Mason. l. 3. c. 5. p. 133. 8. Eliz. c. ^.
not in substance but in circumstance, the words of the Queens letters
patents give testimony against him, that she dispensed with all causes or
doubts of any imperfection or disability that can, or may be objected in any
wise against the same. Now the doubts were not about any accidental ceremony,
or other not essential circumstance, but as appears No man ca^ dispe^se in
the disabilityes of holy orders but he that has power to co^ferre the^.
by the Statute made in the Eight of Queen Elizabeth, and by other most
learned lawyers of the Realm, (as I shall declare by and by) they were about
the very substance it self of their ordination, whether they were true Bishops
or no? Likewise it belongs only to them to dispense even in accidental
disabilities of holy orders, to whom it belongs to confer the orders.
Therefore if Queen Elizabeth had power in M. Masons judgment to do the one,
she had authority to confer the other: and that collation though void in it
self, was judged sufficient amongst the Protestants. Besides, whereas M. Mason
says, That the wisdom of their Church discreetly and religiously pared away
all superfluous and superstitions ceremonies in ordination; Mason l. 2. c. 11.
p. ^4.
What ceremony unbeseeming? What circumstance unfitting remained amongst them
which needed dispe^sation? Especially seeing (as M. Doctor Champney well urges
against him) It is not to be thought that the Queen would dispense with those,
which the wisdom of their Church retayneth as good and lawful.

17. In fine, the ordination ministered in Queen Elizabeth's raygne was no other
then such as was devised in the days of King Edward, ratifyed and confirmed
by her. But that inauguration was no validity, as 8. Eliz. 1.
appears by an Article of Queen Maryes, made by the consent of the Lords
spiritual and temporal, and thus Fox in his Acts and Monum. p. 1295.
related by Master Fox: Touching such persons as were heretofore promoted to
any orders, after the new sort and fashion of orders, considering they were not
ordered in very deed, the Bishop etc. The same Fox reports that Doctor Brook
Bishop of Gloucester, proceeding to the degradation of Ridley (consecrated
Bishop after that new form, yet made Priest after the ancient) told him, That
they were to degrade him only Fox page 1604.
of Priesthood, for they did not take him to be a Bishop. Against which Ridley
never excepted. Howbeit Cranmer being truly consecrated, was degraded as
Archbishop. Then the opinion of the Judges, and censure of the common law
disallowed that new ordination: In the great Abridgement of the common law it
is said, Que Euesques etc. That the Bishops in King Edward the sixth days were
not consecrated, Brooks Novel cases placito 463. fol. 101. printed 1604.
and therefore were not Bishops. For which cause a lease for years made by
them and confirmed by the Deane and Chapter shall not bind the Successor, for
such were not Bishops: Contrariwise of a Bishop deprived which was Bishop in
fact at the time of the letting and confirmation made by the Deane and Chapter.
These were the Judges words, which are yet further strengthened by the case of
Bishop Bonner, who was certified into the Kings Bench by Doctor Horn supposed
Bishop of Winchester, for refusing the new oath appointed to ecclesiastical
persons by the statute of the first of Queen Elizabeth, 1. Elizab. c. 1.
unto him offered in Southwarke in the Bishops house there, and his addition
was: Legum doctor and in sacris or diuibus constitutus and non clericus nec
Episcopus: And therefore the certificate was challenged, sed non alocatur. Also
the said certificate was challenged, for that the oath was said to be tendered
unto him by Robert Horn Bishop of Winchester, who was no Bishop. And Bonner
was endited upon this certificate in the County of Midlesex according to the
Statute, and he pleaded thereunto not guilty. And it was holden that the trial
should not be made by a jury of Midlesex, but by a Iurry of Surry and the venew
of Southwarke etc. It was also much debated amongst 6. and 7: Eliz. Diar folio
234.
all the Justices in the Lord Catlins chamber if Bonner might give in evidence
upon this issue not guilty, that the said Bishop of Winchester, non fuit
Episcopus te^pore oblationu Sacramenti, and resolved by all that the verity and
matter being so indeed he should be well received upon this issue, and that the
Jury should try it. The trial was such as Bonner was discharged and never
called more in question about that matter. But it was presently after ordained
in Parliament, That all acts heretofore made or 8. Eliz. 1. 39. Eliz. 8.
done by any person about the consecration, confirmation or inuesting of any
person elected to the dignity of an Archbishop or Bishop by virtue of the
Queens letters patents or commission since the beginning of her reign shall be
adjudged good.

18. Which laws had been superfluous and not beseeming the dignity of that
place, if the said Bishops had been sufficiently made before; especially seeing
it is provided in the same parliament, that all tenders of the said 8. Eliz. c.
1. circa fine^.
^ath made by any Archbishop or Bishop aforesaid, or before the last day of
this present Session to be made etc. and all refusalls of the same oath so
tendered, or before the last day of this present Session to be tendered by any
Archbishop or Bishop etc. shall be void and of no effect or validity in the law.
What better proofs? What more forcible arguments, to convince the nullity of
their Bishops former ordination, then these Acts of Parliament, these decisions
of the Judges? That acquittance of Bishop Bonner? This disanuiling of the oath
tendered, and refusal Abridgement of Diars reports 7. Eliz. 23. 4.
thereof until that present Session, in which their Bishops were adjudged
authorized and enacted to be lawful? Otherwise it had belonged to that high
Court, to have defended and maynteyned their Bishops precedent inauguration,
their tendering of the oath according to Sand de schis. Angli. pa. 166 D.
Harding in his co^fut. of the Apol. par. 2. cap. ^.
the Statute of the first of Queen Elizabeth, and condemned others refusal
contrary thereunto.

19. Further if Protestant superintendents had that undoubted ordination which
Master Mason fancieth, why did their Ministers after Queen Elizabeth had
unjustly deposed her lawful Pastors, seek to Antony Kitchen Bishop of
Landasse to be consecrated by him, who by reason of his pretended blindness
avoided the task? Why did they repair to the Irish Bishop in the Tower, Fulk
in his answ. to a counter. Cashol. p. 50. Whitaker. contr. 1. q. 5. cap. 6.
Sutcliffe answer to exceptions page 87. Spark in his answer to M. John d'
Albinsc. 1. p 20 23. 24. 26.
who likewise refused to lay hands upon them, and therefore were constreyned to
ordeyne one another at the Nagges head in Cheapeside, in such ridiculous manner
as they are now ashamed of it? Or if they had received their consecration from
our Catholic Bishops, what injury does Doctor Fulke both to his own Prelates
and ours, in saying unto us, You are much deceived if you think we esteem your
offices of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, any better then laymen, and you
presume too much to think that we receive your ordering to be lawful. What
wrong does Doctor Whitaker to himself and his colleagues? when he affirms
our Catholic Bishops not to be lawful Bishops either by divine
ecclesiastical or Civil law. And Sutcliffe in like manner: The Romish Church
is not the true Church, having no Bishops nor Priests at all but only in name,
what disgrace did Doctor Spark cast on the glory of their Clergy, when
writing against us, he presumes to auow, that our Bishops and Priests have no
ordinary calling but wholly unlawful: That infinite have had their
co^secrations and orders, from such as were no true Popes or Bishops during the
time of the Papal schisms, and thereupon infers, how can we count those
right Bishops and Priests (...) were made by such as had no right to make any?
or how shall we (...) them from such as fetch their pedigree from right Popes?
This (...) will trouble the whole Church of Rome to crack.

20. But now M. Spark, not the Church of Rome alone but your reformed Church
of England, is put to the trouble of cracking that nut: Now you your self must
crack it, or else you are a wolf, an intruder, who comes to kill and destroy
the sheep of Christ. For as Socrates in the like case pithyly reasoned: By the
Nicen Fathers Socrates in hist. Eccl. l. c. 32.
all later Bishops are ordained, if they had not the holy Ghost who might
descend by ordination into every one, neither have these received the function
of Priesthood. For how could they receive it when it (...) given by them who
had it not? So I dispute with Master Mason: if our Bishops, and Priests had
no ordinary calling, no right to ordeyne any; If they were wholly unlawful, and
mere laymen, as his fellows ween: what calling have their superintendents?
What ordination? What spiritual jurisdiction, derived from such as had no
authority to ordeyne them? Doctor Whitaker therefore Whitaker. contr. 2. q. 5.
c. 6. folio 35^.
more ancient, and nearer the beginning of Protestant profession then Master
Mason, flatly denies the ordination or calling of their Mynistery, to proceed
from the Catholic Clergy, which went before them, saying: Our Bishops and
ministers although they be not ordained by Papistical Nostri Episcopi and
ministri, and si non sunt a Papisticis Episcopis ordinati, tamen rite and
legitime ordina^tur. Ibidem folio 357. Ibide^ folio 36.
Bishops, yet they are orderly and lawfully ordained. A little before; Truly
amongst them (Catholics) only they are lawful Pastors who are called and
created according to their order: But we say their Ministry was corrupted, and
therefore that we ought not to be made and created Bishops by them. Immediately
after being urged with a Canon of the first Nicen Council: That a Bishop ought
to be created by two or three Bishops, he answers: That law was enacted by
the Bishops, and it was pious if it may be commodiously done, and if there be
godly Bishops from whom ordination may be had, otherwise not: which
constitution in the flourishing Church may be retained, not in the lapsed.
Again, Touching ordination by three Bishops, that constitution is to be
observed as long as things remain whole and entire, and as long as the
Bishops were good, otherwise not.

21. Besides, If he (Bellarmine) grant our vocation (says Whitaker) to be
lawful (which never any Catholic did) Ibid. f. 361.
for ordination we (...) contend; because they that have authority to call, have
authority also to ordeyne, of lawful ordination cannot be ^^tayned etc. But
touching the Bishops of those times they never could be drawn Ad Episcopos
veroillorum ^emporu^ quod attinet, illinu^ quam induci potuerunt, vt quemqua^
ordinare^t nisi qui illis per o^niafaueret
to ordeyne any unless it were such a one as in all things favored the^. For
this cause he flies at the end to an extraordinary succession against the
common fashion and vulgarly received custom etc. This (quoth he) our Church
had because the ordinary succession was corrupt. Where I pray, Master Mason?
where lay your Registers hid when this glorious light of your Church (as a
flatterer styles him) wrote directly against them? Where was that ordinary
succession, ordinary calling, common consecration of Protestant
superintendents, (of which M. Mason braggeth so much) by three of our Bishops
or such as were ordained by them, when Whitaker denied their Prelates and
ministers, to be ordained by Papisticall Bishops? When he ^aught that they
ought not to be created by them? That the manner of consecrating by three
Bishops Ibid. f. 308.
did not take place in their lapsed Church? That Catholic Bishops could not
be induced to lay hands upon Ricard Stock in dedicatory epist. to my
them? That their succession was extraordinary not according to the received
manner? Were Masons ordinations then a foot? His forged consecrations every
where practiced, when Whitaker so often and so advisedly Lord Knowles.
protests the contrary? But into such contradictions they are wont to fall who
wrongfully lay claim to false pretended titles. Mason lib. 1. 2. 3.


22. The chief reason which moved Master Whitaker, Master Fulke and their
consortes, thus to disclaim from the ordination of Catholic Bishops, was
because Whitaker. contro. 2. q. 3. cap 1. folio 184. Episcopi qui secuti
Gregoriu^ magnum verifuerunt Antichristi. Fulke in c. 20. Apo. sect. 2. Spark
in his answer to M. John d' A^bins p. 23.
they most injuriously accounted them antichristian Prelates. The Bishops
(says Whitaker) which followed Gregory the great, were true Antichrists. They
were, as Fulke miscalleth them, Prelates of the Antichristian Church. Right
Priests of Antichrist, says D. Spark; yea nothing is more common among them;
then to call our people, the limbs of Antichrist; our Church, the congregation
of Antichrist; our Priests Fulke in c. 2. ad. These. sect 9. and in c. 17. Apo.
sect. 1. and 4 and in other of his works.
and Bishops, the slaves, and shauelinges of Antichrist: our Popes even
Antichrists themselves; Which although they be most malicious and spi^ifull
calumniations, howsoever Master Powell belieueth the letter as an article of
faith: Yet see the misery of English Superintendents, when to the condemnation
of all their neighbor brethren who want that calling, they are feign to beg
their spiritual power, from such, as they misdeeme Antichristian Gabriel Powel
in tract. de Antichristo p. 2.
Bishops; when they cannot enter the fold of Christ but by the back-dore of
Antichrist, nor minister his Sacraments but by ordination from Antichrist; nor
feed his sheep but by commission from Antichrist; nor receive holy orders and
confer them to others but by the authority Protestants aredriuen to great
extremityes when they beg from Antichrist all their christian rites:
of Antichrist. Was the son of God so needy? The Church his spouse become so
bankrupt, as not to have any power or jurisdiction left, but what it borrowed
from Antichrist her deadly enemy? Was Christ disrobed of all his inheritance,
and after so many ages did he repair to you, to restore him his right, by the
means of Antichrist? By his slavish army? by his Antichristian Idolatours? O
M. Mason, how base are your thoughts? how miserable your clergy, when you are
forced to run to this miserable refuge? To go on. Protestant mynisters want
true mission or vocation to preach.


23. The last defect of Protestant ministry, is mission or vocation to preach,
which is so necessary to the function of a lawful Pastor, and du^y of the
faithful; as Saint Paul says: How shall they believe him whom they have not
heard? And how shall hear without a preacher? But how shall they preach
unless they be sent? In which words he chaineth together in a link
inseparably these four things Faith, Hearing, Romans 10. v. 14. 15.
Preacher, and Mission, and as Hearing is requisite in the belieuer, that ^e
may rightly believe: so Mission in the preacher, that he may lawfully preach.
This mission or calling is of two sorts, the one immediately from God, which is
called an extraordinary Mission, and ought to be proved by apparent miracles,
the irreproueable seals and conformations of Gods will. The other mediatly
only by authority communicated unto them from Apostolical men, the vicegerents
of Christ upon earth, which is termed an ordinary vocation, the usual Mission
now Matthew. 28. Romans 10. Ephesians. 4. Luther Tom. 5. ^. VVite^. in c. 1. ad Galat.
folio. 376.
practiced in the Church, and which has continued according to the promise of
Christ, and testimony of the Apostle confessed by Luther, and shall continue
even to the end of the world, without which whosoever arrogateth the name of a
Preacher, he is an usurper, an intruder, that rusheth in at the window, and
enters not at the door: he is a wolf, a thief, who comes not but to steal
and kill and destroy.

24. Wherefore although we should bestow upon Protestants the alms of
ordination they so importunatly beg, although they could derive a true
consecration Eavocatio durauit vsque ad nostra te^pora, and durabit vsque ad
finem mu^di.
(which they shall never be able) from Catholic Bishops; yet their Commission
and warrant to preach their Caluinisticall doctrine, their vocation thereunto
they can never show: For let them tell me who called them to that office? Who
gave them authority to preach their Protestant faith? Temporal Princes and
secular people, whom Master Whitaker assigns? They cannot communicate that
spiritual power, they cannot preach themselves, much less enable others to
discharge that office. Whitaker. contro. 2. q. 5. ca. 6. f. 36^.
Again, what Princes or people might they be? No Catholic Princes would give
them commission to preach Protestant doctrine: No Protestant Princes or people
were heard of, until Luther and his disciples had publicly In vain do
Protestant mynisters pretend their calling from temporal Princes or secular
magistrates.
preached their Protestant Gospel. In vain then do they seek their calling
from these. Will they plead it from some ecclesiastical persons Priests or
Bishops? But I have often inculcated that there was not any Protestant Priest,
or Bishop in the world when these Sectaryes first began: and as for
Catholic Bishops they were so far from giving them any Commission to
preach, or power to mynister Sacraments after their manner, as they
excommunicated and forbad them all pulpits, and oratoryes; renounced all
society and participation in Sacraments with them; labored by all means
possible to hinder and suppress their false and new coined Gospel. Therefore
M. Mason strives to underprop their Mission, not by letters of credit from any
secular magistrates, or orthodoxall Bishops; but by the broad seal forsooth,
as he falsely supposes, of holy Scripture, the common warrant to which every
heretic seems to lay claim saying: Cranmer and the rest received Mason l.
2. c. 2. folio 11.
from you the shell of succession without the kernel of doctrine. For though
our Church did give men power to preach the truth, yet being bewitched with
Antichrist in many things it did not reveal the Truth; But when God by the
Scriptures revealed it unto them, they both preached it themselves and
commended it to posterity. So that the things revealed unto them in Scripture,
was all the Our Ghospellers have no certain rule to know their revelation from
Scripture to be true.
warrant they had to preach such Protestant articles as they now maynteyne,
contrary to the approved doctrine of the Church.

25. But I inquire of M. Mason what revelation it was they had from Scripture?
Was it the private interpretation they made thereof? That is fallible and
subject to error. That revelation every heretic challenges, and with as
much reason maynteyneth it as any Protestant does his. Was it, as others
pretend, the public voice of God which spoke in Scripture? But this In the
first part of the Antidote in the first and second chapter
is a mere collusion of words to beguile the simple: For the voice of God
speaking in Scripture, is nothing else but the very text of Scripture, the
words and sentences uttered in Scripture, as I have elsewhere often declared.
Was it their industry and labor in conferring reading and finding out the true
sense of Scripture? But this industry was also deceauable as I have inuincibly
demonstrated Our Ghospellers have not the true Christian faith concerning any
article whatsoever.
in the first controversy of my Antidote. Therefore Protestants could have no
revelation from Scripture, wherreby they might be infallibly certain (which is
necessary to says) of the truth they delivered. Yea although they should have
lighted upon the true meaning of some essential article of belief, yet that
article so taught and believed, because they so interpret that place of
Scripture, was not any article of Christian faith, not that divine faith, which
we are commanded to embrace: but a mere humane verity, a humane faith. The
reason is, In the 9. chapter of this third part.
because the thing believed causes not faith, but the infallible motive for
which we believe it; that motive in Protestants is altogether fallible, as
has been elsewhere more largely convinced: Therefore the revealed truth Luther
in expo. Ep. ad Galat. cap. 1. folio 215. printed ad VVittemberge by Joan.
Lu^^. 1954.
which they believe is also fallible.

26. Besides, Truth revealed to Protestants in holy Scripture, is not
sufficient for their Legantine power, unless the legacy also or charge of
preaching be committed unto them. It is not enough (says Luther their chief
Patriarch) for a man to have the word and purity of doctrine, but also he must
be assured of his calling, not of his calling only to Prieststood by the shell
(as you term it) of succession, or ceremony of ordination; but of his calling
and commission given to preach, and recommend unto posterity the kernel of
Luther ibidem and folio 276.
doctrine. This Mission, this vocation he must also have, and that from men, or
else although thou were, as Luther says, wiser then Solomon, wiser then
Daniell, if thou be not called, more then hell, beware thou cast not out a
word. And many leaves Ierom. 23. v. 21.
after he protests of himself, that although he could deliver souls from
error and damnation by his wholesome doctrine, yet he ought to commit the
matter to God, and not to preach Ezech. 13. v. 6.
unless he be called by men. For such as do otherwise he terms them,
impostors, miscarryed not with a good but a wicked spirit. They are those of
whom Jeremy and Ezechiell fore warned us: I sent not the Prophets and they
ran, I spoke not unto them and they prophesied: They see vain things; and
they divine lies saying: our Lord says, whereas our Lord sent them not.

27. Therefore albeit we should suppose that these new Gospellers, had, as
Master Mason insinuates, power from us to preach truth (which notwithstanding
is most false): yet when they began to preach other doctrine then was
delivered unto them, other then was put into their mouths by their
predecessors, therein they lost their calling, ran of themselves, preached
of themselves, not sent from God with extraordinary miracles, nor yet from men
with ordinary commission to publish that faith. For as he who has authority A^
Ambassadour^ who alter the legacy of their Prince are not therein to be termed
his Ambassadors: no more can Protestants be said to be sent to alter the
commission of those that sent them. Optatus l. 2. contra Parmen.
from his King to deliver an Embassage, if he alter or change the Massage of
his Prince, he cannot therein be truly said to be his legate or Ambassador,
especially if the King recall, or countermaunde whatsoever he proposes
contrary to his mind. No more can Protestant Ministers though rightly ordered,
and lawfully called; maynteyne their calling or vocation to preach any other
truth, then such as was commended unto them: much less if our Bishops reuerse
their commission, contradict their doctrine, and labor by all means utterly to
suppress it. For who doubts but that such as have power to communicate, have
power also to revoke, moderate, and restreyne the authority which they give.
And whosoever persisteth after the reuocation, or whosoever alters the tenor
of his commission; he runs not sent, he prophesies that which our Lord
never said, nor any of his servants delivered unto him; he is therein, as
Optatus wittily iesteth at Victor the Donaeist, A son without a Father, a
Nouice without an instructour, disciple without a master, follower without a
predecessor; prodigiously borne a preacher of himself, teaching a lesson
which he never learned of any before. For to go back and say with M. Mason
that God by Scriptures revealed it unto him, is no authentical or sufficient
calling, because generally all heretics boast of the like revelation, all
pretend their Mission and calling by Scripture. That the Donatistes, the
Circumcellians, the Arians arrogated, and had as good warrant God leaves not
Scripture to every ones private exposition but to the interpretation only of his
Church.
for the true meaning of Scripture, as any Protestant has for his exposition.
Wherefore to avoid the confusion, and occasions of error which might ensue, of
leaving the Scripture to the particular interpretations of private men, it
pleases God to unfold the true sense and meaning of his will to the public
Pastors and preachers of his Church; to them he infallibly delivers the
inheritance of truth, of them only we must seek it, to them we are bound to
repair to have it opened unto us, from them alone we can have our vocation to
preach it. Otherwise every mad and fanaticall spirit, might fondly devise, as
Protestants do, what constructions, what revelations he list.

28. This reason John Calvin the chief Architect of M. Masons religion
assigns, why God teaches not either by himself, or by Angels, but by the
voice and Calvin in c. 59. Isa.
speech of men. This order (quoth he) God has settled in his Church, that they
may vaunt themselves in vain to be ready to obey him, who reject his
Mynisters. Therefore he commands the word and doctrine to be required from
the mouth of Prophets and Doctors, who teach in his name, and by his warrant,
least we foolishly hunt after new revelations. If this be so, how durst your M.
Calvin? How durst our sectaryes deliver a Gospel they never took from the
mouth of any Prophet or Doctor? Caluinus contra errores Serueti.
With what face do they vaunt of obeying God, when they disobey his Mynisters
the interpreters of his will? How shall we know that they who follow not the
settled course prescribed by him, do not foolishly hunt after new revelations?
Michael Seruetus forsook that ordinary way, he used the like pretense as M.
Mason does of revelation from Scripture, and the same Calvin inueighed against
him. That like another Mahomet he rose a restorer of a new world, with a new
and unknown revelation; Is not this (says he) to make void the whole glory
which Christ has gotten? By thy own saying I condemn thee and thy fellows o
ungracious servant. For by the same argument thou o Calvin art like another
Mahomet, Calvin and his followers come like Mahomet with new revelations.
the English sectaryes progenitors like so many Mahomets; who contrary to the
public truth received in the Church, challenged another, revealed to them out
of holy Scripture. With whom I reason thus: When Cranmer in England, or any
other began to vent their reformed Gospel, either the same Gospel was
preached by some lawful Pastors in some parts of the world, or not? If it
were not? The Church of Protestants was no where extant, the glory of Christ's
Church in their conceit was wholly extinguished. If it were? From those
Pastors, our sectaryes should have derived their succession. To the^ they
ought to have gone for their holy Orders.

29. Or if the shell of ordinution from the Priests of Tertullian in praes.
ca. 20.
Antichrist, was good enough for their Antichristian synagogue, at least from
them they ought to have taken rraducem fidei and semina doctrinae.
their letters patents, and commission to preach. From them they should have
gleaned the kernel of doctrine, they should have drawn from those pure
Churches, the line of faith and seeds of doctrine, as Tertullian anoucheth:
Aug. l. 5. de baps. contra donatist cap. 26.
which advise S. Cyprian also gives, and S. Augustine much commends it
saying: That which he (Cyprian) admonishes that we repair to the conduite
head, that is, to Apostolical tradition, and from thence direct the pipe to
our times; is an excellent The succession and propagation of truth which here
we seek cannot be learned out of Scripture. 2. Pet. ^. v. 16.
thing, and without doubt to be observed, especially seeing in this mark of
succession it is not the bare truth for which we inquire, but the propagation,
tradition, reception, continuance, and lineall descent of the truth: how it
has been conveyed by Pastor to Pastor in all succeeding ages: how taught, how
believed from the Apostles days even unto ours? This cannot be learned out of
Scripture, because it follows after the Scripture; The succession of doctrine
came after the Scriptures were written, how shall it then be proved by the
precede^t Scriptures? which were in the Apostles time, who endited them,
depraved and Athanasius ora. 2. contra Arian.
perverted by some to their own perdition, as S. Peter witnesses: and why may
not such deprauatours much more be now? How can the Scriptures bear witness of
the publication, progress, and true perseverance of that, Eos qui aliunde qua^
a tota successione Cathedrae ecclesiastica originem fidei suae deducunt
haereticos esse.
which fell out many years after their authors and compilers were dead? So
that for the true doctrinal, you must needs have recourse to the true Pastoral
succession: which are inseparably chayned and linked together. To leave this
way and endeavor either by Scriptures, or by any other means to vphould the
continual descent and propagation of faith, is an evident brand or note of
heresy, as S. Athanasius anoweth saying: They are heretics who de riue the
origin of their faith any where else, then from the whole succession of the
Ecclesiastical chair; which he accounts Aug tract, 37. in Joan.
there an excellent, and an admirable way to fi^d out an heretical sect. And
S. Augustine affirms, That to be the Catholic faith which coming from the
doctrine of the Apostles is planted in us by the line of succession. S.
Irenaeus also more ancient Irenaeus l. 4. cap. 45.
then he says: With whom the succession of Bishops from the Apostles time
downward remained, these are they who conserve our says, and do expound the
Scriptures unto us without danger.

30. By this time thou perceauest (courteous Reader) the perverse and unto ward
course of Protestants, who departed from the Pastors of the Church to the
written word: whereas they should have repaired to her Pastors, to have learned
without danger the meaning of that word. Thou perceauest the beggary, or
nullity rather of their profane and secular ministry, which undertakes the
care of sonles, without any true election, ordination, succession, or mission.
Thou perceauest how vainly they confide in their revelations from Scripture,
who have no certain rule, or public warrant (as Catholics have) to know
whether their revelations proceed from God, or no. Thou see how they bear
about them the earemarke of heretics, in deriuing their faith from another
Origene then the line of Apostolical succession. Thou see how dangerously
they usurp the function of Pastors, who are wolfs, robbers, and soule-killers
of the sheep, so deadly bought with the blood of Christ.

CHAP. XXI. In which the Beginning, Propagation, and Continuance of the true
Faith is proved to be a Note of the true Church, and only to appertain to the
Roman Church, which never altered the Faith it first received from the Apostles.
I SAY prophesying of the true Church, and of the very place from whence Isay
2. v. 3.
the preaching of the euangelical gospel should begin, said: The law shall
come from Sion, and the word of our Lord from Act. 1. v. 8.
Jerusalem. Our Savior does not only assign the same beginning, but
foretells Luc. 24. v. 46. 47.
the growth, increase, and continuance thereof, in these words: You shall be
witnesses unto me in Jerusalem, and in all Jury, and Samaria, and even to the
utmost of the earth. And, Matthew. 13. v. 37. 39. item 24. v. 14.
It behooued penance to be preached in his name, and remission of sins unto
all nations, beginning at Jerusalem. Then he auerreth that the seed of his
word, thus sowed in the field of the world, should increase and grow until the
harvest; That is, until the last day, until the consummation of all things.
Hence S* Augustine Aug. de unit. Eccl. cap. 10.
makes this illation: Let us therefore hold the Church designed by the mouth
of our Lord from whence it is to begin, and how far it is to be dilated; it
is to begin at Jerusalem, and to be dilated into all nations. Where he often
says it shall persevere Ibidem c. 5.
until the end of the world. This mark is distinct from those which I have
explaned heretofore, because I speak not here of the universal being of the
Church, but of the manner how it came to be in all nations; (...) of the
successiue line of pastoral doctrine, but of the order how it also continued
for ever.

2. After which sort it is to be reduced to the precedent note of Apostolical
succession, and such Churches as are thus derived from those which the Apostles
planted, Tertull. in praes. cont. haer.
may be truly called, as Tertullian affirms, Apostolical Churches. But the
Church of Rome only can show how it began at Jerusalem, how it grew, and
spread it self into all nations, how it still perseuereth whole and entire in
all the points of faith she first sucked from the Apostles The Apostolical
faith is to be known not by the private expositions which now are devised, but
by the general interpretations of Scripture which have been delivered from
time to time.
breasts: Therefore she alone is the undoubted spouse of Jesus Christ. For we
do not here intrude our selves to the Apostles times, and lay claim, as
Protestants and other heretics falsely do, to the Apostolical faith, but to
the preaching, propagatio^, and continuance of that faith; not to the new
interpretatio^s which now are made of the written word, but to the received
expositions, which from time to time, from country to country, from Jury to
Rome, from Rome to all nations have been infallibly gathered, and faithfully
delivered out of that sacred word. Of this our sectaryes are so destitute as
they had not any Priest or Bishop, Clark of layman, woman or child, in the
whole world, who preached unto Luther their first beginner, and delivered unto
him, or any other of his consorts their Protestant doctrine. Therefore Master
Mason retire to as you have heard to the revelation of Scripture, made in
England to Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley and their fellows; others to the like
revelations made to Luther at wittemberge, to Calvin at Geneua, Mason l. 1.
chap. 2. fol. 11.
to Oecolampadius at Basil: from thence they derive the propagation or reuiuall
of their Gospel, which lay dead before for many ages. And that which Saint
Augustine Aug. l. de unit. Eccl. cap. 17.
condemned in the Donatists of no less then blasphemy, to wit, that the good
seed of heavenly truth, which was sowed by the Apostles, and Apostolical men
in all the world; and which was there to grow until the harvest, should have
perished out of those places, and be sowed a new out of Africa. This I say
which he accounted in them a most detestable blasphemy, is revived again by our
late Sectaries, who as wretchedly dream, that the same seed was decayed in
their days, or covered at least from the view of the world, that it had not
any public Pastors to preserve it, Doctors to water it, preachers to sow it;
but it must be sowed a new by Cranmer out of England, by Luther out of
Wittemberge, out of Geneua by Calvin: whose folly I impugn with Saint
Augustines words. For as his enemies furnish our Sectaryes with objections: so
he armeth us with irresistible answers. Let them (says he) search the
Scriptures, and against so many testimonies which proclayme the Church of
Christ to be spread over all the world, let them Aug. de unit eccl. c. 4.
bring but one as certain and manifest as those, by which they demonstrate the
Church of Christ to have perished out of other nations, and only to have
remained in Africa, as though it should have another beginning, not from
Ierusaelem, but from Carthage, where first they set up a Bishop against a
Bishop. Or as we may apply it to our purpose, Whitaker. cont. 2. q. 5. cap. 1.
The Apology of the English Church pa. 4. chap. 4. Calvin libro 4. instit 1. c.
7.. 24. Fox acts and mon. page 400. and page 402. Oecolampadius upon his tomb
at Basil, is called Euangelicae doctrinae Author primus. Bu^er ^^. An. 36. ad.
Episco. Hereford, calls Luther primum Apostolum purioris ^uangelij Ioachim
Camera. fratrum orthodoxae Eccles. page 161. calls ^uther (...).
from England, from Wittemberge, from Geneua, where, by Bishops of Priests
lately sprunge up, are scattered abroad new seeds of belief, contrary to the
sowinges of all other Bishops, and Priests. In so much as their own followers
attribute unto them, The Restoration, The Bringing to light, The first
Beginning or Rebudding of the Gospel, The Reedification of the desolate ruins
of Religion, The Opening of a vein long hid before, The Rising of aebeame of
truth then unknown and unheard. They call them the first Authors, first
Masters, first restorers, first Apostles of their evangelical strange ^^d new
reformed doctrine: For themselves also entitle it new ^^d strange. And another
of their favorites auerreth that ^uther received not his faith either from
Husse or Wick^iffe, but was (...) instructed of himself, by the help no doubt
a^ he im^g^^ed of holy Scripture. A plain demonstration that the Protestant
faith is not that, which beginning first at Jerusalem was diffused over the
world, and from Pastor to Pastor descended, by the Apostles prescribed way of
preaching unto them. Now let us see whether this property belong not to the
Roman Church.

3. Our adversaries cannot deny but that the Christian faith first preached at
Rome came from Jerusalem, either by Saint Peter as the whole clowd of Fathers,
and greatest torrent of Protestants bear witness; or at least by S. Paul who
continued the same preaching, and was there under Nero crowned with martyrdom.
Likewise that the same faith was propagated into all Nations, the Apostle also
testifies saying to the Romans: Your faith is renowned Romans 1. v. 8.
in the whole world, and Saint Irenaeus calling it, the greatest and most
ancient Church of Rome, known to all the world as founded by the two most
glorious Apostles Peter and Paul, adds Irenaeus l. 3. c. 3. adu. haeres.
immediately after, that unto this Church in respect of her more mighty
principality, it is necessary that all Churches agree and have access, that is
to say, all faithful people wheresoever they live. In which Church the
tradition that has descended from the Apostles, Whitaker. in his ans. to Doctor
Sanders 2. demonst. Fulke in c. 22. Thessa. sect. 7. Reynolds in his 5. conclus.
has ever been kept, by those that live in any place of the world. Fot this
cause our adversaries confess that it was our mother Church, a most pure
excellent and flourishing Church. And so continued for some few ages. But since
say they it is degenerated into a bastard Church, into an adulterous Church.
Wherefore the only thing I am to prove, is that the Roman church never ceased
to be the true church of Jesus christ, or which is all one, that it never
altered her religion, never changed in any essential point, from the purity of
faith which the Apostles together with their blood (to speak with Tertullian)
powered into it. Which I first demonstrate Tertullia^ in praes. contra haer.
with this common argument, often heretofore insinuated.

4. The divine providence has preserved inuiolably the truth of his Gospel in
the person of succession and invisible descent of Bishops, Priests and
preachers, in some place or other: for he has appointed a perpetual
generation of Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Doctors, to
continue in his Church; until we meet all into the unity Ephesians. 4. v. 13.
of says and knowledge of the Son of God, that is, until the last day. The
final end or cause was, that now we be not children wavering and carried about
with every wind of doctrine. So that Ibidem v. 14.
as an orderly rank of Pastors and preachers was still to remain, even so
the link of heavenly truth, is perpetually chayned thereunto by the holy
Ghost: in so much as the gates of hell, and all the might of Satan shall never
separate them: but no other row of succeeding Pastors can be named, besides
those of the Roman Church, or such as descending from them in all parts of the
world, have likewise agreed with them in faith and doctrine: therefore they are
the Doctors and Pastors, which our Lord has appointed to abide in his
Church, unto the work of the ministry, unto the edifying of the body of
Christ, until Ephesians. 4. v. 12.
we all meet in the unity of faith.

5. Secondly that Church which once was the chaste and undefiled spouse of
Christ, can never cease to be his Three only ways can a true Church fail by
Schism heresy or apostasy. Schisma est recessus. vel diuisio ab vnitate
ecclesiae.
spouse, or loose the integrity of saving faith: unless it be divorced from
him by schism, heresy, or apostasy. Schism comes from the greek word
(...), and is defined a departure or division from the unity of the Church, by
which the band and communion held with a former Church is broken, and cut off.
Heresy as it is now generally taken, is a wilful election and firm adhesion
to some private and singular opinion, or rather error, contrary to the
general approved doctrine of the Church, and it is derived from the Greek
verb (...) or (...) which signifies to choose, or voluntarily to prefer one
thing before another. Apostasy, is a defection or reuolte A description of
heresy.
from God, in such manner as it renounceth his faith, and casts of the very
name and title of a Christian, by embracing Iudaisme, Turcisme, or Paganism.
But the Roman Church which once syncerely professed the faith Of Apostasy.
of Christ, never divided it self by Schism from the body of other faithful
Christians. It never brake the communion, or went forth from the society of any
elder Church. The Roman Church never failed any of these ways. Not by Schism.
Or if it did, tell us whose company it left? From whom it went forth? And
where was the true Church which the Roman forsook? The Grecians and other
schismatic Churches, have separated themselves from her, but she never went
out or revolted from any. Likewise the Roman Church has at no time by
voluntary election, made choice of any singular or new opinion, disagreable to
the common received doctrine of the Christian world. Nor by heresy.
It has cleaned in no age to private articles, or propositions of faith, which
were not at the same time generally maynteyned in the Church of Christ. For who
did ever Nor yet by Apostasy.
tax the Roman Church of nouelty or innovation in this kind? What true Church
did ever disclayme from this singularity or heretical pertinacy in the Roman
Church? Did it betwitch all nations in a moment with detestable heresy? And was
no man left to discover the M. Napp^r upon the revelation p. 66. and 68. item
p. 43. and 63. Melanctho^ in locis postremo editis. Beza confess general. c. 7.
sect. 12. Humfrey Iesuitis. 2. part page 6^4. Whitaker. contro. 2. q. 4 fol.
144. Fulke in his answer to a counterfeit Catholic page 36.
infection? It can not be. Much less did it depart from Christ by the crime of
Apostasy, which necessarily presupposes a departure from the true Church, and
a reuolte from the openly professed faith, with the renouncing of Christianity
and falling to infidelity? Wherefore seeing by no other means a Church once
true, can possibly decay; the Roman Church which by neither of these ways,
has strayed from the truth, perseuereth still the Church of Christ unstained
in her faith.

6. Thirdly if the Roman Church ever failed, I ask when? By whom? Under what
Pope, or Emperor it first began to play the aduoutresse? Master Napper
maynteyneth, that it did first degenerate about 300. and thirteen years after
Christ, by the means of Pope Siluester. Melancton about the four hundred
twenty, by the usurpation of Zosimus. Beza about the four hundred and forty by
the arrogance of Leo. Doctor Humfrey about the five hundred ninty seaue^ by
Gregory the great, whom he terms the first Pope and leader of the Popish
dance? Why taker and Fulke about the six hundred and six, by Boniface the
third and his successors. For Whitaker affirms, All that followed Gregory to
be true Antichrists. Many other dissentions there be amongst them. Because the
Ce^turistes sometimes say, that it began to be corrupted in Cent. c. 4. col.
71. 79. 80. 81. etc. Cent. 2. c. 4. col. 55. Cent. 1. cap. 10. col 571. etc.
and 584. and. c. 4. col. 54. Et conuenientia testimonia non erant. Marc. 14.
Daniel 13.
the three hundred, sometimes in the two hundred year after Christ. Other
while they ascend higher, and find corruptions even in the Apostles days. But
as the disagreement of the two wicked Judges in accusing Susanna, one affirming
she committed adultery under one tree, another under another, was a most
apparent testimony in the judgment of all people, of her unstained chastity,
and their inueterate malice: So if another Daniell would now determine our
cause, this variance of our adversaries in appeaching the Roman Church, one
auonching she revolted from Christ and fell into her spiritual adultery under
one Pope, Another under another. One in the time of Siluester, Another of Leo,
A third of Gregory etc. must needs be an evident token of her unchanged faith,
and their new forged slanders. For why do you dream Master Napper, that in
the days of Saint Napper upon the revelation p. 66.
Siluester, and by his default, the Roman Church decayed? Because (says he)
then Constantine the Emperor gave to the said Pope Siluester, the town of
Rome, and gave unto him the triple Crown to be crowned therewith, in token
that he made him supreme head over all the Churches, in Asia, Africa, and
Europe, as his gift, contained in the decrees distin. 96. For the like
challenge of supremacy, Zosimus, Leo, Gregory, and Boniface, are accused as the
destroyers of the Church, and first usurpers according to Protestants of that
universal and Antichristian dominion. Howbeit I have apparently convinced in
the second book of my Antidote, That the Supremacy was neither given by
Emperors, either by Constantine to Saint Siluester; or Phocas the Emperor, to
Boniface the third: nor yet usurped by Zosimus, Leo, Gregory, or any other: but
that it was imparted immediately from God to S. Peter, and made hereditary to
his Successors. Which Constantine the Great plainly confesses in the very
deed of gift, or Charter of donation which he mad^: when resigning to the Pope
the City of Rome, Italy and the western Provinces, In ipso Edicto donationis
quod habetur Tomo 1. Council. fo. 296. apud Binium. Quoniam vbi principatus
sacerdotum and Christianae religionis caput ab Imperatore caelesti, iustum non
est, vt illic Imperator terrenus habeat potestatem.
he departed to Constantinople: Because (said he) Where by the heavenly
Emperor, the principality of Priests and head of Christian Religion is placed;
it is not meet the earthly Emperor should bear any sway. Therefore not the
spiritual dignity or supreme headship, which Constantine a little before
deduceth out of the words of our Savior spoken to Peter, whom he there
calls the Vicar of Christ: but the temporal territories, lands, and
revenues, were the endowments of the Roman Sea, which he bestowed upon S.
Siluester.

7. And the very Centuristes testify that before Constantine the great the
supremacy of Peter, and consequently of his successors, was acknowledged by
Tertullian, of whom they write: Tertullian does seem not without error, to
think that the keys of the Church were only given to Peter, and that the
Church was built upon him. They blame also S. Cyprian for affirming; that the
Roman Church is the Chair of Peter, from which all the unity of Priesthood
proceeds. Likewise Cyprian, say they, has diverse other perilous opinions,
about this matter; as for example, that he tieth the office of true Pastorship
to ordinary succession. A little before they accuse him and three other Fathers
of his time saying; Cyprianus, Maximus, Vrbanus and Salonius, do think that
one Bishop must be in the Catholic Church, to wit one chief as head of the
rest. All these flourished before the days of Constantine. So did Origin, and
Hipolitus Matthew. 16. versus 18. 19.
Martyr, who subscribed to the primacy of one supreme Pastor. Again if S.
Siluester were the first Prelate, by whom began, as M. Napper blattereth,
the horrible and detestable Kingdom of Antichrist; the first general Counsel
Centur. 3. c. 4. col. 84.
of Nice, (authorized in England by Act of Parliament) in which he presided by
his legates Hosius, Vitus and Vincentius, and which he after ratifyed and
confirmed, did favor and Ibidem col. 84. and 85.
uphold his Antichristian tyrranny, If Zozimus were the man, S. Austine was a
limne of Antichrist, who notwithstanding he was Bishop of Africa, obeyed his
iniunction Origin ho. 5. in Exodus and ho. 7. in Lucam Hi^ol. in ora deconsum.
mundi. Napper. p. 67 Cedrenus in compend. histo, Photius libro de 7. concilijs.
Damasus in Pont, August. Epist. 157.
of necessity, as coming from his superior. The African Bishops likewise,
over whom our adversaries accuse him of encroachment, for challenging the
right Prosper Con. collat. cap. 41.
of appellations: even they (I say) were abettours of Antichrist, to whose
decrees Pope Zozimus (as Prosper writes) added the authority or strength of
his sentence, and to the cutting of the wicked with the sword of Peter, armed
the right hands of all other Prosper in chronicis.
Prelates. A Council held at Carthage of 217. Bishops, and the whole world
did partake with Antichrist: for that Council sent unto Zozimus their
synodicall decrees, Council. Calcedo^ in relation. ad Leonem quae habetur Tomo
2. Conci. act. 16. pa^. 139. apud Binium Leo Sermo 2. in anniassu^p. s^u.
which being approved, says Prosper, throughout the whole world, the Pelagian
heresy was condemned.

8. If Leo were the first by whom the Church, was ruined, and throne of
Antichrist advanced; why do Protestants allow of the Oecumenicall and sacred
Council of Chalcedon? Which three times gave him the title of holy,
acknowledged him their head, and themselves his members; humbly supplicated
unto him to ratify and confirm their Canons. How does Leo, write thus of
himself; When our exhortations are sounded forth in the ears of your
Sanctity, imagine him (to wit S. Peter) whose person we represent to speak
unto you: because with his love and affection we admonish Libro 1. ep. 1. libro
6. ep. 19. libro* 1. ep. 76. l. 4. ep. 33. libro 7. iud. 2. ep. 2. l. 7. ep.
32. l. 1. ep. 72. 75. l 11. ep. 50. 53. l. 7. indic. 2. ep. 112. libro ep. 15.
libro 9. indict. 4. ep. 61 l. 4. ep. 15. 50. 55. libro 1. ep 19. l. 4. epist. 9.
you: and we preach no other thing unto you then that which he taught. With
what face could he have delivered this, in such a public assembly, if he had
coined any new Gospel, or taught any other doctrine, then that which was
preached by S. Peter? But if S. Gregory, as most Protestants accord, was the
last good and first Antichristian Pope, then in his days some monstrous
innovation was brought not only into the Roman diocesses, but into all the
Provinces and Churches of Christendom, which communicated with him, as
appears out of his Epistles to the Bishops of all countries, of Sicily,
Corsira, Sardinia, Africa, Numidia, Hispania, Gallia, Anglia, Hibernia, Grecia,
Dalmatia, over whom he exercised the soueraygnty of his supreme jurisdiction:
yet he innouated nothing therein, nor delivered any other new doctrine not
taught before, as I demonstrate. 1. By all these and other Bishops of his age,
who never appeached S. Gregory of any usurpation of right, or nouelty in
doctrine, to which they would either have opposed themselves, or have
complained of it; or would have mentioned it at least. 2. By S. Gregory
himself who finds no fault with any of his Roman predecessors, for want of
challenging their due, or for not agreeing with him in all points of faith, as
Protestants every where reprehend and task their ancestors with variance
from them, in sundry assertions. 3. By diverse learned Fathers of the precedent
ages, out of whose writings I have already among my Thirty Controuersyes
clearly proved, and out of Scriptures also deduced, every article of
importance, of which our Gospellers attach S. Gregory. 4. By the Magdeburgian
and other Protestants, who confess the like points of doctrine to have been
mayntayned in those former centuryes. 5. By the communication he held with all
nations, to which he neither prescribed any new faith, nor did they object any
new thing ordained or delivered by him. 6. By his reprehension of John the
Patriarch of Constantinople, for challenging the title of Universal Bishop;
which if himself had also usurped, he would never have been so bold to
control in his competitor: Or if he had been so bold, some or other would
In 6. synod. act. 4.
have blamed him for it. 7. By the subsequent age in which the sixth general
synod was celebrated, whereunto both the casterne and western Bishops
assembled, the legates The words of Pope Agatho his Epistle for the integrity
of the Roman says.
of Pope Agatho, the Patriarchs of Constantinople, Alexandria and Antioch
either by themselves or by their substitutes, who uniformly condemned the new
devised opinion of Macharius, concerning the unity of Christ's wills and
operations: In S. Gregory, in the Roman Church, no nouelty was reprehended, but
^^ Epistle of Pope Agatho was publicly read in the presence of the Emperor
and the rest of the Bishops, wherein he protested of the Roman Church, that it
has never been found through the grace of God to have strayed from the path of
Apostolical tradition. And no man neither of the Greek or Latin Church, no
not so much as Macharius himself excepted against it, although it would have
weakened the authority of Pope Agatho, and auayled him much if any such ranker
of corruption had crept into the Apostolical sea. Nay that very Epistle was
after approved by the whole Counsel, Ibidem act. 8.
which they would never have done, if S. Gregory could have been touched with
any superstitious or new broached doctrine.

9. The same argument with most of the former convince the like in the behalf
of Boniface the third, who lived many years before Pope Agatho, and before
this Epistle of his was generally allowed. Lastly if S. Gregory, or Boniface
the third, with the rest that followed be, as Humfrey, Fulke, Whitaker, and all
Protestants commonly Humfrey, Fulke and Whitaker. in the place before cited.
depose, mere Antichrists, and such as depended of them Antichristian
prelates; what do they think of the definitions made, and men condemned by
Agatho and his adherents in that 6. general synod of 289. Bishops, which was
celebrated in the age of our Redemption 681. above 20. years after Boniface
his decease, against Macharius Sergius and the rest of the Monothelites, who
faygned one will and operation in Christ. What I say do Protestants think?
first of the men, were they heretics? For disobeying the sentence of
Antichrist and his impes? Then of the contrary doctrine there defined? to wit,
That as Christ has two several natures, so two several wills and operations?
I ask them whether they embrace this as the orthodoxall and Apostolical
faith, or renounce it with the Monothelites as diabolical and Antichristian
doctrine? Is it Antichristian? Auaunt then and raunge your selves with those
Hellish catyffes, who by co^founding the wills, abolish the natures, extinguish
the merits, destroy the incarnation, and frustrate the redemption of the son
of God. Is it the orthodoxall and Christian faith? How was it then decreed and
maynteyned by the Prelates of Antichrist? Every Kingdom (as our Savior in
like case reasoned against the Jews) divided against it Luc. 11. us 17.
self, shall be made desolate, and house upon house shall fall; and if Satan
also be divided against himself, how shall his Kingdom stand? So if
Antichrist and his whole army fight against themselves, if they uphold the
truth of Christ and so maynly persecute and extirpate their own errors, how
shall they stand? How shall they be advanced and extolled against God? Was
this a repugnant reason, to show that our blessed Redeemer, did not in
Beelsebub the Prince of devils Ibidem v. 15. and 28.
cast forth devils: But in the fingar of God, whose Kingdom he preached? And
is it not as forcible to prove that Antichrist by his own mouth, never
condemned his Antichristian doctrine; never defined the true Christian faith:
but that it was the fingar of God, the voice of the holy Ghost, which spoke in
his Church, was delivered by his true Pastors, in that sacred holy, and divine
assembly. What can Protestants answer to this invincible argument? Will they
neither join with the Monothelites, nor yet admit that Oecumenicall Council
to be the mystical body, and true spouse of Christ? They must then find out
some other Church in that age, some other preachers besides those, of whom
both East and West, Greeks and Latins, the whole Christian world never had
any inkling before.

10. But although they have nothing here to reply, yet let us hear what they
say to the former interrogatory of the Roman Churches decay: when, and by whom
it fell out. Whitaker answers, It belongs not to us to count the times, and
moments, in what year or day, that defection Whitaker, contro. 2. q 3. c. 1.
folio 184. Ibidem contro. 2. q. 5. c. 3. fo. 312. Powell in his consideration
of the Papists suplica. pa. 43.
began. And then, We cannot name any certain year in which their Church
began to be changed. Which Master Powell also confesses with him.
Therefore we may well conclude that it never changed or altered her belief,
because it could not be that a Church universally spread, famously known,
which had the eyes of all men cast upon her, enemies on every side to pry into
her, all sorts of nations consorting with her, innumerable authors writing of
her, should change her faith, her Religion, her worship of God, which are of
all things most remarkable, and no man to perceive that strange revolution.
The time is known, the persons are named, the heresies recorded, by which all
other Patriarch a^ seas have been (...) in ele^^be verbo Macedoniani.
corrupted with error. For example in the year of out Lord 359. Macedonius
defiled the se^ of Constantinople, with impugning the divinity of the holy
Ghost. About the same time Georgius Cappadox, intruded into the sea of
Athanasius, profaned with Arianisme and many Nicepho. Calli. hist. Eccle. l. 9.
other sacrileges the Church of Alexandria. In the year of our Redemption 273.
Paulus Samosetanus stained the sea of Antioch, with the blasphemy of the
Ebionites, affirming our Savior to have taken his beginning Aug. l'de haer.
from the Virgins womb, and not to have descended at all from heaven: with the
heresy also of Sabellius as Epiphanius Epiphanius baer. 65. Eusebius. l. 7. c. 22.
and 24. leron. ep. 61. ad Pa^mach. Ier. in chronic.
writes. John the Patriach of Jerusalem second of that name, infected his sea,
about the year of our Lord 386. with the errors of Origin; which had been
before about the year of our Redemption 351. invaded and polluted also by the
Arians.

11. Besides we can tell who checked and controlled, who opposed themselves
against these mighty heretics. For Damasus the Pope, with the first
Constantinople Council condemned Macedonius. Georgius Theodo. l. c. 11. Tom.
1. Council. f. 10. apud Binium Athana. ad solita. Nazian. orat. in liudem
Athana. Lucifer. pro Atha. l. 1. and. 2. Vide Eusebium libro 7. c. 23. 24.
Iero. ep. 61. Pamma. Ruffin. in explic. sim. Nazian. in carm. de vita sua. who
lived about the year of our Lord 380. Geiasi^^ in decreto habito de
Apochriphis Scripturis: habetur apud Biniu^ tom. 2. eo^cil. folio 264. They
made that decree the year 494.
Cappadox was resisted and impugned by Athanasius, by S. Gregory Nazianzen, by
Lucifer Calaritanus. Paulus Somasatenus by a Council held at Antioch, in the
year of our Lord 274. John the Patriarch of Jerusalem by S Jerome, and S.
Epiphanius. Thus unless you set down the time, the Pope, the heresy by which
the Apostolical sea was defiled with superstition; and who they were that
opposed against it, it is evident which Ruffinus writes, that, in the Church
of the Roman City, no heresy ever began, and the ancient custom is there
observed. Evident, which S. Gregory Naziaze^ testifyeth of his age: That old
Rome from ancient times has the right says and always keeps it, as it
becomes the City which oueruleth the whole world, always to believe rightly
in God. Which Gelasius with 70. Bishops witness for theirs: That the chief seat
of Peter the Apostle, is the Roman Church, not having any spot or wrincle or
any such thing. Which Theodoret for his. That this holy Sea holds the flerne
of government over all the Churches of the world, as for other causes, so for
that it has still remained Theodoret epist. ad Rena. he wrote the year 450.
^oyde of the stench or ill savor of heresy. Which John the Patriarch of
Constantinople, which Agatho, which Regino, which Rupertus affirm for theirs.
John the Patriarch of Constantinople and second of that name says, In the
Apostolical Sea, (speaking of Peter's) the Catholic Religion Johannes Constan.
2. in epist ad Horm. habetur To^. 2. council. about the year 517.
is always kept inviolable. Agatho you have heard already. Regino auerreth,
That the seat of Peter could never be entrapped by heresy or false doctrine.
Rupertus, The Roman Church more strongly built v^on the rock of Apostolical
says, has stood unshaken, and has always condemned the heresies both of the
Greek Church, and of all the world.

12. Moreover not only the ruins of these renowned seas, but the fall of every
particular Church, is registered Regino in 2. libro Chronico. he wrote in the
year 890.
and diuulged by the watchmen of Gods house, by the vigilance of Catholic
Pastors: whose care and diligence to keep the unity of faith inviolable, and
discover the chaunges which might creep into all Cathedral Seas has been
such, as besides the Sacrament of Ordination, these cautions they used with
every new elected Bishop. 1. He was wont to send co^municatory letters
containing Rupertus libro 2. de diui. offic. c. 22. ^e lived about the year
1100.
the profession of his faith to all provinces abroad, especially to Rome, which
was called Synodica^ dare as S. Cypria^ mentions of himself, and of Sabinus
a Spa^nish Bishop. S. Ambrose likewise of his election. The second was if any
broke the line of succession, or altered the tradition of faith, the like
notice was given of him; as of Cerdon, of Eutiches, of Paulus Samosatenus, and
of certain Nouatian See this more largely in Stapleton contro. 1. q 4 or ^. de
principijs fidei doctrine. Cyprian. libro 4. ep. 9. and lib. 1. ep. 4. Ambro ep.
82. Irenaeus libro ^. c. 4. Leo ep. 9. Eusebius. Phamphil. l. 7. c. 24. Cyprianus
l. 1. ep. 3. and 4. Leo epist. 68. Sozom. l 7. c. 8. Theo. l. 5. histo. eccles.
cap. 9. in epis. Synodo.
Bishops, mentioned by Irenaeus, Leo, Eusebius and S. Cyprian. The third was
the confirmation of the Roman Bishop, by whom the election of every new Bishop,
was accustomed to be ratified and confirmed. So Leo the great confirmed
Proterius Patriarch of Alexandria; Damasus confirmed Nectarius Patriarch of
Constantinople, Sop^o. ad Honor.
Honorius confirmed Sophronius Patriarch of Jerusalem. The fourth was to
matriculate as it were, or enrole in the Church books, or public records, the
names of such as agreed with the rest in faith and profession, thereby to
commemorate or remember them in the time of the dreadful sacrifice of the
Mass: which was in diptyro nomen habere, and withal cancelling the memory or
nams of such as disse^ted from them in matters of faith: which Hormisda the
Pope strictly commanded to be put in Hormisd^ in epist. decretal. ad Episcopos
Hispaniae And see Damasus in his epistle to the Eastern Bishops against
Apollinaris ^ apud Theo. l. 5. c. 10. Greg. in Regist. l. 4. ep. 2. indic. 2.
Ibidem l. 4. ep. 34. item libro 6. ep. 64. Cyprian l. 1. ep. 4. Whitaker.
contro. 2. q. 5. c. 3. f. 312. Spark in his ans. to Master John d'Albins.
an Epistle of his to the Bishops of Spain. All these cautions continued in
the Church even until the days of S. Gregory the great, of which he in
particular makes mention. Therefore it was impossible that any one of unknown
says, as S. Cyprian teaches, should usurp an Episcopal Sea. Impossible for
any Bishop to stray from the ancient doctrine, without public notice taken of
it. Much more impossible for the Roman Bishop: As impossible for the Roman
Church which always flourished in the view of the world. And what can our
Protestants devise what color have they to imagine the contrary? Whitaker,
Spark and their sect-mates allege, that, it decayed by little and little, by
such flow and slily steps as it could hardly be perceived.

13. Well let it be, that corruption stole thus secretly upon some part or
limme of the Church, yet it could never grow over all the body, without being
marked by some or other; at least when the change or corruption came to be
notorious. When she first preached heresy, supported idolatry; When she first
relinquished the communion of the true Church, this must needs be noted, and
chronicled. And this is only that which we desire our adversaries to tell us.
We can tell them when all other scandalous, and pernicious heresies first
began; when Arianisme, Nestorianisme, Manichisme, Pelagianisme Lutheranisme,
Caluinisme, etc. We can describe the places, name the authors, recount the
vpholders and supporters of those and the like blasphemous errors. Theodoret
reckons up threescore and six: Saint Augustine fourscore and eight, which
were before their days. S. (...) haer. fabu. l. 3.
Antoninus, Guido Carmelita, Alfonsus de Castro, and Prateolus make mention of
the rest, even to this present age. Let Protestants perform the like, of the
superstitious Aug. l. de haeres. ad Quod vult Deum Antoni. 4. pa. summae titu.
1^. c. 7. Guido de haer. Alfonsus aduersus Haeres. Prateolus in Eleucho.
wherewith they accuse the Roman Church; or else they show themselves impostors
and calumniatours of the Spouse of Christ, especially seeing their Chroniclers
the Magdeburgian Protestants, can find out the beginning of matters of less
moment, of every external and decent rite, which has been practiced in the
administration of Sacraments, celebrating of Masses, consecrating of Altars, of
every new Canon or decree, concerning Burial, Marriage, holywater, fast of
lent, and other Ember days: yet ascribing some of these things to Popes which
were first ordained by the Apostles. They take upon them to set down every
little change and alteration, in order of discipline, and manner of
Government, which has fallen out in the Roman Cent. 2. c. 6. col. 126. Cent.
3. c. 6. col. 137. 138. Cent. 2. 3. and 4. c. 7. Cent. 2. 3. and 4. c. 4.
Church: They note the very titles her Bishops have used in their private
letters. They task the phrases of speeches, which seem to the^ incommodious in
their publik writings. And if any change or mutatio^ ever happened in matters
of faith, could it have escaped the pens and eyes of such curious
marke-maysters, of such quick-sighted enemies?

14. Furthermore the chiefest innouations of which our adversaries endite the
Roman Church, were such, as they could not creep in by little and little, but
they must Auricular confession is a thing so trouble some as it could not be
introduced into the Church by little and little without resistance.
needs be espied, mentioned, and resisted with might and main. For example,
Auricular Confession is a thing so distasteful, and combersome to flesh and
blood; so repugnant to the haughty humors, and dispositions of men, as it
could never have been brought into any Church or diocese, much less in to
all; never have been quietly imposed upon any mean person, much less upon
Kings, Princes and the greatest potentates in the world, unless it had been
instituted and commanded by God. The supremacy likewise and sovereignty over
others, is if it be usurped, a tyrannical enchroachment, subject to so much
iealousy, strife, envy, hatred and contradiction; as I will No more could the
supremacy or any other article of moment.
not say the exercise, but the very motion of such authority, had been a
fan, to move trouble and sedition in all the world. The same I avouch of the
worship of images, of satisfaction for sins, of service in an unknown tongue,
of the adoration of the Sacrament, of the sacrifice of the Mass etc. what
garboyles would these things have bread, if they had been intruded upon all
nations, The sacrifice of the Mass could not be newly established without
trouble and perturbation.
by the invention of man? For to pursue this later, do you think it possible
for any Pope or Emperor, to introduce now the daily immolation of a Lamb,
after the Jewish manner: or the public adoration of a Bull or serpent, in all
his territories, and that none should be known, to murmr and repine? No
friend or foe, subject or stranger, should be so careful as to note the
author, and time, of such Judicial superstition, and heathenish Idolatry? No
more is it possible for man, to command the sacrifice of bread and wine, to be
offered unto our Lord; those elements to be adored as the ever living God, and
he not Epiphan. haer. 79.
to be known who should first ordeyne it.

15. Certain heretics called Collyridians, once offered a little Cake in
sacrifice to our Blessed Lady, honoring Cyprian. l. 2. ep. 3 quae est ad
Caecilium* Tom. 3. council. in council. quinisexto can. 232. folio 147. apud
Binium Aug l. de haer. Council. Bracha. cap. 1. habeturap. Binium tom. 2.
council. f. 1202.
her as a Goddess, and Epiphanius wondering at their madness, names the
Country to be Arabia, and the upper parts of Scithia; the town, Thrace; the
persons, chiefly women which began that Idolatry. The Aquarians offered only,
water in the chalice of our Lord, and S. Cypria^ inueigheth against them as
violating his tradition. The Armenians on the contrary side offered only wine,
and the Council held at ^^ullo in the name of the 6. Synod accuses them of
the like transgression. Other heretics called Artotyritae, sacrificed cheese
together with bread: Others offered milk instead of wine, and S. Austine
condemns the former, the ^. Council or Brachara, the later, as repugnant to
the Evangelical and Apostolical doctrine. But was there no Council general
or Provincial, not any Cyprian, nor Epiphanius, nor Augustine to reprehend the
sacrifice of bread and wine, in which the body and blood of Christ is truly
contained? Were the aforesaid superstitions controlled by them, who
notwithstanding allowed this as the institution of Christ? Our adversaries
themselves have used that diligence, as to observe the time, the place, the
vestements, the chalices, the addition of every rite, ceremony, word or
versicle, which in the manner of that sacrifice, for order and decency sake the
Church has ordained: yet when she first instituted the sacrifice it self they
cannot observe. Spark in the preface before his answer to Master John d'
Albins.
For example, Doctor Spark tells us, that the first allowance of sequences
in the Mass is attributed to Nicholas the first. In Alexander the seconds time
(says he) alleluia was first suspended out of the Church, in the time of Lent.
The Centurists ascend higher even to the ancient time of the Churches purity,
and they forbear not to report out of other historiographers, that Telesphorus
Pope in the second age after Christ, instituted three Masses to be said on
Christmasse night. Likewise that before the sacrifice the Angelical hymn
Gloria in Cent. 2. c. 6. col. 114. 115.
excelsis should be said. They relate a constitution of Pope Soter, in which he
decreed that, no man after he had taken any meat or drink though never so
little should say mass.

16. In the 3. age they refer to Pope Stephen, and quote his deeretall
epistle, how the peculiar and sacred attire Cent. 3. c. 6. col. 146. Nauclerus
gener. 8. Polid. l. 5. cap. 10.
which the Priests only used in the mysteries of the Eucharist should not be
toutched by any but consecrated persons. How he who was to sacrifice before he
ascended the Altar, made his confession. Which rite say they, Fasciculus
temporum, and Nauclerus ascribe to Pontianus. Yet some, as Palidor shows,
assign it to Damasus. Sixtus ordained that whilst the Priest before the
celebration (I use their words) did read the Cannon in silence, the tripled
Sanctus should be sunge among Naucler. gener. 9.
the people: witness Nanclerus and Polidore. In the 4. age. Too great (say they)
and superstitious was the insolency of the Roman Church, touching the
celebration of Mass, which the Roman Council Cent. 4. c. 7. col. 497.
under Siluester commanded to be celebrated, in no other then places
consecrated by the Bishop. And they affirm, that Platina writes in Siluesters
life, of golden and silver challices given by Constantine. Cent. 4. c. 6. col.
410. ibid.
That it is be read in Eusebius his decrees, how the sacrifice of the Altar was
to be celebrated, not in silk or hemp; but only in fine linen, consecrated
by the Bishop. In the fifth age or Century, they make mention out of Platina,
Sabellicus, Cas^^na and Sigebert, of the Antiphones, Introites, gradualls,
tractes, etc. of the psalm Iudica me Deus, to be said at the beginning of the
sacrifice. All which they ascribe to Celestine the first who Cent. 5. c. 6.
col. 725. 729 and 727. Sabellicus Tom. 8. l. 1. Sigebert in chronico.
lived about 426 years after Christ whom Vrspergensis according to them,
makes author of the hymn holy, holy, holy, to be sunge. They allege out of
Sigibert, Hirmanus Gigas, and Flores temporum, how at the end of Mass he that
saydit, was by the ordinance of Gelasius, to bless the people, and to say the
hymn, trium pueroum.

17. In the same age they write of Leo, how he decreed that in the action of
our Lords supper these words should be pronounced, Ibidem col. 729.
Hancigitur oblationem etc. Bergomensis, say they, and Platina mention it.
Sigebert delivers this clause also to have been added by him, and that in
the Canon of the Mass, Sanctum sacrificium Bergome^sis in Theo.
immaculatam hostiam: which Sabellicus also reports. Nauclerus likewise
avouches that by his ordinance, Orate sratres, is said in Mass and Deo
gratias in the end. Sigebert relates of him how he was wont Sabellicus Enead.
8. l. 1.
to say Massesouer the bodies or monuments of Martyrs when he would communicate
their relikes unto others. All these be the words of the Centuristes. Neither
do they only specify these ceremonies, belonging to our sacrifice, but they
find Naucler. l. 2. gene. 15. Ibidem col. 729.
fault with many of the ancients, for writing vnbeseemingly in their conceit
of the sacrifice it self: as with Ignatius the Apostles scholar, because he
said ambiguously and Cent. 5. c. 6. col. 730.
incommodiously (I repeat their words) it is not lawful without a Bishop
neither to offer nor immolate the sacrifice. Then Cyprian say they
superstitiously fayneth etc. the Priest to supply the room of Cent. 2. ca. 4.
col. 63.
Christ, and sacrifice to be offered to God the Father etc. which prase (to
offer sacrifice) Tertullian also uses speaking of the supper. And Martial,
the supper of our Lord that is a sacrifice is offered on the Altar Ignat. ep.
ad Smirn.
to God the Creator. After, There is a new phrase also in Nazianzen, he
defiles his hands with the oblation of the unbloody sacrifice. Ambrose uses
speeches of the supper, which before him none Cent. 3. c. 4. col. 83. Centur.
3. c. 4. col 83. Tertullian de cultu faem. Hartialis ep. ad. Burdeg. Cent. 4.
c. 4. col. 294. Nazian. in inuect. 1. in Julian. Cent. 4. c. 4. col. 295.
Ambros. l 5. ep. 33.
of the Fathers was wont to use, as to say Mass, to offer sacrifice. Hither to
the Protestants of Magdeburge. By the which we manifestly gather, first, that
our present Roman Church that now is, has no way declined from the purity of
the ancient Church, which flourished in the first five hundred years after
Christ, not in this divine worship and public sacrifice of the Mass. Secondly
that this our sacrifice was not inverted by man, but instituted by Christ, and
practiced by the Apostles: which I prove by three uncontrollable rules in the
Judgment of all prudent men. Aug. l. 4. de bap. ca. 24. Aug. l. de baept.
cont. Donat. ca. ^. Calvin l. 4. instit. c. 18.. 1.


18. The First is S. Augustines rule saying, That which the universal Church
does hold and was not instituted by Counsels, but has been still retained in
the Church, this we may most justly believe to have come from no other
anthority then the Apostles. By which he proves the b^ptising of infants, not
expressed in Scripture, to be an Apostolical tradition, writing thus: That
custom which men before us looking upward to antiquity, did not find to have
been ordained by them that came after the first ages, is rightly believed to
have been delivered by the Apostles. But the sacrifice of the Mass has been
offered in the universal Church: For Calvin going about to impugn it says, I
here match in fight with that opinion wherewith the Romish Antichrist, Cen. 6.
c. 6. col. 33. Vtintelligas inquiunt missarum nunc solemnia passim o^nia loca
co^pleuisse
and his prophets have infected the whole world, namely that the Mass is a
work whereby the sacrificing Priest etc. The Centurists his companions
acknowledge the like general practice above a thousand years ago, affirming
in the 6. age, Now the solemnityes of Mass to have every where filled all
places. Yet they looking into all historyes, ransacking all ancient monuments
from that time upward, cannot find by whom it was first instituted, or where
it began. Therefore it was derived from the Apostles as the institution of
Christ, otherwise these cunning Masons who discovered the placing of so many
little rafters, would have espied without doubt the laying of this great beam,
(in their eyes) of superstitious idolatry. And M. Mason himself who disauoweth
this sacrifice, and the only Priesthood ordained by Christ to offer it to his
Father, dismantleth his sectmates of the true spiritual power of ^^iesthood,
or jurisdiction of Bishops.

19. The second Rule is grounded upon experience ^f the difficulty which
arises, in bringing in of any new ^ustome change or innovation in a common
wealth. ^or as that can never be done in any temporal state, tou^hing temporal
affairs; without some strife, opposition, or dispute, so much less in the
Kingdom of the Church about matters of religion, concerning which her watchmen
Isay 62. v. 6.
and Pastors shall never be silent, but always resist (as M. M. Fulke
witnesses with us) all false opinions, even, with open reprehension. This
argument M. Bilson uses to prove Fulk in his answer to a counterfeit
Catholic page 11. and 62. Bilson in his survey of Christ's sufferings page 660.
Christ descending to Hades, to have been aunciently and openly professed in
the primitive Church; because Eusebius who expounded it so, had been otherwise
resisted and resuted by the Religious of those ages who lived with and after
him. So if our sacrifice of the Mass, Invocation of Saints, worship of Images,
Merit of works, vows of chastity, and the rest, often inculcated by the
ancient Fathers, of the first five hundred years; had varyed from the analogy
of Apostolical faith; some other guides and Doctors of the Church would have
checked and resisted (which never any did) those novelties in them. Was
Triphylius an eloquent and learned Bishop, sharply rebuked in a public
audience by the venerable and reverend Spiridion, only because he changed for
elegancy and finenes of speech, a word of the sacred writ, of no great
importance, to wit Grabatum into Lectulum: and could so many chaunges or
prophanations rather, as sectaryes conceive; not in words, Nicepho. l. 8. cap.
42.
but in sense, and substance, in Sacraments, sacrifice, orders, Priesthood,
worship of God, and chief articles of faith be generally made, in all
Countries, without ^hecke or controllement? It is credible? It is possible?

20. The third Rule is mentioned by Tertullian; That if these points of
doctrine, which Protestants condemn in the Roman Church, were the inventions
of men: they could never be so uniformly taught and constantly believed, among
such diversity of nations. For, Is it likely, says he, so many and so great
Churches could combine together all in the same error? Had Churches erred,
they would have differed Tertullia^ in prescrip. cap. 28.
in their errors. Wherefore what is one and the same amongst so many, was not
^eygned, but delivered. So the Pagans or heathenish Idolaters, agreed all in
acknowledging fealty, by outward sacrifice to some high and supreme excellency
Aug. ep 49. ad Deogra. q. 3.
which was God, as S. Augustine insinuates and proceeded from God, yet they
infinitely varied in the multiplicity of false Gods to whom, and diversity of
sacrifices which they offered: for those things sprung from their own fancies,
or self liking of others. But the Roman Church every The conformity of the
Roman faith, in all articles, al over the world, co^uinceth it to be the true
faith of Christ
where accords, not only in the external homage of sacrificing to some: but
in the three persons of Trinity, to whom alone our sacrifice is offered. In
the thing sacrificed, which is bread and wine mingled with water; both
consecrated into the body and blood of Christ. In the form of words, which
our Savior himself used in offering of it. In the circumstance of time, and
place, in which he instituted it. In all necessary conditions, properties, or
other dispositions required in him that sacrifices: Which constant uniformity,
must needs flow from the soueraygne spring, and author of unity. That which I
avouch of our sacrifice is verified of Purgatory, prayer for the dead,
invocation of Saints, merit of works, and the rest which Protestants condemn
of nouelty, and superstition. For neither can these be drawn to any other
head, or of spring then Christ, and his Apostles; nor could they be so
conformably taught by all sorts of people, had they crept into the Church by
the errors of men. Therefore by all these rules it is manifest that the Roman
Church, never altered her faith, or vented any new opinion, not generally
approved before. Which rules M. Field also Field in his 4- book of the Church
chap. 18 fo. 224.
receaueth as infallible, saying: Whatsoever the most famous have constantly
and uniformly delivered as a matter of faith, no man contradicting, though
many other Ecclesiastical writers be silent, and say nothing of it: Like wise,
that which the most famous in every age constantly delivered as matters of
faith, and as received of them, that went before them, in such sort that the
contradictours and gaynsayers were in their beginning, noted for singularity,
nouelty, and di^^on, and afterward in process of time (if they persisted in
such con^radiction) All Protestants co^uicted of innouatio^ by Fields
testimony. Aug. tom. 7. l. 1. co^t. Iulia. pela. cap. 2. Aug. in psalm. co^tra
partem Donati. Cypria^ ep. 55. Iero. Apo. aduer. Ruff. l. 3. c. 4 Cito Romana^
fide^ non posse mutari. Bern. in c. 1^0. ad Innocen. Arbitror ibi potissimu^
resarciri da^na fidei vbi no^possit fides sentire defectum. Bilson in 2. part
of the true differ. etc. page 386. print. in 8.
charged with heresy. These things we admit (says ^e) as coming from those
first authors and founders of our Chri^^ian profession. See what a verdict M.
Field has given in, ^o acquit our sacrifice and other articles from
superstiti^n, which have been by the most famous in all ages uniformly
believed, and to find his own sectmates guilty of innovation, who for
gaynsaying of them, were in their beginning, noted for singularity, nouelty and
division (as Aerius, Vigilantius, and other their forerunners at sundry times
have been for the like contradiction) and afterward for their wilful
perseverance, arraygned and condemned of heresy by the whole Senate of
Christendo^ in the Council of Trent.

21. Finally many ancient Fathers and renowned writers testify not only that
the Roman sea bath not, but that it cannot change, or alter her belief: by
reason of Gods special assistance always guarding and protecting it, and her
supreme Pastor. So S. Augustine writes of Innocentius the Pope, What could
that holy man answer to the African Counsels, but that which aunciently the
Apostolical sea, and the Roman Church held with other Churches. And in another
place, he calls Peter's seat, That Rock which the proud gates of hell
^^^quith not. S. Cyprian says, To the chair of Peter and the prin^ipall
Church etc. infidelity or false faith cannot have access. S. Jerome, Know you
that the Roman Faith, commended by the Apostles ^oyce, receaueth no such
delusions; and that being armed with Paul's ^uthority it cannot be changed
etc. S. Bernard writing to the Pope says, All dangers and scandalls of the
Kingdom of God, es^^cially those which belong to Faith, ought to be reserred
to your A^ostleship For I think it meeete, that the decays of faith be there
re^ayred, where Faith cannot suffer any detriment. For to what other ^ea was it
ever said, I have prayed for thee Peter that thy Faith do ^^^ fail. M. Bilson
obiecteth to himself by Philander his adversary, these three last authorityes,
and although he dippeth of the chiefest part of S. Bernards sentente,
disgraceth him with the scoff of poor Bernard, and requires some grauer and
eider Father: Yet he grants, that S. Bernard applies this privilege (of not
erring) to the Church of Rome. But S. Cyprians saying he pitifully writheth up
and down, forcing it rather to be understood of the people of Rome, then of
the Pastors, of whom S. Cyprian directly speaks, writing to Cornelius the
Pope, of Felicissimus Cypria. ep. 55.
and other seditious persons, sent by Fortunatus the false Bishop, out of
Africa unto him. His words are. After all this they dare sail, and carry
letters from schismatikes and profane persons, to the Chair of Peter, and the
principal Church, where Priestly unity had her beginning, and do not remember
those to be Ad quos perfidia non potest habere accessum.
Romans whose says was praised by the Apostles mouth, to whom infidelity or
false belief cannot have access. Therefore to them, infidelity could not
come, in S. Cyprians judgment, to whom Fortunatus sent his legates: to them,
that presided in Peter's chair, to them, that were governors of that
principal Church. And who were these, but the supreme Bishops Bilson ibid.
page 388.
of the Roman sea?

22. M. Bilson was not so dull, but he perceived the weakness of this first
cuasion, which makes him seek another way, to gloze both S. Cyprians and S.
Ierome^ De regulis iuris, 68 in Glossa.
words, by turning non posse cannot, to may not by right, or lawfully: because
the law says id dicimur posse quod de iure possumus, we can do that which by
right we can. As though infidelity could come by right to any other Church, or
the Ephesin, the Constantinopolitan, or other faith might be lawfully changed,
which must needs follow of that construction, or else, that neither S. Jerome
gives any prerogative to the Roman Faith (which by Saint Paul's warrant, they
extol so much) above the faith of every town, and village, man, or woman,
pezant, or Artisan, that ever believed. For unfaithfulness cannot by right have
access to any, nor can their faith be possibly changed without incurring
infidelity: which is all the praise that S. Jerome, according to M. Bilson in
the same place page 394.
Bilsons fond interpretation, allows the Roman faith: and yet indeed it is no
singular praise, but a childish collection not sauouring of S. Ieromes Wisdom,
not fitting his purpose in that, or suitable to his writing in other places. For
it is no singular praise to appropriate that, Ieron. tom. 2. Ep. 57. Dama.
Cathedra^ Patri and fidem Apostolico ore laudatam censiuico^sulenda^.
to the faith of the Roman Church, which is common to the faith of all Churches
whatsoever. It is no better a collection, that Faith cannot be changed without
incurring infidelity, then that temperance cannot be lost, without falling to
intemperance; or a virtuous man become vicious, without some vice: which is too
childish an inference for the gravity of S. Jerome. And how does it sort with
his discourse in that place? the Roman faith admits no such delusions,
because faith cannot be changed without incurring infidelity. O ridiculous
glozes, making the text ridiculous, Tom 1. ep. 26. adprin^ipium c. 1. Quasi ad
tutissimu^ communionis suae portum Romam confugerant.
which they pervert: and corrupting the Authors mind in many other places, in
which he counsayleth us in doubtful cases to repair to the Chair of Peter,
and faith praised with the Apostles mouth, Calls that sea, a most safe haven
of communion, Refers his writings to be corrected by it. Desires to be
resolved by her authority, in matters of faith, in omitting or using the name
of three Hypostases, Says, Let the chair of Peter the Apostle confirm with
her preaching, the preaching of the chair of Mark the Evangelist; concludes
at length that, whosoever gathers not with Damasus (Bishop the Roman Sea)
scatters, that is, he belongs In explica. Symbo. ad ama. Tom. 2. ep. 57. ad
Dama. Ep. 78. ad Pamma^h. and Marc. Ep. 57. ad Damas. Cypria^ Ep. 55.
not to Christ, but to Antichrist. And S. Cyprian avouches that heresies and
schisms sprange from no other root, then that the Priest of God is not
obeyed, nor one Priest in the Church, nor one Judge for the time, in liew of
Christ is had in mind. Therefore the Roman Bishop, whom he accounts that one
Priest, cannot be the author of Schism nor broacher of heresy. He and his
Sea, with the Church which obeys him, is defended by God, warded by the holy
Ghost, fenced, by the prayer of Christ, made for S. Peter, and his successors:
That it never was, nor ever can, be circumuented with error, or be witched
with the charms of pernicious falsehood.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS OR PRINCIPAL HEADS contained in this Book.
THE Epistle to the Reader. page 1. CHAP. 1. Wherein is examined, what the
Church is, and who are of it. page.13. Chap. 2. Wherein is discussed, whether
the Church be one, or many: one visible which we ought to obey, another
invisible, which we ought to believe: against D. Whitaker, and Doctor Fulke.
page 20. Chap. 3. In which is declared, that the true visible Church is
apparently known and famous to the world, against D. Whitaker, D. Fulke, and
D. Spark. page 27. Chap. 4. In which it is argued, that the true visible and
apparently known Church can never fail. page 35. Chap. 5. VVherin is
mayntayned, that the true Church cannot err: against D. Reynoldes, D. Fulke,
and Doctor Whitaker. page 45. Chap. 6. Wherein is demonstrated that the
Church is the supreme Judge of controversies: against D. Whitaker, D. Fulke,
and all Protestants. page 58. Chap. 7. VVherin is manifested the conformable
practice of the Church; other authorityes alleged; and the imagined circle
objected against us avoided. page 65. Chap. 8. Wherein is discovered, that out
of the true Church there can be no hope of salvation, in any Congregation or
Sect whatsoever. page 71. Chap. 9. In which is proved, that no Sectary can be
saved by believing the chief heads of Religion. page 76. Chap. 10. Wherein
is disproued the false Marks which Protestants allege to find out the
Church: Against D. Whitaker, and M. White. page.90. Chap. 11. Wherein is
showed, That our Sectaryes had not any Preachers of the Word, nor
administration of Sacraments, nor any Church at all before Luther began:
Against D. Fulke, and D. Spark. page 99. Chap. 12. VVherin is disproued the
Claim which our Reformers make to certain pretended Protestants, and to men
of our Church: Against D. Fulke, and D. Spark. page 106. Chap. 13 Wherein is
overthrown the like Claim which Protestants make to the Professors of the
Roman Church: against D. Field, and M. White. page 112. Chap. 14. In which
Unity is explayned, and strongly proved to be a mark of the true Church:
Against D. Whitaker, and Doctor Field. page 122. Chap. 15. In which sundry
variances are reckoned up, wherein Protestants dissent amongst themselves in
essential points of Religion. page 129. Chap. 16. VVherin is declared how
Sanctity or Holiness is a note of the true Church: Against D. Whitaker, and D.
Field. page 137. Chap. 17. In which Sanctity or Holiness is another way
explayned, to be a badge of the true Church. page 146. Chap. 18. In which, the
Name of Catholic, is proved to be a mark of the ^rue Church: Against D.
Whitaker D. Fulke, and D. Field. page 155. Chap. 19. In which the thing
signified by the Name Catholic, to wit, Universality, is showed to be a mark
of the true Church: Against D. Whitaker and D. Abbor. page 164. Chap. 20. In
which Apostolical succession is declared to be an appaparent note of the true
Church: Against M. Francis Mason. page 177. Chap. 21. In which the Beginning,
Propagation, and Continuance of the true Faith is proved to be a Note of the
true Church, and only to appertain to the Roman Church, which never altered
the Faith it first received from the Apostles. page 205.


Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page Line Fault Correction Page 4. 25. heriocall heroical 6. 34. good God 7.
14. hild hid Ibid. 24. some son 11. vlt. holiness holy ones 14. 31.
Nouitians Nouatians 15. 27. preseuer persevere 19. vlt. she sheep 23. 13.
would could 24. 38. blind build 25. 17. paradoxes paradoxe 27. 18 co^municateth
communicated 28. 1. some sometimes 29. 6. thorn throne 33. 16. breathed since
he etc. breathed since, he defends it now etc. Ibid. 26. dispute disputant
37. 22. visible flock a visible flock.

In the margent page 8. praesentiam, lege potentiam.

If any other faults have escaped, it is desired of the learned Reader, to
correct them of his courtesy, the Author being far absent from the print, and
so forced to commit the same to strangers.

FINIS.

