THE TRAGEDY OF GORBODVC, whereof three Acts were written by Thomas Nortone,
and the two last by Thomas Sackuyle. Set forth as the same was showed before
the QVENES most excellent Majesty, in her highness Court of White Hall,
the.xviij. day of January, Anno Domini. 1561. By the Gentlemen of Thynner
Temple in London.



IMPRYNTED AT LONDON in Fletestrete, at the Sign of the Faucon by William
Griffith: And are to be sold at his Shop in Saint Dunstones Churchyard in
the West of London. Anno. 1565. September. 22.

Thargument of the Tragedy.
GORBODVC, king of Britain, divided his Realm in his life time to his
Sons, Ferrex and Porrex. The Sons fell to dyuision and discention. The
younger killed the elder. The Mother that more dearly loved thelder, for
revenge killed the younger. The people moved with the Cruelty of the fact,
rose in Rebellion and slew both father and mother. The Nobility assembled and
most terribly destroyed the Rebels. And afterward for want of Issue of the
Prince whereby the Succession of the Crown became uncertain. They fell to
Civil war in which both they and many of their Issues were slain, and the
Land for a long time almost desolate and myserablye wasted.

W G



The names of the Speakers.
Gorboduc, king of great Brittayne. Videna, Queen and wife to king Gorboduc.
Ferrex, Elder Son to king Gorboduc. Porrex, Younger Son to king Gorboduc.
Clotyn, Duke of Cornwall. Fergus, Duke of Albanye. Mandud, Duke of Leagre.
Gwenard, Duke of Cumperlande. Eubulus, Secretary to the king Gorboduc.
Arostus, A Counselor of king Gorboduc. Dordan, A Counselor assigned by the
king to his Eldest Son Fcrrex. Philander, A Counselor assigned by the
king to his younger Son Porrex. (Both being of the old (kings Counsel
before. Hermon, A Parasyte remaynyng with Ferrex. Tyndar, A Parasyte remaynyng
with Porrex. Nuntius, A Messenger of thelder Brothers death Nuntius, A Messenger
of Duke Fergus rysynge in Arms. Marcella, A Lady of the Queens privy
Chamber. Chorus, Four ancient and Sage men of Brittayne.
The Order of the do^me show before the first Act, and the Signification
thereof.
First the Music of Violenze began to play, during which came in upon
the Stage six wild men clothed in leaves. Of whom the first bare in his neck
a Faggot of small sticks, which they all both severally and together assaied
with all their strengthes to break, but it could not be broken by them. At the
length one of them plucked out one of the sticks and brake it: And the rest
pluckinge out all the other sticks one after an other did easelie break, the
same being severed: which being conjoined they had before attempted in vain.
After they had this done, they departed the Stage, and the Music ceased
Hereby was signified, that a state knit in unity does continue strong against
all force. But being divided, is easily destroyed. As befell upon Duke
Gorboduc deuidinge his Land to his two sons which he before held in
Monarchy. And upon the discention of the Brethrene to whom it was divided.

Of Gorboduc. Actus primus. Scena prima.
Viden. Ferrex. Viden. THE silent night that bringes the
quiet pawse,
From painful travails of the
weary Day:
Prolonges my careful thoughts
and makes me blame
The slow Aurore that so for love or shame
Does long delay to show her blusshing face,
And now the Day renewes my griefull plainte.

Ferrex. My gracious Lady and mother dear,
Pardon my grief, for your so grieved mind
To ask what cause tormenteth so your heart.

Viden. So great a wrong and so unjust despite,
Without all cause against all course of kind.

Ferrex. Such causeles wrong and so unjust despite,
May have redress, or at the least revenge.

Viden. Neither my Son, such is the froward will,
The person such, such my mishap and thine.

Fer^ex. Mine know I none, but grief for your distress:

Viden. Yes: mine for thine my son: A father? no:
In kind a Father, but not in kyndlynes.

Ferrex. My Father: why? I know nothing at all,
Wherein I have misdone unto his Grace.

Viden. Therefore, the more unkind to thee and me.
For knowing well (my son) the tender love*
That I have ever borne and bear to thee,
He grieved thereat, is not content alone,
To spoil thee of my sight my chiefest Joy,
But thee, of the birth, right and Heritage
Causeles, unkindly and in wrongful wise,
Against all Law and right he will bereave,
Half of his kingdom he will give away.

Ferrex. To whom?

Viden. Even to Porrex his younger son
Whose growinge Pride I do so sore suspecte,
That being raised to equal Rule with thee,
Me thinks I see his envious heart to swell
Fyllde with Disdain and with ambicious Pride
The end the Gods do know, whose Aulters I
Full often have made in vain of Cattle slain,
To send the sacred smoke to Heavens Throne,
For thee my son if things so succeed,
As now my Ielious mind misdemeth sore.

Ferrex. Madame leave care and careful plaint for me.
Just has my Father ben to every wight,
His first injustice he will not extend
To me I trust, that give no cause thereof.
My brothers pride shall hurt him self, not me.

Viden. So grant the Gods: But yet thy father so
Has firmly fixed his unmoved mind
That plaints and prayers can no whit avail,
For those have I assaied, but even this day,
He will endeavor to procure assent
Of all his Counsel to his fond devise.

Ferrex. Their Ancestors from race to race have borne
True faith to my forefathers and their seed,
I trust they eke will bear the like to me.

Viden. There rests all, but if they fail thereof,
And if the end bring forth an evil success
On them and theirs the mischief shall befall,
And so I pray the Gods requite it them,
And so they will, for so is wont to be
When Lords and trusted Rulers under kings
To please the present fancy of the Prince,
With wrong transpose the course of governance
Murders, mischief, or ciuyll sword at length,
Or mutual treason, or a just revenge,
When right succedinge Line returns again
By Jove's just Judgment and deserved wrath
Bringes them to civil and reprochefull death,
And roots their names and kindredes from the earth.

Ferrex. Mother content you, you shall see the end.

Viden. The end? thie end I fear, Jove end me first.

Actus primus. Scena secunda.
Gorboduc. Arostus. Philander. Eubulus. Gorboduc. MY Lords whose grave advise
and faithful aid
Have long vpheld my Honor and my Realm
And brought me from this age from tender years.
Guidynge so great estate with great renown:
Now more imports me the erst to use
Your faith and wisdom whereby yet I reign,
That when by death my liefe and rule shall cease,
The kingdom yet may with unbroken course,
Have certain Prince, by whose undoubted right,
Your wealth and peace, may stand in quiet stay,
And eke that they whom Nature has preparde,
In time to take my place in Princely Seat,
While in their Fathers time their pliant youth
Yeldes to the frame of skillful governance
May so be taught and trained in noble Arts,
As what their fathers which have reigned before
Have with great fame derived down to them
With honor they may leave unto their seed:
And not be taught for their unworthy life,
And for their Laweles swaruynge out of kind,
Worthy to lose what Law and kind them gave
But that they may preserve the common peace,
The cause that first began and still mainteines
The Lyneall course of kings inheritance,
For me, for mine, for you, and for the state
Whereof both I and you have charge and care.
Thus do I mean to use your wonted faith
To me and mine, and to your natyue Land,
My Lords be plain without all wrie respect
Or poisonous craft to speak in pleasyng wise,
Lest as the blame of ill succedynge things
Shall light on you, so light the harms also.

Arostus. Your good acceptaunce so (most noble king)
Of such your faithfulness as heretofore
We have employed in duties to your Grace,
And to this Realm whose worthy head you are,
Well proves that neither you mistruste at all,
Nor we shall need no boasting wise to show,
Our truth to you, nor yet our wakefull care
For you, for yours, and for our native Land,
Wherefore (O king) I speak for one as all,
Sith all as one do bear you egall faith:
Doubt not to use their Counselles and their aides
Whose honors, goods and lives are whole auowed
To serve, to aid, and to defend your Grace.

Gorboduc. My Lords I thank you all. This is the case
Ye know, the Gods, who have the sovereign care
For kings, for kingdoms, and for common weals,
Gave me two sons in my more lusty Age,
Who now in my deceyuynge years are grown
Well toward ryper state of mind and strength,
To take in hand some greater Princely charge,
As yet they live and spend their hopeful days,
With me and with their Mother here in Courts
Their age now asks other place and trade,
And mine also does ask an other change,
Theirs to more travail, mine to greater ease:
When fatal death shall end my mortal life,
My purpose is to leave unto them twain
The Realm divided into two sandrie parts:
The one Ferrex mine elder son shall have,
The other shall the other Porrex rule
That both my purpose may more framelie stand,
And eke that they may better rule their charge,
I mean forthwith to place them in the same:
That in my life they may both learn to rule,
And I may Joy to see their rulynge well.
This is in so^me, what I would have ye wey:
First whether ye allow my whole devise,
And think it good for me, for them, for you,
And for our Country, mother of us all:
And if ye like it and allow it well,
Than for their guydinge and their governance,
Show sorthe such means of circumstaunce,
As ye think meet to be both known and kept:
Lot, this is all, now tell me your advise.

Arostus. And this is much, and asks great advise,
But for my part my Sovereign Lord and king
This do I think your Majesty does know,
How under you in Justice and in peace,
Great wealth and Honor, long we have enjoyed
So as we can not seem with gredie minds
To wisshe for change of Prince or governance,
But if ye like your purpose and devise,
Our liking must be deemed to proceed,
Of rightful reason, and of heedefull care,
Not for our selves, but for our common state:
Sith our own state does need no better change
I think in all as erst your Grace has said:
First when you shall unload your aged mind,
Of heuye care and troubles manyfolde,
And lay the same upon my Lords your sons
Whose growing years may bear the burden long
And long I pray the Gods to grant it so:
And in your life while you shall so behold
Their rule, their virtues and their noble deeds,
Such as their kind behighteth to us all,
Great be the profits that shall grow thereof,
Your age in quiet shall the longer last,
Your lasting age shall be their longer stay,
For cares of kings, that rule as you have ruled
For public wealth and not for private joy,
Do wast man's life and hasten crooked age,
With furrowed face and with enfeebled lymmes,
To draw on creepynge Death a swifter pace.
They two yet young shall bear the party reign
With greater ease, than one now old alone
Can welde the whole, for whom much harder is
with lessened strength the double weight to bear
Your eye, your Counsel, and the grave regard
Of Fathers, yea of such a fathers name,
Now at beginning of their sondred reign,
When it is hazard of their whole success,
Shall bridle so their force of youthful heates,
And so restreine the rage of insolence,
Which most assailes the young and noble minds,
And so shall guide and train in tempred stay
Their yet green bending wits with reverent awe
And now inured with virtues at the first.
Custom (O king) shall bring delightfulnes
By use of Virtue, Vice shall grow in hate,
But if you so dispose it, that the day,
Which ends your life, shall first begin their reign
Great is the peril, what will be the end,
When such beginning of such liberties
Void of such states as in your liefe do lie,
Shall leave them to free randon of their will
An open pray to traitorous flattery,
The greatest pestilence of noble youth:
Which peril shall be past, if in your life,
Their tempred youth with aged fathers awe
Be brought in ure of skillful staidnes
And in your life, their lives disposed so,
Shall length your noble liefe in ioyfulnes.
Thus think I yt your grace has wisely thought
And that your tender care of common weal,
Has bred this thought, so to divide your Land
And plant your sons to bear the present rule
While you yet live to see their rulynge well,
That you may longer live by joy therein.
What further means behouefull are and meet
At great leisure may your Grace devise,
When all have said, and when we be agreed
If this be best to part the Realm in twain,
And place your sons in present government
Whereof as I have plamely said my mind,
So would I here the rest of all my Lords.

Philander. In part I think as have been said before,
In part again my mind is otherwise
As for dividing of this Realm in twain
And lotting out the same in egall parts,
To either of my Lords your Graces sons,
That think I best for this your Realms behosf,
For profit and advancement of your sons,
And for your comfort and your honor eke:
But so to place them while your life do last,
To yield to them your Royal governance,
To be above them only in the name
Of father, not in kingly state also,
I think not good for you, for them, nor us,
This kingdom since the bloody civil field
Where Morgan slain did yield his conquered part
Unto his Cosyns sword in Camberlande
Contains all that whilome did suffice,
Three noble sons of your forefather Brute,
So your two sons, it may also suffice,
The more the stronger, if they gree in one:
The smaller compass that the Realm does hold
The easier is the swey thereof to welde,
The nearer Justice to the wronged poor,
The smaller charge, and yet enough for one.
And when the Region is divided so
That Brethrene be the Lords of either part,
Such strength does nature knit between the both.
In sondrie bodies by conjoined love
That not as two, but one of doubled force,
Each is to other as a sure defense,
The Noblenes and glory of the one
Does sharp the courage of the others mind
With virtuous envy to contend for praise,
And such an egalnes has nature made,
Between the Brethren of one Fathers seed,
As an unkindly wrong it seems to be,
To throw the other Subject under feet
Of him, whose Peer he is by course of kind,
And nature that did make this egalnes,
Often so repineth at so great a wrong,
That often she rayseth up a grudgynge grief,
In younger Brethren at the elders state:
Whereby both towns and kingdoms have be rased
And famous stocks of Royal blood distroied:
The Brother that should be the Brothers aid
And have a wakefull care for his defense,
Gapes for his death, and blames the lyngering years
That brings not forth his end with faster course
And often impacient of so long delays,
With hateful slaughter he presents the fates
And keeps a just reward for Brothers blood,
With endless vengeance on his stock for aye:
Such mischiefs here are wisely met withal:
If egall state may nourishe egall love,
Where none has cause to grudge at others good,
But now the head to stoop beneth them both,
Ne kind, ne reason, ne good order bears,
And often it has been seen, that where Nature
Has been preuerted in disordered wise,
When Fathers cease to know that they should rule
And Children cease to know they should obey,
And often our unkindly tendrenes,
As Mother of unkindly Stubbornes:
I speak not this in envy or reproach,
As if I grudged the glory of your sons,
Whose honor I beseech the Gods to increase:
Nor yet as if I thought there did remain,
So filthy Cankers in their noble breasts,
Whom I esteem (which is their greatest praise,
Undoubted children of so good a king.
Only I mean to show my certain Rules,
Which kind has graft within the mind of man
That Nature has her order and her course,
Which (being broken) does corrupt the state
Of minds and things even in the best of all
My Lords your sons may learn to rule of you
Your own example in your noble Court
Is fittest Guyder of their youthful years,
If you desire to seek some present Joy
By sight of their well rulynge in your life,
See them obey, so shall you see them rule,
Who so obeys not with humblenes
Will rule without rage and with insolence
Long may they rule I do beseech the Gods,
But long may they learn ere they begin to rule
If kind and fates would suffer I would wisshe
Them aged Princes and immortal kings:
Wherefore most noble king I well assent,
Between your sons y^ you divide your Realm.
And as in kind, so match them in degree
But while the Gods prolong your Royal life
Prolong your reign, for thereto live you here,
And therefore have the Gods so long forborne
To join you to them selves, that still you might
Be Prince and father of our common weal:
They when they se your children ripe to rule
Will make them room, and will remove you hence,
That yours in right ensuynge of your life
May rightly honor your mortal name.

Eubulus. Your wonted true regard of faithful hearts,
Makes me (O king) the bolder to presume
To speak what I conceive within my breast,
Although the same do not agree at all
With that which other here my Lords have said
Nor which your self have seemed best to like,
Pardon I crave and that my words be deemde
To flow from hearty zeal unto your Grace,
And to the safety of your common weal:
To part your Realm unto my Lords your sons
I think not good for you, ne yet for them,
But worste of all, for this our Native Land:
For with one Land, one single rule is best:
Divided Reigns do make divided hearts.
But Peace preserues the Country and the Prince.
Such is in man the gredie mind to reign,
So great is his desire to climb alofte,
In worldly Stage the stateliest parts to bear,
That faith and Justice and all kindly love,
Do yield unto desire of Sovereignty:
Where egall state does raise an egall hope
To win the thing that either would attain
Your grace remembers how in passed years
The mighty Brute, first Prince of all this Land
Possessed the same and ruled it well in one,
He thinking that the compass did suffice
For his three sons, three kingdoms eke to make
Cut it in three, as you would now in twain:
But how much Brutish blod has sithence be^ spilt
To join again the sondred unity?
What Princes slain before their timely honor?
What wast of towns and people in the Land?
What Treasons heaped on murders and on spoils?
Whose just revenge even yet is scarcely ceased,
Ruthefull remembrance is yet had in mind:
The Gods forbid the like to chance again
And you (O king) give not the cause thereof:
My Lord Ferrex your elder son, perhaps
Whom kind and custom geues a rightful hope
To be your Heir and to succeed your Reign,
Shall think that he does suffer greater wrong
Than he perchance will bear, if power serve
Porrex the younger so vnpaised in state,
Perhaps in courage will be raised also,
If Flattery then which sails not to assail*
The tender minds of yet unskillful Youth,
In one shall kindle and increase disdain:
And Envy in the others heart inflame,
This fire shall waste their love, their lives, their land,
And rutheful ruin shall destroy them both,
A wisshe not this (O king) so to befall
But fear the thing, that I do most abhor
Give no beginning to so dreadful end,
Keep them in order and obedience:
And let them both by now obeyinge you,
Learn such behavior as beseemes their state.
The Older, myldenes in his governance,
The younger, a yeldyng contentednes:
And keep them near unto your presence still,
That they restreined by the awe of you,
May live in compass of well tempred stay,
And pass the perilles of their youthful years,
Your aged life draws on to febler time,
Wherein you shall less able be to bear
The travails that in youth you have sustained
Both in your persons and your Realms defense
If planting now your sons in further parts,
You send them further from your present reach
Less shall you know how they the^ selves demand
Traitorous corrupters of their pliant youth,
Shall have unspied a much more free access,
And of ambition and inflamed disdain
Shall arm the one, the other, or them both
To ryuill war, or to vsurpinge pride.
Late shall you rue, that you ne recked before:
Good is I grant of all to hope the best,
But not to live still dreadles of the worst,
So trust the one, that the other be forsene,
Arm not unskillfulness with princely power
But you that long have wisely ruled the reigns
Of royalty within your noble Realm
So hold them, while the Gods for our auayles
Shall stretche the threde of your prolonged dales
To soon he cla^me, into the flaming Carte
Whose want of skyll did set the earth on fire,
Time and example of your noble Grace,
Shall teach your sons both to obey and rule*
When time has taught the^, time shall make the^ pace
The place that now is full: and so I pray
Long it remain, to comfort of us all.

Gorboduc. I take your faithful hearts in thankful part
But sith I see no cause to draw my mind,
To fear the nature of my loving sons,
Or to misdeme that Envy or disdain,
Can there work hate, where nature planteth love
In one self purpose do I still abide,
My love extends egally to both,
My Land suffiseth for them both also:
Humber shall part the Marches of their Realms:
The Sotherne part the elder shall possess,
The Northern shall Porrex the younger rule,
In quiet I will pass mine aged days,
Free from the travail and the painful cares
That hasten age upon the worthiest kings.
But lest the fraud that ye do seem to fear
Of flatteryng tongues, corrupt their tender youth
And wrieth them to the ways of youthful lust,
To climyng pride, or to reuengyng hate
Or to neglecting of their careful charge
Lewdely to live in wanton recklenesse,
Or to oppressinge of the rightful cause
Or not to wreke the wrongs done to the poor
To tread down truth, or favor false deceit
I mean to join to either of my sons
Some one of those whose long approved faith
And wisdom tried may well assure my heart:
That mynyng fraud shall find no way to crepee
Into their fensed ears with grave advise:
This is the end, and so I pray you all
To bear my sons the love and loyalty
That I have found within your faithful breasts.

Arostus. You, nor your sons, our sovereign Lord shall want
Our faith and service while our lives do last.

Chorus. When settled stay does hold the royal throne,
In steadfast place by known and doubtless right:
And chiefly when descent on one alone
Make single and vnparted reign to light.
Each change of course vnioynts the whole estate
And yeldes it thrall to r^yne by debate.
The strength that knit by last accord in one
Against all foreign power of mighty foes,
Could of it self defend it self alone,
Disioyned once, the former force does lose
The sticks, that sondred brake so soon in twain
In faggot bound attempted were in vain.
Often tender mind that leads the perciall eye
Of erringe parents in their childrens love,
Destroies the wrongful loved child thereby:
This does the proud son of Appollo prove,
Who rasshely set in Chariot of his sire:
Inflamed the perched earth with heavens fire.
And this great king, that does divide his land,
And changed the course of his discending crown
And yeldes the reign into his childrens hand
From blisfull state of joy and great renown,
A Myrrour shall become to Princes all
To learn to shun the cause of such a fall.

The order and signification of the do^me show before the second Act.
First the Music of Cornettes began to play, during which came in upon the
Stage a king accompanied with a nombre of his Nobylytie and Gentlemen. And
after he had placed him self in a Chair of estate prepared for him: there
came and kneled before him a grave and aged Gentilman and offered up a Cup
unto him of Wine in a glass, which the king refused. After him co^mes, a
brave and lusty young Gentleman and presents the king with a Cup of Gold
filled with poison, which the king accepted, and drinkinge the same, immediately
fell down dead upon ye stage, and so was carried thence away by his Lords and
Gentlemen, and then the Music ceased. Hereby was signified, that as Glass by
nature holds no payson, but is clear and may easily be seen through, ne
boweth by any Art: So a faithful Counselor holds no treason, but is
plain and open, ne yeldeth to any indiscreet affection, but gives wholesome
Counsel, which the ill advised Prince refuses. The delightful gold filled
with poison betokens Flattery, which under fair seeming of pleasant words
bears deadly poison, which destroieth the Prince yt receives it. As befell
in the two brethrene Ferrex and Porrex who refusing the wholesome advise of grave
Counselors, credited these young Paracites, and brought to them selves death
and destruction thereby.

Actus secundus. Scena prima.
Ferrex. Hermon. Dordan. Ferrex. I Marvel much what reason lead the king
My father thus without all my desarte
To reave me half y^ kingdom which by course
Of law and nature should remain to me.

Hermon. If you with stubborn and untamed pride
Had stood against him in rebellious wise,
Or if with grudging mind you had envied
So slow a slidynge of his aged years,
Or sought before your time to haste the course
Of fatal death upon his Royal head,
Or stained your Stock with murder of your kyn:
Some face of reason might perhaps have seemed
To yield some likely cause to spoil ye thus.

Ferrex. The wrekefull Gods power on my cursed head,
Eternal plagues and never dyinge woes,
The Hellish Prince, adiudge my dampened ghost
To Tantalus thirste, or proud Ixims wheel
Or cruel Gripe to gnawe my growing heart
To during torments and unquenched flames
If ever I conceived so foul a thought,
To wisshe his end of life, or yet of reign.

Dordan. Ne yet your father (O most noble Prince)
Did ever think so foul a thing of you
For he with more than fathers tender love
While yet the fates do lend him life to rule,
(Who long might live to so your rulynge well)
To you my Lord, and to his other son
Lo he resignes his Realm and Royalty
Which never would so wise a Prince have done
If he had ones misdemed that in your heart
There ever lodged so unkind a thought.
But tender love (my Lord) and settled trust
Of your good nature, and your nable mind
Made him to place you thus in Royal throne
And now to give you half his realm to guide
Yea and that half within abounding store
Of things that serve to make a welthie Realm
In stately Cities and in fruitful soil,
In temperate breathing of the milder heaven,
In things of needful use, which friendly Sea
Transportes by traffike from the foreign Ports,
In flowing wealth, in honor and in force,
Does pass the double value of the part
That Porrex has alloted to his reign,
Such is your ease, such is your fathers love.

Ferrex. Ah love, my friends, love wrongs not whom he loves.

Dordan. Ne yet he wrongeth you that gives you
So large a reign ere that the course of time
Bring you to kingdom by descended right,
Which time perhaps might end your time before.

Ferrex. Is this no wrong, say you, to reaue from me
My native right to half so great a realm,
And thus to match his younger son with me
In egall power, and in as great degree:
Yea and what son? ye son whose swellyng pride
Would never yield one poinct of reverence,
When I the Elder and apparaunt heir
Stood in the likelyhode to possess the whole
Yea and that son which from his childishe age
Enuieth mine honor, and does hate my life,
What will he now do? when his pride, his rage,
The mindful malice of his grudging heart
Is armed with force, with wealth and kingly state

Hermon. Was this not wrong? yea ill advised wrong
To give so mad a man so sharp a sword,
To so great peril of so great mishappe,
Wide open thus to set so large a way.

Dordan. Alas my Lord, what griefull thing is this?
That of your brother you can think so ill
I never saw him utter likely sign
Whereby a man might see or once misdeme
Such hate of you, ne such vnyeldinge pride
Ill is their counsel, shameful be their end,
That raising such mistrustfull fear in you,
Sowing the seed of such unkindly hate,
Travail by reason to destroy you both:)
Wise is your brother and of noble hope,
Worthy to welde a large and mighty Realm
So much a stronger friend have you thereby,
Whose strength is your strength, if you gree in one.

Hermon. If nature and the Gods had pinched so
Their flowing bounty and their noble gifts
Of Princely qualyties from you my Lord
And powrde them all at ones in wastfull wise
Upon your fathers younger son alone:
Perhaps there be that in your prejudice
Would say that birth should yield to worthiness:
But sith in each good gift and Princely Act
Ye are his match, and in the chief of all
In mildenes and in sobre gouernauce
Ye far surmount: And sith there is in you
Sufficing skill and hopeful towardnes
To weld the whole, and match you Elders praise
I see no cause why ye should loose the half,
Ne would I wisshe you yield to such a loss:
Lest your mild sufferaunce of so great a wrong
Be deemed cowardishe and simple dread:
Which shall give courage to the fiery head
Of your young Brother to invade the whole,
Whiles yet therefore sticks in the peoples mind
The lothed wrong of your disheritaunce,
And ere your Brother have by settled power,
By guyle full cloak of an allurynge show,
Got him some force and favor in this Realm
And while the noble Queen your mother lives,
To work and practice all for your avail
Attempt redress by Arms, and wreake your self
Upon his life, that gains by your loss,
Who now to shame of you, and grief of us
In your own kingdom triumphs over you:
Show now your courage meet for kingly estate
That they which have auowed to spend their goods
Their lands, their lives and honors in your cause,
May be the bolder to maintain your part
Johan they do see that cowarde fear in you,
Shall not betraye ne sail their faithful hearts.
If ones the death of Porrex end the strife,
And pay the price of his usurped Reign,
Your Mother shall persuade the angry king,
The Lords your friends eke shall appease his rage
For they be wise, and well they can forsee,
That ere long time your aged fathers death
will bring a time when you shall well requite
Their friendly favor, or their hateful spite.
Yea, or their slackenes to auaunce your cause
Wise men do not so hang on passing state
Of present Princes, chiefly in their age.
But they will further cast their reachinge eye
To view and weigh the times and reigns to come
Ne is it lykely though the king be wroth
That he yet will, or that the Realm will bear
Extreme revenge upon his only son:
Or if he would, what one is he that dare
Be ministre to such an enterprise.
And here you be now placed in your own
Amyd your friends, your vassalles and your strength
We shall defend and keep your person safe
Till either counsel turn his tender mind
Or age, or sorrow end his werie days
But if the fear of Gods and secret grudge
Of Natures Law, repynynge at the fact,
Withholde your courage from so great attempt:
Know ye that lust of kingdoms has no Law
The Gods do bear and well allow in kings
The things they abhor in rascal routes.
When kings on sclender quarrels ron to wars
And than in cruel and unkindly wise,
Command theftes, rapes, murder of Innocents
To spoil of towns, and reigns of mighty realms
Think you such Princes do suppress them selves
Subject to Laws of kind and fear of Gods,
Yet none offense, but decked with glorious name
Of noble Conquestes in the hands of kings,
Murders and violent theftes in private men
Are heinous crimes and full of foul reproach:
But if you like not yet so hot devise,
Ne list to take such vauntage of the time.
But though with great peril of your state
You will not be the first that shall invade,
Assemble yet your force for your defense,
And for your safety stand upon your guard.

Dordan. O heaven was there ever hard or known,
So wicked Counsel to a noble Prince?
Let me (my Lord) disclose unto your grace
This heinous tale, what mischief it conteynes:
Your fathers death, your brothers and your owns
your present murder and eternal shame:
Hear me (O king) and suffer not to sink
So high a treason in your Princely breast.

Ferrex. The mighty Gods forbid that ever I
Should once conceive such mischief in my heart
Although my Brother has bereft my Realm
And bear perhaps to me and hateful mind.
Shall I revenge it, with his death therefore?
Or shall I so destroy my fathers life
That gave me life? the Gods forbid I say,
Cease you to speak so any more to me
Ne you my friend with Answer once repeat
So foul a tale, in scilence let in die:
What Lord or Subject shall have hope at all
That under me they safely shall enjoy
Their goods, their honors, lands and liberties,
With whom, neither one only brother dear
Ne father dearer, could enjoy their lives?
But sith, I fear my younger brothers rage,
And sith perhaps some other man may give
Some like advise, to move his grudging head
At mine estate: which counsel may perchance
Take greater force with him, than this with me,
I will in secret so prepare my self,
As if his malice or his lust to reign
Break forth with Arms or sodeine violence
I may withstand his rage and keep myns own.

Dordan. I fear the fatal time now draws on
When ciuyll hate shall end the noble line
Of famous Brute and of his Royal seed
Great Jove defend the mischiefs now at hand
O that the Secretaries wise advise
Had erst ben hard when he besought the king
Not to divide his land, nor send his sons
To further parts from presence of his Court
Ne yet to yield to them his governance
Lo such are they now in the Royal throne
As was rash Phaeton in Phoebus Carre
Ne then the fiery stedes did draw the flame
With wilder randon through the kindled skies
Then traitorous council now will wherle about
The youthful heads of these unskillful kings,
But I hereof their father will enforeme
The reverence of him perhaps shall stay
The growing mischiefs, while they yet are grene
If this help not, then woe unto them selves,
The Prince, the people, the divided land.

Actus secundus, Scena secunda.
Porrex. Tyndar. Philander. Porrex ANd is it thus? And does he so prepare
Against his Brother as his mortal foe?
And now while yet his aged father lives:
Neither regardes be him? nor fears he me?
War would he have? and he shall have it so.

Tyndar. I saw my self the great prepared store
Of Horse, of Armours and of weapons there,
Ne bring I to my Lord reported tales
Without the ground of seen and serched truth
Lo secret quarrelles run about his Court
To bring the name of you my Lord in hate
Each man almost can now debate the cause
And ask a reason of so great a wrong,
While he so noble and so wise a Prince,
Is as unworthy rest his Heritage.
And why the king mislead by crafty means
Divided thus his land from course of right.
The wiser sort hold down their griefull heads
Each man withdrawes from talk and company,
Of those that have been known to favor you,
To hide the mischief of their meaning there.
Rumors are spread of your preparynge here.
The Rascal nombres of the unskillful sorts
Are filled with monsterous tales of you and yours
In secret I was counseled by my friends
To have me thence, and brought you as you know
Letters from those, that both can truly tell
And would not write unless they knew it well.

Philander. My Lord, yet ere you now unkindly war,
Send to your Brother to demand the cause.
Perhaps some traiterous tales have filled his ears
with false reports against your noble grace:
Which once disclosed shall end the growing strife
That else not stayed with wise foresight in time
Shall hazard both your kingdoms and your lives:
Send to your father eke, he shall appeal
Your kindled minds, and rid you of this fear.

Porrex. Rid me of fear? I fear him not at all:
Ne will to him, ne to my father send
If danger were for one to tarry there
Think ye it safely to return again.
In mischiefs such as Ferrex now intendes
The wanted courteous Laws to Messengeres
Are not observed, which in just war they use,
Shall I so hazard any one of mine?
Shall I betraie my trusty friend to him?
That has disclosed his treason unto me?
Let him entreat that fears, I fear him not:
Or shall I to the king my father send?
Yea and send now while such a mother lives
That loves my Brother and that hates me?
Shall I give leisure by my fond delays
To Forrex to oppress me at unware?
I will not, but I will invade his Realm
And seek the Traitor Prince within his Court
Mischief for mischief is a due reward.
His wretched head shall pay the worthy price
Of this his Treason and his hate to me
Shall I abide, entreat and send and pray?
And hold my yelden throat to Traitors knife?
While I with valiant mind and conquering force
Might rid my self of foes: and win a Realm,
Yet rather when I have the wretches head,
Than to the king my father will I send,
The booteles case may yet appease his wrath:
If not I will defend me as I may.

Philander. Lo here the end of these two youthful kings
The fathers death, the reign of their two realms
O most unhappy state of Counselors
That light on so unhappy Lords and times
That neither can their good advise be hard,
Yet must they bear the blames of ill success
But I will to the king their father haste
Ere this mischief come to that likely end,
That if the mindful wrath of wrekefull Gods
Since mighty Ilions fall not yet appeased
With these poor remnant of the Trojans name
Have not determinedlie unmoved fate
Out of this Realm to raze the Brutish Line
By good advise, by awe of fathers name
By force of wiser Lords, this kindled hate
May yet be quentched, ere it consume us all.

Chorus. When youth not bridled with a guyding stay fraie,
Is left to randon of their own delight
And welds whole Realms, by force of sovereign
Great is the danger of vnmaistred might
Lest skilles rage throw down with headlong fall
Their lands, their states, their lives, them selves and all.
When growing pride does fill the swelling breast
And gredy lust does raise the clymbynge mind
Oh hardly may the peril be represt,
Ne fear of angry Gods, ne Laws kind,
Ne Country care can fiered hearts restrain
When force has armed Envy and disdain.
When kings of foreset will neglecte the read,
Of best advise, and yield to pleasinge tales
That do their fancies noisome humor feed
He reason, nor regard of right auailes
Succedinge heaps of plagues shall teach to late
To learn the mischiefs of misguydinge state.
Foul fall the Traitor false that undermines
The love of Brethrene to destroy them both
Woe to the Prince, that pliant ear enclynes,
And yeldes his mind to poisonous tale, yt flows
From flattering mouth, and woe to wretched land
That wastes it self with ciuyll sword in hand.
Lo, thus it is poison in gold to take,
And wholesome drink in homely Cup forsake.

The order and signification of the do^me show before the third Act.
First the Music of Fluites began to plare, during which came in upon the
Stage a company of Mourners all clad in black betokeninge Death and sorrow to
ensue upon the ill advised misgouernement and discention of Brethren, as befell
upon the Murder of Ferrex by his younger Brother. After the Mourners had passed
thryse about the stage, they departed, and than the Music ceased.

Actus tertius. Scena prima.
Gorboduc. Eubulus. Arostus. Philander. Nuntius. Gorboduc. O Cruel fates, O
mindful wrath of Gods*
whose ve^geau^ice neither Simois streined streams.
Flowing with blood of Trojan Princes slain
Nor Phrygian fields made rank with Corpses dead
Of Asian kings and Lords can yet appease,
He slaughter of unhappy Pryams race
Nor Ilions fall made level with the soil,
Can yet suffice: but still continued rage,
Pursue our lives, and from the farthest Seas
Does chaste the issues of distroyed Troy:
Oh no man happy, till his end be seen,
If any flowyng wealth and seeming Joy
In present yeresmight make a happy wight,
Happy was Hecuba the wofullest wretch
That ever lived to make a Myrrour of
And happy Pryam with his noble sons,
And happy I till now, Alas, I see
And feel my most unhappy wretchedness:
Behold my Lords, read ye this Letter here
Lo it conteines the ruin of our Realm
If timely speed provide not hastle help
Yet (O ye Gods) if ever woeful king
Might move you kings of kings, wreke it on me
And on my Sons, not on this gilties Realm.
Send down your wasting flames from wrathful skies
To reave me and my sons the hateful breath
Read, read my Lords: this is the matter why
I called ye now to have your good advise.

The Letter from Dordan the Counselor of the elder Prince.
Eubulus reads the Letter. MY Sovereign Lord, what I am loath to write
But lothest am to see, that I am forced
By Letters now to make you understand
My Lord Ferrex your eldest son mislead
By Traitors framde of young vntempred wits
Assembleth force against your younger son,
Ne can my Counsel yet withdraw the heat
And furyous panges of his enflamed head:
Disoaine (says he) of his inheritance
Arms him to wreke the great pretended wrong
With ciuyll sword upon his Brothers life,
If present help do not restrain this rage
This flame will wast your sons, your land and you.
Your Majesty's faithful and most humble Subject Dordan.


Arestus. O King, appease your grief and stay your plaint
Great is the matter and a woeful case
But timely knowledge may bring timely help
Send for the^ both unto your presence here
The reverence of your honor age and state
Your grave advise, the awe of fathers name
Shall quickelie knit again this broken piece:
And if in either of my Lords your sons
Be such untamed and vnyelding pride
As will not bend unto your noble Hestes.
If Ferrex the elder son can bear no peer.
Or Porrex not content, aspires to more
Then you him gave, above his Native right:
Join with the iuster side, so shall you force
Them to agree: and bold the Land in state.

Eubulus. What means this? Lo yonder co^mes in have
Philander from my Lord your younger son.

Gorboduc. The Gods send joyful news.

Philander. The mighty Jove
Preserve your Majesty, O noble king.

Gorboduc. Philander, welcome: But how does my son?

Philander. Your son, sir, lives and healthie I him left:
But yet (O king) this want of lustful health
Could not be half so griefefull to your Grace,
As these most wretched tidings that I bring.

Gorboduc. O heavens yet more? no end of woes to (...)?

Philander. Tyndar, O king, came lately from the Court
Of Ferrex, to my Lord your younger son,
And made report of great prepared store
Of war, and says that it is whollic meant
Against Porrex for high disdain that he
Lives now a king and egall in degree
With him, that claims to succeed the whole.
As by due title of discedinge right
Porrex is now so set on flamynge fire,
Partly with kindled rage of cruel wrath,
Partly with hope to gain a Realm thereby,
That he in haste prepares to invade
His Brothers Land, and with unkindly war
Threatens the murder of your elder son,
Ne could I him persuade that first he should
Send to his Brother to demand the cause,
Nor yet to you to stay his hateful strife.
Wherefore sith there no more I can be hard.
I come my self now to inform your Grace:
And to beseech you, as you love the liefe
And safety of your Children and your Realm.
Now to emploie your wisdom and your force
To stay this mischief ere it be to late.

Gorboduc. Are they in Arms? would he not send for me*
Is this the honor of a Fathers name?
In vain we travail to assuage their minds
As if their hearts whom neither Brothers love
Nor Fathers awe, nor kingdoms care can move
Our Counsels could withdraw from ragyng heat
Jove slaye them both, and end the cursed Line
For though perhaps fear of such mighty force
As I my Lords, joined with your noble Aides
May yet raise, shall repress their present heat,
The secret grudge and malice will remain
The fire not quentched, but kept in close restraint
Fead still within, breaks forth with double flame
Their death and mine must peaze the angry gods

Philander. Yield not, O king, so much to weak dispaier
Your sons yet live, and long I trust, they shall:
If fates had taken you from earthly life
Before beginning of this ciuyll strife:
Perhaps your sons in their vnmaistered youth,
Lose from regard of any living wight,
Would run on headlonge, with unbridled Race
To their own death and ruin of this Realm.
But since the God that have the care for kings,
Of things and times dispose the order so
That in your life this kindled flame breaks forth
While yet your life, your wisdom and your power,
May stay the growing mischief, and repress
The fiery blaze of their inkindled heat
It seems, and so ye ought to deem thereof,
That loving Jove has tempred so the time
Of this debate to happen in your days
That you yet living may the same appeaze.
And add it to the glory of your latter age
And they your sons may learn to live in peace
Beware (O king) the greatest harm of all,
Lest by your wayleful plaints your hastened death
Yield larger room unto their growyng rage:
Preserve your life, the only hope of stay:
And if your highness herein list to use
Wisdom or force, Counsel or knightly aid:
Lo we our persons, powers and lives are yours.
Use us till Death, O king, we are your own.

Eubulus. Lo here the peril that was erst forsene
When you, (O king) did first divide your Land
And yield your present reign unto your sons.
But now (O noble Prince) now is no time
To wayle and plain, and wast your woeful life,
Now is the time for present good advise,
Sorrow does dark the Judgment of the wit
The Heart unbroken and the courage free
From feeble faintnes of booteles dispaier
Does either rise to safety or renown
By noble valor of vnuanquisshed mind
Or yet does perish in more happy sort
Your Grace may send to either of your sons
Some one both wise and noble personage,
Which with good counsel and with weighty name
Of father shall present before their eyes
Your hest, your liefe, your safety and their own
The present mischief of their deadly strife
And in the while, assemble you the force
Which your Commandment and the spedie have
Of all my Lords here present can prepare:
The terror of your mighty power shall steye
The rage of both, or yet one at lest.

Nuntius. O King the greatest grief that ever Prince did here
The ever woeful Messenger did tell,
That ever wretched Land has seen before
I bring to you. Porrex your younger son
With soden force, invaded has the land
That you to Ferrex did allotte to rule:
And with his own most bloody hand he has
His Brother slain, and does possess his Realm.

Gorboduc. O Heavens send down the flames of your revenge,
Destroy I say with flasshe of wrekefull fire
The Traitor son, and than the wretched sire:
But let us go, that yet perhaps I may
Die with revenge, and peaze the hateful gods.

Chorus. The lust of kingdoms knows no sacred faith
No rule of Reason, no regard of right
No kindly love, no fear of heavens wrath:
But with contempt of Gods, and man's despite,
Through blodie slaughter does prepare the ways
To fatal Scepter and accursed reign.
The son so lothes the fathers lingerynge days.
Ne dreades his hand in Brothers blood to stain
O wretched Prince, ne do thou yet record
The yet fresshe Murders done within the Land
Of thie forefathers, when the cruel sword
Bereft Morgan his liefe with Cosyns hand?
Thus fatal plagues pursue the guilty race
Whose murderous hand imbrued with giltles blood
Asks venge aunce before the heavens face,
With endless mischiefs on the cursed brood.
The wicked child this bringes to woeful Sier
The mournful plaintes to wast his weary life:
Thus do the cruel flames of Ciuyll fire
Destroy the parted reign with hateful strife
And hence does spring the well from which does slo:
The dead black streams of mournings, plaints and woe.

The order and signification of the do^me show before the fourth Act.
First the Music of Howeboies began to play. duringe which there came forth
from under the Stage, as though out of Hell three Furies. Alecto, Megera and
Ctesiphone clad in black garments sprinkled with blood and flames, their
bodies girt with snakes, their heds spread with Serpents in stead of hear,
the one bearinge in her hand a Snake, the other a whip, and the third a
burning Firebrande: each driuynge before them a king and a Queen, which
moved by Furies unnaturally bad slain their own Children. The names of the
kings and Queens were these. Tantalus, Medea, Athamas, Ino, Cambises, Althea,
after that the Furies and these had passed about the Stage thrice, they
departed and than the Music ceased: hereby was signified the unnatural
Murders to follow, that is to say. Porrex slain by his own Mother. And of
king Gorboduc and Queen Viden. killed by their own Subjects.

Actus quartus. Scena prima.
Vidensola. Viden. Why sold I live and linger forth my tune
In longer liefe to double my distress?
O me most woeful wight whom no mishap
Long ere this day could have bereued hence.
Might not these hands by fortune or by fate,
Have perst this breast and life with Iron reft,
Or in this Pallaice here where I so long
Have spent my days, could not that happy hour*
Ones, ones have hapt I which these hugie frames
With death by fall might have oppressed me
Or should not this most hard and cruel soil,
So eft where I have pressed my wretched steps
Sometime had ruthe of mine accursed liefe,
To rende in twain and swallowe me therein,
So had my bones possessed now in peace
Their happy grave within the closed ground
And greadie worms had gnawen this pyned heart
Without my feelyinge pain: So should not now
This living breast remain the ruthefull tomb
Wherein my heart yelden to death is graued:
Nor driery thoughts with panges of pining grief
My doleful mind had not afflicted thus,
O my beloved son: O my sweet child,
My tear Ferrex, my Joy, my lives delyght.
Is my well-beloved son, is my sweet child,
My dear Perrex, my Joy, my lives delight
Murdered with cruel death? O hateful wretch,
O heinous Traitor both to heaven and earth,
Thou Porrex, thou this damned deed have wrought
Thou Porrex, thou shall dearly abye the same,
Traitor to kin and kind, to Sire and me,
To thine own flesh, and Traitor to thy self
The Gods on the in hell shall wreke their wrath,
And here in earth this hand shall take revenge
On the Porrex, thou false and caytife wighte,
If after blood, so eigre were thy thirst
And Murderous mind had so possessed thee,
If such hard heart of Rock and stony Flint
Lived in thy breast, that nothing else could like
Thy cruel Tyrants thought but death and blood
Wild savage beasts might not y^ slaughter serve
To feed thy gredie will, and in the myddest
Of their entrails to stain thy deadly hands
With blood deserved, and drink thereof thy fill:
Or if naught else but death and blood of man
Might please thy lust, could none in Bryttain land
Whose heart be torn out of his loving breast
With thine own hand, or work what death thou would
Suffice to make a Sacrifice to appeaze would
That deadly mind and murderous thought in the?
But he who in the self same womb was wrapped
Where thou in dismal hour receiuedst life?
Or if needs, needs thi^ hand must slaughter make
Moughist thou not have reached a mortal wound
And with thy sword have persed this cursed womb?
That the accursed Porrex brought to light?
And given me a just reward therefore.
So Ferrex, if sweet life might have enjoyed
And to his aged father comfort brought,
with some young son in whom they both might live
But whereunto wast I this ruthefull speech?
To the that have thy brothers blood thus shed
Shall I still think yt from this womb thou sprung?
That I thee bare? or take thee for my son?
No Traitor, no: I the refuse for mine,
Murderer I thee renounce, thou art not mine:
Never, O wretch, this womb conceued thee,
Nor never bode I painful throws for thee:
Changeling to me thou art, and not my child
Nor to no wight, that spark of pytie knew,
Rutheles, unkind, Monster of Natures work.
Thou never suckte the milk of woman's breaste
But from thy birth the cruel Tigres teates
Have nursed, nor yet of flesh and blood
Formed is thy heart, but of hard Iron wrought.
And wild and desert woods bread thee to life:
But can thou hope to escape my just revenge?
Or that these hands will not be wrooke on thee?
Do thou not know that Ferrex mother lives
That loved him more dearly then her self?
And does she live, and is not venged on thee?

Actus quartus. Scena secunda.
Gorboduc. Arostus Eubulus. Porrex. Marccilla. Gorboduc. WE marueyle much
whereto this lingeryng stay
Falls out so long: Porrex unto our Court
By order of our Letters is returned
And Eubulus received from us by hest
At his arriuale here to give him charge
Before our presence straight to make repair
And yet we have no word whereof he stays.

Arostus Lo where he co^mes and Eubulus with him.

Eubulus. According to your highness hest to me
Here have I Porrex brought even in such sort
As from his weried Horse he did alighte,
For that your Grace did will such haste therein.

Gorboduc. We like and praise this spedie will in you
To work the thing that to your charge we gave
Porrex, if we so far should swerve from kind,
And from these bounds which laws of Nature sets
As thou have done by vile and wretched deed
In cruel murder of thy Brothers life,
Our present hand could stay no longer time,
But straight should bathe this blade in blood of the
As just revenge of thy detested crime.
No. we should not offend the law of kind,
If now this sword of ours did slaie thee here:
For thou have murdered him whose heinous death
Even Natures force does move us to revenge
By blood again: But Justice forces us
To measure Death for Death, thy due deserte,
Yet since thou art our child, and sith as yet
In this hard case what word thou can allege
For thy defense, by us has not ben hard
We are content to stay our will for that
Which Justice biddes us presently to work:
And give the leave to use thie speech at full
If ought thou have to lay for thine excuse.

Porrex. Neither O king, I can or will deny
But that this hand from Ferrex life has reft:
Which fact how much my doleful heart does wail
Oh would it might as full appear to sight
As inward grief does power it forth to me,
So yet perhaps if ever ruthefull heart
Melting in tears within a manly breast
Through deep repentance of his bloody fact
If ever grief, if ever woeful man
Might move regreite with sorrow of his fault,
I think the torment of my mournful case
Known to your grace, as I do feel the same,
Would force even wrath her self to pytie me.
But as the water troubled with the mudde
Shows not the face which else the eye should see,
Even so your Irefull mind with stirred thought,
Can not so perfectly discern my cause.
But this unhappy, emongst so many heaps
I must content me with, most wretched man,
That to my self I must refer my woe
In pynynge thoughts of mine accursed fact:
Since I may not show here my smallest grief
Such as it is, and as my breast endures,
Which I esteem the greatest myserie
Of all mishappes that Fortune now can send.
Not that I rest in hope with plaints and tears
Should purchase life: for to the Gods I clepe
For true record of this my faithful speech,
Never this heart shall have the thoughtfull dread
To die the death that by your Graces dome
By just desarte, shall be pronounced to me:
Nor never shall this tongue ones spend this speech
Pardon to crave, or seek by suit to live:
I mean not this as though I were not touchde
With care of dreadful death, or that I held
Life in contempt: but that I know, the mind
Stoupes to no dread, although the flesh be frail,
And for my gilt, I yield the same so great
As in my self I find a fear to sue
For grant of life.

Gorboduc. In vain, O wretch thou shewe^
A woeful heart, Ferrex now lies in grave,
Slain by thy hand.

Porrex. Yet this, O father, hear;
And than I end: Your Majesty well knows,
That when my Brother Ferrex and my self
By your own hest were joined in governance
Of this your Graces Realm of Brittayne Land
I never sought nor trauaylled for the same,
Nor by my self, or by no scende I wrought*
But from your highness will alone it spronge,
Of your most gracious goodness bent to me,
But how my Brothers heart even than re^med
With swollen disdain against mine egali rule
Seeing that Realm, which by descent should grow
Wholly to him, allotted half to me?
Even in your highness Court he now remaynes,
And with my Brother than in nearest place
Who can record, what proof thereof was shewde
And how my brothers envious heart appearde
Yet I that judged it my part to seek
His favor and good will, and loathe to make
Your highness know, the thing which should have brought
Grief to your grace, and your offense to him
Hopyng by earnest suite should soon have won
A loving heart within a Brothers breast
Wrought in that sort that for a pleadge of love
And faithful heart, he gave to me his hand.
This made me think, that he had banisshed quite
All rancour from his thought and bare to me
Such hearty love, as I did owe to him:
But after once we left your Graces Court
And from your highness presence lived aparte
This egall rule still, still did grudge him so
That now those Envious sparks which erst lay raked
In living cinders of dissembling breast,
Kindled so far within his hates disdain
That longer could he not refrain from proof
Of secret practice to deprive me life
By Poisons force, and had bereft me so.
If mine own Servant hired to this fact
And moved by truth with hate to work the same,
In time had not bewraied it unto me:
When thus I saw the knot of love vnknitte
All honest League and faithful promise broke
The Law of kind and trothe thus rent in twain
His heart on mischief set, and in his breast
Black treason hid then, then did I dispaier
That ever time could win him friend to me
Than saw I how he smyled with slaying knife
Wrapped under cloak, then saw I deep deceit
Lurk in his face and death prepared for me:
Even nature moved me than to hold my life
More dear to me than his, and bad this hand
Since by his life my death must needs ensue,
And by his death my life to be preserved:
To shed his blood, and seek my safety so.
And wisdom willed me without protracte
In spedie wise to put the same in ure.
Thus have I told the cause that moved me
To work my Brothers death and so I yield
My life, my death to judgment of your grace.

Gorboduc. Oh cruel wight, should any cause prevail
To make the stain thy hands with brothers blod
But what of thee we will resolve to do
Shall yet remain unknown: Thou in the mean
Shall from our royal presence banyshed be
Until our Princely pleasure further shall
To the be showed, depart therefore our sight
Accursed child. What cruel destenie
What froward fate has sorted us this chance
That even in those, where we should comfort find
Where our delight now in our aged days
Should rest and be, even there our only grief
And depest sorrows to abridge our liefe,
Most pynyng cares and deadly thoughts do grave yours

Arostus. Your Grace should now in these grave years of
Have found ere this the price of mortal Joys,
How short they be, how fadyng hear in earth
How full of change, how Brittle our estate,
Of nothing sure, save only of the Death,
To whom both man and all the world does owe
Their end at last, neither shall natures power
In other sort against your heart prevail,
Than as the naked hand whose stroke assayes
The Armed breast where force does light in vain

Gorboduc. Many can yield right grave and sage advise
Of pacient sprite to others wrapped in woe,
And can in speech both rule and conquer kind,
Who if by proof, they might feel natures force,
Would show them selves men as they are in deed,
which now will needs be gods: but what does mean
The sorry chere of her that here does come?

Marcella. Oh where is ruthe? or where is pytie now?
Whether is gentle heart and mercy fled?
Are they exiled out of our stony breasts
Never to make return? is all the world
Drowned in blood, and soncke in cruelty?
If not in women mercy may be found
If not (alas) within the mothers breast
To her own child, to her own flesh and blood
If ruthe be banisshed thence, if pytie there
May have no place, if there no gentle heart
Do live and dwell, where should we seek it than?

Gorboduc. Madame (alas) what means your woeful tale?

Marcella. O silly woman I, why to this hour,
Have kind and fortune thus deferred my breathe
That I should live to see this doleful day
Will ever wight believe that such hard heart
Could rest within the cruel mothers breaste,
With her own hand to slaye her only son?
But out (alas) these eyes beheld the same,
They saw the driery sight, and are become
Most ruthful records of the bloody fact.
Porrex, (alas) is by his mother slain,
And with her hand a woeful thing to tell,
While slomberinge on his careful bed he restes
His heart stalde in with kniefe is reft of life.

Gorboduc. O Eubulus, oh draw this sword of ours,
And perce this heart with speed, O hateful light,
O loathsome liefe, O sweet and welcome Death,
Dear Eubulus work this we thee beseech.

Eubulus. Patient your Grace, perhaps he lives yet.
With wound receued, but not of certain death.

Gorboduc. O let us than repaier, unto the place,
And see if that Porrex, or thus be slame.

Marcella. Alas he lives not, it is to true,
That with these eyes of him a pereles Prince,
Son to a King, and in the flower of youth,
Even with a twinke a censeles stock I saw.

Arostus O dampened deed.

Marcella. But hear this ruthefull end.
The noble Prince perst with the sodeine wound
Out of his wretched slombre hastily starte
Whole strength now failyng straight he overthrew
When in the fall his eyes even new unclosed
Beheld the Queen and cried to her for help
We then, alas, the Ladies which that time
Did there attend, seeing that heinous deed
And hearing him often call the wretched name
Of mother, and to cry to her for Aid
Whose direful hand gave him the mortal wound
Pitieng, (alas, for naught else could we do)
His ruthefull end, ran to the woeful bed
Dispoyled straight his breast, and all we might
wyped in vain with napkyns next at hand,
The sodeine streams of blood that flusshed fast
Out of the gaping wound: O what a look,
O what a ruthefull steadfast eye me thought
He fixed upon my face, which to my death
Will never part fro me, when with a braide
Adeepe set sign he gave and therewith all
Claspinge his hands, to heaven he cast his sight*
And straight pale death pressyng within his face
The flyinge ghost his mortal corpse forsook.

Arostus. Never did age bring forth so vile a fact.

Marcella. O hard and cruel hap, that thus assigned
Unto so worthy a wighte so wretched end
But most hard cruel heart, that could consent
To lend the hatefnll destenies that hand
By which, alas, so heinous crime was wrought,
O Queen of Adamante, O Marble breaste
If not the favor of his comely face,
If not his Princely chere and counten^unce,
His valiant Active Arms, his manly breaste.
If not his faier and semelie personage
His noble Lymmes in such preparacion cast
As would have wrapped a silly woman's thought
If this might not have moved the bloody heart
And that most cruel hand the wretched weapon
Even to let fall, and kiste him in the face,
With tears for ruthe to reaue such one by death
Should nature yet consent to slaye her son
O mother, thou to murder thus thie child
Even Jove with Justice must with lightening flames
From heaven send down some strange revenge on thee.
Ah noble Prince, how often have I beheld
Thee mounted on thy fierce and traumpling stead
Shyning in Armor bright before the Tylte
And with thy Mistress Sleaue tied on thy Helm
And charge thy staff to please thy Ladies eye
That howed the head piece of thy friendly foe,
How often in Arms on horse to bend the Mace
How often in Arms on foot to break the sword,
Which never now these eyes men (...) again.

Arostus. Madame, alas, in vain these plaints are shed.
Rather with me depart and help to assuage,
The thoughtfull griefs that in the aged kings
Must needs by nature grow by death of this
His only son, whom he did hold so dear.

Marcella. What wight is that which saw that I did see
And could refrain to wail with plainte and tears
Not I, alas, that heart is not in me,
But let us go, for I am grieved anewe,
To call to mind the wretched fathers woe.

Chorus. When gredie lust in Royal seat to reign
Has reft all care of gods and eke of men,
And cruel heart, wrath, Treason and disdain
Within the ambicious breast are lodged then
Behold how mischief wide her self displaies
And with the brothers hand the brother slaies.
When blood thus shed, does stain this heavens face
Crying to Jove for vengeance of the deed,
The mighty God even moves from his place
With wrath to wreke, then sendes he forth with speed
The dreadful furies, daughters of ye night
With Serpents girt, carrying the whip of Ire,
With hear of stinging snakes and shining bright
With flames and blood, and with a brande of fire:
These for revenge of wretched Murder done
Do make the Mother kill her only son.

Blood asks blood, and death must death requite
Jove by his just and everlasting dome
Justly has ever so requited it
These times before record, and times to come,
Shall find it true, and so does present proof,
Present before our eyes for our behoof.
O happy wight that suffres not the snare
Of murderous mind to tangle him in blood*
And happy he that can in time beware
By others harms and turn it to his good
But woe to him that fearing not to offend
Does serve his lust, and will not see the end.
The order and signification of the do^me show before the fifthe Act.
First the Drommes and Fluites, began to sound, during which there came
forth upon the Stage a company of Hargabusiers and of Armed men all in order
of Battle. These after their Pieces discharged, and that the Armed men had
three times marched about the Stage, departed, and then the Drommes and Fluits
did cease. Hereby was signified tumults, rebellions, Arms and ciuyll wars to
follow* as fell in the Realm of great Brittayne, which by the space of fifty
years and more continued in ciuyll war between the Nobylytie after the death
of king Gorboduc, and of his Issues, for want

of certain lymitacion in the Succession of the
Crown, till the time of Dunwalle Molmutius,
who reduced the Land to Monarche.
Actus quintus. Scena prima.
Clotyn. Mandud. Gwenard. Fergus. Eubulus. Clotyn. DId ever age bring forth
such Tirants hearts
The Brother has bereft the Brothers life,
The Mother she has died her cruel hands
In blood of her own son, and now at last
The people lo forgettyng truth and love,
Contemnynge quite both Law and loyal heart
Even they have slain their sovereign Lord and Queen.

Mandud. Shall this their traiterous crime unpunished rest
Even yet they cease not, carried out with rage,
In their rebellious routes, to threaten still
A new blood shed unto the Princes kin
To slaie them all, and to vproote the race
Both of the king and Queen, so are they moved
With Porrex death, wherein they falsely charge
The giltles king without desarte at all
And traiterouslie have murdered him therefore,
And eke the Queen.

Gwenard. Shall Subjects dare with force
To work revenge upon their Princes fact?
Admyt the worst that may: as sure in this
The deed was foul, the Queen to slaie her son
Shall yet the Subject seek to take the sword?
Arise against his Lord, and slaie his king?
O wretched state, where those rebellious hearts
Are not rent out even from their living breasts
And with the body thrown unto the Fowls
As Carrion food, for terror of the rest.

Fergus. There can no punisshement be thought to great
For this so grievous crime: let speed therefore
Be used therein for it behooves so.

Eubulus. Ye all my Lords I see consent in one
And I as one consent with ye in all:
I hold it more than need with the sharpest Law
To punisshe the tumultuous bloody rage
For nothing more may shake the common state
Than sufferaunce of Vproares without redress
Whereby how some kingdoms of mighty power
After great Conquestes made, and floorishing
In fame and wealth have been to ruin brought
I pray to Jove that we may rather wayle
Such hap in them than witness in our selves
Eke fully with the Duke my mind agrees
That no cause serves, whereby the Subject may
Call to account the doings of his Prince.
Much less in blood by sword to work revenge
No more then may the hand cut of the head,
In Act nor speech, no: not in secret thought
The Subject may rebel against his Lord
Or Judge of him that sittes in Ceasars Seat.
With grudging mind do damn those Hemislikes
Though kings forget to govern as they ought,
Yet Subjects must obey as they are bound:
But now my Lords before ye farther wade
Or spend your speech, what sharp revenge shall fall
By justice plague on these rebellious wights
Me thinks ye rather should first search the way
By which in time the rage of this vproare
Might be repressed, and these great tumults ceased
Even yet the life of Brittayne Land does hang.
In Traitors Balaunce of unequal weight
Think not my Lords the death of Gorboduc
Nor yet Videnaes blood will cease their rage:
Even our own lives, our wives and children,
Our Country dearest of all in danger stands,
Now to be spoiled, now, now made desolate,
And by our selves a conquest too ensue:
For give ones sweye unto the peoples lusts,
To russhe forth on, and stay them not in time,
And as the stream that rowleth down the hill,
So will they headlong run with raging thoughts
From blood to blood, from mischief unto more,
To ruin of the Realm, them selves and all
So giddle are the common peoples minds,
So glad of change, more waueryng than the Sea
Ye see (my Lords) what strength these Rebels have,
What hugie nombre is assembled still,
For though the traitorous fact, for which their rose
Be wrought and done, yet lodge they still in field
So that how far their furies yet will stretche
Great cause we have to dread, that we may seek
By present Battle to repress their power.
Speed must we use to levy force therefore,
For either they forthwith will mischief work
Or their rebellious roares forthwith will cease:
These violent things may have no lasting loud
Let us therefore use this for present help
Persuade by gentle speech, and offer grace
With gift of pardon save unto the chief,
And that upon condition that forthewith
They yield the Captains of their enterprise
To bear such querdon of their traitorous fact
As may be both due vengeance to them selves,
And wholesome terror to posterity.
This shall I think: flatter the greatest part
That now are holden with desire of home,
Weried in field with could of Winters nights,
And some (no doubt) stricken with dread of Law
When this is ones proclaimed, it shall make
The Captains to mistruste the multitude
Whose safety biddes them to betraye their heads
And so much more because the rascal routes,
In things of great and perilous attemptes,
Are never trusty to the noble race.
And while we treat and scande on terms of grace,
We shall both stay their furies rage the while,
And eke gain time, whose only help suffices
Withouten war to vanquisshe Rebels power
In the mean while, make you in redynes
Such band of Horsemen as ye may prepare:
Horsemen (you know) are not the Commons strength
But are the force and store of noble men
Whereby the vnchosen and unarmed sort
Of sk^^^she Rebels, whom none other power
But nombre makes to be of dreadful force
With sodeyne brunt may quickly be oppreste
And if this gentle mean of proffered grace
With stubborn hearts cannot so far avail
As to assuage their desperate courages.
Than do I wisshe such slaughter to be made,
As present age and eke posterity
May be adrad with horror of revenge,
That justly than shall on these rebels fall:
This is my Lords the so^me of mine advise.

Clotyn. Neither this case admittes debate at large,
And though it did: this speech that has been said
Has well abridged the tale I would have told:
Fully with Eubulus do I consent
In all that he has said: and if the same
To you my Lords, may seem for best advise,
I wisshe that it should straight be put in ure.

Mandud. My Lords than let us presently depart
And follow this that lyketh us so well.

Fergus. If ever time to gain a kingdom here
Were offered man, now it is offered me:
The Realm is reft both of their king and Queen
The ofspringe of the Prince is slain and dead
No issue now remains, the Heir unknown,
The people are in Arms and mutynies
The Nobles they are busied how to cease
These great rebellious tumultes and vproars
And Brittayne Land now deserte left alone
Amyd these broils uncertain where to rest
Offers her self unto that noble heart
That will or dare pursue to bear her Crown:
Shall I that am the Duke of Albanye
Descended from that Line of noble blood.
Which has so long floorisshed in worthy fame
Of valiant hearts, such as in noble Breasts
Of right should rest above the baser sort,
Refuse to adventure liefe to win a Crown,
Whom shall I find enemies that will wtstande
My fact herein, if I attempt by Arms
To seek the Fame now in these times of broyle
These Dukes power can hardly well appease
The people that alredie are in Arms.
But if perhaps my force be ones in field
Is not my strength in power above the best
Of all these Lords now left in Britain Land.
And though they should match me with power of men
Yet doubtful is the chance of Battailles joined
If Victors of the field we may depart,
Ours is the Scepter than of great Brittayne,
If slain amid the plain this body be
Mine enemies yet shall not deny me this,
But that I died gyuynge the noble charge
To hazard life for conquest of a Crown.
Forthwith therefore will I in post depart
To Albanye and raise in Armor there
All power I can: and here my secret friends,
By secret practice shall solicit still,
To seek to win to me the peoples hearts.

Actus quintus. Scena secunda.
Eubulus. Clotyn. Mandud. Gwenard. Arostus Nuntius. Eubulus. O Jove, How are
these peoples hearts abusde
what blind Fury, thus headlong caries the^?
That though so many books, so many rolls
Of Ancient time record what grievous plagues,
Light on these Rebels aye and though so often
Their ears have hard their aged fathers tell
What just reward these Traitors still receive.
Yea though them selves have seen deep death and blod
By strangling cord and slaughter of the sword
To such assigned, yet can they not beware:
Yet can they not stay their rebellious hands,
But suffering to foul treason to distaine
Their wretched minds, forget their loyal heart,
Reiecte all truth and rise against their Prince,
A ruthefull case that those, whom duties bound
Whom grafted Law by nature truth and faith
Bound to preserve their Country and their king
Borne to defend their Common wealth and Prince,
Even they should give consent thus to subuerte
The Britain Land, and from the wombeshuld bring
(O natyue soil) those, that will needs destroy
And ruin thee and eke them selves in fine:
For lo, when ones the Duke had offered Grace
Of pardon sweet (the multitude mislead
By traitorous fraud of their ungracious heads)
One sort that saw the dangerous success
Of stubborn standing in rebellious war
And knew the difference of Princes power
From headles nombre of tumultuous routes,
Whom common Countreies care and private fear
Taught to repent the terror of their rage
Laid hands upon the Capatines of their band,
And brought them bound unto the mighty Dukes
An other sort not trusting yet so well
The truth of Pardon or mistrusting more
Their own offense than that they could conceive
Such hope of pardon for so foul misdede:
Or for that they their Captains could not yield
Who fearinge to be yielded, flead before,
Stale home by scilence of the secret night,
The third unhappy and vnraged sort
Of desperate hearts, who stained in Princes blood
From traiterous furour could not be withdrawn
By love, by law, by grace, ne yet by fear,
By proffered life, ne yet by threatened Death,
With minds hopeles of liefe, dreadles of Death,
Careless of Country, and aweles of God:
Stood bente to fight as Furies did them move
With violent death to close their traitorous life:
These all by power of Horsemen were oppressed
And with revenging sword slain in the field,
Or with the strangling Cord hanged on the trees
Where yet the carryen Carcases do proche
The fruits that Rebels reap of their vproars,
And of the murder of their sacred Prince,
But lo, where do approach the noble Dukes,
By whom these tumults have been thus appeasde.

Clotyn. I think the world will now at length beware*
And fear to put on arms against their Prince.

Mandud. If not: those traiterous hearts that dare rebel
Let them behold the wide and hugie fields
With blood and body spread with rebels slain,
The lusty trees clothed with corpses dead
That strangled with the cord do hang therein.

Arostus. A just reward such as all times before
Have ever lotted to those wretched folks.

Gwenard. But what means he that comes here so fast.

Nuntius. My Lords, as duty and my troth does move
And of my Country work and care in me
That if the spending of my breath avail
To do the Service that my heart desires,
I would not shun to embrace a present death,
So have I now in that wherein I thought
My travail might perform some good effect^
Ventred my liefe to bring these tydinges here.
Fergus the mighty Duke of Albanye
Is now in Arms and lodges in the field
With twenty thousand men, hither he bendes
His spedie marcke, and minds to invade the Crown
Daily he gathers strength and spreads abroad
That to this Realm no certain Heir remains,
That Brittayne Land is left without a guide,
That he the Scepter seeks, for nothing else
But to preserve the people and the Land
Which now remain as ship without a Stern
Lo this is that which I have hereto said.

Clotyn. Is this his faith? and shall he falsely thus
Abuse the vauntage of unhappy times?
O wretched Land, if his outrageous pride,
His cruel and vntempred wilfulnes
His deep dissemblinge shows of false pretense
Should once attain the Crown of Brittayn land
Let us my Lords, with tymely force resist
The new attempt of this our common foe
As we would quench the flames of common fire.

Mandud. Though we remain without a certain Prince
To weld the Realm or guide the wandering rule
Yet now the common Mother of us all,
Our Native Land, our Country that conteines
Our wives, children, kyndred, our selves and all
That ever is or may be dear to man
Cries unto us to help our selves and her:
Let us advance our powers to repress
This growing foe of all our liberties.

Gwenard. Yea let us so my Lords with hasty speed,
And ye (O Gods) send us the welcome death,
To shed our blood in field and leave us not,
In loathe some life to longer out our lives
To see the hugie heaps of these vnhappes,
That now roll down upon the wretched Land
Where empty place of Princely governance
No certain stay now left of doubtless heir,
Thus leave this guidelesse Realm an open pray,
To endless storms and wast of ciuyll war.

Arostus. That ye (my Lords) do so agree in one
To save your Country from the violent reign
And wrongfullie usurped Tirrannie
O^ him that threatens conquest of you all
To save your realm, and in this realm your selves
From forreyne thraldom of so proud a Prince,
Much do I praise, and I beseech the Gods,
With happy honor to requite it you.
But (O my Lords) sith now the Heavens wrath
Has reft this Land the issue of their Prince:
Sith of the body of our late Sovereign Lord
Remains no mo, since the young kings be slain
And of the Title of the descended Crown,
Vncerteynly the diverse minds do think
Even of the Learned sort, and more vncertainlye
Will perciall fancy and affection deem:
But most vncertenlye will clymbynge pride
And hope of Reign withdraw from sondrie parts
The doubtful right and hopeful lust to reign.
When ones this noble service is achieved
For Brittayne Land the Mother of ye all,
When ones ye have with armed force represt,
The proud attemptes of this Albanyan Prince,
That threatens thraldom to your Native Land,
When ye shall vanquishers return from field
And find the Princely state an open pray.
To gredie lust and to usurping power,
Then, then (my Lords) if ever kindly care
Of ancient Honor of your auncestoures,
Of present wealth and noblesse of your stocks:
Yea of the lives and safety yet to come
Of your dear wives, your children and your selves,
Might move your noble hactes with gentle ruthe,
Then, then have pytie on the torn estate,
Then help to salve the well near hopeles sore
Which ye shall do, if ye your selves with hold
The sleayng knife from your own mothers throat
Her shall you save, and you, and yours in her
If ye shall all with one assent forbear
Ones to lay hand or take unto your selves
The Crown by color of ^^^tended right,
Or by what other means so ever it be
Till first by common counsel of you all
In Parliament the Regal Diadem
Be set in certain place of governance,
In which your Parliament and in your choice,
Preserve the right (my Lords,) without respect
Of strenght of friends, or what so ever cause
That may set forward any others part,
For right will last, and wrong can not endure,
Right mean I his or hers, upon whose name
The people rest by mean of Native line,
Or by the virtue of some former Law,
Already made their title to advance:
Such one (my Lords) let be your chosen king
Such one so borne within your Natyue Land
Such one prefer, and in no wise adinitte.
The heavy yoke of foreign governance,
Let foreign Titles yield to Public wealth,
And with that heart wherewith ye now prepare
Thus to withstand the proud inuadynge foe,
With that same heart (my Lords) keep out also
Unnatural thraldom of strangers reign,
Ne suffer you against the rules of kind
Your Mother Land to serve a Foreign Prince.

Eubulus. Lo here the end of Brutus royal Line,
And lo the entry to the woeful wrack
And utter ruin of this noble Realm.
The royal king, and eke his sons are slain,
No Ruler restes within the Regal Seat:
The Heir, to who^ the Scepter longs, unknown
That to each force of Foreign Princes power
Whom vauntage of your wretched state
By sudden Arms to gain so rich a Realm
And to the proud and gredie mind at home
Whom blinded lust to reign leads to aspire.
Lo Brittaiue Realm is left an open pray,
A present spoil by Conquest to ensue,
Who sees not now how many risyng minds
Do feed their thoughts, with hope to reach a Realm
And who will not by force attempt to win
So great a gain that hope persuades to have:
A simple color shall for title serve.
Who winnes the Royal crown will want no right
Nor such as shall displaye by long descent
A lyneall race to prove him self a king,
In the mean while these ciuyll arms shall rage,
And thus a thousand mischiefs shall unfold
And far and near spread thee (O Brittayne Land)
All right and Law shall cease, and he that had
Nothing to day, to morrow shall enjoy
Great heaps of good, and he that flowed in wealth,
Leo he shall be reft of life and all,
And happiest he that than possesses least.
The wives shall suffer rape, the maids defloured
And children fatherles shall weep and wayle:
With fire and sword thy Native folk shall perisshe.
One kinsman shall bereave an other life,
The father shall vnwittynge slaye the son,
The son shall slay the sire and know it not:
Women and maids the cruel Soldiers sword
Shall perse to death, and silly children lo
That playinge in the strea^es and fields are found
By violent hand shall close their latter day.
Whom shall the ferce and bloody Soldier
Reserve to liefe, whom shall he space from death
Even thou (O wretched mother) half alive
Thou shall behold thy dear and only child
Slain with the sword while he yet suckes thy breast:
Lo, giltles blood shall thus each where be shed:
Thus shall the wasted soil yield forth no fruit
But derth and famyne shall possess the Land.
The Towns shall be consumed and brent with fire,
The peopled Cities shall ware desolate,
And thou (O Britain Land) whilom in renown
Whilome in wealth and fame shall thus be torn,
Dismembered thus, and thus be rent in twain,
Thus wasted and defaced, spoiled and destroyed:
These be the fruits your civil wars will bring.
Heretost co^mes when kings will not consent,
To grave advise, but follow wilful will:
This is the end, when in young Princes hearts
Flattery preuayles, and sage read has no place:
These are the plages, when murder is the mean
To make new Heirs unto the Royal Crown.
Thus wreke the Gods, when ye the mothers wrath
Naught but y^ blood of her own child may swage.
These mischiefs springs when Rebels will arise,
To work revenge and judge their Princes fact:
This, this ensues when noble men do fail
In loyal truth, and subjects will be kings.
And this does grow when lo unto the Prince,
Whom death or sodene hap of liefe bereaues,
No certain Heir remains, such certentie
As not all only is the rightful Heir,
But to the Realm is so made unknown to be
And troth thereby vested in Subjects hearts,
To owe faith there, where right is known to rest
Alas, in Parliament what hope can be,
When is of Parliament no hope at all,
Which though it be assembled by consent,
Yet is it not likely with consent to end:
While each one for him self, or for his friend
Against his foe, shall travail what he may,
While now the state left open to the man,
That shall with greatest force invade the same,
Shall fill ambicious minds with gapynge hope:
When will they ones with yelding hearts agree?
Or in the while, how shall the Realm he used?
No, no: then Parliament should have been holden
And certain Heirs appointed to the Crown
To stay their title of establisshed right:
And plant the people in obedience
While yet the Prince did live, whose name and power
By lawful So^mons and auctorytie
Might make a Parliament to be of force,
And might have set the state in quiet stay:
But now (O happy man) whom spedie death
Depriues of life, ne is enforced to see
These hugie mischiefs and these miseries,
These ciuyll wars, these murders and these wrongs
Of Justice, yet must Jove in fine restore
This noble Crown unto the lawful Heir:
For right will always live, and rise at length,
But wrong can never take deep root to last.

The end of the Tagedie of King Gorboduc.

