A SINFVLL Man's Solace: Most sweet and comfortable, for the sick and sorrowful
Soul: Contrived, into seven several Days Conference, between Christ and a
careless Sinner.

Wherein, every man, from the highest, to the lowest: from the Richest, to the
poorest: and above all, the sorrowful Sinner: may take such sweet repaste of
Resolution, to amendment of life, and confirmation of Faith: that (in respect
of the Heavenly Solace, therein faithfully remembered:) all the pompes and
pleasures of this wicked world, shall be plainly perceived to be mere
misery. Writeen, by JOHN NORDEN.

JOHN. 6. Hec est voluntas Patris mei, qui misit me, vt omnis qui videt filium
and credit in eum, habeat vitam eternam, and ego resuscitabo eum, in nouissimo
die.

Printed at London by Richard Jones. 1585.

(...) and of the youngest, of those of my profession in that place: and yet as
a chicken under the wings of your Lordships favor, I rest in hope of defense,
from the scarring practices of such, as (deservedly or undeservedly) make
profers and manifest means to bereave the credit of all and some of those
that are or should be, as I (for functions sake) desire to be: namely, as one
able to execute, and with truth to prosecute our vocation, the office of
Attorneis: which office, as it has and ought to be of credit, so ought it to
be executed with honesty and truth (as it is not unknown to too many of us)
is grown into contempt of many. In respect (I think) of the ignorance that
the rudest sort are blinded with, that they see not their own ease and
benefit, slaundering the honest minded for the misbehauiour of the insatiable,
and dishonest dealers sakes. But right honorable, omitting that, it rests to
crave humble pardon for my presumptuous andacitie, wherein as a poor Cobbler, I
presume to show my self as it were ready to take a pensell in hand to frame a
goodly whole and perfect picture, when (in deed) I know not how to cast the
proportion of the very shoe it self: yet (always hoping pardon) having by
experience, a certain spark and feeling of sundry extraordinary and approved
errors, manifest, resting and daily increasing, among the lowest, as (also)
among those of higher calling and countenance: I presumed upon my slender
learning, to make a show of the erroneous and perverse conceit, that a man of
these our days, in the time of the clear light, was so besotted in the miste
of the voluptuous cares of this cankered world, that he could not see the way
to truth, but betook himself, to the way of sinful security, a man yet
breathing, whose reformation I heartily wish: And (to the end) that by his
folly, other may learn wisdom, and that by his reformation, other may be
reformed: I have attributed unto this poor piece of work (of mine) the Title
of, A Sinful Man's Solace: for that it is comfortable to all men, and hurtful
to none: I have contrived it into seven several days conference, between
Christ and a Sinner: Wherein it may appear, that as the minds of men being
evil, the days dangerous, and good endeavors, rare and seldom: So is our
Heavenly Solace, our Mediator Christ, the readier, through his grace, to
redress the one, and to stir up the other: wherein his willingness, and care
of our salvation, his mercy and favor showed, and our peruersitie and
weakness, laid open, and Satan vanquished: Which (right honorable) I have
endeavored to set down (according to the truth) as well, for mine own private
comfort, as for the commodity that others may reap of the same: Although)
perchance) it may be objected against me, that I am of an other profession,
unlearned, without experience, a green head, and of no judgment: I yield me
guilty of all: only, my profession, as a Christian, I stand to defend: though
not a professed Divine, but a poor Punie, that is willing to be instructed of
the more learned and godly divines: presuming herein, to make trial, whither it
will win me condemnation or good liking: praise or dispraise: favor, or ill
will: But being so resolved of your (good Lordships) good liking of the thing,
tending to a good purpose: though not so pithily and exactly handled, as
beseemed this piece of work: I rest so much the more, in hope, that your
favor, will breed other men's good affection, to this travail: tending to the
good o^ all men, and to the hindera^ce of none: We wander (right honorable) in
a wilderness of evils: we are beset with many dangers, familiar and household
perils and annoiances, which breed in our bosoms, not seen, not heard, not
felt, nor understood: by reason, that natural inclination to evil, does blind
our eyes, and dull our senses, in such sort, as neither, virtue, truth nor
grace, can take any place in us, but is repulsed by the hand of sin and
Satan rules in our hearts, and poisoneth all our desires, stirring us up to
all mischiefs: hardening so our hearts, that we, very seldom, reform our
lives: nor although we be (daily) called to unfeigned repentance, like untamed
coltes, too well fed, that know neither master, want, or woe: we run (headlong)
after the fleshly motions of our unstaid will, worse then the silly birds of
the air, the beasts or worms of the earth: who know their times and seasons,
and keep the law of their natural custom, as ancient writers do report,
that the Storke by the Skies, knows the time and season of the year, the
Crane, the Turtledoue, and diverse other birds, beasts, and worms, by their
coming and departure, do argue that they have a certain knowledge, that it is
not always Summer nor always Winter: and according to the time they labor,
they rest, they come, they go, they fast and feed: and therefore does the Ant,
as the least among the rest, gather in the Summer, to supply his want in the
Winter. By the due course of which silly and unreasonable Creatures, may Man
feel and understand his own imperfection and weakness, who being ordained
from the beginning, Supreme gouenour (as it were of all the rest of Gods
creatures, in respect of the gifts of reason, and wisdom,) whereby he ought
to direct his way to the praise of God, by his sincere and godly life, falls
into diverse, and sundry noisome and indecent conceits, sinful motions, and
ungodly devices, whereby to win unto himself here, that, that shall be to
him in the time to come, a mere impediment and stay of his entrance into
eternal joys, which earthly eyes can not see, neither can the minds of
mortal men conceive: for that natural reason draws from the true sense of
spiritual motions, unto unseemly attempts, to follow vice, with gredines,
like unto the brute beasts, whom no stayed counsel does gouetne, but even
the mere natural motions, whereunto it is incide^t for them to yield: wherein,
if men show themselves like brutish, to yield and give their rash consents to
every fleshly motion, It may well be said of them, which the Poet Iuuenall
says: Demens hou nimium demens, qui cum similis Diis.
Esse queat ratione vtens, vestigia mauult.
Sectari pecudum, veneri venerisque, sod ali,
Ventri indulge^do, and turpissima queque seque^do.


They are mad, yea too too mad, that where (in respect of knowledge) they might
be as Gods, they will rather choose, through the loosenes of their lives, and
careless coming forward in virtue, to give themselves over to follow (as it
were the steps of brute beasts, in all kind of filthiness, then imitating the
godly lives of good men, and counsel of Christ, to purchase the crown of
eternal bliss: And that by coruption of nature, whereby they repose th^^
affections in vanities: accompting that true felicity, which is mere
unhappiness, and contemning that, which is most excellent, esteeming it as mere
vanity, and that might they of reason, (were it not dimmed with the clowd of
worldly desires, and vain glory) plainly perceive: namely, how the Rich-man,
the covetous earl, thinks riches, and great abundance to be very felicity:
The glutton reposeth his delight in gurmandy, and persuades himself that
delicate fare passes all pleasures. The drunckard is persuaded, that: Cum,
ludeth inter Sciphos: when he is upon his Ale-bench, he thinks himself in
Paradise* The Leacher and (finally) all sinners, the thing wher' in they take
delight, is chiefest felicitie^ with them: But (truly) they shall have their
reward. A most miserable blindness it is, which has thus darkened the
senses of man, that, having in this world, so many experiences, of the mercy,
love, and liberality of the Lord,, through his Gifts, his creatures and
disposition of things wonderful, for the use of man. And again, seeing his
Justice his Vengeance and hatred, which he has and takes upon those, that
run headlong, by their loosenes of life, and secure conceits, into his
displeasure: how he turns them over in to a reprobate and dark senee, that
they may see, and not perceive: and hear and not understand, the deepenes of
his Judgments: For, as he is merciful, so he is just: as he gives, so he
takes away: he is a merciful father, but a seueare Judge: behoulding with
angrye countenance, the peruers and loose ways of men: which although he omyt
to punysh for a time, he has a Rod, provided: an Iron Rod, to beat (even to
powder) those that offend, of malicious wickedness: wherefore, he wylleth us to
be circumspect to walk honestly as in the day time: not, in banquetyng, in
Chambering and wanttonnesse: but according to the truth: So shall our days be
long and happy, up on earth: and after this life, our Joys be with out end.
Wherefore (my very good Lord) although my learning comes far too short, of
performing this piece of travail, of mine, in such sort, as the weightinesse
of the matter requires, yet I humbly crave your good Lordshyps wylling
acceptance thereof, as the fruits of a wyllyng mind, which I (in stead of a
greater Present) this day, among those of more value and estimation: I send as
a Messenger to manifest my good affection unto your good Lordshyp: which as I
confess to be sclender (in respect of ability:) I humly pray pardon of my
boldness, in troublyng you with so rude a Gift: But that I may not show my
self (altogether) vngreatefull, or unmindful of my duty, in the beginning
of this new year: wherein every man's zealous regard of mainteining favor with
those, whose good countenance, may (in all laudable things, be their defense: I
presume to commend this poor Sinful-mans solace: under your protection, to the
view of those, who desire to be awakned, out of their security, and trained in
the way of the heavenly verytie: which I have set down, not as a thing (in
respect of mine own learning) worthy to be publyshed: but that the course of
time, waxyng (as it does) from bad to worse, may be the better considered: And
the Work (not the workman) to be had in such regard, as the matter (which it
imports) does (justly) require: In which poor travail of mine, may be
seen, both the folly and secure race of the most: and a course toward a godly
Reformation of those that err, plainly set down: which being embraced, and
(duly) followed, shall bring such comfort to the poor afflicted soul, as (in
respect thereof) all the pleasures of this miserable world, shall be esteemed
both vain and dampnable.

Westminster, this first of January. 1585. Your good Lordshyps, most bownden:
JOHN NORDEN.

A SINFVLL Man's Solace. Contrived into seven days Conference between Christ
and a wordly-minded Rich-man.
THE ARGUMENT.
A certain coueitous Rich man, having his Cofers full of gold and silver: And
so great abundance of all things about him, that he thought himself so far
in fortunes favor, that (being blinded with his greedy desires of gain, and
love of himself) he fell into this foolish conceit following.

The Rich-man. OH Corpse of mine, The foolish conceits of most men, that this
world does favor (as it were) at will, is commonly thus.
take now thine ease,
betake thy lymbs to rest:
I have enough to keep thee now,
as dainty as the best.
My wily wit has won such wealth
now is my storehouse ^ull:
I will the same enlarge in have,
and down my barnes I Will pull.
And build them bigger for my grain,
whose great increase is such:
That all my house ne Garners can,
contain in them so much,
My Staules likewise I must augment*
wherein I may conueie,
Mine Oxen and my Cattle store,
my fodder and mine Hay,
I must provide me greater Chests,
and Locks in stronger wife,
Where to convey my bags of gold,
with strong and curious Keys.
And Servants both of men and maids
I must likewise provide:
To wait on me and on my wife,
where so we go or ride.
My Plough and other husband^works,
for want of Servants more,
Are idle and lie quite undone,
but I will get me store.
My flocks of sheep do so abound,
my sheepheards are so few,
By view, the number of their charge
they cannot rightly show.
Whereby my profit goes to wrack,
I will provide in have,
To keep my substance from annoy,
and from such spoiling waste.
And when these things provided be,
I then will take mine ease:
And carke for nothing else at all, Worldly wealth, and bodily health are the
principal things now a days regarded.

but how to shun disease.
And to maintain mine health so long,
that I may see my store,
To be as great as Cresus wealth,
ye, (if I can) and more,
Yet first I will erect in have, A great care of the wealthy, is to have a gaye
house, decked both within and without, after the daintiest fashion.

a sumptuous Palace hie,
Wherein like Prince in passing pomp,
my friends and I may lie:
With each delight and pleasant sport,
to please my dainty mind,
Set forth with caruings and conceits,
as curious head can find.
With goodly Gallaries aloft,
of prospect far and near:
With Garden walks, and pleasant springs:
and princely parks of dear.
Sweet Arbors here and there, about
my Palace shall be set,
With plants of price, of sweetest smell,
that I for coin can get.
Wherein, to pass my plesaunt days,
I will my solace take:
With melody and music sweet,
and all things else forsake.
(...) is had to the situation of a worldly building, and none at all for the
place where the soul must dwell at last.
But lo, where should I find a seat,
thus to content my mind?
It must be where some plesaunt spring
and woods do grow by kind.
Where eccoes with resounding voice,
may answer Cornet shrill:
The Trumpet and Recorder sweet,
to please my fancy still.
Which might it be, where Wheary boat
could pass the Theams with oar,
Where I might take my like repaste,
with Citron and Bandoare.
It were a wished seat indeed,
a pleasant place for me:
To take my solace at my will,
and pass my time with glee.
And as I guess I have a place,
within a Manor near,
A Farm in lease, I Will get me that,
and place my Palace there.
I think my Tenant will be glad, Might without regard to right, thinks the
poorer will yield for fear. And the Landlords think the Tenant bound to yield
to all his tyrranie

to yield to my request:
If not, he shall be sure to sit,
therein with little rest.
Go footboys, go thy way in haste,
to Simple of the Grange,
And bid him come to me as fast,
as he can hither range.
Thou shall not need to show ye cause,
but bid him come in have:
And tell him if he tarry long,
his stay will breed him waste.

The Footboye. I have bin there, lo Simple coms
he is at hand, I see
Him come: lo here he is, say on,
whatso your pleasure be.

Simple. God save you sir, lo here I am, Poor men must stoop, and yet the
more they yield, the more they are oppressed.

your message I obey:
Both I and mine to your command
as subjects here this day.

The Rich-man. I thank thee Simple, welcome now,
I thank thee for thy pain,
I sent for thee, come walk with me,
thou shall go soon again.
Good Simple, do one thing for me,
and I will be thy friend.
It is (indeed) a small request:
in brief I Will make an end.
And thus it is: the Grange thou have,
and lands by lease of me.
Fair words move men to do that they after repent.
It will be eighteen years and more,
before it ended be.
I must request the same in hand,
And I will set thee, where
Thou shall be sure, to live as well
as ever thou did there.
It is a place so fit for me,
thou may not me withstand,
But grant me back my state again,
i will build there out of hand.

Simple^ Oh Sir, I trust, you will not so
oppress me seely man:
If I forgo my Farm, I must
seek dwelling where I can,
Desire it not Landlord I pray,
on knees I do request:
I came with willing mind to you, The mildnes of the poor, make the rich
often more cruel.

but now with grief oppressed.
I humbly pray you be content,
crave not my living so:
It makes my heart with bitter sighs,
to burst it self for woe.

The Rich-man. Wherefore? I will bestow on thee, By flattery or threatening,
by hook or by crook, he will have it.

A place as good as that:
And stand thy faithful friend at need,
thou do thou know not what,
Denying me so small a thing:
which gently I request,
But yield it up I say or else,
thou shall have little rest.

Simple. Where shall mine woeful wife become? The rich regard not a poor man's
grief, but their own pleasure and profit.

what shall my children do?
Ten tender Infantes, all undone,
this fact of thine shall rue.
Have some remorce, therefore on us,
let pity pearce your breast.
Seek not to suck, your sweet of me,
already thus oppressed.
The sharper to the poor, the sweeter to the rich.
Who gave an Incum, great God wot
and yearly rent, not small,
To pinch at every quarter day,
my careful heart withal.
And gape you yet, for greater gayn?
to grieve me more and more?
Nay, gain is past, and now you seek
to get me out of door.
The poore-mans petition, makes the rich man the prouder^
Good landlord let these words suffice,
let mercy move you so,
That I may now depart again,
work not my further woe.
It greeues me to forgo the thing
concerning me so near.
Content your self therefore, I may
not buy your love so dear.

The Rich-man. Ah, are you at this point indeed,
The countenance of the rich makes the poor man quake.
has scripture taught you this
To use such taunting words at him
that far your better is?
Yet law has twenty tricks again,
which I have learnd of late:
The covetous man has no regard to the equity, but to thextremitie, to work
the poor much w^
To make such beggars as thou art,
to forfaite their estate.
Wherefore be sure to pay thy rent,
according to the day
Or else be sure I will not slack
to thrust thee clean away.
And other Covenants there are,
(although thou have enioiyde
Thy lease with quiet) which may soon
make all thy title void.
And if I find a hole therein,
what law may do, be sure,
To feel the smarte, if gold or fee, Threatening and flattery seem
contraries, and yet in nature coosen Iermaines, works of mischief.

thy torments may procure.
Content thy self therefore and yield
unto my small request:
And I will stand, at need, thy friend,
and when thou art oppressed.

Simple. Alas, is there no shift to shun,
this forced cause of woe? Voluntary despair.

Must I be sorst against my will,
my living to forgo?
Well, then I know my wife and I
with all our children, must
Go beg our bread, go steal, or sterue,
to satisfy your lust.

The Rich-man. Fair words is franckest when the game is fairest.
No, no, thou shall not beg thy bread,
thy wife, ne Children shall
Go steal, nor starve for want of food,
nor be oppressed with thrall:
If thou will yield thy lease again,
Of all the Grange to me:
Dissimulation is not dainty in the ambitious man.
I will do any thing in deed,
wherein to pleasure thee.
By word, or deed, to ride, or go,
to lend, or give, be sure,
I will be ready at thy need,
while life, and lymbs endure.

Simple. Thus if you do, I am content
Dotage in doubte^
to satisfy your will:
But if I thought the contrary,
I would retain it still.

The Rich-man. Doubt not the contrary, but fetch
He will cut his throat first, and lay a plaster afterward.
thy Lease in have to me:
I Will cancel that, and then I will,
do what I can for thee.

Simple. Then grant that I may keep the same
A small demand.
this quarter, that I may:
Provide for my poor family,
some other where to stay.

The Rich-man. Well, bring thy Lease I will not stand, He promises honey, and
gives gall.

upon a thing so small:
I will do any thing I can,
to pleasure thee withal.

Simple. Here is the Lease, do what you will,
therewith, I am content,
But sure my wife does sigh so sore, Qui ante non cauet, post do lebit.

as though her heart would rent.
And all her children cry to see,
their Mother in that case:
Would God you would vouchsafe to show
me woeful man some grace.
To let me have my Lease again,
and I will pray for you:
Or else no flintie heart, but may,
mine hap, so heavy rue.

The Rich-man. Nay, nay, pray not for me at all, The poor man's grief, a
pastime to the rich.

these words be but in vain:
It Is naught to me, although thy wife
and children, wail amain.
Wherefore (I say) provide a place,
pack from the Grange in have:
The promise of honey performed with gall.
Thou shall not tarry there (in deed)
if this week once were past.
I will not slack my building so,
nor spend the time so long:
Hence, hence, thy peevish prattle does,
my weighty causes wrong.
For I will presently in hand,
t-accomplish my desire:
Bags of gold and silver, are the eggs whereon Satan fits abroode, to
breed young Diuils, to torment the^ that put their confidence therein.
I have laid baggs enough in store,
to pay the workemens hyre.
I would it were now finished fair,
according to my will:
In finest wise as might be done,
by man's inuentiue skill.
But long it shall not be I trow,
Till it be brought to pass:
That I may sit therein and say,
a brauer never was.
And in delight to pass my days,
Wealth, and a gay house, foolish and imperfect felicity.
in such a princely place.
Who would not be in pleasant plight
to stand in such a case.

Solace. Oh foolish man, oh mortal wight, God sends men knowledge of their
error, only of love, to win them to salvation.

in woeful state art thou,
Thy soul accursed, a thousand times,
for sin, unless thou bow.
Has Satan thus be-witched thee?
has worldly wealth undone?
That sacred thread, that Jesus for
thy sweet Salvation spun?
Then, the^, woe worth the days wherein
thy cancred corpse do live
Throough foolish will, to fond delight,
such rash consent to give.

The Rich-man Why, what art thou, The truth, is strange to the woldly ones,
whose wits are occupied about transitory, and vain causes. The rich, measure
other men's wisdom and honesty, by their own wealth.
that tauntest thus
and thus controulest me?
I know thee not, nor Jesus, whom
thou say my friend to be.
But for thy wealth or his, I know
can not my wealth surpass,
My riches are as great (I trow)
as Jobs abundance was:
And yet to see thy taunting terms,
thy carping crakes at me,
Do make me muze, yt thou will not
bow to mine high degree.
I think thou do not know my wealth,
my state unknown to thee,
Makes thee so rash: I pray thee show
thy wealth and name to me.

Solace. My wealth is a contented mind,
The greatest wealth, is co^tentation.
my name, a name of bliss:
No sweeter or more wholesome name
in all the earth there is,
My will it is likewise to win,
thy sinful soul from woe,
To kill these wicked weeds in thee,
that in abundance grow.

The Rich-man. Man's blindness can not see the misery of this world, nor
understand the perfect happiness of heaven.
Can thou redeem the soul from woe,
that is in passing joy?
Whom nothing can oppress at all,
or work the same annoy?
If furious foe, should seek to spill:
my blood, or work my thrall:
My goods are great, I have enough,
to purchase help withal.
Money accepted as a God, to redress many miseries.
If health of body do impair,
and sickness do possess
My Corpse with grief, my goods can get,
best Physic for redress.
What if a time of dearth should come
to pinch the poorer men?
Then were the time, for me to make*
of every penny ten.
For I have store of every thing, Where there are all things at will to content
the flesh, there is seldom any thing to quicken the spirit.

that would be present gayn:
As Sheep and Oxen, fruict and wul,
and every kind of grain.
Which ten years dearth could never spend,
what can annoy me then?
I live secure, I am at ease,
I stand no dread of men.
What say thou now, am I in ease
to seek for aid of thee? Many may, but few have relief of the wealthy.

No, no, go pack, a thousand may
have their relief of me.

Solace. ALas thou foolish wretch, whom the dregs of the uncertain mucke of
the world, has drowned in the puddle of pernicious security. Thou laughest,
Many sing, when they should sigh, and laugh, when they should weep. Many build
l^oft for the body but think not of the pore ^oule where it shall dwell in the
end, the du^gion of hell,
when in deed thou should weep: Thou singest, when thou have great
occasion to sigh, and thou triumphest, in rash desire of finishing a sumptuous
house of earthly and no durable matter, where (in deed) thou should rather,
put on thy mourning weeds of sorrow, for the ruinous fall of a more precious
building, thy poor soul, whom the heavy burden of thy sinful and voluptuous
life, has cast into the dungeon of darkness. Hearken thou unto me therefore,
and mark my words which flow from the fountain of perfect felicity. Harke^
to god defy the devil.
And thou shall learn another lesson, thou shall sing another song, and frame
thy fancy after another fashion. That is thou shall condemn and despise,
Riches in respect of the uncertainty of them, are not to be accounted a man's
owne^
and in the bitterness of thy soul, even curse those things that thou hold
so dear, and of so high price. And sigh for sorrow, that thou have so much
regarded the things that were none of thine.


The Rich-man. What, what, you run at random, sir
your wits are not your own:
I think poor man with tauntinge terms
Worldlinges do persuade the^ selves to live for ever and that there is noe
God to take again what he has given them But make Fortune the Author of
happynes.
your wits are overflowed
Do I possess that is not mine?
whose wealth is that I have?
Whose is the substance of the store,
which friendly Fortune gave?
Is not the gold that I have got,
mine Oxen fair and fat?
My flocks of sheep mine own? poor man
thou say, you know not, what.
But tame thy tongue, or use thy terms
in better sort to me:
Take other mates for thine estate,
I am no mate, for thee.

Solace. Alas that silly soul of thine,
does rest in woeful case:
It can not choose but rue to see,
thee run so retchles race.
What though thy body live at ease, It is the fashion of fickle Fortune to
favor to day and to frown to morrow. But the surest hold of happiness is to
trust in God.

and wealth abound at will?
Will thou like witles wretch give thanks
for foolish Fortunes skill?
In fickle state (alas) art thou,
dame Fortunes wheel unsure:
Can turn thy wealth to want again
when thou art most secure.
Thy silly soul is sunck in sin,
whose due deserte is woe,
Wherefore return again in time It is a rare matter, to find a man willing
to forgo his wealth, or to take the loss of his abound^n^e with p^tience.

to friend, and fly thy foe.

The Rich-man. What should I fly, oh foolish wight,
my Lands, mine only stay?
My store, my stuff, my bags of gold,
and cast my wealth away?
No, no, I Will know from whence thou art,
thy name, thy force and will:
Before thy cunning shall convert,
my Conscience to thy skill.

Solace. To shun the inconvenience that Riches brings is to repose no further
trust in them, then as vrge^t necessity forces.
AS my meaning is not, that thou should rashly or unadvisedly cast away that
abou^dance (the gift whereof thou foolishly, attributest to Fortune, which,
indeed, God has bestowed upon thee) so I would not that thou should put
such affiance and such trust, of a permanent and happy estate in that, that so
soon may vanish away: Psalm. 62 10.
like the flower that in the morning, the dew makes most fragrant fresh and
sweet, Iam. 1.10 11.
and before the evening with the scorching sun beams is withered, loses his
fashion, and all beuty. The rich, and their riches compared to the flower of
the field.
Even so fares it with the rich of the Earth: who (to gether) with their
abundance* fleet away, the body to the grave and their wealth they know not
to whom: what fond conceit (therefore) moves thee (thou foolish man) thus
madly to make fortune the master of thine happiness, and to account this
world, the habitacle of thy sinful carcas, of a further and more durable
continuance then it is. (...) in this world to to be found.
Think it certain and nothing more certain, that true felicity is not here to
be sought for, not here to be had, nor here (after the manner thou have begun)
to be tasted. To be made rich, to become Lords, Ladies, Kings, or Keysars,
Worldly promotions, no spark of true happiness.
to be noble, or honorable, worshipful, or Gentlemen, or to abound with all
the pleasures, or pleasant delights that the whole world can yield, is no
spark of true happiness: and therefore deceiuest thou thy self, thou runnest
headlong into a laborinth of mischiefs, in choosing this world, to be thy
throane of honor, There be too many that think, that there is neither heaven
nor hell: but the pleasure and pains of this world. Like Epicures, who shall
find it contrary, to their endless destruction. The glory of this world a
prick of evil.
thy seat of happiness, and Fortune, the mother and nurce, of thy prosperous
estate, as though there were no other place of bliss, no other seat of honor
nor other Aucthor of happiness: here (thou fool) the Glory, the Pride, the
Pomp, the wealth, the bravery, the pastime and daliance, honors and riches,
the aucthorities and preferments, together, with all the Ornaments of beauty
and strength, carnal reason, and worldly wisdom, what is it, but the pricks
of Satan, a sting to the good conscience? and destruction to the wicked soul?
what is it but vanity, ye mere vanity and affliction of spirit?


The Rich-man. This answers not to my demand,
I ask thy name, and why
The arrogant man is ^oth to be re^oued* but if he feel himself manifestly
touched with his fault he will put on a stout ^ace, and cover his wickedness with
audaci^^e.
Thou do control me thus, for that
a care to live have I.
I will avouch and verefie,
which I have said before
I am not yet afraid: I know
such preachers are there store,
That cry in every pulpit still,
woe worth the wealthy ones,
They threaten with the plagues of, hell
yea all the plagues at once.
But seek not thou, even so to set,
my stately state at naught,
Be not too bold, I am no babe,
I see what sleightes are sought*
To suck the sweet of such as I,
that have such wealth at will,
But show thy name perchance I may,
attend unto thy skill.

Solace. The sweetest Solace for an offender, is ^^^don for (...) crime^
My name as erst before I said,
Is wholesome, pure, and sweet:
True Solace, for a sinful Soul,
whom Satan luls a sleep.

The Rich-man. ^
Is Solace then your name in deed?
For thee then I have ^ought,
With great expense, with carke and care,
with all my will and thought:
And wandered far and near about,
my country here and there.
To settle me in sweetest soil,
good Solace show me where*
And what may best delight the mind
of him who has in store
A world of wealth, yet still I wish,
with all my heart for more.

Solace. Thy senses foolish man do err,
thy fancy flies too fast,
Thou feedst thy folly like the fly,
that fryes in flame at last.
Do thou suppose my coming is, The word of God is not to draw men to, but
to withdraw men from sin.

to solace thee with sin?
No, no, it is to call thee from,
the error thou art in,

The Rich-man. Why say thou so? Solace I seek,
If thou be Solace, say,
I am: and I am he that will,
all pleasant things obey.
Want not for gold nor silver dear, Nothing too dear for the flesh, but
every trifle accounted too dear for the Soul.

ask what thou will, for fee,
No price shall pass, ask what thou will,
and I will give it thee.

Solace. I crave not gold nor silver man,
Heavenly comfort revealed to none that have their whole delight to fulfill the
will of the f^esh^
thy fees I do defy:
These profers do thy wicked heart,
oh Sinful man discry.
I see thou sauourest all of sin,
true Solace, is no share,
For thee, nor for such wicked ones,
that thus affected are.
Leave of, Leave of, therefore in have,
these fond conceits of thine.
And to mine healthful counsel see,
thine heart thou do incline.
Let Satan sit no more within,
thy breast to rule thy will.
Feeding thy fancy with delights,
of worldly pleasures ill.
Look thou into the Gospel true,
the word of life and light,
And thou shall see (as in a glass,)
thy self in sinful plight.

The Rich-man. This solace is contrary to the rich man's ^xpectation.
What? what? is this, the Solace which
thou will revive withal:
And win my silly Soul in have,
from pain and pinching thrall.
Quite contrary to my request, He that persuades a worldling from his
inordinat cares of the world, he accepts him as his utter enemy. Too much
affiance in a ches is enmity to God.

yea, to my sudden woe,
I thought thou had bin for my tooth
but lo thou art my foe.

Solace. No, no, I am thy faithful friend,
and thou a foe to me,
Which thou shall well in fine perceive
was cause I came to thee.

The Rich-man Well, well, say on, proceed to show
thine whole intent in have,
Be brief, I pray, the evening comes
on us, thou see full fast.

Solace. Attend thee then, let pleasure pass,
and hearken what I say,
My Solace shall be sweet, in fine,
if thou my words obey.
AS far as I can perceive, by the circumstance of thy former determination and
intended proceedings as also by thine obstinate perseverance, in thy wilful
and perverse opinion: that either thou haste never heard, never read, or quite
forgotten, that sacred saying of Jesus Christ in his gospel, where he warns
all men to beware of covetousness: And to consider that the safety of their
lives, consists not in the multitude of their riches, Riches can not save a
man's life.
and worldly pleasures. But thou ere while protestedst, that thou knew
neither me nor Jesus Christ, then can thou hardly believe his sayings: He
that loves not God hears not his word.
much less the sayings of any other, that comes unto thee in his name, whom
likewise thou co^temnedst ere while, saying: there were of such Preachers
store, but hearken a little what I will say: In the 12. of Luke.
when Jesus put forth the parrable of him whose fruits, and abundance so
increased, that he was forced to enlarge his rooms to co^ueie his Grain and
store, so much increasing: Though God be unknown to man yet he sees the
secrets of the heart of man and judges accordingly. God is just to punish the
ofenders, and to turn their pleasures into pain.
either he prognosticated of thee or of some other, whose heart was set on
fire with the love of this world, as thine is: And therefore, assure thy self,
that although he be unknown to thee, and his messengers despised of thee* the
peruersitie of thy life, thy wilful rebellion against him is not hid, nor
can be concealed from his knowledge, nor thy self defended from his rod, who
keeps his punishment in store for thee, till the fulness of thy wickedness be
come to an end, when (according to his Justice) he will turn all thy pleasures
into pain, thy plenty into poverty, thy wealth into want, thy statly palace
(that thou intendest to build) into a deep botto^lesse dungion, and thy
prospectes of pleasure, into horrible darkness in hell, thy sweet mellodie and
music into horrible hissing of venomous Serpents, and hydious hellish powers,
and thy singing and mirth, into howling, weeping, and gnashing of teeth, God
Punishes with the want of that that we here abou^de withal.
thy sweet smells, into stinking and loathsome savors, thy delights of the
Thems, into the stinking water of Stix in hell. And further, (that of Justice)
he shall give thee in stead of thy gorgeous attire, miserable nakedness, in
stead of thy delicates, gurmandies and belly cheer, Gods judgment is without
redemption.
hunger and inextinguishable thirst: in so much as thou shalt not have, for
gold silver or friendship, for wealth or good will, as much as one drop of
cold water to cool the heat of thy tormented conscience: Consider this and
believe it: for, Luke 16.
was not he of whom the Gospel makes mention, in case as good, (or rather)
in the sight of the world, as happy as thou esteemest thy self to be? Was he
not Rich? had he not abundance? Was he not clothed in Rich raiment, and
gorgious garments of costly colors most sumptuous to behold? fed he not as
fine, and fared he not as daintely as thou? was he not as duly attended on,
and pleased with as solemn eye service, as thou? was he not glutted with all
kind of pleasures? and had all the world as it were at his beck and
commandment? as much as thy self? And yet such was the hardness of his heart,
the frailty of his faith, and coldness of his charity, the wilful stubbernes
of his untamed will, that he would not bestow as much as the crummes that fell
from his table, no not the voidings of his Trenchers, upon poor Lazarus, who
lamentablely oppressed with hunger, and grieved with soars, Dogs cruel by
kind, yet here more courteous then men.
begged at his gate, having none other relief, none other help or comfort in
that deep distress, but the poor Curs, that licked away the filth that did
flow, and distill from his Loathsome carcas, pitiful to behold: But was for
very hunger driven to yield up the ghost whom Angels forthwith carried into a
place of unspeakable bliss, Poverty, and Sores, no bar to keep the Soul
from bliss.
the bosom of Abraham, where he rested, revived with Joy, refreshed with
comfort, released of misery, and richly reliued with all unspeakable happynes.
But mark what became of this dainty rich man, Death not long after, took him
from his abundance and left his riches he knew not to whom: If money could
save the soul the devil had lost his share.
and the Devil and his Angels, attending his departure, as greedy of so great
a pray, without delay drew him into the deep dungion of hell, to pray on him
there, their fill, and to give him his just reward, in utter darkness, where is
continual weeping and gnashing of teeth, and where the worm of his conscience,
never ceased to torment him: The rich man's grief increases, to see the poor
man in bliss.
and so much the more, seeing ye poor soul and loathsome Lazarus, whom he in
the world so much despised to be placed in heaven, and him self in hell:
Lazarus in bliss and he in curse, Lazarus in Joy, he in pain, Lazarus in
great glory, he in perpetual darkness, yea in such unspeakable heat of,
conscience, ye he cried for one drop of mercy and could not obtain it. To
deny help to the needy, is sin before God,
What say thou now, this man for denying to give that which he thought his
own, what was his reward. Thou have not heard, that he went about to defraude
any of his living, or by threats or flatterye to take, from any man that which
was not his, but only for seying his poor brother to want, that, wherein he
abounded. In what case thou art thou, who have not only, denied things
necesarye to the nedye, and withheld help from the helples, not only, not
releued, but oppressed the poor, and wrongfully taken from poor Simple thy
Tennant (whom in conscience thou art bound to relieve,) his silly Cottage
whereupon he lived, having none other place to hide his head in, Many are ready
to rifle. But few to relieve the poor.
to harbor him and his in, which is lamentable, being monyles, and
friendlesse, having many poor children, and no refuge, and thou have neither
remorce of thine own conscience, pity upon their estate, or remembrance of
thy reward. Thy greedy mind is contrary and clean repugnant to the counsel
of Jesus Christ, A hard Sentence to a miserable man to give all that they have
to the poor. Pro. 19.17. He le^deth to the Lord, that has pity on the poor.
^ob. 4.8 9. A foundation laid upon the pleasures of this world, is the ground
work of destruction. Luke 12.20.
who wills thee to give all that thou have to the poor: but contrary, thou
robbest the poor to make thy self Rich. Thou do not consider that he that
has pity on the poor, lends unto ye Lord, and the Lord will reward him.
But I say, seeing thou have much, thou should give plenteously. Thou should
not shut up thy compassion from the needy, nor forget to distribute, whereby
thou might lay up in store a good foundation against the time to come. But
the foundation which thou beginnest to lay, is upon a weak ground, upon a
ground that will sink thee, into ye gulf of perpetual perdition. Thou fool,
this night will Christ take away thy life, then whose shall these things be,
which thou have pawned thy Soul for? Think upon the impossibility of the
Rich-man, to enter into the kingdom of heaven: Hard for the rich man, but
impossible for the wicked rich man to enter into heaven.
for if generally, it be as hard a thing for a Rich-man to enter into the
kindome of heaven, as for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, how
shall it be for thee, which art so far in love with thy bags of gold, and
great possessions, and so desirous to become wealthy, that thou fallest into
diverse temptations, into the snares of the Devil, by many and noisome desires,
Iosu. 7.10. Achan stoned to death for stealing.
running headlong into hell, death and destruction. Achan, through his
coueitous desire of gold, was himself stoned to death, and all that he had,
burned at the commandment of Joshua. Ahab, seeing his poor neighbor Nabothes
vinyardly conveniently for him, Ahabs wicked desire of Naboths vinyarde.
fell into a burning desire thereof, and never left until Naboth was slain, by
ye procureme^t of wicked Iesabel his wife: and then went Ahab to take
possession of ye vineyard, The wickedness of Iesabell.

A just reward.


where the Prophet of the Lord told him, yt for his wicked deed, he and his
wife should be devoured with Dogs. But he himself upon repentance, obtained
pardon: Pardon upon repentance.
but Iesabel was eaten with Dogs according to the word of the Prophet: Let these
examples move thee, who have deserved no less punishment, in defrauding
(partly by flattery, and parley by thy threatening) thy poor Tenant, whose
undoing cries unto the Lord, God sees the wickedness of man.
who slumbreth not, but sees thy wickedness, and has laid up in store a
punishment for thy cruelty, and pride of heart, as by these and many other
examples it may appear. Repent therefore in time.


The Rich-man. ^rueth unpleasant to the wicked.
This sounds not like Solace man
this fills my heart with woe:
This is to drive them to despair,
that with abundance floe.

Solace. No, no, but hearken thou a while,
what I shall say to thee:
For every man is not accursed,
that is of rich degree:
As shall appear hereafter plain,
examples here ensue.
Of David, Iobe, and Abraham,
believe them, they be true.
THe scripture reports that Abraham was rich, Abraham, Job, and David rich.
that Job was wealthy, and that David abounded in substance, and yet Abraham
believed in God and was reputed righteous: Genesis 15.^9.
Of Job it was said, that there was not his like upon the Earth, a man simple
and just, fearing God, Job. 1.3.
and declining from evil. And the Lord himself, said of David, 1. King. 15.4.
that he had found a man, according to his own heart, whereby thou may
perceive, that riches are not of themselves, so much to be dislyked, or
condemned, but the abuse of them: The abuse of riches to be avoided.
the greedy gathering, and wicked whording of them: for these men, although
they were very rich and had all things, esteemed them selves as having nothing,
The Rich should esteem of themselves as having nothing. Riches withdraws the
hearts of men, from the truth. Luke. 16.
so humble were they in mind, so lowly in their hearts, and liberal of their
goods. The Prophet David says, if riches increase, set not your hearts upon
them: for as the Adamant by nature, draws Iron to it, so riches commonly
draws the hearts of men to an insatiable desire, according to the words of our
Savior, that where a man's riches are, there is his heart. And surely it is hard
to find a man* of a content estate, that desires not more, and a harder thing
to find one, having more then enough, that is content. The reason is, because
they perceive not, that as an Horse is a vain thing, to save a man: so their
riches is of no force to relieve them without it be guided and bestowed
according to ye word of God, Riches not available without the grace of God to
guide the same.
which is by the examples of Abraham, Job, and David, who were as having
nothing* and yet possessing all things. This (if thou did consider, thou
would accept, and content thy self only with the gifts of God, We must be
content withour estate, be it high, or lowe^
were they great, or small, many, or few, and that with modest and hearty
thankfulness, not in pride, or despair, not couiting other men's, but to be
helpful to others with thine own: for there is a God in heaven, that will one
day ask account, We must give account of our Tallent.
what Talent he gave thee in his absence to use, what thou have gotten thereby?
which is: what good thou have done by thy vocation to others? And further, he
will demand what goods thou had of his to keep, how thou gattest them, and
how thou bestowedst the^? what will thou answer? can thou say, I have with
my Talent, gained one other? when, indeed, all thy studies (I perceive) are
set upon greedy and ungodly gain? and so have thou loitred in thy masters
business, and waited on Satan, ran from Christ, and followed Beliall, forsaken
thy Savior and obeyed the mortal enemy of all mankind, the Devil. How can
thou say for the getting of all thy goods together? can thou say, It is a
hard thing for a rich man to discharge him self of all ill means to get his
goods.
I have gotten them with pain and travail of my body, with the sweat of my
face? nay, can thou excuse thee (if thou be charged) to have encroched by
violence that, that other poor men have sweat for? other have travailed for?
and painfully purchased with great and daily labor? how (I say) can thou
excuse thy self herein? But to come nearer unto thy curssed wretchedness, admit
thou can excuse thee of this, (as thou can not) it shallbe further demanded
of thee how thou have bestowed those things that the Lord has made thee
Steward of, here? and what will thou answer? will thou say, here is thine
own? It will not discharge thee: for he commands them that be rich in this
world, to be ready to give and glad to distribute, but thou art not only not
ready to give, but take from other, that which is not thine, Mat. 19.20.
Occasion, the minister of much mischief The rich rob themselves of the freedom
of a good mind* through insatiable covetousness.
thou art not glad to distribute, but greedy to lay up: where the rust and
moth does corrupt, and evil disposed persons, have their minds stirred up, to
venture their lives and souls to rob thee of. And in the mean time thou thy
self, robbest thy self of the freedom of a godly mind, and tiest thy poor
soul to the Gates of destruction, with the cords of pride and self love, not
making any account how to avoid, thy casting into utter darkness, where shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth, It is the least care in this world to a uoid the
pains of the world to come^
as an unprofitable servant: neither make thou any account, how to avoid
bu^ning* among the Tares as a weed of the world, or to shun the company of the
goats, that shall be set at the left hand of the Lord in the last judgment, as
matter for the fire, that never shall be quenched: as thou have heard, by the
reward of the former Rich man, in the 10. of Luke. But to come again to thy
riches, which thou so honor, and to thy stin^king carcas, which thou so
daintilie feedest, and finely ^l^^hest. The vncerta^ntie of riches by the
example of Job.
Remember that Iobe was rich, with whose abundance, thou made comparison
before, (yet not with his integrity) but mark how soon his prosperity was
changed into adversity, his goods into grief, his wealth into wickedness, his
health into sickness, and all his glory into utter contempt of all his
friends: so vain and variable are riches, and so subject to sudden change,
is your health of body, that you care so much for: Riches (I say) are casual,
and rise* and fall, at the pleasure of the giver: yea, were thy riches as much
as Abraham's, or Jobs, David's, or the greatest Kings in the world: yea, were it
as much as the world could contain, and were it never so secreatly hidden, or
conveyed under those curious Locks and keys, All riches are in the hands of
god: and he is able to take away what he has given.
that thou say thou will provide, in Braze^ or Iron Chests, never so
strongly, thou could not bring it without the compass of Gods omnipotent
power, but that he is able to pluck it from thee, to make it to melt away like
wax at the scorching fire: what madness (therefore) art thou in, Man's folly to
promise him self ease in respect of his riches.
thou foolish man, to say to thy soul or body, take ease or live at rest, for
thou have enough for thy life? think thou not that as God is the Aucthor to
give so to be in his power to take away? as he exaltith, so he can pluck down?
as he makes rich, so he can make poor again? And (therefore) the most sure
and certain mean, Man is but tenant at will of his worldly substance.
long to enjoy these gifts of God, is to acknowledge thy self to be but his
Tenant at will, of all that thou possessest: and therefore bound to dispose at
his pleasure for fear of Fortune: and not to repose thine happiness in thine
abundance, Happiness is not in the abundance, nor unhappiness in the want of
wealth. Job. 17, 13.
neither thine unhappiness in the want of transitory wealth: considering that
as thou came into this world naked, so shalt thou naked return, from
whence thou came, to earth: of which thou were created, and leave the honor
of thine house behind thee, for the pomp of thy wealth shall not follow thee.
But what thou have carefully heaped up, others shall prodigally, waste. Evil
gotten, soon spent.
And therefore, is the abou^dance of wealth so far from making men truly
happy, as it rather turns to their utter destruction, and even poison, unto
their soul. 2. King. 5.22.
Geizi under the name of Elizeus, took reward of money, to make himself rich:
The reward of Bribers.
But it wrought with ill effect, it poisoned him, it caused him to fall into
Leprosy as white as Snow. Ananias and Saphira, Act. 5.3.4.
for keeping back part of the price of their own possessions to their own
use, were rewarded with present death. But call to mind the horrible end of
that notorious Arch-traytor Judas, Mat. 27.5.
who for money betrayed his Master, and Lord, the Savior of the world Jesus
Christ. Whose corrupt conscience, by reason of his briverie and treason, so
pricked him, that in desperate madness he hanged himself, The reward of Judas,
for betraying Christ.
and burst in sunder in the midst, that all his bowels gusshed out. An infinite
number of such examples (whereof, covetousness has bin the aucthor) thou may
read, both in ye scripture, Coueitousnes odious in the sight of God.
as also in profane histories, confirmed to be odious in ye sight of God, by
his just judgments, following such covetous desires of men. Wherefore look thou
unto thy self, search thine heart, try thy thoughts, examine thine affections,
clear thee if thou can, of this pernicious desire: no, thou can not say,
thine hands are clear, of taking: thy Chestes free from whording, that, which
was wrongfully gotten. Wash the^ thine hands, cleanse thine heart, and rid thy
cofers of their ill gotten goods, least God of his justice come down, and
find thee thus polluted, reward thee according to thy deserts: he sees it
that will not suffer thee, to escape scot-free. Thou may perchance say, yt
thou must provide for a dear year, thou say, thou have enough for many
dear years: many thowsands have the less: Let Simple thy Tennant (for one)
be witness, did not Christ, feed with flue barley loaves, Mat. 14.20. Io^ 6.11.
Mat. 15.33. Water given out of the hard rock.
and two fishes, five thousand men, beside women and children? and with seven
loaves and a few small fishes, fed he not four thowsa^d? when ye children of
Israel wanted water in ye wilderness to kill their thirst, was it not given the^
out of an hard Rock? 1 King. 19.6. Eliah fed in the wilderness.
did not God send unto Eliah bread and water in ye desert, in his great, and
wearisome journey? which shows the care and tender mercy of ye good God
toward them yt fear him. And to show his Justice likewise upon ye stubborn
rebellious and stifnecked: Dani. 4.22. The fall of Nabugodonozer for his pride
and rebellion against god.
what did he to Nabugodozer, ye mighty king, that esteemed himself rather a
God, then a mortal man: did he not pluck him from his kingly throne, from his
seat of glory, and set him amongst the wild beasts of the field? And in
stead of his Palace of admirable beauty, was he not forced to shroud himself
with the bushes in the wild field? and for his dainty fare, was feign to feed
among the beasts of the land, on grass and green herbs, contrary to the
course of man? only for his pride and tyrrannie? for his striving and
presuming against the almighty God? See then if he have not spared the
greatest and most mighty king of the world, but punished him after so strange
a fashion, he will not spare thee. There is no respect of persons with him. No
respect of persons with god.
But he that does his will and works righteousness, is accepted, be he poor,
or rich, high, or low, king, or beggar: yea, he rayseth the simple, poor,
naked, and needy, out of their misery, and trouble, and plucketh down the
high, the mighty and proud, and sends those that account themselves rich and
to have no need of his help, them (I say) he sends captive away: he plucketh
down their proud Pecockes tails, and scatters them in the imagination of
their hearts, Luke 1.2.
and will feed the hungry and such as thou dispisest, with good things. And
therefore, once again, I say unto thee, that foolishly thou say unto thy
soul, take thine ease, or to thy body, take thy rest, I have enough for my
life, I will go build, etc. When the Lord of might, can with the breath of
his mouth, Osee. 13. God, even with the breath of his mouth, can shake our
foolish buildings to pieces. 1. Tim. 6.17.
shake those foolish buildings of thine in shiuers, tumble them to ye ground,
and make thy great abundance nothing at all: And therefore Saint Paul wills
Timothy, to tell the^ that are rich in the world, that they should not be
exalted with pride. But contrary thereunto. It may be well perceived, how thou
in thine abundance beginnest to swell in contempt of other men, through pride,
whereof thy wealth is the worker, and pride the nurce of all other vices: so
that thou make that the instrument of all evil, which God has ordained to
do all men good. How have thou gone about to trample (as it were) poor Simple
thy Tennant under thy feet? Thou have utterly undone him, in taking his poor
living from him, flattering him until thou had gotten him into thy spiders
web, and then beganst to poison him, then beganst thou to threaten him, so that
the poor man may say, that he sold his liberty, for a pound of flattery.
But in deed, tell me, Liberty sold for a pound of flattery.
intendest thou to proceed in this peevish purpose of thine? Meanest thou to
make such a mighty Mansion, such a huge house, with so many stories hye:
fear thou not falling? do thou not know, that he that climes highest, is
in most danger, and has the greatest fall: The plot and grou^d-work of a
notable b^lding.
let me advise thee, to frame thy plotte and proportion of thy building thus:
first, for thy foundation, dig the trench very deep, even to the very
root of thine heart: search and see, whither^ it be all firm ground, there
or not, The sea side of Satan.
vp^n which thy building must be first founded: and because, it stands so
near the sea side of Satan, Quicksands.
thou must take heed that there be no gulfes or quick Sands therein, Privy
conspiracy.
driven by the waves of wickedness, whereby thy cogitations have, or hereafter
may sink into any mire or puddle of privy conspiracy against thy soul: The
stamp of a good concience.
which if thou find, thou must ram down with the stamp of a good
conscience, as much Clay of true repentance, as will serve the turn, The
stones of a man's life, hewn with the hammer of gods word.
and then begin the foundation, with the Stones of a new life, hewn out
with the Hammer of Gods word, and laid by the dyrecte Line and level of a
true faith: and the workman of this building, must be the holy spirit of
God, The leuel of a true faith.
whom thou shall find (if thou sake him with a single^hart) standing ready
(but not idle) in the Market place of true religion, The holy ghost the work
man.
working in the new buildinges of such as unfeignedly intend to become new
men. But his hire will be ^omewhat hard, he will not work b^ the day, neither
by the month, nor by y year, but will covenant for all thy life, and thou
shall covenant with him to give all that thou haste, at his disposition: which
covenant if thou break (yea when the building is even finished) he will cast
it all to the ground again: We must break promise with the body.
and where thou have promised thy soul and body to live at rest, and to take
their ease, thou must break promise with them, for this worke-man will have
thy self, under him to be the principal ouerseer, and surueyer, to watch
night and day, A work-m^ of a contrary building, Satan.
least a worke-man of a contrary building, pluck down, what he settes up,
and destroy what he has made: but he will instruct thee, and direct thee
hereafter what thou shalt do in this business, and how thou shall proceed in
this bui^ding, if thou will frame thy fancy to follow it: this buildinge will
be so stately and high that if thou fall, it will crush all to pieces: and yet
so precious, and glorious, that thine eye has not seen thine ear heard,
neither can thine heart conceive, the precious and beautiful furniture, and
ornaments thereof. But a hard piece of work, for a natural man, too curious
to thy crooked conceit: which I doubt will be hardly drawn from thy former
folly, from proceeding to finish another piece of work, whereof the wicked
workman (that I erst spoke of) is the aucthor, Satan the workman of all
mischief.
and pricks thee forward, to go in hand with thine intended enterprice, thy
sumptuous Palace, (which is for princes) thy curious caruings haughty
hangings, goodly gallaries, pleasant walks, stately standings, and princely
prospectes: to see (abroad) the Hawks to fly, the hounds to run: And
(within) thy rare Jewels of gold, thy Cubbords of plate, thy Cofers full, and
whatsoever else, delightsome unto thee, he persuades thee to be all good. But
alas, he does but deceive thee: For God by the Prophet cries out ^ond says:
Esaias. 5.8.
Woe be unto you that glory in your vanities, joining house to house, and land
to land. The earth is full of gold and silver, there is no end of their
treasures. I am angry with their covetousness, Abac. 2.6.
(says God) I will strike their iniquity, and not suffer such, Esa 2.12.
as thus glory in their goods, and the vain pleasures of the world, to have
any certain rest, An inordinate care of riches, a worm to the conscience.
But I will put a worm in their conscience, which shall torment them with
continual anguish and perplexity (yea hows^euer the world goes with them:)
for such is the inextinguishable fire of insatiable covetousness, Pro. 27.20.
that it ever desires and is never satisfied, no, although it obtain as much
to day, as it wishes for, Covetousness sets the end of al sacietie in
things wished for^
to morrow it desires as much more, like an insatiable Sea, and the fire that
has never enough. But sets as it were the end of sacietie, in things
wished and hoped for, and not in that which he has, have it never so much. And
therefore, it is said, that desire of money increseth as much as money it self:
meaning, The covetous man enemy to all m^n (...) and chiefly to himself.
that the more a man has, the more he coueiteth. Whereby he offends God,
iniureth himself, and does wrong to his neighbor; he does not his duty to
God, he withholdeth things necessary from himself, and helps not his
neighbor when he needs: he is to God unthankful, to him self cruel, to
his neighbor froward. And therefore, John in his first Epistle, and second
chapter, 1. Io. 2.15*
wills thee not to love the world, nor the things in the world: for
whatsoever is in the world, is concupiscence of the flesh, Of concupiscence
springs all evil.
concupiscence of the eyes, and the pride of life: out of which, as out of
head-fountaines, spring all other evils: namely, of the concupiscence of the
flesh, Concupisce^ce of the flesh. Co^cupisce^ce of the eyes.
voluptuousness, of the concupiscence of the eyes, riches and desire of thy
neighbors goods: by which came thy first motion to desire Simple thy Tena^ts
living. Pride of life.
And of the pride of life, springs ambition and desire of honor, and to be
great in the sight of men: out of which sprang thy pernicious, and foolish
purpose to build, Voluptuousnes.
etc. Again, of voluptuousnes, comes dishonest, and uncomely things: of
riches, wicked things: and of ambition, Riches. Ambition.
foolish things: all which are so linckt and knit together, as embrace one,
and thou art guilty of all: follow thou one, and the rest will follow thee. So
that here is the case of coueitousnes, who by reason of his riches, becomes
so lofty, that he would bring all other (as it were,) under his girdle. I go
for proof, but to thy self, who (notwithstanding thine abundance,) wast not
contented to see poor Simple to live by thee, but most greedily have thou
eaten him up, and devoured him of his living, to his utter beggering, which
greedy desire of thine, I find accompanied with so many evils, Coueitousnes
accompaned with many evils.
and vanities of the mind, choking so the senses, with the thornie cares of
this world, that I perceive thee quite and clean drawn, from the true and
wholesome service of God* to the most servile and sinful slavery of deceitful
Satan.


The rich-man. Oh hold thy peace, and say no more,
my wits are clean berest:
Thy words have sacked my senses so,
I have no comfort left.

Solace, Well then, adue, farewell, I will
too morrow come again:
Since night is come, farewell, do not
these words of mine disdain.
But think upon thy former ways
which thou have past in sin:
In sine, my solace shall be sweet
for thee to solace in.

Godly meditations for him whose heart is infected with coueitousnes.
Incline mine heart O Lord unto thy testimonies and not to covetousness. Psalm.
119.

Oh tvrne away my eyes, least they behold vanity and quieken me in thy way.
Eodem. 14.

Take away the rebuke that I am afraid of, for thy judgments are great.
Eodem. 42.

A Godly and devout prayer for the avoiding of Gods wrath, against him that
has oppressed the poor to make himself rich, fit for every rich man^
OH most omnipotent and eternal Cod, father of all power and knowledge, the
giver of all goodness, and just punisher of the wicked, I prostrate my self
here before the seat of thy mere mercy, most humbly craving pardon for mine
infinite iniquities, for mine obstinate and wilful rebellion against thy divine
majesty, for running so far from true obedience, I have gone astray (sweet
Lord) I have gone astray: I have greedely followed, that which I should not,
and wilfully fled from that which I should have carefully embraced: O Lord, the
desires of the world have undone me, the pleasures thereof, have pierced mine
heart so near, they have wounded my conscience so sore, that virtue, faith*
and godliness, are chased clean away: I have streched out mine hands, to take
that I ought not, and withheld them from doing that which I ought to have done.
I do confess* O Lord I cannot deny, but I have oppressed and pinched the
poor to make my self rich: I have foolishly framed my fantacie, to follow and
fulfill all unlawful desires. But pardon me (oh heavenly Father,) pardon me,
and give me grace, with Zache, to stand up, and restore again, whatsoever I
have by forged flattery, by force, or violence, wrongfully taken from any
body: that thou may vouchsafe to come and dwell with me, to the comfort of
my poor soul: say unto me, (sweet Jesus) as thou said to Zache, that this
day salvation shall come into mine house. Oh sweet Jesus, come thou unto me,
which art salvation it self: a most comfortable, sweet and most joyful news
it was to him: so sweet and joyful (oh Lord Jesus) it will be to me that now
am tied with the Fetters of Satan, for then shall I be free, that now am in
bondage, and then I shall be at liberty: wherefore sweet Jesus, say on, and not
only say thou will, but come unto me, as I know thou came to seek that was
lost, to call them home that went astray, to accept again of him that wilfully
ran from thee: like the untamed Heyfer, who being too well fed, winch and kick
against thee. But Lord, I unfeignedly lament my disobedience, and pray thy
grace, whereby I may forsake the evil and perverse immaginations of my heart,
which have so bewitched my senses, that they are dull to do good, and expert
to do evil: forward to vice and froward to virtue. But alter mine affections,
sweet Jesus, change my desires, that in stead of the pleasures of this world, I
may embrace the path, that leads unto eternal life. Wash me sweet Jesus,)
wash me and make me clean, and put far from me all ungodly gain, make me
content with mine own: stir up in me a willingness to be ready to give, and
glad to distribute, slow to lust, and willing to lead a new life: kill all
concupiscence in me, both of the flesh and of the eyes and of the mind: and
give me in stead thereof, earnest zeal to goodness, true lowlines of he^^t, and
perfect patience, joined with unfeigned faith: that I may lay up in store a
good foundation against the time to come, that through thee sweet Jesus, I may
obtain eternal life. AMEN.

O Lord increase my faith.

THE TVESDAY, or second days conference between Solace and the sinful man.
Wherein (after long persuasion) and (understanding by many examples of the
just judgment of God against worldly minded men, and the greedy desire of
wicked gain,) begins to consider that he has greatly erred, in reposing
his trust in transitory riches, and in his abundance, to sell the end of all
happiness: And falls into a kind of despair, wherein he utters his grief,
and afterward receives comfort, Solace, showing himself to be Christ, etc.

The sinful man. OH sinful soul of mine sing forth,
the doleful tunes of woe:
Let sobs and sighs, let trickling tears
from thee like fountains floe.
Let groans in grief, be now thy gain,
let sorrow bear ye swaie:
Let Solace pass, for thou have lost,
thine health and won decaie.
Oh worth, oh worth me, wicked wretch
woe worth ye day wherein,
That my rebellious mind did give
the first consent to sin.
Woe worth the day wherein I was,
seen first of woman's eye:
Would God my life had ended when
I first began to cry.
Then should not thus my silly soul
been wrapped in irksome woe,
Nor it have felt the careful thrall
that now is forste to show.
My heart should not have harborde woe
nor conscience cause to weep:
That now in grief does groan to see,
it self in torments deep.
But then, ten thousand times I had
been happy in my death:
Ten thousand times unhappy now
that I enjoy my breath.
Wherefore prepare oh grave in have
to take thy share of me:
And death do thou thy duty too,
I yield me now to thee:
For all my pleasures now are gone
my mirth to mourning cheer
Is changed quite: my joys are past,
now gryping griefs draw near:
That grieve my silly soul so sore,
my corpse consume full fast.
Oh death deny me not therefore,
but take me hence in haste:
The God that sits in Crystal skies
has cast me clean away.
No hope of help, no hold I have,
good death make no delay,
No pardon due for my desert,
my sins deserve to die:
I linger like a loathsome wretch,
in deep despair I cry.
Come death, and end my doleful days,
defer it not, make haste,
I loath to live, yet dread to die
all hope of help is past.

Solace. Oh wretched man, what is ye cause
thou mournest thus in woe?
Leave of to cry and come to me,
why doste thou sorrow so?
The thrall is great that thou poor wretch
doste seem to sorrow in,
Show me ye cause: be of good cheer
I sollace men in sin.

The sinful-man. See the corruption of nature that imputes the cause of his
grief to him that would cure his deadly disease.
Woe worth if thou be Solace, who
was yeasterday with me:
He was the cause of this despair,
Yea, none the cause but he.

Solace. Say thou so? Thou art greatly deceived, in deed I am that Solace,
that for thy comfort came unto thee yesterday, Proverb. 13.1. Pro. 9.7.8. The
wise when they are reformed depart from their evil, but the foolish will not
amend. The ungodly to excuse their faults, do by circumstance endeavor to
lay the cause of their evil upon God him self.
to call thee from thy foolishnes, from thine error and censelesse security:
But thou art that scorner that the wise man means, that refuses to be
reformed. For a wise man, when he is reproved, departs from his evil, but a
fool, when he is rebuked of his error, falls into raging, and as it were
into a desperate madness, as may appear by thy frowardnes, that art not ashamed
wrongfully and most unjustly to charge me to be the cause of this sorrow of
thine, of thy despair, thou augmentest thy fault in thus rashly accusing me.
But it is a Leasson learned long ago, many thousand years put in practice:
namely, the ungodly to find out excuses according to their own wills and
perverse conceits. As Adam and Eve thy great grandsieres did in the beginning,
Eccle. 32.18.
when they had manifestly transgressed the Commandment of their Creator in
eating the fruit forbidden, Genesis 3.7.
when they were charged with the crime: what did they? did they (upon their
reprehension) confess and say, it is so Lord, we have eaten it contrary to
thy will? noe but they sought another bye mean to cloak their disobedience,
Adam for his part said: The woman whom thou gave me made me to eat: And Eve
(seeing the matter said to her charge) said it to the Serpents charge,
thincking to make (by circumstance) God himself the author of their fall. But
this iugling could not avail them, He that by vain excuses goes about to
hide his offense from God, increases his fault.
their deceitfulnes deceived themselves, and they had al their reward: Now to
come to thine excuse, who (to discharge thine own unhappiness, layest the fault
on me) that came not to undo thee but to revoke thee from thy miserable
blindness from thine obstinate foolishnes, and overthwart opinion, wherein thou
were trudging as fast as thou could to undoubted dampnation. Satan sets
a vale before our eyes that we should not see the light of the truth. John.
1.5.


But I see that Satan has set a vale before thine eyes, that thou can not
see thy friend from thy foe, thou take light for darkness, and darkness
to be light, yea darkness has so dimned thy censes, that thou can not
comprehend the light. 2. Cor. 6.14.
For there is no familiarity between light and darkness. But awake thou
foolish man that sleep in darkness, Ephesians. 5.14.
and God shall give thee light, yea, I am the light of the world, Io. 8.12.
he that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall enjoy the light
of eternal life.


The sinfull-man. Oh, say no more, I am undone,
I cry, but all in vain:
In deed I am in darkness deep*
thy words augment my pain.

Solace. Thou art deceived, in deed I am,
the Solace that will ease:
This doleful plight of thine with speed
and wrath of God appease.
Christ the la^be of God that takes away the sins of the world.
I am that lamb of God that came,
by God my fathers heste:
By death for true repenting souls,
to purchase lasting rest.
Although our sin be as red as Scarlet, Christ can make it as white as Snow.
Although thy sin the Scarlet do
in rednes far surpass,
My death shall make thy soul as white
as whitnes ever was.
Wherefore, return to me in haste
amend what is amiss:
I am the God that pardons him,
that true repentant is.
Therefore give care attend unto,
these comforts of my will:
Believe, amend, do not despair,
convert thy self from ill.
I Know (oh sinful man) that riches and vainglorie had even overcome thee.
Thou were in a slumber, The devil rocketh men a sleep with worldly pleasures
that seem sweet, but are in deed deadly poison.
with the sweet lullings (as they seemed) of that deceaueable Satan the god
of this world, who has in such sort blinded thy mind, and bewitched thee with
vain and transitory pleasures, that the light of my glorious Gospel, which
is the power of God, should not shine unto thee. By reason whereof the
examples of the Justice of mine heavenly father (extended against such as have
their hearts so seared with the hot iron of worldly carefulnes) has moved
thee to this kind of despair, feeling thy conscience guilty of the things
whereof thou have been reproved: And therefore most wrongfully do thou
attribute the cause of thy grief unto me. But it is Satan that thus
bestirreth him now to retain thee in the blind bye-path, that he has hitherto
deceitfully drawn thee into, beset with so many dilightsome devises, and
dainty delicates of the flesh, of the mind, and of the eyes, that he is loath
to lose thee, he thinks that if thou once go from him, thou will come no
more, if thou forsake him, thou will be retained into my service, who will give
thee better entertaineme^t, yea, though my wages in this world be not gold and
silver, though my Liuerie be not so glorious to the eye, Satan is most busy
to lead us to evil, when we be most willing to apply us to goodness.
and thy diet so dainty, yet I say thou shall be sure of a good living, in
reuersion, which is, after this life rent free, without any fear of
forfeiture: thy Lyuery shall be here the liberty of a free mind, and thy Diet
daily meditation of heavenly things. Which living, which Livery and which diet
(I know) thine old master tells thee are al vain, The servants of God shall
have the kingdom of heaven for their inheritance.
al full of servitude, watchings, waytings, and thraledome, and he gives thee
both great wages of Gold and Silver, and a great living in hand, he gives thee
not board wages, but places thee most princelike at his own Table, Satan
bestows all things in this life on his servants, to please them, but after
this life eternal pains in hell.
he feeds thee with his own hands, but he craves attenda^ce, he is something
nice in service, you must wait at an inch. But then like the master of a good
hound, he pleases thee with many rewards: which thou have accounted a very
sweet and pleasant service, but thou have heard before, that it is vain, yea
most vain, Christ came into this world to call us out of the service of Satan
to serve the almighty God.
and very affliction of the spirit, carrying thee as it were (sleeping) into
the most horrible pit of all endless perdition: And even of mere love (being
sent to call those that were gone astray,) I was moved to awaken thee of this
sinf^ll slumber, to warn thee out of the service of this wicked master of
thine, and therefore I know that thou condemnest me to be the cause of this
thy sorrow: Alas art thou so sorrowful and full of grief, to give over that
master of thine endless misery, Satan the master of all mischief.
the master (I say) of all mischief, the ringleader to all evil rule, the
Captain of all the hellish crew: the crew that have their cogitations commonly
occupied in couetouse cares and ungodly desires of wordly pleasures: the crew
(I say) that are carried by his most wicked wiles into most cursed captivity,
never caring for God or godliness, who esteem my words as wind, as thou do,
who so reioycest in thine abundance, as one that laugheth in his dream, and
when he awaketh is driven to howl in sorrow? He that is not reconciled to
God by Christ is dead in this world.
yea as dead being yet living, for thou can not be but dead, unless thou be
reconciled by me, who by my blood shedding, on the Cross, slew all enmity,
between God my heavenly father and thee. And as I have purchased this
reconciliation for thee: So I am come to thee to tell thee, to warn thee,
Ephe. 2.1.15. Col. 2.14.
and to reclayme thee from error to the truth, from the claws of Satan to
the favor of mine heavenly father, if thou will hear me and embrace my
sayings.


The sinful man. Art thou in deed that Christ so pure,
whom Judas did betray:
And whom ye Jews tormented sore,
as sacred scripture say?

Solace. Ye I am he that hung on cross,
fast nailed to the tree:
Christ the sacrifice for sin.
A sacrifice, to pacify,
my fathers wrath for thee.

The sinful man. Woe worth me then, for thou art he,
whom I offended so:
That in despair I languish here,
a wicked wretch in woe.
Oh let the mountains fall on me,
Despair.
to hide my sin from thee:
Let death approach, let gaping grave,
take now their due of me:
I dare not look on thee, whom that
my sin offended so,
No, no, thou will not pardon me,
thou art (of right) my fo.
Satan the author of all despair.
And Satan seeks as erst you saydst,
to win my soul from thee:
I am content, to his request,
I willingly agree.
I can not now revoke again,
my promise ready past:
Wherefore I know noe remedy,
I must be his at last.

Solace. ALas poor man thou art in great perplexity, thy senses are sacked in
deed: But can thou ^^l by whose means? wotest thou ye cause? can thou yet
consider who it is that works this unpleasant thing in thee? Is it I, or
Satan? is it virtue or vice? Is it life or death?


The sinful man. A great conflict I feel in deed,
a right of furious fiends,
Within my mind: a troop of foes,
whom subtle Satan sends.
Who with despair do so beset,
and ransacke all my will:
That nothing can appease the rage,
that pricks me forth to ill.
Wherefore (I know) no boot to seek Those that yield themselves servants to
sin, are in great subjection to Satan.

to shun my raging thrall:
For Satan binds me to attend,
when he or his do call.

Solace. WEll poor man, notwithstanding, The unspeakable power and mercy of
God toward man.
thy dissobedience and thy wilful running from me, to that venomous Serpent,
who has thus poisoned thee with the sting of despair: I am not so hard
hearted, but (of mercy) will be pacified, and upon thine earnest repentance, be
a mean, for thy reconciliation, to the favor of mine heavenly father again,
Christ the reconciliation. to God for sin.
who gave me up into the the hands of the world, in the flesh to be a Sacrifice
and Oblatio^, to appease his wrath (which nothing else could do) and to be made
the cause of eternal salvation to all the world, as many as believe in me.
Heb. 5.9.



The sinful man. Oh, worth me wretch: then I am none
of whom salvation came:
For I have disobeyd thy will,
and led my life in blame.
And rest in Satan's bands a slave,
by due desert I die:
Oh death make haste, my Soul, in sin,
for thee is forste to cry.

Solace. AND do thou now confess that it is Satan has thus be witched
thee? It is true: and most untruly erwhile did thou charge me with it: be
now ruled by me, take mine advice, and there shall be a dispensation provided
for thee, easily to defeat Satan and deceive him of all his hope, he has
(yea of al his title, intrest and demand) in thee: Christ has subdued Satan,
and bereft him of all his power.
for I have his head under my girdle: I vanquished him upon ye Cross: I
spoiled him of all his power: I took all his weapons from him, and tied him in
chains, that he cannot pass those limmits and that compass which I have
assigned him, without my permission and license: I discharged all wretched
sinners out of his jurisdiction, and in my humanity, satisfied and absolutely
discharged the debt of all mankind, and cancelled the Obligation wherein they
stood bound, and took an acquittaunce for the same, sealed with mine own
blood upon the Cross: So that your old master, subtle Satan has no more
to demand of them: Christ has discharged, by his death all that was due for
sin Genesis 3.10.
for I have bound my self to answer, the uttermost farthing that law can
charge them withal: Although they were (by reason of the breach which thy
great graundparents, Adam and Eve, made of the Commandment of the Lord in the
beginning) all under the law, and so bound to answer the law: which I have
done for all men. And therefore if thou submit thy self unto me, Belief in
Christ, is the mean to be at one with God.
and believe in me with a true faith, thou shall be reconciled unto mine
heavenly father, who (if thou believe in me) shall honor thee, and for that
thou art weak and full of infirmity, Ioh. 12.6. 2. Cor. 12.7.
my grace and power (fear thou not) shall then most abundantly appear (when
thy weakness is greatest) to hold thee up and to help thee. Romans 5.20.
For although sin abound in thee, grace may more abound: that is, if thou
repent thou shall find favor and mercy: but he that walks on still on his
wickedness, without any motion of conscience, to crave pardon, He that
perseuereth in wickedness, has no hope of grace.
of him whom he offends, this grace and this reconcilement takes no place in
such a one. Therefore, must thou come to me in faith, and in true repentance,
turn from thy former wicked ways: so shall thou be reconciled unto GOD mine
heavenly father, whose wrath, by mine obedience, is appeased, his anger
qualified, and love renewed: Death vanquished, and life obtained: hell gates
shut up, and the gates of heaven opened: yea, my dying* has made all men
alive: Genesis 3.15.
for I am that seed of the woman, that have broken the Serpents head, that
have cast out the Prince of this world, and judged him: Io. 12.31.
But he loves yet to play the busy body, he luoeth still to be sifting every
man, standing at their elbowes, to prick them forward to every vanity: Za.
13.1.
and falsely flatter them as a deep dissembler: saying, tush, tush, God
knows, Satan stands at our elbowes to prevent us (if he could) from doing
good, and to procure us to do evil.
that if thou do thus, it shall be for the best, this is the way to thy most
benefit. But contrary when he sees a man forward to virtue, bent to do
good, and to do my fathers will, how then he bestirres him, then he takes them
by the arm (as it were) and says, do not that, and stays him, dissuading
him: saying, take heed whether thou go, take heed what thou do: so that he
is a minister to all mischief, and a let to godliness: The world and the
flesh the spurs to sin.
he secketh by all means to train men into wickedness, having his
hirelinges, the world and the flesh to attend night and day, ready to lay
sundry temptations, to move men to evil: the pleasures of the world, to win
them: and the motions of the flesh, to move the^, to his detestable errors:
wherinto he wrencheth and wringeth me^ with tooth and nail, to snare them and
so to destroy them. Was not he the mean, to move Herod to persecute me? and
to seek occasions to tripp me? that provided false witness to accuse me? Io.
13.2.
wicked Judges to condemn me? And at last sent he not Judas to betray me? yes
surely, it was even he: for his te^pting me in the Deserts on the pinnacle of
the temple, makes it manifest that it was he: Mat. 4.6.
But lo, he could bring nothing to pass, but as the Scripture before had
determined should be done, before all things (to that so precious business of
mine) should be finished. I could have prevented him of his purpose, but the
will of my father was, that I should obey: Christ obedient unto his fathers will.
so I did to the death, the death of the Cross, a death most ignominious, most
reproachful: and yet to make the matter more slanderous (as they thought, and
as the ministers of satan persuaded them selves) they hung me among thieves,
and murderers: yea, a thief and murderer was set at liberty, his notorious
crime pardoned, Innocent Christ condemned, and a thief discharged.
and his life saved, to thrust me forward, who was innocent, faultlesse, just,
and clear, they having nothing to lay to my charge, and yet he never left
until they had hanged me: but not to fulfill his will, but the will of my
father. Satan for his part, needed not to have been so busy, for by my death
I subdued him, by mine obedience I brought him in subjection, Christ by his
death subdued Satan.
and bereft him of all his authority. A most happy death for all mankind:
for thereby I have gotten them eternal life. I was willing and ready to
fulfill the will of mine heavenly father therein: I refused nothing that might
be for the benefit of sinful man, or that might overcome this great Goliath,
this huge Holophernes, and to confound that saucie companion, that intruded
himself into the Garden of Paradise, Genesis 3.7.
so mallepertly among thy parents Adam and Eve, whom with fair words, Satan
with an apple, won Adam and Eve to break the precepts of God.
glorious shows, and vain intisements, he ouerthrewe, and robbed them of all
their happiness, and that with an Apple: He is the instrument of all evil,
the master of all misrule, who has plaide the like part with thee, in
stirring up thy mind to the vanities of this world, to suck the sweet from
poor Simple thy tenant: But his dealing is with such crafty conueyaunce,
that he makes a great show that what he does is for thy salvation, when in
deed it is to draw thee into destruction, and thou so simple, (nay rather
full of subtlety as a good scholar of his) haste obeyed him, and dissobeyed
me: followed him and forsaken me: betrothed thy self to him, and broken thy
faith with me: But thou see now I have vanquished him, I have beaten him
down, Though Satan be subdued, he seeks still to beguile us.
I trample him and his ministers under my feet: thou may perceive that his
courage is quayled, and his force of none effect: yet does his will continue
wicked, and his practices very perrilous. But to whom? not to me, neither
available against my members, although he seeks by all means to devour
them. The devil prevails not against the faithful.
It is to such as are weak in faith and of no courage: to such as he finds
ready prepared for his coming, and such as will willingly entertayne him, and
be entertained with him: to such as will not only seek how to resist him, but
yield before he come nere them: to such as will not fly from him, The power of
the devil of it self is nothing, but such as obey him make it strong.
but go (as it were) to meet him: to such as have a dainty, and a nice care
for the flesh, and no regard to the soul: against such his force is very
strong. And why? not that it is of it self strong, but such as thou art make
it strong, who fear to offend him, who art loath to displease his officers,
the world and the flesh: but can find in thine heart, to go for them, to
ride for them, to run for them* yea, and to live and dye in their drudgerie,
in their servitude and slavery: such an one he found thee. He no sooner said to
thee, do this, but thou did it: say this, but thou said it: frame thy
cogitations thus, but thou did so: when he says eat, thou eatest, so did thy
fore father and mother: when he bids thee go thou will run, and when he bids
thee run thou will ride poest, Man does all things that may displease but
nothing to please God
so dilligent art thou to please him. But contrary, when I bid thee do this,
thou disdaynest: when I or any by my commission, bids thee go, thou will
either stand stark still, or go backward, which pleases well your master
Satan: he feeds this frailty of thine with diverse fantasies, as might
appear yesterday, before I took thee out of his Cradle of Security. But will thou not confess yet that he has deceived thee? do thou not yet feel it?
does he yet keep thee under his tyranny? Ioh. 8.44. Job. 41.25.
Uerely verily he is a liar, a murderer, and the King of pride: Satan is a
liar and a murderer.
he has taught thee to lie, and to dissemble: he has hurted and wounded thee,
and puffed thee up with such ambition that thou know not thy self. Leave thy
lying therefore, and speak the truth: be not high minded, but consider that
thou art an earthly man: thou have nothing to brag of, but rather great
occasion to mourn and weep for thy wounds, which if thou seek not help
for, Christ the true Samaritan to heal our wounds. Luke 10.33.
will kill thee. Return therefore unto me, look up, I am that Samaritane that
will power the oil of grace into thy wounds, and bind them up with the
cloutes of mercy. It is I, that will carry thee unto the Inn of eternal
bliss, if thou will rise up and walk with me: nay I will set thee upon mine
own shoulders, I will bear thee on my back, thou shall lack nothing, I will
give thee whatsoever thou want, and bring thee where thou shall be cured,
Christ heals what Satan has hurt.
and feel no more the smart of these wounds of thine: Satan has made the^,
I will heal them: Satan has undone thee, I will relieve thee: Satan has
plucked thee down, I will raise thee up: Satan has blinded thee, with the
vain and transitory, with the frail, and foolish pleasures of this world,
and allured thee to follow him, to eternal destruction: but I will open thine
eyes, and I will give thee light, so that thou shall be able to discern his
falsehood and flattery, from my faithfulness: how to fly him, and to follow me
to eternal salvation, whereof (if thou frame thee faithfully to my words) I
will assure thee. Hear me.


The sinful man. Oh what should I poor sinner do?
whose sins surpass the sand
In number, which the surging seas
and waves have cast on land.
No wit, no wisdom, or good will, Hard winning of a desperate man.

does rest within my breast,
Thy words are all in vain to me,
I am bereft of rest.
And know not how to win again
thy favor which is lost:
In doleful plight I strive in vain,
to yield up guilty ghost:
That earth might pass to earth again,
of which it first begun:
My soul where it deserves to be,
an woeful ghost vndun.

Solace. Will thou (oh man) continue still
so hard of heart in woe?
Refusing so the fruits of grace,
that from my mercy floe?
Whereby thou may, at liberty
be set, from force of foe:
Reclaimd from sin and Satan's will,
to rest no more in woe.
Repent therefore (I say) repent,
turn thou to me in haste:
Give ear unto me once again,
be yet reformde at last.
Such is the love and mercy of Christ, that he seeks by all means to win
us from Satan.
Thou shall perceive that I forgive
all sinners when they cry:
Not wishing any sinful soul
in such despair to dye.
ALL the Prophets bear me witness, tha^ through my name, all that believe in
me shall receive remission of sins. Act. 10.45.
John says, (...) any man have sinned, he has an Advocate wit^ the father,
Testimonies of Christ's victory.
Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he i^ the propitiation for our sins. I am that
Christ of whom Osee testifies, and says: in that I have conquered Satan
already: O Death I will be thy death: O Hell I will be thy destruction: I have (as
David says) lead captivity captive, when I ascended into heaven, in
ouercomming the Devil, Sin, Death, and Hell, enemies to the soul of man.
These that were long before me have testified of me, whose testimony of me is
true: Genesis 3 15.
And my father in the beginning, promised that the seed of the woman should
tread down the Serpents head, Esaias. 7.14. Ier. 31.22.
I was that pure seed of the Uirgine, of whom the Prophets spoke long before,
1. Io. 5.7.
and I have performed it upon the Cross, and thus does the spirit testify
in the hearts of all the Children of my father. Now, 1. Io. 5.11.
if these witnesses cannot move thee to believe: believe my father in heaven
who testifies of me: saying, Mat. 11.
This is my well-beloved Son hear him. My father has sent into the world
eternal life, and that is by me his Son. Well then, come unto me al ye that
labor and are heavy laden with the burden of sin, come unto me and I will
ease you. They that are laden with the burden of their sins may come freely
to Christ, and be comforted.
Art thou laden (therefore) poor man? ye more then laden: thou art pressed
down, not to the ground, but to ye very gulf of hell: thou may thank thy
master Satan for it, who being pitiless presses down with the weighty
burden of all wickedness, such as yield him service. He will promise at the
first, nothing but ease, nothing but pleasure: The devil will promise ease, but
the end is pain and lasting woe.
but in the end he lodeth with labor, and paieth your hire with pain: thou
that have had the trial of it, excuse him if thou can: no thou can not,
nor thy self. Wherefore, I say, defy him, and condemn thy self, who have gone
astraie, who have wrought wickedness, even with greediness: And I see that he
has led thee into such a Laberinth, into such a deep Dungion of despair,
that it will be hard for thee to wind thee out again. But I will work thee
such a way, as if thou be advised by me, if thou follow my counsel, The
counsel of Christ eternal truth, and the way of life.
and walk the way that I will show thee, thou shall (spite of his heart)
break his fetters in pieces, get out of his prison, and defy him and all his
wicked retinue even to their faces.


The sinful man. Oh Solace does thy mercy, so
abound to pardon me?
Although like stinking filthy cloth
my life appear to thee.
If Satan held me not in band,
fast linckt in fetters fell:
Who roares like raging Lion, when
I do determine well.
Full feign I would return to thee,
whose mercy now I see:
And do perceive that Satan seeks
the means to murder me. Satan seeks to draw men first into despair, and
the^ to cut of their own days.


Solace. YEa, that is his occupation, he has nothing else to live by, nor to
maintain his kingdom withal: He first allureth men to al kind of vice: he
stirs them up to rebel against the will of mine heavenly father, and (as
much as in him lies) reteineth them therein: but when they be somewhat touched
with the knowledge and feeling of their error, when the spirit begins to
groan, under the heavy burden of sin, and sommoneth them to the leading of
a new life, and they begin to fall from him: then begins he to bestirre
himself, Satan most dilligent to deceive us, when we be most desirous to
return unto God.
then he begins to cogge and to lie, then he renues the Commissions of his
officers, and wicked ministers, to lay a new assault to their souls, who with
great diligence execute their masters will, in persuading the poor sinner,
that he begins to take an ill course, if he decline from his wicked way, when
he refuses to do ill, and chooses to do good: when he leaves darkness and
betakes him to the light of truth. He told Judas that he was not wise if he
would follow me, Ioh. 13.2.
but if he would forsake me and betray me then did he well. But when he had
performed his commandment, and done as he was bid, what did that master of
his for him? for sooth, (for fear least he should have truly repented and
have unfeignedly returned to me again) he put such a prick into his
conscience, that he never left him, till he had hanged himself. Such
conflictes makes he in the minds of men, that have once yielded unto his
pestilent motions, and obeyed his wicked will, without remorse of conscience,
fear of death, or love of me, and that will not be in time reclaymed from
their wickedness, whom the words of my mouth will not move, nor the fear
of hell fire, fraye from their filthiness: these (I say) when they hear the
judgments of my Father against them for their sins, he (to the end he may
hold them still in blindness) fearreth them with threats, and overcomes their
wits, with most horrible and blasphemous persuasions, that there is no
salvation or hope of help in me* in so much as he laboreth by all means, and
uses all his policies to bring them to destruction, resisting them always
from doing any good: Zach. 3.^. The Devil went about to let the prai^^s of
Joshua. Math. 8.12.
as he stood at the right hand of Iehoshua to let him, when he prayde unto
mine heavenly father for the state of the people: So he endeavors to take my
word out of thine heart, least thou should believe and be saved: yea, he
desires to winnow those that will come forward to godliness as Wheat, as he
sifted Peter mine Apostle, Peter denied Christ by Satha^s means.
who persuaded him self to be able to stand strongly, but lo, (even with the
fear that Satan stroke him with) he denied me three times: but he repented,
went out, Mat. 26.34.
and wept bitterly: Mark 14.32. Mat. 4 3.
And afterward resisted him manfully, nay, he was not contented only to try
mine Apostles, and other holy men, but he had a pull at me, he laid a great
assault against me (as he thought) for he tried me with great possessions that
he promised to give me, Satan tempted Christ.
hoping that wealth would win me: he tryes me with hunger, and when he saw
this would not move me, he sought means that I might kill my self, to throw
my self down of an high ^^eeple, but I could have done it without hurt, and
so he persuaded me (although he believed it not. The devil seeks many means
to destroy us.
) But this practice he puts yet in proof, for he wills one to drown
himself, another to kill himself, the third to hang him self, and by diverse
other means, he moves them to mischief themselves, to dispatch them out of
the way: And why? Number. 21.6. The brazen serpent a figure of Christ
Least they should after his venomous biting, look upon the brazen Serpent and
live, (which is) least they should forsake sin and cleave unto righteousness,
least they should repent their wicked life, Io. 3 14. When satan has stung us
with sin, we must look upon Christ, that is, we must believe in him and be
saved.
and so return and look upon me, who was lifted up, upon the Cross, that
none that believe in me, should perish, but be healed of their spiritual
diseases, the sting of Satan. Wherefore, turn thou unto me, turn thee I say
unto me, behold me crucified, take a good heart unto thee, fear thou not: I
was sent in the flesh to die for thy sins: such tender love of thy salvation
had mine heavenly Father, that notwithstanding, I was his only dear Son, in
whom he was delighted, yet spared he not me, but sent me to save thee. Set
Satan therefore at naught, I have already reproved him, Zech. 3.2.
take him as he is a fire brand of hell, whom I have dispoyled of all his
power: fear none of these things that he threateneth thee withal: But be
faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a crown of life. Reave. 2.10.
Be strong in the power of my might: Put away lying, and the author of lies,
and gird thy loins with verity, put on the breast plate of righteousness, the
shield of faith, Ephe. 6.10.
and stand against these sharp assaults of Satan, out of whose hands to
redeem thee, I have paid, what could be demanded, yea, the uttermost
farthing, nothing could ransom thee, but my blood, and that I gave even unto
the last drop: whereof, because I see thee ignorant, Christ has ransomed us
out of the hands of Satan, even with his own blood.

We must take opportunity when we may have it, to turn to the Lord.


I tell it thee so much ye oftener, wherein if thou believe me, I will proceed
to show thee further what my fathers will is, and how thou shall go forward
to fulfill the same. Play the good and skillful Mariner, that hoyseth up the
Sails when the wind best serves, and like a wise Merchant, make thy market
when thou meetest with the best Chapman, least when thou would sail, the
wind turn against thee, and the market (contrary to thine expectation) fall
to thy disprofit: Therefore I say, while thou have this opportunity, take hold
of my proffer, seek me now I am near, least when thou would, thou can
not find me: take heed yt thou omit not this convenient time, say not I come
too morrow, Make no delay to return unto God.
I will go bury my Father: I will go prove my yoke of Oxen, I will go see
my Farm, I will go build, etc. These and such like delays have deceived many:
were not the five foolish Uirgines shut out, The wise and foolish virgins.
because they had no light in their Lamps when the Brydegroome came? Let this
suffice, while thou have light proffered, receive it, least thou be thrust into
utter darkekenesse, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.


The sinful man. Oh Solace, I appeal to thee,
in heart I do request:
That you wilt show the perfect path,
to thy surpassing rest.
I do perceive from Satan thou,
by death have set me free:
But tell me what I must believe,
and do to come to thee.
He labors yet within my breast,
and feign would have me gone:
He tells me flat* that comfort thou,
in fine, wilt show me none.
For I am his, (he says) and he
will have me in the end*
Good Solace (if thou can) do thou,
this cause of mine defend.

Solace. WEll, well, (I say) take heed thou sinful wretch, least (as I said
erwhile) thou loose this fit opportunity, this convenient wind that now is
risen to blow thee to the sweet harbor of salvation, take heed, it turn
not against thee: do thou believe these tales of him that seeks to destroy
thee, and that raises so many storms and tempests to beat thee back from
the sweet and sure harbor of heavenly comfort? And make thou a doubt of my
power? Infidelity, the greatest let to come to Christ.
Shall I defend thee if I can? Is it by reason of infirmity, that thou say
so? or is it a stone which Satan gave thee to throw at me, as his ministers
did when I was on ye Cross, they bid me come down and save my self if I
could, yes, yes, I could, and so am I able to save thee if thou believe in me:
I have already vanquished him that holds thee thus in darkness and in the
shadow of death, and thus persuades thee to refuse light offered in an
acceptable time. But faint not I say again, but believe verily to have thy
portion in the land of the living. Psalm. 27.13.
Oh wretched man, Heb. 4.15.
I perceive thine infirmity, yet touched with the desire of thy salvation,
wherefore suffer this trial with patience, I was tempted (as thou have heard)
but I withstood it, even unto the death. Be strong, Mat. 4.^. Phil. 2.8.
resist this cruel adversary of thine, sight manfully against him, and beat
him down with the Clubbe of a true and undoubted faith in me: Faith, the
chiefest weapon to resist Satan.
Lay about thee, before thee, and behind thee, and of every side: suffer him
not to come near thee: let him understand that thou have a master now that is
mightier than he: tell him that thou art now in the service of Jesus Christ, a
Captain that has given thee the weapons wherewith he overcame him on the
Pinnacle, and on the Mountain, and at al times in all his assaults, and then
will he think his labor to be all in vain, which he has bestowed in
stirring thee against me. And as I have promised to stand thy friend, I will
perform it: Heb. 4.16.
come thou holdly unto the Throane of grace, where thou shall receive comfort
in these conflictes, Gal. 5.1. Christ the fou^tain of al true help.
I am the fountain of all spiritual help, who have delivered thee out of the
bondage and thraldom of the devil: by my blood have I raunsomed thee out of
the captivity of Satan, I willingly obeyed mine heavenly father to the death,
to obtain remission of thy sins, and rose again for thy justification, that
thou through faith in me should be saved, and from henceforth to live, not
to thy self after the flesh, to fulfill the lusts and evil appetites
thereof, pleasing Satan, but to live unto me: that is, to abandon vice and to
follow virtue: to eschew evil and to do good: to seek peace and to ensue
it, and carefully to embrace godliness and righteousness of life, 2. Cor.
5.14. Colos. 20.
as by me thou art made righteous, and by me all things pacified both in
heaven and earth: We are in Christ, made at one with God. Ephe. 1.13.
by me thou art reconciled and made at one again with God mine heavenly father
and by me (if thou believe) thou shall obtain forgiveness of all thy sins,
and pardon for all thine offenses, for thy manifold transgressions, rebellion,
and dissobedience: And to thee that art sinful, Ephe. 1.17.
ignorant, and far from knowledge, to thee is here (even in my blood)
salvation offered, and the true spirit of wisdom opened, that the eyes of thy
mind, that now are so dimmed with the shadow of the old man, may be
lightened with the Candle of my sacred counsel, and truly perceive and thine
heart rightly conceive, what the end is of this hope whereunto I am come to
call thee: what the riches of my glorious inheritance (which I here proffer
thee) is, Col. 2.14.
and the greatness of my power, which I promise thee: who (as I said before)
have torn in pieces, and cancelled the Obligation, wherein thou stoodest
bound, 1. Io. 3.8.
I have taken it away, and fastened it on the Cross, I have losed thee from
the servitude and slavery of Satan, who (as thou say) does challenge thy
service, I have set thee free from the works of darkness, Io. 2.4, 6.
who am the light, and no man that believes in me shall remain any more in
darkness: believe therefore in the light, that thou may be made the child
of light, and obtain life again, that now art dead under the Prince of
darkness, who had once the power of death. Heb. 2. Christ has delivered all
men from death that believe in him. Ephe 2.18.
But I have delivered all them that believe in me, and live in my fear, and
have taken away that partition, that was set between God my father and them: So
that through me thou may have free access unto him: yea, Jews and Gentiles,
are united and knit to one God, even my father, who for their sakes, Jews and
gentiles have access to God the father through Christ. Romans 5.19. Gal. 3.13.
2. Cor. 8.9^
gave me an oblation and sacrifice, to be offered upon the Cross, to the end
that by mine obedience they might be made righteous. I was accurssed, that
through my curse they might be blessed, and delivered from the heavy burden of
the law, yea, I became poor to make all men rich: but not as thou have
gloried to be rich, in goods and great abundance, but in grace and the
favor of mine heavenly father, with whom I have obtained peace for thee, and
delivered thee out of ye thraldom of that spiritual Pharao, by offering my
body a Pascall Lamb, and sprinckling my blood upon the door posts of the
hearts of all true believers in me. Wherefore come unto me, thou that art so
heavy laden, and I will refresh thee. Confess me with thy mouth, and believe
in thine heart, Romans 10.9.
that God raised me from death, and thou shall be saved, for my coming into
this world was to seek and to save that was lost. Luke. 19.10.
Wherefore hear me, for if thou hear my words and believe in him that sent
me, Io. 6.40.
I will raise thee up in the last day to eternal life, for there is salvation
in none but in me only, Romans 2. There is salvation in none but in Christ.
who have the power even in mine own hands to recover that again for thee,
which was lost by the fall of Adam.


The sinful man. Oh passing comfort now I feel
renew in me again:
Me thinks I hear that Satan says,
now is my labor vain:
Which I and mine have had with him,
that now converted is.
Me thinks I hear him rage, yt I
should take the way to bliss:
But let him fret and fume his sill,
and do his worst to me:
I do not force: my sure refuge
good Solace is in thee.
True comfort does begin I see:
increase it more and more:
And let that furious feend leave of
to vex my soul so sore.
And show what I must do in haste,
because the night is nigh:
For I intend to follow thee
good Solace, till I dye.

Solace. SO said Peter mine Apostle, Ioh. 18.17. Luke 22.57. Mark 24.6.8.
that he would follow me whether soever I went, yea, he would not refuse to
dye with me: but when the raging and boisterous storms of Satan's ministers
blewe about mine ears, and began to beat upon the walls of his frailty, We
may not presume to stand, least we fall.
being demanded whether he were not of my company? he flatly denied me, nay,
he forsware me, and said, that he knew me not: Be not therefore too bold at the
first brunt, though thou feel more comfort, and thy mind more quieted, and
Satan not so strong with thee as he was, 2. Pet. 2.22.
take heed thou faint not, take heed thou return not to thine old vomit, to
the wallowing in the mire and dirte of the dregs of Satan's poison. But be
thou mindful of these words of mine, and the comfortable counsel which this
day I have given thee. Believe my sayings: and because the night is at hand,
I will refer other things which I must learn thee toward the amendment
of thy sinful life, till to morrow, when thou shall find me ready here: in
the mean time, be meditating of my former speeches, retain them in memory,
and praise mine heavenly father in me, for thy comfort already obtained.


The end of the Tuesdayes Conference.
A Thanksgiving to Christ our Savior, for his comfort in the affliction of
conscience, with a prayer for his continual assistance, to be preserved from
despair.
OH Gracious and Omnipotent God, Oh Jesus my Savior, I yield thee all possible
thanks and praises, that in my great distress and conflict of conscience, thou
have vouchsaued to send me comfort and inward feeling of thy mercy, and the
unfeigned love and care, which thou have of the salvation of my poor soul,
which Satan mine adversary: and the utter enemy of all mankind, has
environed with so many doubts of thy mercy and my salvation: and laid before
the eyes of my poor conscience so many grievous sins, most horrible
offenses, and such manifest rebellion against thee: that I standing, as a
guilty wretch, a condemned person, at the Bar of thy just judgment,
expecting nothing but the sharp sentence of death: thou have vouchsaued (such
is thine unspeakable mercy) lovingly to call me out of that deep dungion of
despair, to rescue me from the cruel claws of Satan, and to set me free
from the most fearful and just doom of death: Insomuch (sweet Jesus) as I
feel my self comforted, I feel me relieved, and my soul freely ransomed
from the captivity of that monstrous enemy: that ougly Serpent, that filthy
feend and most cruel adversary of mine, Satan: and that by thy death and
bitter passion: whereby thou have lead captivity captive, when thou ascendest
into heaven, yea, thou have vanquished the death of death, thou have vanquished
the devil, and triumphed over death and hell: all power both in heaven and
earth is in thine hands: and that Satan, that has so sharply assaulted me,
is within the compass of thy power: hold him under, sweet Jesus, keep him
down, let him not prevail against me, and as my poor soul and weak body
are subject unto sin (being destitute of thine help, and wanting thy grace)
So (sweet Jesus) look favorably upon me, in mercy, hold me up that I fall
not: suppress all ungodly motions in me, drive all dullness from mine heart:
and darkness from mine understanding, make me subject unto thy will in all
things, and assure me of salvation: Let thine holy spirit work unfeigned
belief of all thy loving promises: and drive away all doubts of thy blessed
favor: for, most loving Jesus, my redeemer and daily mediator, such and so
many are the pernicious sleightes, and mischievous devices of that subtle
serpent, whereby he never ceasseth, but continually seeks to torment the
troubled consciences of those that he has wounded with the Darte of sin,
working in them a loathsome desire to live, and a great desire to die: pricking
them forwards to many mischieues, drawing them into many dangerous and noisome
conceits, to cast themselves away, and to seek death before their due time: So
has he sought (sweet Jesus) to entangle me, to move me to cast away my
life: whereby arises in me such a conflict, between him and thine holy
spirit, that it even brings me into the dungion of utter despair. Oh good
Jesus, help me good Jesus, comfort me sweet Jesus, defend me from his
tyranny, Come thou unto me, show thy self in me, that the filthy feend may
see and perceive that a stronger then he keeps the house of my poor soul.
Oh most invincible Jesus, let him know, that I serve under the banner of that
most mighty Captain, that overcame him long ago, and conquered all his
kingdom. Oh sweet Jesus, leave me not, depart thou not from me: but let thy
grace remain in me as a sufficient Buckler against that ougly Serpent, that
old Traitor Satan, who never ceasseth to assault me: hear me, oh sweet
Jesus, and give me strength, Amen: Oh Lord, increase my faith.

THE Wednesday, or third days Conference, between Solace and the sinful man:
Whereas the sinful man was yesterday stricken with despair of being saved,
by reason of his manifold offenses, which Solace proved, and his conscience
confessed him to be guilty of: receiving some comfort again, by the sweet
counsel of Solace. Now Solace begins to prescribe him the way that he must
begin to take to become a new man.

The sinful man. Lo Solace here I am to day,
as thou appointest me:
Thy counsel is so passing sweet,
I long full sore for thee.

Solace. Then here am I attend, give ear,
embrace my counsel dear:
If thou be sorry for thy sin,
it will full soon appear.
And do with faithful heart believe
the Solace which I show:
Repenting truly all thy sins:
on me lay all thine woe.
And cast the burden of thy sin
on me, without delay:
Be strong in faith, attend to me,
and gad no more astray.

The sinful man. Oh, Solace art thou ready here,
lo, I attend thy will:
But for repentance and for faith,
as yet do pass my skill.

Solace. Faith and repentance, the g^ound work of a new life.
THou must learn them then, for they are things most necessary: Faith and
Repentance are the very beginning, the foundation and groundwork of a new
life, and are so lineked and united together, that the one cannot work
effectually in thee without the other. And for as much as thou say thou art
ignorant in them, I will show thee what they are and how they work, if thou will attend a little while.


The sinful man. Yes, with good will, good Solace show
at large what thou have said:
Proceed to finish in mine heart,
the plat which thou have laid.

Solace. WEll, since then thou desire to be instructed in the path that
leads unto amendment of life: know this that Faith is the ground of all
goodness, whatsoever: and whatsoever proceeds not of Faith, is sin. And
therefore, will I show first, what Faith is, which must be the foundation of thy
true repentance.

Faith, (as mine Apostle Paul in the 11. to the Hebrews, by the instinct of
my grace, has rightly defyned it) is a certain and sure belief of the
obtaining things already hoped for, Heb. 11.1. The definition of faith. 1.
Pet. 1.
and an evident feeling of the manifold promises which God mine heavenly father
has made unto thee, touching thy salvation, in me, his Son. And whereby also
thou may inwardly taste of the unspeakable joys, whereof thou shall be made
full partaker hereafter in heaven.


The sinful man. Oh rare and passing thing is this,
a glass of heavenly skill:
Whereby on earth I may behold
in thee, thy fathers will.

Solace. SO it is in deed, and without it, It is impossible to please God
without faith.
it is impossible to please mine heavenly father, or to take any benefit, of
that sacred counsel which I have before given thee. Thou must therefore
remember, that as I have rowsed thee out of the sleep of this sinful
security, and redeemed thee out of the claws of Satan, so to stand
undoubtedly persuaded, that I had such an especial care of thy salvation, as
through the free favor and mercy of mine heavenly father, thou art by my blood
shedding, without any desert or merit of thine at all, upon thy true and
unfeigned repentance freely pardoned of all thy sin: Ioh. 8.2.3. Luke 10.39.
Christ cast 7. devils out of Mari Magdalene. Ioh. 11.2.
As Mary Magdaline, a most sinful woman, out of whom I cast seven devils,
through this faith, was attentive unto my words, and grew into such a
loathing of her sins, and grief of heart for her iniquities, that she truly
repented, fell prostrate on ye knees of her heart, wept, and washed my feet
with her tears, and wiped them with the heir of her head: this was the
working of a true faith: Whereby mine Apostle Peter also confessed me to be
very Christ the Son of the living God, Matthew. 16.16. Ioh 6.65. Genesis 15.6.
and that I was eternal life. By this faith also, did Abraham believe the
promises of mine heavenly father, and refused not to sacrifice his own son
Isacke, Genesis 22.2. Abraham was accounted righteous by reason of his faith. Luke
1.38.
to fulfill the will of the Lord, and by reason of his belief was accounted
righteouse. Mary, the blessed Uirgin, the minister by whom I was borne in the
flesh, believed the message of the Angel Gabriell, and was blessed. The Eunuch
by this faith believed the preaching of Phillip, Act. 8.37.
that I was the Son of God, who desired and was Baptized. Mine heavenly
father, 2. Luke 6.18.
through the earnest and faithful prayer of Elisha, disco^fited and struck
with blindness, The enemies of Elisha stricken with blindness.
his enemies that came to take him. With this weapon did Jonathan, with a young
man, his Armor bearer, discomfite and put to flight, a great Garrison of the
Philistines. David when he was a poor Shepherd, by faith, 1. Sam. 14.13. 1.
Sam. 17.^6. David by faith overcame great Goliath. Dan. 3.^7.
overcame ye great and mighty Gyaunt Goliath, and thereby discomfited all the
host of his enemies. The three Children by this faith were delivered out of the
hot burning Furnace, and the ministers of Nabugadonazer consumed with the same
fire. Eliah in the Wilderness, in his great distress of hunger, 1. King.
17.12. Eliah fed with Ravens.
was by faith fed twice every day with the bread and flesh that was brought him
by the Ravens, sent by ye providence of mine heavenly father. And by the same
faith, restored from death to life the widows son of Zarephath, 1. King.
18.38.
and so increased and multiplied her Oil and Meal, that the more she spent
the more she had. And mine heavenly father, at the faithful prayer of Eliah,
sent fire from heaven upon his sacrafice, Fire from heaven consumed Elias
Sacrifice.
to manifest my fathers power, and to confound the false Prophets of Baall.
Joshua the King, to be revenged of his enemies, prays unto mine heavenly
father in a strong faith, Josh. 10.12.
that the Sun and Moon should stay and stand still, The Sun and Moon
stood still at the faithful prayer of Joshua. Ioh. 1.30.
and so they did, until he had overcome five Kings and hanged them. This faith
was the guide of mine Ambassador and forerunner John Baptist, whereby he
executed and performed the will of mine heavenly father, and by the eyes of the
same faith saw before what should come to pass afterward: preparing that path
by Baptism by water, unto Repentance: which represented that heavenly
Baptism, wherewith I afterward Baptized with the holy Ghost, to eternal
salvation. Ma 4 1^. Through faith the Apostles followed Christ.
Peter and Andrewe his brother mine Apostles, being poor Fishers, when I
willed them to follow me, even by this faith left their Nets and followed
me: so did the rest of mine Apostles. And through this faith Aarons Rod budded
and did bear blossoms and ripe Almonds, for a testimony against the
rebellious children, who grudged to have him to serve ye Lord in the Tabernacl,
Luke 23.43.
efor the people. The thief that hu^g on the Cross with me, believed in me
and was saved. So excellent a thing is faith, that by it, are all the fiery
darts of Satan, 1. Tim. 1.
the devices of the wicked, and all impediments of the mind quenched and
overcome: And they that want the same, are in most miserable and hard estate:
for that without it, they are not able to resist the devil, the Prince of
darkness, who draws the^ headlong into endless destruction. Faith, the weapon
to withstand Satan. Psalm. 18.2.
This faith (I say) is the sure defense and shield of thy salvation: my right
hand vpholdeth all the^ that put their trust in me. They that believe in me
shall always rejoice, Psalm. 5.12.
they shall be always giving of thanks, I will bless them, and with my
favorable loving kindness I will compass them about as with a shield. Verily
verily I say unto thee, Ioh. 5.24.
if thou hear my words and believe on him that sent me, thou have everlasting
life, and shall not taste of death but shall live. But those that put not their
confidence in me, but go on still in their wicked ways, them (I say) will I
root out of the earth, Psalm. 37.2. The Lord will root out and consume those
that put not their trust in him.
I will consume the^ with the breath of my mouth, I will cut them off, like
grass, and they shall wither like the green herb. They that forsake me and
believe not my sayings, though for a time they flourish and make a show of
prosperity, yet they shall perish and consume away as ye fat of Lambs, even
like smoke shall they vanish away: for the God of this world has blinded their
hearts, 2. Cor. 4.4.
that the light of my glorious Gospel should not shine unto the^: who shall be
damned for not believing the truth, 2. These. 2.12.
but took delight in unrighteousness, in vanities and lies. The Prince that
would not believe the words of Elisha, 2. King. 7.17. The unbelieving prince
trodden to death. Genesis 19.24.
the Prophet of mine heavenly father, who promised plenty of victual to
Samaria, was trodden to death by the people. The sons in law of Lot believed
not the words of Lot, and were destroyed among the Sodomites with fire and
Brimstone. This unbelief was the ground of the fall of Adam and Eve: Genesis 2.17.
for had they believed ye words of mine heavenly father, which he told the^,
that in what day soever they eat of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil, they should dye the death, they had lived: Mar. ^6.16. He that
believes shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned.
but they did not believe it, but hearkened to the Serpent, and lost the
freedom of the Garden. Verily I say unto thee, he that shall believe and be
Baptized shall be saved, but he that will not believe shall be damned, and loose
the freedom of eternal bliss.


The sinful man. A sharp conclusion, which does seem
the sum of all: whereby,
The faithful ones shall live for aye:
and unbelievers die.

Solace. THou conceiuest it aright: for they yt believe not my gospel, they
that despise my commandments, and work not my will, though they make a show of
feined holiness for a time in the world, they do but beguile themselves, whose
joy in the end, shall be weeping and mourning, whose estaste is resemblable to
the great and mighty trees of the earth yt men grub up by the roots, Cursed
is he that puts his trust in man, and not in God.
the printe of whose place can be no more seen. Yea, cursed is that man that
puts not his trust in the help of mine heavenly father, but reposeth his
confidence in fleshly and transitory means, as in his own strength, in
th'abunda^ce of his riches, in the multitude of his great and wealthy friends,
and in the aid that comes of flesh: for he shall wither like th^e grass,
and consume away like ye green herb; whose strength is mere weakness, Iud.
20.21. The children of Israel slain in putting their trust in their own
strength. 2. Chron. 13.18
and whose wisdom is mere foolishnes. The Children of Israel putting their
trust in their own strength, were slain of the children of Benjamin. Abiiah,
putting his trust in the help of mine heavenly father, and disstrusting in the
power of his own people, prevailed, and slew five hundred thousand chosen men
of Israel. Hezekiah king of Judah, 2. King. 1^.
put his whole confidence in the help of mine heavenly father: and all that he
took in hand prospered: God is the strength, the buckler and strong shield of
them that faithfully believe in him, he that unfeignedly trusts in God mine
heavenly father, shall be as the mount Syon, which can never be moved, The
faithful, are compared to mount Syo^ that shall never be moved.
but remains steadfast and sure for ever, whom no tribulation, no storm,
tempests of adversity, nor worldly vanitities can remove from holding fast,
and surely depending upon the providence of mine heavenly father. They that
trust in Chariots and horses, are soon overcome: Psalm. 20.
but those that faithfully depend upon mine help and strength, stand fast and
invincible for ever, Ier. 57 5. The wonderful blessings* that are promised to
the faithful.
and shall be like the tree planted by the rivers side, that brings forth his
fruit in due season, whose leaf shall never wither away, and whatsoever he does
it shall prosper: he shall flourish like an olive tree in my fathers house that
never decaieth: Isay. 57.13.
he shall inherit the la^d and possess the holy mountain: that is, he shall be
fed and relieved while he lives upon earth, and in ye end, be partaker of mine
eternal inheritance: which by the shedding of my blood, I have purchased for
all them that believe: which blood of mine, remains always fresh in ye sight
of mine heavenly father: to who^ thou have (through me) free access, and with
him, my self, a continual Mediator for thy sins: wherefore come boldly unto
the throane of grace, come with a true heart and full assured faith, be sprinkled
with my blood from an evil conscience, and keep the possession of a sure hope
of salvation in me, without wavering. The just shall live by faith, for if thou
withdraw thy self from trust in me, The Just shall live by faith.
my soul shall have no pleasure in thee, and thy soul shall dye ye everlasting
death. Wherefore let not Satan (I say) ouerrule thee, to draw thine affections
with the force of worldly reasons into the gulf of despair again, as he has
endeavored heretofore: We must beware that we be not led by worldly reason, for
it often deceives
for thou must renounce al policies, al forecasts, al whatsoever reason
teaches thee: and with the foot of a true faith sta^pe it to pieces: only
settling thine heart and whole mind to perform that in all thine actions and
thoughts, which the eye of faith shall see poynted out with the finger of mine
holy Spirit, for thy comfort and undoubted salvation. Wherefore, let the eyes
of thine heart be always open, and the shield of a true faith, always
ready to see, and strongly to withstand, the deceiptes and errors of Satan,
least he dazell thine understanding, and quench the good motions of the
spirit, with the vanities of the old man, and so take this shield of faith
from thee, and make thee unable, to take hold of those things, Satan lays
natural reason often before the eyes of men, to the end that stu^blinge upon
the same, to hinder their faith. Mat. 15 33. Io. 4 9. Io. 8.56.
the belief whereof leads unto eternal bliss, and the unbelief turn to
thy destruction. Thou must beware I say of natural reason in causes touching
thy salvation: for Satan many times lays it as a block for the children of
God to stumble at, as an hindrance of their faith, whereby he went about to
quench the faith of my disciples, and to drive them to think it impossible for
me te feed four thousand men, with seven loaves and a few fishes. The woman
of Samaria being led by reason, could not perceive what that water of life was,
which I promised her, Natural reason could no^ conceive how Abraham saw Christ
long so before he came into the world. The eye of faith takes his light from
the word of God.
but when she had pluct away the veil of reason, and felt a sparkle of says,
she persuaded her self, that I was Christ the Savior of the world. This
reason could not perceive how Abraham, that was so long before me, could see
my days, to see me in the flesh: which (in deed) he saw a far of, with
the eyes of an undoubted faith: the eye of which faith, takes his light of ye
word of mine heaue^lye father, the writings of the Prophets, and of the
Gospel of truth: and by that eye, he saw me so long before, and by that eye,
must thou direct all thine affections, and measure all thy desires. For the eye
of reason, The eye of reason has his (...) from wor^dly wisdom which is
foolishnes
takes her light from worldly and natural wisdom, which is foolishnes before
me* for the natural man cannot comprehend my doctrine, he knows not what God
mine heavenly father is, neither can he understand what his will is, when he is
in (...) and when he is in error, when he is in light, and when he sits in
darkness: he cannot ^aste of the word of truth, but remains in voluntary
blindness: and to such is the preaching of the sacrifice, which I offered once
for all, Gall. 5.2. Romans 1^16.
upon the Cross, foolishnes. But unto such as believe in faith, it is the
power of God my father unto all nations: wherefore, be not ashamed of my
Gospel, for it is the very instrument of salvation to all that believe: The
gospel is the instrument of salvation.
for thereby is the righteousness opened, which if thou attain unto, by
proceeding from faith to faith, thou shall appear in the last day, among the
number of them, that shall live for ever. Shut up (therefore) the eye of
reason, wherewith thou have bin so long led into error, and vanities: And have
the eye of faith opened, whereby thou may be guided to true belief in the
living God, mine heavenly father, who made thee: in me his Son, who have
redeemed thee: and in the holy ghost, who has sanctified thee, All that we are
bound to believe consists in the trinity.
and all those that are appointed to eternal Salvation: wherein consists the
whole sum of all that which thou art bound to believe, to be saved.


The sinful man. Oh Solace, should my whole belief,
be grounded on you three?
Then show I pray thee more at large,
what my belief must be.
I do already understand,
that faith must be the eye:
Whereby I must expect to have,
salvation from on hye.
I do believe: help unbelief,
and show thy self to me:
I do repose my confidence,
and all my trust in thee.

Solace. Well then, Luke 3 21.22, 2. Io. 5.7. 2. Cor. 13.13.
for as much as I see thee desirous to be more fully instructed, and to have
thy faith more strongly confirmed, towchin^ the Trinity.

THou must first believe, there is a God, one in essence, and three in person,
Genesis 1.1.16. Mat. 3.16.17. Mat. 28.19.
namely the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, which three persons thou
must undoubtedly believe, to be one very God, of an undivided, and inseperable
substance, without beginning or ending, who has made heaven and earth, Reave,
1.8.
and all things contained in them: he has made thee to his own image and
lykenes, Genesis 1.
not to live only in this world to thy self, Esa. 6.1. and 45.12. Psalm. 33.6.
namely, to fulfill thine own desires, but to glorify him, to believe in him,
to serve him, and to hope for the inheritance of his kingdom, and to be
partaker of the glory, God the creator of all things^
and bliss, which I have purchased by my blood. Thou must believe that he is
the creator of all things, visible, and invisible, reasonable, and
unreasonable, 1 The 1.9. Heb. 2.15. Luke 1.74. Mat. 4.10. Luke 4.8.
man, and beast, whose power is infinite, whom thou must only serve, only
love, only worship, and to whom thou must pray in the time of thy
necessities, ^aithfully, believing that he it is, that helps thee, feeds
thee, Genesis 1.31. 1. Ioh. 1.5.
and defends thee: from whom proceeds all things that are good, and
nothing that is evil: in him, is all light and no darkness: all righteousness,
and abhors sin. And therefore, must thou verily believe, that in the
beginning he made Adam, the first man, 1 Io. 2^29. Genesis 2.26.
according to his own image and lykenes, and placed him in Paradise, the
garden of happiness, there to have continued in joy without sorrow, Ecle. 17.3.
in comfort without care, in ease without labor, and in a blessed estate, had
he not by his own Freewill (which then he had) yielded unto the deceitful
allurings of ye serpent, eating of the fruit of the tree, Wis. 2.23.
Romans 5.12.
which was forbidden him, the tree of the knowledge of good and evil: where,
in obeying that subtle Satan, he lost the benefit of the garden, and was
driven from thence, Gen, 3, 8.
by ye Angel of mine heavenly father. And where the serpent falsely persuaded
them, that in eating of ye forbidden tree, they should be as Gods, knowing good
and evil, they were as Devils doing nothing that was good at all: After the
fall of Adam, sin entered, there is none that does good.
but insteade of knowledge, became stark Fools: in stead of happiness,
purchased unhappiness, not only to them selves, but to all their posterity for
ever: in whom, 1 Cor. 2^8. Gall. 5 17.
by reason of their rebellion, there rests no will to do good, but a desire
to do evil: forsaking their Savior, and cleaving to Satan: disobeying God,
1 Io. 3.8.
and obeying the Devil: Dewt. 28.47.
of a free man, be come a captive and bondslaue, sold under sin. By whose
transgression and disobedience, thou must believe that all his posterity, Romans
5^12.
which is, all men, in general (my self the promised Savior excepted) became
disobedient, and sinners, in such sort, as all men are corrupt, imperfect,
unjust, liars, and rebels against God mine heavenly father: yea, all they that
came of ye stock of Adam, wi^, 13.1. Romans 3.10.
are all become abominable, and of none ability to do good: there is none
that works righteousness, no, not one, (my self excepted,) who according to
ye promise of mine heavenly father in the beginning made to Adam, yt the seed
of the woman, Genesis 3.15.
should tread down the Serpents head: and who was also promised to Abraham,
Isaak, and Jacob, where it was foretold, that in their seed should all the
kingdoms of the earth be blessed, wis. 13.1.
and therefore, must thou believe that ye original corruption, which proceeded
from Adam, remains yet in all flesh, Ier^ 31.30.
in general, whose reward is death. But my father has reserved unto himself,
a certain number, To. 31^33.
known only unto himself, which in my blood he has sanctified, unto
eternal life, whom by the holy Ghost, he elected and chose out, Ephe. 1.4.5.
before the foundation of the world, to be his children, adopted, and united
into his favor, Gall. 4.4.
and mercy again, by me his only son, who in the time, from the beginning
of the world, limited by the holy Prophets, foreshewed, came into the world, in
the very shape and form of a man, and in all things like unto a man, Mat, 1,
18*
(sin excepted,) conceived in the womb of a virgin, whose name was Marie, by
the holy ghost, and was incarnate, and took substance of her body, Ier, 31,
22, Ioh* ^, 14, Luk, 2, 7,
and borne into the world, and growing in the flesh according to the manner of
sinful men, (yet without sin) according to the word of the Prophets. Esa,
61, 2,
And that I was ye Messiah so long before promised, who should bring joy and
glad tidings, unto all the world, and to set those at liberty, that were in
the bondage of Satan, Luk, 2, 32,
sold under sin, Io, 12, 46,
and to give light to them that sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death:
who have bin from the beginning of the world, Col, 1, 15.
begotten before all creatures, Psalm, 45, 7.
and consecrated of mine heavenly Father, to be the only Hye Priest, that
should offer the Sacrifice, that should appease his wrath for all the sins of
the world: Io, 18, 37.
to be the king to defend his people: and the Prophet to show them his will,
and to guide their feet unto the way of peace. Act, 7, 37.
Who by offering up my body in sacrifice once for all, 1. Io, 3, 8.
through the eternal spirit, without spotte, or sin, purged the consciences
of men, from dead works, to serve the living God, Ioh, 5, 15.
mine heavenly Father: and that for that purpose, I left the heavenly City,
the bosom of mine heavenly Father, and being Lord of all, became a subject,
and servant to all, laying aside all glory, and put on the base attire of
mortal man, Io: 1, 14. Christ had two nature^ divine and human.
being endued with two natures, Divine, and Human: without which the will of
my Father, could not have bin executed, according to his divine providence, for
in my humanity, Mar, 11, 12, 13. 2 Samuel, 7.16.
I was in this world parsonally dwelling among men, eating, and drinking among
men, Esa: 7, 10. Mat, 1:23.
and was very man, of the promised seed of David: and yet as touching my
Godhead, I was nothing inferior to mine heavenly father, Mat. 1.23.
but coequall with him, and coeternall: yet was I content to humble my self,
and obey his will, and to show his unspeakable love and ardent desire he had
of the redemption of mankind: wherein he gave me (his only son) to dye for
the sins of the world: Christ dyed for the sins of the world.
who according to his determinate will, did most willingly embrace, even the
death of the Cross to redeem them from death, that were justly condemned,
performing the message of mine heavenly father in all things, Ioh. 8.26.40.
doing nothing, but what was decreed before the beginning of the world, by the
eternal counsel: Mat. 8.20.
I became poor to make thee rich: and to be a mean to bring thee into the
favor of mine heavenly father, Luke 9.58.
again, I became bond to the will of mortal men, See the vnspeake able
benefit of Christ's death.
to make thee free with the imortall God: I became a stranger and a Pilgrim in
earth, to make thee a Citizen of heaven: I became the son of mortal man, to
make thee the child of the living GOD: I suffered the pains of Hell to
purchaze thee heaven: I was content to sufter the cruel death of the Cross,
to procure thee life eternal. Thou must therefore faithfully believe that I am
that Christ that true Messiah, Christ the true messiah. Luke 2.32. Mat. 26.63.
that was promised to be the Savior of the world, who was anointed with the
oil of grace, and was endued with all spiritual and heavenly gifts, Ioh.
1.14.
here in earth above all others: and that my flesh was so sanctified, with my
Divinity, and Godhead, that it could not suffer or see corruption. Thou must
believe also, Luke 4.15. Mat. 4.15. and 8.4. Io. 21. Mat. 11.29^
that after I had preached the will of my father in Judea, and Galile, in great
humility, where both by word and miracles, Io. 5.18. and 7.29.
I showed my self to be the son of God, as also by the preachings of the
Prophets. The Jews by all means sought to take me, but could not before my
time was come, and when the hour came, Ioh. 7.30 and 5.32.
when I should be delivered into their hands, according to the will of my
Father, I was unjustly accused of ye chief priests, Mat. 26.34. Mar. 14.1.
who consulting how they might have me taken, Luke 22^2^
procured Judas falsely to betray me, promising him a bribe, who although) I
could have prevented him, Mat. 26^53*
) betrayed me with a kiss. And then the chief Priests bound me, Mat. 26.
Mar^ 14^
and brought me before Pylate, and had provided false witness to accuse me, Luk,
22. Ma. 27.30.31^ Ioh. 18.
wicked ministers to scourge me, scoffers to deride me, condemning me most
unjustly to dye, and to be hanged upon the Cross between two thieves, as a
principal malefactor, and yet pure, and altogether without spotte, or sin:
where, most ignominiously, and cruelly, I was crowned with a Crown of thorns,
Mar: 15. Luk, 23. Ioh. 19.
in dispitefull, and disdaynfull manner, saluting me by the name of the king of
the Jews, who being thirsty, they gave me most sharp vinegar, Mat: 27.34.
mingled with gall, to drink: all which I most meekely, and willingly
suffered: took all their torments patiently: their raylings and reuilings,
mildly: Ioh: 10.15*
their buffetings and spittings at me, meekelie: longing (for the redemption of
mankind) to be baptized with that baptism of so grievous a death, Luke 12.50.
and to offer up once for all, the sacrifice of my body, to revive them that
were dead in sin, and to obtain pardon for their transgressions, even the
tender love I had to the salvation of their poor souls: by which oblation,
Romans 4, 25.
I have purchased full satisfaction for the sins of the whole world: that
who so believes in me, should not pearish, Ioh, 3, 15. Tit. 2.11. Psalm* 69^6.
but should obtain eternal life. Thou must verily believe also, that I dy^d
upon the same Cross, and even giving up the ghost, Mat, 27, 34.
into the hands of mine heavenly Father, I endured such agony due for the
sin of mankind, which answered the Justice of mine heavenly Father, in so
heavy and exceeding manner, in respect of mine humanity, Luke 22.44. Mat.
27.46.
that the very anguish and conflict of the flesh, and spirit, I sweat water
and ^loud, and was for^ed to cry with a loud voice, Psalm. ^^.^. Mar. 15.34.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. Such were the cruel torments that I
suffered for thee, (O sinful man,) and for all mankind: So heavy was the just
judgment of god against sin, that Christ through his torments in respect of
his manhood, had thought his fa^^er had forsaken him. Esa. 53.
as that by reason of the extreamitie thereof, I thought my self even forsaken
of my father. But so heavy was his displeasure against the sin of all
mankind, and all the punishment due for it, laid only upon me, that requisite
it was, that the stripes wherewith so great a disease should be healed, should
be grievous and many. And therefore, thou must not think that I was forsaken,
of God, though I were contemned of the world, but highly in his favor: for it
behooved that I should suffer, and afterward enter into my Fathers glory.
Luke 24^4. Luke 24.7.
That I should fall into the hands of mortal men, be crucified, and made a
Sacrifice for the sin of all mankind, that they might be made the righteousness
of mine heavenly Father in me, 2 Co^. 5.21.
who have paid the rau^some for all the posterity of Adam, Christ has paid
the ransom for the sins of Adam.
and redeemed them out of the bondage of Satan, death, and hell: my death is
to all believers life: by my humility are they exalted, by my contempt are thy
made glorious, by my poverty, are they made rich, and by my misery, have they
eternal felicity. I descended also into hell, to make man inheritor of
heaven. So precious was my death, and so glorious my contempt, that by death, I
have not only overcome death: All men in Christ overcome death.
but all men by me. In my victory consists thy victory, by my triumph, all
mankind may justly triumph. I am the way, the truth, and the life: Christ is
the way, the truth and the life.
who so will go to the Father must come through me: who so will be saved, must
believe in me, and live in me: for to me has mine heavenly Father given all
power and authority, both in heaven and earth, that I might give eternal
life, Mat: 28, 18. Io, 17, 2.
to as many as he has given me: who as Jonas lived in the Whales belly three
days, Iona: 1, 17.
and three nighces, and the third day was cast on land, living: Mat, 27.50.
So after my death, being taken down of the Cross, I was laid in the
Sepulcher, Mar, 15:37. Mat: 12.40.
where I lay three days, to accomplish the sayings of the Prophets, and to
vere^ie that which was long before written of me, and that I rose again the
third day, Ioh. 2, 19. Mat. 28, 6^
for the Justification of all that believe, showing my self openly to my
Disciples, eating with them, and talking with them: Ioh* 20.5.
and with a Clowd, was taken up into heaven, and placed at the right hand of
God, Mar: 16.19.
mine heavenly Father, crowned with that glory, Luke 24.51.
honor, and immortality, wherewith I was endued before the fou^ndation of the
world: who, by my self, have purged thee from all thy sins: Collo. 20.
and have made free passage unto mine heavenly Father, for all the^ that in a
true faith follow me in life and conversation, treading the steps of
righteousness, 1. Pet. 2.21.
for who^ I remain a continual intercessour, Mediator and Advocate, unto mine
heavenly father, 1. Ioh. 2.1.2. Romans 8.34.
for things necessary as well for their bodies as their souls, faithfully
asking and praying for the same in my name: yea, you may not accept of any
other mean or instrument, Lu. 3.22. Io. 10.1.2.3.
to come unto mine heavenly father then my self, for then do thou greatly
err, thou blasphemest mine heavenly father, and dishonorest me: Christ is the
only way mean to bring us to God.
for he will be served, honored, and prayed unto, in me, and in the name of none
other. Thou must lay aside all prayers to Saints, and cast away all belief,
that there rests in them any power to appease the wrath of mine heavenly
father for thy sins, or to procure thee help in thy necessities, but must
come in my name, and then thou shall be sure to be heard, if thou believe: yet
not despising, but faithfully imitating, in good life and holy conversation,
those blessed members of mine departed out of this life before thee. As for all
remission of sins, al help and relief, thou must ho^e for and acknowledge
to come from mine heavenly father, by my means only, and by none other.
Wherefore (I say) thou must believe in none other but in me Jesus Christ
crucified, Heb. 12.24. Mat. 1.2^. Christ God and man sitting at the right hand
of the father, making continual mediation for us.
God and man, sitting in heaven at the right hand of mine heavenly father, and
remaining a Mediator between him and all those yt in faith come to me. Take
hold of me therefore I say, who am that Son of God and man, that was borne of
the U^rgine Mary, for the salvation of all mankind, who was conversant here in
this miserable world, laid first in a Maunger, most basely: and when,
according to the course of other me^, by sucking, eating and drinking, I grew
in stature, I preached and taught the will of my father, glad tydinges unto the
world. I was betrayed and sold by Judas: I was bound and buffited: I was
rayled at and reviled: I was turned over from one to an other: to Annas, to
Cayphas, to Pylate, to Herod, to ye Hall, held up mine hand at Bar and
there falsely accused: then scourged, and carried to the place of Execution,
where I was most miserably tormented, hanged on the Cross, then laid in the
grave: from whence I rose, and now ascended above all heavens: and all this for
thy ^ake, all this for no desert of mine, but ^or the redemption of all mankind
from the curse of the law: for there is ^o condemnation to them that are in
(...), walking not after the flesh, but after the spirit. The power of the
^pirite of life which is in me, has de^uered thee from the power of sin and
death: but he that has not my ^pirite, he is not mine, but shall dye.
therefore must thou mortefie the ^edes of the flesh by the spirit, that ^ou
may live. we must mortify the deeds of the flesh by the spirit.
Also thou must be^eue, that as I ascended visibly into ^eauen, with the very
body, wherein I suffered, so must thou likewise believe, Act. 10.42. Romans
14.9.10.^3. Io. 5.27.
that in the same body I shall come again, in great glory and magestie, to
judge both the quick and the dead, at whose hands, all me^ shall receive
reward, according to their well and evil doing: which Judgment shall be final
and general, whereat all men shall appear, all men shall give account of
their doings, Christ will come again to judge both the quick and the dead,
and give to every man according to their works.
yea, (...) every idle word and evil thought and that then shall those that
hau^ done good, be set in peaceable posses^sion for ever of the unspeakable
ioye^ of heaven: and they that be found i^ the service of Satan, and carried
(...) way with ye cares of this world, Ephe. 5.5.
the Couetouse persons, the Drunkerds the Extortioners, Liars, Usurers and al
those that have not obeyed the word of my heavenly father in (...) but have
lived in sin, and have (...) truly repented, such (I say) shall b^ cast into
utter darkness, ^. Cor. 6.9.10. Ephe. 5.4.
where sha^ be continual sorrow: no joy: al paine^ and no pleasure all grief,
and no gla^^nesse, with such continual and endless torments, (as the tongue of
man cannot express) with howling, weeping, and gnashing of teeth, where the
worm of the conscience shall never dye.

Thou must also believe, 2. Cor. 13.14. 1. Ioh. 5.7. Mat. 3.16.17. Ioh. 14.16.
that the holy Ghost, being ye third person of the Trinity, is a divine
person, coessentiall and coeternall with my father and me, who proceeds from
mine heavenly father and me: 1. Pet. 1.2.
It is the comforter and spirit of truth, the very pledge and earnest penye
of thy salvation, whereby thou art sanctified, Romans 8.15.16.
and assured in thy conscience, that thou art the child of mine heavenly
father, 1. Ioh. 3.24.
and heir of eternal life, and by it dwells mine heavenly father in thee.
It is the direction to all goodness whatsoever, Lu. 16.7. and 2.25. 2. Pet.
1.2.
whereby the Prophets have prophesied, mine Apostles preached, all ancient
Fathers written, and al godly men tasted, Ioh. 4.10. and. 7.38. Gal. 3.2.
of the sweet and comfortable message, which I have brought into this world.
It is the water of life, Mat* 13* 58. Man., 6.5.6.
which by no means will flow into the hearts of the wicked, nor abide in the
hearts of ye unbelievers, but delights to rest in the hearts, and to guide the
souls of the^ tha believe, and cleave unto righteousness, and thereby may
thou answer the adversaries of my word and Gospel. Mat. 10 19.20. Ephesians. 5 8.
It is the holy Ghost that calls men from darkness, to walk in light, that
procures newness of life, John 13.6.
and that mortefieth the old man, the world and the flesh, and makes thee
strong, against sin, death, and Satan, and that gives knowledge of the
truth and power to embrace it, and which makes my yoke easy and my burden
light, Mat 11.29.30. Job. 9.19.
that strengthens the weak hearts and feeble consciences, to serve mine
heavenly father, whereby thou art conducted and guided the way, Lu 1.7.4^75. Io
14.6. Mat. 25.34.
that leads unto the bliss that never shall cease. It measures all thy
doings by the rule of my word: reformeth errors, and reproves the world of
sin, 1. Ioh. 4.6. Io. 16.8.
of righteousness, and of Judgment, and bears witness in the hearts of all
believers, that their sins are freely forgiven the^ in me. Luke 24.49.
It was the guyd whereby mine Apostles followed me: without the which no man can
say, that Jesus is the Lord. Thou must also faithfully believe in one
Catholic Church universal, Luke* 3.29.
dispersed throughout the whole world, being the whole company of the
faithful believers in me: who notwithstanding, they are not of one unite
company in bodily society, yet in respect of their mutual and joint
agreement of their faith, of their life, their Baptism, their holy Table, and
true Religion, they are one Church and Congregation, Luke 10.20. Ioh. 13.1^.
Mat. 15 13.
of those yt of the free grace and mercy of God mine heavenly father, are
chosen and predestinat, to eternal life: Romans 12.5.
of which Church and Congregation I am the head, and whom the holy Ghost has
sanctified, and made holy, and whom I commend unto mine heavenly father, to
enjoy that inheritance, Mat. 13.58. Mar. 6.5.6.
which I have purchased with my blood, who as long as they are conuersaunt in
this miserable world, Romans 7.14.15. 1. Ioh. 1.4.8. Mat. 26.41. Luke. 22.46.
and bear about them the heavy burden of the flesh, cannot do that which they
should, and therefore cannot be of such perfection, Mat. 6.12.
nor be so purged from their original corruption and infirmities, which
abides in all flesh, Mat. 18.19.20. Ioh 17.21.
as is requisite, until such time as I (their head) shall appear, when they
likewise shall appear with me in glory: which Church and godly Congregation you
must likewise believe to be so knit and united together in the band of mutual
love, Romans 12.5.
and godly agreement, 1. Cor. 1.9. Mat. 6.11.
that whatsoever good gift, mine heavenly father bestows upon them
perticulerly, they imploye it to the common behoof of all in general. And
that as this Church and Congregation of al faithful believers in me, is the
true Catholic and apostolic Church, 1. king. 8.50.51
Luke 1.77,
so for them I have purchased free forgiveness of al their sins, Ioh. 20.23.
and that of ye mere love of mine heavenly father, Lu. 1.78 Romans 11.30.
and mine obedience unto the death, and nothing of their deserts: in so much,
as there remains none other satisfaction, or attoneme^t to be made with mine
heavenly, for the sins of ye world, but my self only, and that none can
obtain remission of their sins, 1. Pet. 3.20.21. Ioh. 20.21.
but such as be made true members of the same Church by me: for, besides the
same Congregation, there be none but such as work iniquities, to who^ I will
say: depart from me, I know you not, Mat. 7.23.26.
for whom there is a place of endless woe provided. Also thou must believe, that
although the corruptible bodies of ma^kinde, must perish, putrefie, and return
again to dust, of which it was first created, Job. 19.26.27. Mat. 27.52.53.
yet that in the last day they shall rise again with the same bodies, and
covered with the same skins, which now they have, and which the^ shall be
renewed and glorified, and they that are departed this life already, shall
take again their own bodies, which then shall be of far greater glory,
then either in this life they were, or that any heart can imagine. And those
that at my coming shall be found living in this world, shall suddenly be
changed: and those that be of this Congregation, the true members of this
Church, shall be placed in the unspeakable joys of eternal bliss: Mat.
13.30.43 John 5.29.
but those that have given them selves in this world to the fulfilling of the
lusts and desires of the flesh, 1. Cor. 6 9.10. Ephe. 5.51.
lived in wantonness and chambering, the Couetouse persons, the Usurers,
Drunkardes, Gluttons, and ungodly persons, shall not enjoy the benefit of that
sacrifice, which with mine own body I offered on the Cross once for all, but
shall be cast into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Unbelievers are not members of the true Church.
THese things must thou faithfully and undoubtedly believe to be the very truth
and ground of true religion, which, who so believes not, is no true member of
that holy Catholic Church, which is predestinate to be saved: And therefore
by a firm and constaunt faith, thou must take hold of these things which I
have declared unto thee being the ground of thy salvation, freely promised in
me: of which faith, the holy ghost, is ye giver, who frames the hearts of all
men, to believe the promises of my heavenly father touching their salvation, in
me, and seals up the sam^ promises in their hearts, whereby they persuade
themselves to be members of the same true Church, and of the company of those
that are predestinate to be saved: which faith brings forth the fruits of a
godly life, the beginning whereof (as I said before) is unfeigned repentance,
Act 5.31. and 11.18. and 26.8. Tim. 1.2^.
grounded upon this true and undoubted faith, in which two, (Faith and
repentance) is contained the whole sum of my Gospel: wherefore, Faith and
repentance the sum of the Gospel.
as thou have heard what this faith is, how it works, and what it should be
exercised in: So must thou retain it, and bring forth the fruits thereof, We
must bring forth the fruits of faith.
that it may appear a lively, an effectual, and not not a dead faith.) And
forasmuch, as the night is so near: I will for this day here make an end: And
in the mean time would have thee, to meditate of my former words: not
forgetting them, We must be the same inwardly which we would seem outwardly.
but diligently inclyning all thy study, will, and whole heart, effectually to
follow that which may testify in thy conscience, that thou art the same
inwardly: which thou desire to seem outwardly: And in the morning when thou
come again, I will proceed, to direct thee to that repentance, wherein thou
must exercise thy self toward the amendment of thy former life.


The sinful man. Would GOD the night were not so near,
thy talk delights me:
Increase my faith: to morrow I,
will wait again on thee.

The end of the VVednesdaye, or third days Conference.
A PRAYER FOR the increase of faith, and for the direction of the holy spirit,
to frame our lives according to the rule which God the father, in his son
Christ, has prescribed unto us.
OH, God, my God, giver of al good things, and the sure defense and succor of
all them that faithfully believe in thee. Lo, I thy silly creature, the work
of thine own hands, who in my great darkness and ignorance, humbly crave of
thee, the light that shines from on high, that faith (sweet Lord) without the
which no man can please thee, which proceeds from the holy Ghost, the most
wholesome water of life, whereof (oh Lord) give me some taste, some sparcle,
whereby I may come unto thee, whereby I may frame my life according to thy
blessed and heavenly will, and whereby I may truly serve thee, and do worship
to thine holy name. Vouchsafe (oh Lord, vouchsafe, in Jesus Christ thine only
and well-beloved sons name, and for his sake, to be merciful unto my
wretchedness, to forgive my wickedness, to strengthen my weakness, to pardon my
dulnes, and more and more to increase my faith, and to vouchsafe me perfect
knowledge of goodness, and ablenes, by thine holy spirit, to follow thee, to
frame mine heart unfeignedly to love thee, my will to seek, and al my powers,
to do their duties to praise thee: Lord increase my faith) which is the
principal mean, whereby we take hold of thy most loving and most comfortable
promises, in Christ our Savior, thine only and well-beloved Son, whom thou of
mere love of our salvation, sentest into this miserable world, here to suffer
the opprobrious death of the Ctosse, to appease thy wrath for our sins, and
to ris^ again for our justification: The worl^ ^hereof, sweet IeIesus, thou
have not only, most willingly as an obedient son, performed according to thy
fathers will, but have reueyled and manifested the mystery thereof to all the
world, and trained out the way, that we should walk in, to come to that
vnspeable happy habitation, the endless blessings, and passing joys whereof,
no tongue can express: Thou have by thy death, sweet Jesus, purchased again
for us, that which before we had lost in Adam: Thou have redeemed us again out
of the hands of death, and raunsomed us from the cruel bondage of Satan, that
enemy of al mankind, whose head although thou have trodden down, and paid the
uttermost, which could be demanded for our redemption, spoiled him of all his
power, and unarmed him of all his weapons, and gotten the victory over death
and hell: Yet such is our weakness, our corruption, and the hardness of our
belief in thee, that he remains yet tyrannous, diligently attending,
watching, and seeking whom he may devour, whom he may lead with blindness,
into error and false religion, into the ways of wickedness, to destruction
both of body and soul: And we, most wretched sinners, prone to do that which
is contrary to thy will* have of our selves no power to ^^thstand him, no
ablenes to avoid his tyranny: Wherefore, most loving Jesus, I the most
wretched and sinful, the most ignorant and blind creature, most humbly pray
thine aid, thine assistance and gracious protection, not only to defend me
from the claws of Satan and his ministers: the World and lusts of the
corrupt flesh: but also grace, to guide my life in faith unfeigned, perfect love
and true fear of thee, mine only Savior and Redeemer: having none other
hold, none other help, strength, defense or hope, to be defended and saufely
conducted, in a godly life and conversation, but thy self, sweet Jesus, thou
invincible captain, thou lamb of God, who take upon thee the sins of the
world* whose will is, that we should be saved, and be preserved from the hands
of that cruel Adversary the Devil. But alas: (good Jesus) so blinded are we,
that we can not see the way to thee: so deaf, that we refuse to hear thee:
and so disobedient, that we come not willingly unto thee: we have not attended,
when thou have taught us: but have refused to be instructed, when thou have
directed us. But most loving Jesus, the cause is the want of that most
excellent gift of thine, a true faith, which thou have offered, and I
neglected: and therefore have I not hethertoo been perfectly assured, nor
certeynly persuaded in heart, of the performance of those most comfortable
blessings which are promised in thee: Oh sweet Jesus, have thou remorse of
this my dullness, pluck out of mine heart the Beam of unbelief, and voutsafe
me now the right use of that most singular mean of following thee, the eye of
a perfect and true faith: and let natural reason, the Mother of error, no
longer deceive me, or draw me into conceits, contrary to thy most blessed
will, but being endued with thy gift of unfeigned faith, I may truly repent me
of all my former evils, and so evermore hereafter, even to my lives end, cleave
steadfastly to pure religion and the true service of thee. Oh Lord, give me one
sparcle of this true faith, whereby I may be able to comprehend: and rightly to
understand, what thy divine will and pleasure is in all things: That I may
frame mine outward desires, to the fulfilling thereof, and by thine holy spirit,
continually keep down the proud attempts, vnlawlawfull desires and carnal
lusts of the flesh, withstand the devil in all his assaults, and manfully
overcome the vain pleasures of this wicked world. Oh give me the shield of a
true faith, and the brestplate of unfeigned repentance, to fight that good
fight, that happy fight whereby I may be crowned with the glorious crown of
victory, and whereby I may be accepted into the number and society of that
holy congregation and fellowship of the faithful, the Catholic Church:
whereof, sweet Jesus, thou art the head, and only defense: in whom, whosoever
overcomes, thou have ordained the Diadem of al true happiness: wherewith thou
have promised to crown them, and to set the title of triumph upon their heads
to place them in that heavenly country, that celestial inheritance, wherein
there shall be no more fear, no more cares, no more vanities or affliction of
spirit, but continual peace, unfeigned love, unspeakable joys, and endless
felicity for evermore. Wherefore, sweet Jesus, vouchsafe me, that spiritual
weapon, the shield of a true faith, that fighting therewith against all the
assaults of sin, under the Banner of thy protection, I may in the end, be
crowned with the Crown of Eternal life, among the rest of thy chosen
children, sweet Jesus, Amen.

Oh Lord increase my faith.
THE THVRSDAY, or fourth days Conference, between Solace and the sinful Man.
Wherein the sinful man confesses his Faith, and is instructed by Solace,
what repentance is, and what are the fruits thereof, and the things that
hinder it.

Solace. WHere art thou man, that yesterday,
did promise to be here:
Come forth, attend, believe in me,
let fruitful faith appear.

The sinful man: Oh, Solace, art thou here so soon,
this day to meet with me:
Say what thou will, I do believe,
attendant here on thee.
Who as a just reward they had,
from their estate exile.
And all that come of Adams line,
through Adams sin do fall:
Deserving death by due desert,
and thus came first our thrall.
And then our God of passing love,
most sorry for our sin:
Did promise that the woman's seed,
should our salvation win.
And promised to Abraham,
to give his son to save
Mankind, from Satan's tyranny
as I believe he gave.
Thy self sweet Jesus, I believe,
who were coequall than:
With God thy father were content,
to be both God and man:
To come into this vale of woe,
and walk amongst us here:
To show for our salvation,
thy fathers wisdom clear.
Borne of the virgin Marie pure,
as was before decreede:
That thou that should save us all,
should come of woman's seed.
Whose Godhead and humayne state,
should link them selves in one:
Invisible and visible,
and not be here alone.
The heavenly counsel did decree,
thy self as man to dye:
And as a God again for us,
exalt thy self on hye.
And when thou here in earthly soil,
in human weeds below:
Did wander: I believe thee then,
like other men to grow.
To show thy self as man to us,
in humayne state to be:
In each respect a man in deed,
from sin yet only free.
And wast content, to bear reproach,
to suffer cruel Jews,
To buffet thee, to spit at thee,
and thee full vilely use.
Who sought by many wily means
to take thy life from thee,
Procuring wicked ministers,
to punish thee for me.
False witnesses unjustly came,
accusing thee of ill:
And thou a lamb most innocent,
were well contented still.
And when the time appointed came,
wherein thou should die:
Thy torments were so terrible,
were forced as man to cry.
My God my God, in my distress,
why haste thou leaft me thus?
No tongue can tell the great conflicts,
which thou had then for us.
Wherein thou gave up the ghost,
unto thy father dear:
Discending to the deep of hell,
to cleanse us sinners here.
The wrath of God thy father was,
to Adams sin so great:
That nothing could but thou his son,
his love again entreat.
Who on the Cross I do believe,
with heart and tongue confess:
That thou for all offenders then,
did purchase due redress.
For our offenses wlllingly,
thou did accept to dye:
And to be laid in grave as man,
and seen with humayne eye.
The third day after to arise,
again out of the grave*
And to ascend above the Skies,
to whom, thy father gave
Thy former glory and the seat,
at his right hand again:
Where thou as Lord of all and some,
doste with him now remain.
And there a Mediator true,
for sinners here below:
Thy self in mercy merueilous,
unto thy father show.
And when the time is full complete,
from thence I do believe:
In judgment thou will come again,
to all mankind, to give
Their just reward of life or death
as they deserve to have,
Who then shall take the flesh again,
they carried to the grave.
And those that do remain alive,
shall quickly changed be:
The wicked to their endless woe,
and just shall go with thee.
Into that s^^te of passing bliss,
that never shall have end:
And those that thou shall find unjust
thou will with Satan send.
The holy ghost I do likewise, Belief in the holy ghost*

in heart confess to be:
Whom I do faithfully believe,
to be all one with thee.
And with the father, who are three,
in parson, but (in deed)
In substance one, a Trinity,
in unity decreede.
Which holy ghost does sanctify,
thy chosen ones to live:
Assuring all men to be thine,
that faithfully believe.
And those to be an holy church,
a congregation pure.
Whom Satan can not with his wiles,
from thy precepts allure.
Dispersed through the world so wide,
yet faithfully agree:
In faith, in baptism, and good will,
united all in thee.
As to their head and chief defense
on whom they do depend:
And whom with mighty hand thou doste,
most graciously defend.
And they like faithful children do,
communicate in one:
And do not use thy benefits,
each man by him alone.
But what thou do on one bestow
he does impart to all,
And each in godly love supports
another, least he fall.
Whose sin I faithfully believe
is pardoned in thee,
Who by thy death I do believe:
have made me likewise free.
And that our bodies now corrupt
shall rise again in fine,
In purerest wise, and them into
thine hands again resign.
And that our souls and bodies shall,
the heavenly joys possess:
For ever more increase my faith,
that I believe no less.

Solace. WELL then, if thine heart do faithfully believe those things which
thou have here confessed, and do not swerue nor stand doubtful of any one of
these several Articles, thou art in a good way, and shall shortly feel in thy
self a merueilous change, through the working of this faith, whose operation
and effect as I told thee yesterday, is wonderful, and to conclude: Heb.
11.32. The operation of faith is wonderful.
look upon Gydion, Barach, Sampson, Ieptha, David, Samuel, and the Prophets,
who, through the same faith, subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness,
obtained the promises, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the force and
violence of fire, escaped the edge of the Sword: of weak were made strong,
became valiant in battataile, and put to flight the Armies of the Aliauntes:
Faith the foundation of all other virtues.
It is (I say) the foundation and groundworke of all other virtues whatsoever,
showing it self by unfeigned repentance, which is, an inward sorrow for sin,
and a continual godly care of the amendment of life, Faith must be
accompanied with repentance.
as thou shall hereafter be better instructed, if faithfully thou embrace my
sayings, and incline thine ears to knowledge.


The sinful man. Increase my faith, I am corrupt,
which keeps me dull perforce:
The flesh is frail.
My flesh is frail, my will is weak,
good Solace show remorse:
And what, as yet, does want in me,
unfold the same in have:
That I a sinner may repent,
of all offenses past.

Solace. IF thou be so well disposed, and so ready in heart, truly to turn
unto me, and unfeignedly to repent, as by outward show thou seem, I will
proceed, to show thee how thou must finish ye good desire of thine, to obtain
eternal life.


The sinful man. Say on (good Solace) I attend,
I long in heart to hear:
The course of this thy purpose pure,
which is to me so dear.

Solace. THen understand thou, that when I walked in this vale of misery, in
the similitude of mortal man, healing all deseases and bodily infirmities,
Amendeme^t of life, the chiefest remedy for the sickness of the soul.
I required for my reward of those that were healed, and as a fit preservation
for them only, that they should amend their lives and sin no more, and to
lead innocent and godly lives: and because that I would move them the more to
a zealous and godly carfulness, to keep them selves from thence forth, from
wantonness and sin, A good caveat.
I gave them this caveat, that they should beware that they returned not to
their old filthiness, least a worse thing should happen unto them afterward.
Now therefore, for as much (oh sinful man) as I have showed thee and ministered
unto thee a medicin, Those that are lulled a sleep through the allurements of
Satan, in the pleasures of this world, think none other happiness but
worldly felicity.
for a far more dangerous desease then can possess the body, an inward
evil, a spiritual malladie, which had taken deep root in the bowelles of
thine heart, and festered it in such sort, as it was almost incurable, and
have now brought it to such perfection, as there is some likelihoode of speedy
cure, if thou will be ruled and advised by my directions. Thou know, thou
can not deny, that the couetouse desires and foolish fantasies of this
wicked world, had so blinded thee, and the pernicious devices of subtle Satan
so lulled thee a sleep, that thou knew none other happiness, but thine
abundance: none other comfort but thy coffers of gold and silver: no
pleasure but thy pomp: nor fear any other pain but poverty, and not moved
with pity, did pinch thy poor Tenant, and were altogether ignorant, what
was the commodity of the sacrifice of my body upon the Cross, or to what
purpose was my death and most bitter Passion, placing al thine affections upon
transitory toys, running headlong into thine utter destruction, without
redemption, had not I awakened thee, out of that deadly slumber, reclaymed thee
from thine error, brought thee out of that darkness, and showed thee light:
searched thine heart, being so infected with this dangerous desease, thou
had never been healed, but had dyed in utter despair, and so have been
damned for evermore. Now, if bodily infirmities and corporal deseases are to
be preserved, The sickness of the soul much more to be respected then the
disease of the body.
by such a due regard of keeping them selves pure and undefiled, by avoiding
wantonness and amending their lives, how much more have thou cause to look unto
thy self? to keep watch and ward night and day, least (upon this thy
recovery, that venomous serpent Satan, who first poisoned thee, seeking yet
still by all means to renew thy desease) should find the door of thine
affections open, we must have regard, least the door of our affections open to
entertain the intisements of Satan.
thrust in new venom, new inchauntments, and new means to hinder thy
curing, and to make a new wound incurable, and so thine end be worse then
thy beginning. Therefore, so much the more must thou be careful and
circumspect, for the preservation of thine health, begun, for the saftie of thy
poor soul, to amend thy life and to sin no more: which is, We must amend
our lives and sin no more.
thou must speedely rid away and cast out all the evil within thee, by the
hand of a lively faith, joined with an unfeigned sorrow, and true repentance,
which is a virtue much pleasing mine heavenly father: The difinitition of true
repentance.
for that it is an inward godly lamenting and mourning of the heart, for
things committed and done, contrary to the blessed will and holy commandments
of mine heavenly father, a detesting and utter abhorring of all ungodliness,
of all things whereby the displeasure of God may be provoked or his love
abated: a godly and zealous endeavor to do well, and a fearful trembling to
do evil, whereby every sinner returning unto God, acknowledges his offenses,
condemns himself, and confesses himself guilty, and justly deserving
punishment, casting himself down in his own conceit, in such remorce of
conscience, as he seeks and by all means possible endeavors himself to
make amends for his offenses past: framing his life so strictly, and so
sincerely in all his doings, as it may outwardly appear, and his conscience
bear witness inwardly that he utterly abhors sin, and coueiteth to lead
a new life. Mat. 3 2. John Baptist baptized none but such as repented their
sins.
And therefore* John Baptist when he Baptized in Jordan, Baptized none but
such as repented and confessed their sins. Wherefore (I say) repent, and
sin no more, that thy wickedness may be forgiven thee, and thine infirmities
be cured. Learn of David, Psalm. 51.4. David repented at the warning of the
Prophet Nathan.
who when he was reproved of the Prophet Nathan for his sins, cried out
against himself, confessed his sins: and not like an hypocrite feynedly
before men, but in great bitterness of heart inwardly, cried out and said:
Lord I have sinned against thee, True confession.
I have done amiss in thy sight, and as one wounded and thoroughly grieved, for
provoking Gods heavy displeasure so against him, that he most earnestly
prayed for mercy: whose sorrow was according to that that mine Apostle
speaks of, 2. Cor. 7.10. Godly sorrow.
causing repentance unto salvation. The sorrow whereby the lost Son
obtained his fathers favor and pardon again: Such sorrow had Peter when he
had denied me: wherein he repenting, wept bitterly. Job. 1.20.
Such a godly sorrow had Job: who rent his clothes and shore his head, and
cast himself unto the ground. Genesis 4.13. Mat 27.5.
Thou must beware that thy sorrow be not as Esaus, as Judas, and as Caines
was, The sorrow of Esawe Judas and Cains Evil.
who were also greatly grieved, and inwardly pinched, at ye feeling of their
offenses, but not in respect that they were in any mislike with their sins,
but being rather hardened, and as it were inwardly set against God mine
heavenly father, kicking against his mercy and loving promises, Act. 1.18.
fell desperately from him: their sorrow was not of faith, and therefore caused
not repentance unto salvation, but augmented their sins. That sorrow which
is not of faith, causes not repentance unto salvation. What true repentance is.
True repentance, is altogether to put of the old man, and not to fulfill the
lusts of the flesh, but even to forsake thy self, and to be renewed in
righteousness: not only in outward apparaunce, but even in the very
intentions and inward affections of the heart, putting on the new man: which
is newness of life, being thoroughly persuaded of the fatherly love and loving
promises of mine heavenly father: for otherwise, it is impossible to yield thy
self in unfeigned repentance unto his mercy, or endeavor thy self truly to
turn unto him, as he desires all men to do: not wishing any to perish in his
sins, but most lovingly calls he all men: not only by me his Son, 2. Pet.
3.9.
but by his messengers, the Prophets, and true Preachers of my word, Iet.
3.1. Hos. 14.2.
to return from their wicked ways and be saved. Return, return therefore,
every one from his evil ways, from the wickedness of your inventions, Ier.
3.14. and 18.11.
and put not of from day to day: for suddenly comes the wrath of God upon
the children of unbelief, upon the stubborn and stifenecked. Repent, I say,
repent, and dye not in thy sins: We must speedily repent, least we dye in our
sins.
seek mine heavenly father in me, and thou shall find him, and for my sake
shall he pardon thee: he shall be merciful unto thee, and shall rid thee out
of all thy troubles, and defend thee from all miseries: Deuteronomy. 4.29. 2. Cron.
12.12. Roboam repented. 2. Cron. 33.12.13.
As he did Roboam, who after he had offended, humbled himself, and obtained
favor. Manasses likewise an Idolater, having by his dissobedience, procured
the wrath of God against him, was taken prisoner, and of his enemies was bound
in fetters: but upon his true repentance, The repentance of Manasses. Judith
4.9.10. The children of Israel repented.
humbling himself in prayer, obtained not only deliverance, but pardon for
his offenses. The Isralites, in their great danger, repented their sins,
fell prostrate unto God in true repentance, and were delivered. Marie
Magdaline. The ninevites.
Mary Magdaline, upon the like repentance, humbled her self, and I forgave her
sins. The Ninevites, a rebellious and obstinate people, at the coming of
Jonas, preaching repentance, repented in Sackcloth and Ashes, Men of the old
world not repenting at the preaching of Noe we drowned.
and were saved. But the old world, whose hearts would not relent, nor turn
from their wickedness by the preaching of Noe, were they not suddenly taken
and drowned in the great Flood, Noe with a small number of persons excepted?
The Sodomites and men of Gomorrha, who would not repent at the message of my
father, The Sodomites and me^ of Gomorra burned with fire and brimstone.
Jerusalem destroyed.
were burnt with fire and Brimstone suddenly from heaven. Such was the
unbelief and careless wretchedness of those of Jerusalem, whose dissobedience
was great, and would not repent, had the sentence of destruction seven years
before pronounced against them, and yet run on still in their wickedness,
were besieged and entrenched with their enemies Tytus and Vespatian: who
battered their walls, sacked their City, burned their houses, and themselves
in such misery, that for mere famine were driven to eat their own children,
and things clean contrary to the nature of men: such is the just judgment of
mine heavenly father against such as will not ^e warned at my word, The
iudgemen^s of God great against such as neglect his word.
the Gospel of truth: such as neglect and contemn my messengers, and set at
naught the preaching of my will. Wherefore, I say again unto thee, and not to
thee only, but to al in general, rent your hearts and not your garments, and
return speedely unto him, God is ready to receive them that truly turn to
him.
whose hands of mercy are now extended, ready to receive them that truly
turn to him: and his vengeance and wrath ready to be powered out upon the
rebellious people, upon the sinful and wicked ones, that without regard of his
mercy, or fear of his Justice, embrace wickedness, and lock up vanity in
their chestes, even with greedines: Iud. 2^.14.
for which cause the wrath of my heavenly father is inkindled, wherein he
delivers the offenders into the hands of their adversaries that shall
destroy the^. And yet such is his mercy, and his love so unspeakable, that
at what time soever they shall unfeignedly repent them of their sins, when
soever they shall in heart return to him, he shall receive the^ in mercy, and
with his merueilous loving kindness shall he defend them as with a shield.
Wherefore, I say unto thee, and not only unto thee, but to all those that have
their affections set on the things of this world: Mortefie your members, Col
3.5.6. We must mortify our evil affections.
which are on the earth, fornication, uncleanness, the inordinate and unbridled
affections of the heart, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which is
Idolatry, which is now adays most greedely embraced: But be assured, and let
no man (neither thine own perverse imagination) deceive thee, that neither
Whoremonger, Ephe. 55.
neither unclean person, nor he that supposes his safety to consist in his
riches, an Idolater, shall have any part of the inheritance of my Kingdom.
Among whom thou thy self have walked, and which things thou have sometimes been
defiled with, Ephe. 2.3.
fulfilling the desires of the corrupt flesh, whereby the wrath of mine heavenly
father was bent against thee. If we repent and believe, we shall be saved.
But of my rich grace, if thou repent and believe, thou shall be saved.
Wherefore, beware thou harden not thine heart in evil, return without delay,
be warned and run not headlong into new euilles, as the corruption of thy
perverse nature provoke thee, and whereby Satan seeks to draw thee,
either into a careless going forward in evil, or else into that false and
damnable kind of sorrow, whereinto he drew Caine, The sorrow of Esau, Cain
and Judas, damnable.
Esau, and Judas: whose sorrow was not to repentance unto salvation, (as thou
have heard before) but whereby they aggrauated and increased the displeasure of
God against them: and into the same sorrow he began to draw thee, when thou
were first touched with ye knowledge of thy sins, of which kind of sorrow
thou must beware, and prepare thy heart to that sorrow of David's: of Mary
Magdalines, A godly sorrow.
and of the Thief that was executed with me: whose sorrow was unto salvation,
not unto death: unto amendment of life, not unto perseueraunce in wickedness:
unto righteousness, not unto sin. Thou must search thine own conscience,
and root out of thine heart al hypocrisy, al unbelief, all hawtines and
pride, and in all humbleness and lowliness of mind, prostrate thy self
before the tribunal sea^e of God the father, making humble confession of thy
former evil life, and in an unfeigned faith cry out, that for my sake he will
be merciful unto thee, that he will forgive thy sins and pardon thine
iniquities: God is ready in great mercy to embrace them that truly turn to
him.
who is ready in great mercy to return to him, that seeks him by me with
his whole heart: who eschueth evil and does the thing that is good: that
cleaves unto righteousness, and auoydeth all occasions to do evil. And that
with David considering his ways, turns his feet unto my testimonies, and
not to Covetousness: chastizing himself with true mortification, and casting
away all impediments, that may hinder or let the preceding to the amendment
of his sinful life. For, he that will come unto me, He that will come unto
God must forsake the (...) of the world.
must be contented to take in good part, to forgo the pleasures of this
world, to be of small reputation here, to be hated, reviled, persecuted, yea,
and to suffer death for my sake.


The sinful man. All this I can, and will perform, We may not presume of our
selves to do any g^o^ thing.

yea, what thou will I shall:
I yield my self with wil^ing mind,
for thee to bear it all.

Solace. ALas poor silly man, thou show thy self very valiant before the
battle, and very coragious before the combat, We can stand fast before we be
shaken.
thou can stand fast before thou be shaken: as though thou were of thy self
of power to do what thou ought, and to abstain from doing that thou
ought not to do: as though thou had no need of my help, nor want of the
aid of the holy Ghost: or had such perfection already, as now there wanted no
more in thee. Beware of this presumption, for it is a mean to quench true
zeal, and a great hinderaunce unto the work of true repentance. Presumption
is a mean to quench true zeal.
It is the dregs of Satan's poison that yet remain in thy corrupted mind,
wherewith thine heart yet swells against instruction, with a vain conceit
of sufficient ability, to do good and to eschew evil, and to bear the
heavy burden of death for my sake: when in deed, thou art not yet healed of
thine old sore, but refusest (as it were) to receive the medicine, which for
thine eternal health I minister unto thee. Satan tells thee that thou art
able already to work miracles, and to do wonders, and that thou know all
things already, wanting nothing, and why? because he would keep thee still
in ignorance, and from coming to knowledge. Satan's devices to detain us
from hearing the word of God.
It is his endeavor, not in thee only, but he works to the same effect in
many, whom he withdraws from hearing my ministers and messengers, to
pronounce my Gospel, as he seeks to withdraw thee from hearing me: saying
to some, why, what will thou stand hearing of this man to prate in the Pulpit?
he has no learning, he has no vtteraunce, he has this imperfection, or that,
and so pluckes the^ by the sleeue, to go gad, to walk, and to wander in their
wonted wa^tonnesse and wicked ways, in such abomination, as the stincke of
their filthintsse has infected many. Some he sends to the hearing of the
word, but why? to hear for profit? no, but to cauell and to descant upon the
Preachers words, Some come to hear the word for cauelations sake.
and interpretation of this word and of that sentence, and so fall into a
deuillish disputation, wresting the truth to their own corrupt imaginatio^s,
bringing into the Church scruples, and doubtful questions, The beginning of
scismes, is the misconstruction of the Scripture.
as the ministers of Satan to be stu^bling blocks, and lets unto ye passage of
the divine message of my heavenly father: whereby has grown so many Sects,
Scismes, Heresies, false constructions, and deuillish doctrines, that my Church
is nothing so great, as the most damnable Chapel of Antechrist. And I see
that of set purpose to hinder thine amendment has he whispered thee in the
ear, The Church of God calls them the chapple of Antichrist. Mat. 7.13.14.
and told thee that thou art cunning enough, and that thou may work and
accomplish al things by thine own free will. But thou art greatly deceived:
for I will be known to be only righteous, and thy self to be full of
wickedness, not knowing what my righteousness is, and yet take upon thee
most arrogantly a perfection of wisdom and ability, to know and do all good
things, when in deed thou art mere foolishness and corruption it self. We
must cast our selves down in our own conceits.
Wherefore (I say) cast down thy self in thine own conceit, put of al
presumption and hope of thine own strength: hearken not to Satan, but consider
that thou had utterly perished in thy sins, and been quite and clean cast
away by reason of thy desease, have thou not had this mean to be healed, and
to be purged and made clean by my blood. And therefore, I say again, be
warned, and look unto thy self, be watchful to the end, least thou grow
ouerbolde, and so heap a more horrible vengeance of my heavenly father upon
thee.


The sinful man. Alas what must I sinner do?
whereto poor wretch must I
Imploye my self? I think there be
no shift but I must dye.
I will like woeful wight in have,
of hayre-cloth make my bed:
The death of Christ took these ceremonies away
And clad my careful corpse in sack,
and cast dust on my head.
In mourning wise to pas my days,
and pinch my self with fast,
As my forefathers did, that I
may purchase bliss at last.

Solace. IN deed, that has been the manner in the old world, as ceremonies
used, as shows of great heaviness, and arguments of humility, The outward
show of repentance is not always accompanied with inward contrition.
and outward tokens of repentance. But consider this, that these outward
shows, are not always accompanied with that inward working which cauleth
repentance unto salvation, but rather a worldly show of sorrow unto death:
for that, that under this kind of disguising, Dissimulation odious before God.
and outward show, there may lurk deep dissimulatio^ and hypocrisy, making
an outward show of heaviness, and yet not ceasing inwardly to laugh and to
retain their former wanton desires: The manner of sturdie beggars, hypocrisy.
like a thief that when he is brought before ye Judge or Magistrate, upon hope
to be acquitted, can cry out and make a great show of outward lame^tation,
kneeling, crouching, and other hypocritical means, to be discharged: and when
he has his liberty, he ca^ fall to his old wickedness a fresh: like unto the
sturdie Beggar, that feineth him self lame, his arms mayned, and his body
crippled in this wars, or in that work, by such a mishap, and halting before
men in hope to be relieved with other men's sweat, showing him self impotent:
who when he has obtained his purpose, and gotten his game, he can turn his
face, and fleere to his fellow hipocrites, leap, and skippe like lusty
Uagabondes, and under color of this hypocrisy, not only deceives many with
the outward dissembling show, Dissimulatio^ deserves double punishment.
but when he sees a booty and opportunity serves, he can play the kindly
Ruffian, and take it by violence: whose dissimulation deserves dubble
punishment. Thus thou see that the outward show is often deceiuable, Joel.
2.13.
but the true sorrow, the acceptable repentance, is inward, according to the
words of the Prophet Ioell: who cries out and says, Rent your hearts and not
your garments and turn to the Lord your God: Mat. 6.17.
and not to look outwardly sour as hypocrites, disfiguring your selves with
this or that kind of outward Ceremony, that the show of your repentance may
appear more outwardly, then (in deed) it is inwardly: to which words of Ioell
is added, that it must be with fasting, weeping, and mourning, in Sackcloth and
Ashes, prostrate on the ground: which in those days was in deed a testimony
of repentance: The outward show of repentance mere hipocrysie without
inward punction.
yet that outward show without the inward compu^ction, and renting of the
heart, with a godly and continual sorrow, and zealous lamentation for sins,
was mere hypocrisy. And yet, were not this visible shows of Sackcloth and
Ashes, with many other like rites and ceremonies to be condemned in those
days: for that they were given and accustomed, not yt through the visible and
external show only, (which was but the shadow) could sufficiently appease
the wrath of mine heavenly father, but that thereby, they might so much the more
eleuate, In the old world the outward ceremonies were helps to repentance
and lift up their minds above the thing seen, to a further and more higher
consideration, both of their own corruption, weakness, and blindness, and
of the mercies and most loving promises of God mine heavenly father: of which
faithful consideration of the visible show, grew an inward godly sorrow,
causing repentance unto salvation: but the external Ceremony, Dan. 9.3.4.5.
without faith in God mine heavenly father, was then not only not available,
but very abominable. The external show without faith more abominable.
But since the sacrafice of my body upon the Cross for sin once for all was
offered, that outward Ceremony is not material: who by my death have
fulfilled and performed ye whole sum of all the law: And therefore, not
only such ceremonies as have been in the old world, but peevish Pilgrimages,
Ceremonies, Penance, and such like foolish fantasies, are now of none effect,
and are no part of that true repentance, which I require of thee, to be an
inward renting of the heart, and an unfeigned continual godly grief for thy
sins, and a faithful endeavor to frame thy life according to the will of mine
heavenly father. Now, as touching fasting, True fasting.
know that the true fast is a member of thy true repentance, wherein it
behooves thee to have great regard, Esa. 18.5. The true fast consists not
altogether in the abstine^ce from meats.
being a work as it is necessary, so (not seldom) abused: as of hypocrites,
who chastise their bodies, and afflict their so^les, for a day, bowing their
heads like a Bulrush, and making their bed with Sackcloath and Ashes, (as before
is said) standing upon their cinceritie and strickenes of life, even to the
face of mine heavenly father: saying, we have fasted and thou have not seen
it, we have pinched our Carcasses and thou have not regarded it: as though by
the outward punishment of the flesh only, they showed themselves sufficiently
penitent, when in deed they feed the old man, and maintain their wonted
wantonness, with the crummes of a careless life, and striking their fellows
with the fist of all kind of wickedness and covetous desires. Will thou now
call this a fasting, or a repentance acceptable to God? Uerely, such
Hypocrites have their reward. But to fast truly, Mat. 6.^6. What true fasting
is. Psa. 1.16.17. Esa. 58.7.
thou must wash thee and make thee clean, thou must cast away and banish from
thine heart all evil desires, and lay all the works of wickedness out of my
sight: thou must leave to do evil and learn to do good, seek judgment,
relieve the oppressed, and defend the fatherless: many blessings promised to
true fasting.
thou must give thy bread to the hungry: harbor the poor and harborlesse:
clothe the naked, and do wrong or oppression to no man. This is the fast most
acceptable, to which mine heavenly father has promised many and great
blessings: namely, that thine infirmity shall speedely be healed, thy soul
comforted, thy righteousness appear before God and man, and the mercies of
mine heavenly father: in me embrace thee on every side, and thou shall want no
manner of thing that is good: of which fast, proceeds by means of a firm
faith, that sorrow (for the sins which proceed of the corruption of the
old man, whereby the wrath of mine heavenly is incensed against thee) causing
repentance unto salvation. This fast, this sorrow, and this repentance,
builded upon the immovable rock of faith, must be the beginning of thy new
life.


The sinful man. But must I not sometimes abstain
my careless corpse from meat?
Or is it lawful when I list,
all kinds of meat to eat?

Solace. AS for meats, Romans 14.1.3.14.
thou need not to put any difference between them: for that God my heavenly
father, has created and ordained all things for the use of man, and those may
every one yt believes lawfully receive, All meats to be taken with
thanksgiving.
with thanksgiving to the heavenly creator, who has made all things good, and
nothing to be refused. Wherrein notwithstanding is a godly abstinence, and
mean to be used: namely, not to exceed in the greedy receiving of those
creatures: Luke 16.19. 1. Pet. 4.3.4.
as in Gluttony, in Drunkenness, and belly cheer: whereby comes not only
sickness, and dangerous deseases unto the body, but stirring up the same to
wa^tonnesse, and many noisome desires, procures the wrath of my heavenly
father. Excess to be avoided Ezekiel ^6.4^. Gluttony, one of the sins of Sodom^

Excess in eating an enemy to study and prayer.


It was one of the sins of Sodom, whereby being puffed up, fell to
wantonness, and committed abomination before mine heavenly father, for which
they were destroyed. This excess is also an enemy to the study of the holy
Scriptures: and especially to earnest and devout prayer: for the fullness and
ouercharging the stomach, quenches the godly affection, and stops the
zeal of the heart, so, that it cannot so effectually open it self to the
comfort of the soul, as in a moderate and competent diet, 1. These. 4.34. ^.
Pet. 2.11.12.
it can, and as is requisite it should do, to serve the living God. Wherefore,
thou must beware of this excess, and embrace not only this kind of
abstinence, but abstain also from Fornication and uncleanness, from fleshly
lusts, We must obey those ordinances of man, that tend to the glory of God.
which fight against the soul, and keep thy body from being defiled with
evil concuviscence, as a vessel of holiness, submitting thy self to all
manner ordinance of man, for my sake, whether it be unto the King, as unto thy
Superior, or unto other Governors and Magistrates, as unto them that I have
sent, for the punishment of them that do evil, and praise of them that do
well. Luke 12.1. Hypocrysie the leven of the Pharysies.
Take heed therefore of this leaven of the Pharasies, which is hypocrisy,
whereby many seem outwardly as Angels, but inwardly are devils. Such a one
was Judas, Mat. 2.27.3. Exodus 8.8.
who under color of a kiss (which is a token of love) betrayed me. Such
hypocrisy had Pharaoh, Saul, and Achan, 1. Sam. 15.13. Ioh. 7.20. Esa. 29.13.
and many others, who had Honey in their lips, and Gall in their hearts: such
I say come nere me with their mouths, and honor me with their lips, but
their hearts are far from me: but they shall have their reward, their feigned
fasting shall be turned into their utter confusion, their wisdom into mere
foolishness, and their understanding shall perish. Wherefore, that thy
repentance may both outwardly appear to good example, and inwardly to thine
own salvation, We must revenge our selves of our sins.
thou must (as it were) revenge thy self of thy sins: that is, thou must
bridle thy corrupt flesh: namely, if thou have offended in Gluttony, to
chastise thy body with godly abstinence and fasting: if in whoredom, thou
must bridle thine appetites with a continual continency: To make restitution
of our goods ill gotten, is a special fruit of repentance.
and as thou have embraced Covetousness, used Usurie, and pilled the poor for
lukers sake, thou must not only, not hereafter use it, but thou must make
penitent restitution, which is a special fruit of repentance, including a
certain due consideration of thine estate, what it has been, how it is, and
how thou have behaved thee in the same, and by what means thou have made thy
self so rich, whether with thine own, or the sweat and labor of other men,
whereof thou can not clear thee: for me thinks, I hear the voice, not only
of Simple thy Tenant, but of many poor men more, crying out and saying, that
thou have undone them. Wherefore, I say, look to thy self, and discharge thy
conscience, for a guilty conscience, cannot stand in the last day, to plead
for his discharge, but shall receive his reward among the wicked in utter
darkness where shall be weeping and gnasshing of teeth. A guilty conscience
shall condemn it self in the last dry.



The sinful man. An hard sentence for the couetouse men.
Alas must I restore again
the things I do possess,
Which I have gotten heretofore,
or am remediless?
Then, woe is me, I am undone,
my state, will then decay:
Good Solace pardon that, and I
will all things else obey.

Solace. AH, are you the man, who ere while promised to bear all things for
my sake? And to be ready to perform whatsoever I willed thee, toward the
obtaining of eternal life? and that for my sake thou would be contented to
suffer death? I told thee, thou were valiant before the cumbat, and would
stand fast before thou were shaken: is this so sharp a blast unto thee, that
thou art forced through weakness to run under the defense of thine old
adversary, who (as I told thee,) is so loath, to let thee go out of his
captivity, that he seeks many means to keep thee in awe of him? If this
shake thee so sore, what would my cross do? What would death do? Luke, 18,
22. Mat, 19.20. Hard for a rich man to be saved.
But now are my words of the scripture verified: That it is hard for a rich man
to enter into the kindome of heaven, yea, as impossible, as for a Camel to go
through a needles eye: And why? for that he puts greater delight in his
wealth, then in my counsels: he has greater pleasure in riches, which endure
but a while then in the joys of heaven, enduring for ever: because he fears
not the destruction of the wicked, The state of wicked, Rich men, very
miserable,
nor longs for the salvation provided for the godly: O miserable estate of
the wicked Rich-men, that repose their confidence in their muck, and hazard
their souls for the wealth of the world. But awake, awake thou foolish man,
that slumbrest thus in sin, look upon that godly Zacheus: Luke, 19, 2. to
11. Zacheus a pattern of repentance.
set him as a glass wherein to behold the pattern of perfect repentance, who
being very rich, was voluntarily contented, to restore not only, fowerfould
that which he had wrongfully gotten, but to give the half of his goods to the
poor, who had salvation for his reward. Consider this O foolish man, and
refuse not to make restitution of thine indirectly gotten goods: And of that
which thou have then left, be thou liberal, in so much as if thou see thy
poor brother to want, that, wherewith thou have to relieve him, thou may not
withhold it. Prou, 28.8. We must relieve our poor brethren.
And let not the insatiable desire of momentanie pleasures to choke thine
understanding, that my words can not revoke thee from thy disobedience, to a
speedy sorrow, causing repentance unto salvation: walk not thus in a shadow,
Psalm. 39.6. and 49.6.
disquieting thy self in vain, reposing thy trust in casual riches, whereof
thou have boasted thy self heretofore, as though it could redeem thy soul in
the last day. Psal^ 52.6.7.8.
Wherefore, I say be warned, least thou be destroyed for ever, least thou be
plucked out of thy foolish earthly tabernacle, and quite and clean rooted out
of the land of the living: which the righteous shall see and laugh at, and
shall say: Behold the man that took not God for his strength, but trusted in
the multitude of his riches, which now, (not only) avails him not in the day
of the Lords wrath, but has heaped upon himself vengeance, 1. Sam. 25* The
reward of Naball for not releuing the young men that came from David.
for his reward. Naball, a very rich man, refusing (of his increase and store)
to relieve the young men whom David sent, who in his covetousness said. Shall I
take my bread and my water, my flesh and substance, which I have gotten
together, and give it to them I know not? But he was rewarded with death.
Wherefore, I say, consider this and turn unto me in newnes of life, Pro. 11.4.
and in righteousness, which shall deliver thee from death: Set not thine
affections altog^ther thus on worldly things, Prosperity the nurce of vice.
which I perceive has made thee so drunken, that thou perswadest thy self,
that thy prosperity, (which is the nurce and foundation of all other vices,
and the ground of all impiety, and disobedience against God mine heavenly
Father) is the mother of true happiness: Beware of that error, for David, 1.
Sam* 12.13^ David in prosperity fell to vice.
when he was in prosperity, having all things at will, fell to Adultery, and
murdered an innocent man. But he escaped not scotfree, he was plagued with his
own son Absolon, who rebelled against him: so dangerous is the estate of
prosperity, and so just is the judgment of mine heavenly Father, against such
as do not bestow his gifts, to the help, and relief of his poor brethren:
but who, in stead of relief, use for their own private gain, Luke. 19.8,
violence, and oppression: Wherefore (I say,) stand up with Zache, be merciful,
and helpefull, unto thy poor and needy brethren, according to thy power, and
as thou have plenteous, ^ob. 4, 8.9. As we have plenty, we must give
plentifully.
give plenteously, turn not thy face, from him that asks of thee: and what
thou have had of any man wrongfully, restore it again willingly: be ready to
give, and glad to distribute, and what thou layest out, God rewards those
that give to the poor. Prou. 19, 17. Psalm 41.1.
mine heavenly Father, shall pay it thee again in heaven, and shall defend
thee in time of thy necessity. Trust not in uncertain riches which has
already deceived thee, but in the living God, mine heavenly father, who
performed his promises for evermore, who shall make thee so rich in good
works, that in me, and for my sake, 1. Tim. 6.18.
thou shall obtain eternal life.


The sinful man. Then lo I will restore in have,
the lands and Graunge again:
To Simple: and no other man,
shall loss by me sustain. We must not only say we will, but we must do thus

But will the poor, and needy man,
relieve that are oppressed:
And then I trust, I shall possess,
at last eternal rest.

Solace, IF this restitution of thine, proceed of an unfeigned faith: and the
residue of thy doings, tend to the amendment of thy life, assure thy self of
eternal salvation: yet not in respect of thine own good works, We may not not
look for salvation in respect of our own works, but in the merit of Christ.
be they never so many: but for my sake who (as thou haste heard) have
purchased the same, for all them that unfeignedly repent and turn from their
wicked ways: for when thou of thy self, have done all that thou can, yet
art thou an unprofitable servant: therefore must thou quite and clean disclaim
thine own worthiness: 1^ John. 2 12. Iud^. 21. We must disclaim our own
worthiness. Psalm. 1.43.2.
for in the sight of mine heavenly father, shall no man living be justified.
But if thou be ouerburdened with the weight of thy sins come unto me, lay all
thine offenses in true repentance on me, who continue an advocate in the sight
of mine heavenly father, 1. Ioh. 2.1. Heb. 9.24^ Romans 8.34.
making continual intercession, for as many as faithfully believe: whom I
will cloathe with the weeds of righteousness, that they in the last day may
appear without spot, and receive the reward of eternal life.

Where thou have (also) diligently, to beware, that seeing salvation, and
redemption, to come only by my death, and by sacrifice of my body on the
Cross, once for all the sins of the world, and that I continue a mediator
and advocate unto mine heavenly Father, for thee for ever: and that I am full
of mercy, slow to wrath, and ready to forgive. Take heed, I say, least the
prince of this world thy woonted adversary Satan, put into thine heart a
presumption of these mercies of mine, We may not so presume upon the mercies
of Christ* as to neglect our own endeavors to do well.
persuading thee that there is no doubt of salvation, because that I have
promised, that wear thy sins as red as Scarlet, I will make them as white
as Snow, and so hold thee still, to fight against all goodness, and godlynes,
and to stand stoutely, (as it were) in defiance of my loving calling, and
despise the riches of the grace and mercy of God, mine heavenly Father,
purchased by my blood, wherein I lovingly call thee now to repentance, Romans
2.4,
wherein thou must unfeignedly return to me, and that spedily: not driving off
from day to day, saying, as the wicked, (when they be reproved of their
sins, accustomably do,) That they know they shall have time enough to repent
ere they dye, which is another stop, We must take heed of driving off from
day to day, to repent.
and stumbling block, that Satan lays before them that are called, that they
should not repent, but dye in their sins. So tells he thee, and persuades
thee, that death shall not be so cruel unto thee, but shall spare thee, and
afoord thee time enough to say (even at the last gasp,) Lord have mercy upon
me, Lord forgive me my sins, and so forth: which, as he tells thee, shall be
sufficient for thee: Thus he seeks to stay thy true repentance every way,
and in this foolish imagination, of craving pardon at the last, while, many
have delayed the amendment of their lives, Many be overtaken with death, while
they defer their repentance from day to day.
Death (contrary to their expectation) has summoned them to depart by and by,
whose long flattering themselves in their folly, has bin the cause of their
sudden destruction, as to the Sodomites, and men of Gomorra, to those of
Jerusalem, and them that perished in the flood, and so diverse others, whose
harms, may be a sufficient spectacle, to see, and plainly to behold the end
of all senceles security. But thou will pechaunce, say, why? I have seen
many, that for their wicked lives, were even marks for other men to point at
with their fingers, and they have made godly ends, and have departed the world
very devoutly: by which show of repentance, thou think their sins forgiven
them: but I say unto thee, that whosoever goes on still in his wickedness,
presuming, to have time enough in the end to cry for mercy, We may not defer
our true repentance, but spedely to return unto God.
he may cry and not be heard: make no tarrying therefore to turn unto the
Lord, let true repentance, be thy daily and continual exercise, examine thine
own conscience, search and see whether Satan have not thruste into thine heart
this presumption: if so, cast it out speedely, and follow not the greater
number to do evil, accustom not thy self to sin, trusting in thine
abundance, but embrace my former counsel: stand not in a foolish hope to
repent at last, be not deceived, let not Satan hinder thee, with his subtle
devices, but resist them all, manfully: for I know thou can not say, No man
can say my heart is clear from sin.
mine heart is clear from them: can thou? speak thy conscience.


The sinful man. Alas my conscience does accuse,
me guilty of them all:
I must confess my careless life,
has well deserved thrall.
But, lo, in hope, I hold by thee,
my sins I will declare
To thee, who does already see,
that they corrupted are.
Wherein I lived long secure,
bewrapt in wealth at will.
I run a race, that now I rue:
and lingered long in ill:
Uouchsafe that I with heart and hand,
may now restore again:
The things which I by fraud have had,
of any man for gain.
And show what further does belong,
to train me to thy bliss:
Uouchsafe to show that I may come,
where all true Solace is.

Solace. Seeing then that thou do confess, that thou have been hindered, by
these devices and lets of Satan, and have now a feling of thy corruption and
former wicked life, beware thou give not place herafter to his wiles: but by a
firm faith and confidence in me, withstand him and his ministers, the world
and the flesh: for as the wickedness of the wicked, shall not hurt him,
whenever he truly, and unfeignedly repents, so shall not the righteousness
of the righteous avail him, whenever he offends. Repent thee therefore,
of thine offenses past, and from henceforth keep thee upright in all thy
doings, Luke. 15.7. Joy in heaven, for a sinner that repents.
that there may be joy in heaven for thy repentance: And for as much, as the
day is so far spent, and the night so near, and that thou haste promised
to make restitution, of the things which thou have wrongfully gathered: go thy
ways* perform it accordingly, and beware of keeping back any thing, least
thou be taken in thine hypocrisy, Act. 5.5^10. The hypocrisy of Annanias and
Saphira rewarded with death.
and rewarded with Annanias, and Saphira, who for keeping back some of the
price of their own field, were stricken with present death: how much more then
shall mine heavenly father punish thee, if thou keep any thing back that is
none of thine own? In the morning I will be here again: in the mean time, be
careful of thy promise, finish it faithfully, and too morrow will I further
direct thee, in the residue of thy course, to eternal life.


The sinful man. Then will I hasten me away,
to finish it in haste:
And in the morning hasten me
again to thee as fast.

The end of the Thursday or fourth days conference The end of the fourth
days conference.

A prayer for true repentance.
OH Lord my god, A prayer.
father of marvelous loving kindness, who in my great slumber, and sleep of
sinful securitye, have awakned me: and by thy sweet, and well-beloved Son
Jesus Christ, called me out of darkness to light: out of error to the truth:
and haste opened the eyes of mine heart, to see mine own corruption:
vouchsafe (oh Lord) for that thy son our Savior Jesus Christ's sake, that as
he has called me, to the end I should give over the ways of wickedness, to
walk in thy ways and laws: to for sake sin, and cleave unto righteousness:
slye Satan, and follow thee: I most humbly beseech thee to accept me again
for his sake, into thy favor, who long have erred and gone astray: to forgive
me who have offended thee, and who am most ignorant, how (truly) to return
to the, and to repent my former corrupt and most sinful life. But unto thee
most merciful Lord god, in the name of Jesus Christ, thy dear Son, I
prostrate my self in all humbleness of heart, bewayling my filthiness, and
lamenting the frowardnes and corruption of my former life: humbly appealing
unto thy mercies, as one who have rebelled most traitorously against thee, and
most wickedly and wilfully transgressed thine holy precepts and will. And yet,
such is thine unspeakable mercy, that thou have most lovingly warned me, to
forsake mine evil and perverse ways, and untoward imaginations, which I have
heretofore accounted, most right and dear. And which now by the light of thy
counsels, I understand to be altogether wicked, altogether froward, foolish
and mere vanity it self. I now feel mine own corruption (sweet Jesus) mine
own blindness, and error, and perceive thy wisdom which is infinite, thy
mercies unspeakable, and love above measure: whereby (sweet Jesus) I am stricken
with a desire to be unburdened of the weight of this mine obstinat error,
which by the illusion of mine adversary Satan, I have followed with such
greedines, that without thy mere mercies, I have no hope of salvation. Exte^d
therefore (o father of mercy) for Jesus Christ's sake thy favor unto me
again, and deal not in justice, as my deeds have deserved, but give me: that
godly sorrow, that true and unfeigned sorrow for my sins, which may move in me
repentance unto salvation, which may kill and speedely mortefy, all evil
desires, all the corrupt affections, and ungodly motions, of the world and
flesh, and the deceites of subtle Satan, who goes about like a Lion, seeking
whom he may keep back from that most acceptable work of true repentance:
And thou (good Jesus, know, what, and how many and great are the letts, and
wiles which he uses, in laying stumbling blocks, before the feet of those
that endeavor themselves to return to thee: And my will, which is peruers,
ready to yield unto him, and slack in coming unto thee, pulls me
oftentimes backward, and suffers me not to do that which I should* but
thrusts me forward to do that which I should not, to follow darkness, and to
forsake the light, so lovingly proffered. Oh good Jesus, consider these
conflictes of mine. Look upon the want which I have of thine holy spirit,
without the aid whereof, I can not truly turn to thee. Assist me therefore,
sweet Jesus, that I may now, as I have promised, forsake sin, and cleave unto
righteousness: mortesie the old man, and be renewed unto thee: forsake Satan,
and follow thee: that unto my lives end, I may fly and eschew, whatsoever
works to true repentance: that as thou have said, there may be more joy in
heaven for me, faithfully rereturning unto thee, then for many that need no
repentance. And in the end, I may enjoy that heavenly inheritance which by
thy bloodshedding, thou have purchased for all such as in a true faith follow
thee. Grant this, oh God, mine heavenly father for Jesus Christ's sake. AMEN.

Oh Lord increase my Faith.
The Friday, or fifth days co^fere^ce, between Solace, and the sinful man:
That where the sinful man being yesterday persuaded, to redeliuer those things
unto Simple, his Tenant, which he had by flatterye and threatening gotten of
him: As also to make restitution of all his wrongful gotten goods to other men,
he did it accordingly: And when been had given every Bird his Feather; he
became so naked, and his estate so bare, that for his suddayne change, he
cries out in great heaviness, on this wise: Solace comforting him, and wills
him to bear the matter with patience and to confess his sins. etc.

The sinful man. ALas, the life that late I did
in precious price embrace,
Is past and gone, and poor estate
has taken riches place,
My Peacocks plumes are pluct full lo,
that flickred erst so hie.
Mine hautie heart in heavy chere,
does wonted joys deny.
Where riches did ere while abound,
and bags of gold were store:
Now want has won the field again
woe worth me wretch therefore.

Solace. What is the matter, oh sinful man, that this morning, thou beginnest
thus, as a man bestraughted, showing thy self yet subject to frailty, which
thou yesterday did promise manfully to withstanay


The sinful man. Oh (Solace) help, I am undone,
now past are pleasant days,
What thou did will is done, and now
my stately state decaies.
My substance all, alas is gone,
now Simple and the rest
Have had their shares of all my store,
my share alas is least.
I am undone, I know not how,
to maintain me and mine:
I doubt I shall be sore oppressed,
with poor estate, in fine.
And that my Children shall be forste
for want, to beg their bread,
Why should we live in this distress?
would they and I were dead.
This hard estate of mine, I know
would break an heart of stone:
For that in my distress, I have
no where to make my moan.
For those that did before acquaint
themselves as friends to be.
Will now disdain my poor estate,
and look awry on me.
Unles it be for my reproach
to say, lo, this is he,
That was alo^t but now is low,
what shall mine answer be.

Solace. AS for thine answer, what it must be to such as shall dyspise thee,
in respect of thy decayed estate: take thou no great care: thou shall
hereafter understand by the examples of such as have been aflicted with far
greater extremeties then thou art, how they have borne the burden both of
poverty, and other myseries and the contempt of men with patience: but first,
thou must answer to another question: and that is, where thou cryest out in
such heaviness, and take on, as one ouer-flowne with the stream of utter
despair, being out of all hope of help, fluttering, like a foolysh fly, in
the Cobwebs of Satan, from whence, I delivered thee ere while: why have thou
so soon entangled thy self again, in his most venomous snare? reteyning such
a desperate sorrow, for restoryng that, which thou can not deny, but thou
had wrongfullie gotten of other men: whereby thou made thy self rich, and
them, not able to live: thy self, to be of estimation, and them to be
contempned. And now (as thou say) every Bird having his feather, ^here be
many that in outward show seem peacockes and brave birds who (if every
bird might take his feather) would show them selves to be poor bussards.
you art left half naked, and thy state decayed: whereby, it appears that thou
made thy self a proud peacock^ with the plumes of other Birds. But this kind
of Bird, is not rare: there are so many peevish Buzzardes (now a days) that
are decked up we Peacocks feathers: But wear their feathers restored, from
whence they were (sinisterly and wrongfully) taken: their gallant shows, would
be turned into simple attire: their flagrant hue, into adurtie dunghill, and
themselves, in another likeness: as may appear now in thy self: who feelinge
the want of that, that before thou didste wrongfully possess, thou appearest
in thy likeness: that is: where thou made a show to be a profitable Be, to
gather Honnye for ye Commonwealth, thou appearest a very Droan, devouring
that, ye other me^ gather: Some that show themselves to be good members or (at
least seek to be accounted profitable for the common wealth, that are very
catterpillers of the land.
yea, a very Catterpiller, eating up ye fructs of ye sweat of other men's
labors: But, such Peacocks, such Droans, such Catterpillers and such
hipocrites, shall have their reward. And though they appear not, for a public
example, as you do: but pass their days in iollytie, live in worldly
estymation and great credit: I say unto thee, y^* unless they repent, they shall
perish, and be cast off in ye last day, to receive their reward among ye
wicked. But this sudden change, from wealth to want, I perceive, is not a little
grievous to thee, Luke. 13.5.
it has given thee such a knock in the head, yt it has (almost) astonished
thee: The excha^ge of wealth into want, is grievous.
and yet ye blow thou gave poor Simple, thy tenant, and such like, thou
feltest not: no, such knocks aswere for thy benefit, thou thoughtst to be sweet
smoothings and loving strikings, The knock^ that we give other men to benefit
our selves, are sweet unto us, though sower unto them.
ye other men delited to have at thine hands: thou were sure yt Simple would not
refuse (to pleasure thee) to forgo al yt he had, and that were ye co^te^t to
take: but his want was not thine woe: it was thy wealth: his sorrow, was thy joy:
his sighs were ^allets in thy dish, and pe^ce in thy purs: whilst you were in the
sunside, there was no shadow: whilst you were warm, there was no cold: The poor
man's sorrow are sallets in the rich man's dish.
thou being full, and faring daintily, thoughtst not of hunger: no, you thoughtst
neither of heaven nor hell, runnyng, headlong (as it were) arm in arm with
Satan, the prince of this world, who provided for thee also such pleasant
companions to keep thee company, with their pleasant conceits, to egg thee
forward to utter destruction, as thou were almost past all recovery: thy
iornie was so pleasant to thy worldly eyes, that thou were loath to return.
But being now sumwhat reclaimed, thou must turn a clean contrary way into
another country, heavenly Jerusalem: in which iornie, it behooves thee to
proceed without looking back, and to refuse, and avoid the company, of thy
woonted companies: ^. Cor 5.11. We must make choice of company, to go forward
in virtue.
as drunckerds, gluttons, coueitous men, Idolators, extortioners, vserers, and
coueitous persons, who are the subjects of Satan, prince of darkness: and now
must frequent and desire, the familiarity, and society, of the godly, sober,
zealus, devout, and men of honest conversation, The conversation of the godly,
a good example to follow.
and good life, whose sinceretie, conference, and godly example shall not only
direct, but delight and prosper, the way: and by whose example also, thou shall
see and perceive, that riches, health, beutie, honor, dignity, and
preferment, and other transitory pleasures of this world are not (only) not
helps, but mere lettes: and pouertye, sickness, contempt, and worldly
afflictions, not only, not lettes, but great helps, and furtherances to true
and unfeigned repentance: which is the entrance, and setting forth of this so
precious and profitable a voyage, wherein I will direct and guide thee unto the
end. Comfort thy self therefore, in this, that God mine heavenly father,
has stretched forth his merciful hand, by me, to bring thee out of all thy
perplexities and troubles: Poverty, ^ good spur to prick us forward to
obedience to God.
and accept this sudden change of thine, to be a good and necessary Spur
to prick thee forward, to a more dutiful obedience to his blessed will: and in
thy want to seek unto him to be releued, to be helped and defended by him,
whose power is infinite, his love incomprehensible, and wisdom so great, as he
works not according to the corrupt desires of flesh and blood, which are
always evil: The spirit works contrary to the will of the flesh.
and seek nothing but what is enmity to the spirit, which is willing, and the
flesh too weak, to walk the way that leads unto life.


The sinfullman. Alas my poor estate is such,
I am so sore decade:
No man can blame mine heaviness.
if mine ill hap were wayde.

Solace. IN deed, if thou dydste well way thine ill hap, it might justly
drive thine heart, to power forth tears of blood: not in respect, of the
alteration of thine estate, from worldly wealth, to the want of thy wunted
Pleasures, but in respect, that thy corruption, has tide thine affections, to
the pernicious poastes of Satan's subtyle allurements, with the cursed cords of
his flattering falshoode, in such sort, as thy bands can not yet be broken
of, by the force of the invincible word of eternal truth: As flesh taken
newly from the shambles soon f^streth, so he that is lately called from error
is sooner withdrawn from the truth again without exercise.
such is thine vntowardenes, that where yesterdaie, thou seemedst to be in (a
manner) free, thou have wound thy self again since into the snares of his
subtyle slightes, like the flesh taken fresh out of the Market, being unsalted,
waxes soon unsavory: so I see, that thy rawnesse, being as yet vnsaulted
with the bryne of temptations, waxes unsavory: yea, full of the worms, that
increase of Satan's poison, but I see thy dulnes must be stirred up with a more
sharp sauce, thy stomach is not yet come to thee, too digeste, the bitter
physic of afflictions: but alas, this sauce is (as it were) seasoned with
sugar: which if it seem sharp unto thee, being but the perbrakings of thine
own too full stomach, surfeting with the goods of other men: how will the pills
of bitter extremity work with thee? that is: if thou take this change, this
Restitution of other men's goods, so heavily, what will thou say? and how will thou take the physic which was ministered unto Job? The pouerti of Job was
preparatiue to patience.
a righteous Rich man? who (as for a Preparatiue to Patience) was not only
bereft and utterly spoiled of all that he had, of great abundance of
richesse (one jot whereof, no man could charge him, to have wrongfully gotten,)
but was (also) stricken with most horrible loathsomeness of body, in such
sort, as he was not only forsaken of all his friends, but (in stead of a
House most dainty, was laid on a Dunghyll, most loathsome: where he was
glad, of a Potsheard, to scrape away the filthe of his own flesh.
Notwithstanding, his most miserable estate, fell not into such dispaier, but
most mildly, in great patience, referryng his cause to mine Heavenly Father,
The humilety of Job.
saying: The Lord has given: and the Lord has taken away: as it pleases
him so does he: Blessed be his most glorious name for evermore.

Lo, here was the plot of perfect Patience: set him as a Pattern before thine
eyes, by whose example thou may, with like patience take thine affliction,
which is but one drop, in respect of his great and raging sea of troubles: but
one fillip, in respect of his many thowsa^ds buffets wherewith he was stricken,
not in restoring that which he had wrongfully gathered, but even to try his
constancy, to prove his patience, whereof he shall remain an example for all
mankind for evermore.


The sinful man. Oh how could he with patience,
these cruel crosses bear:
It can not be but that he did,
in grief himself beteare.

Solace. YEs, yes, be sure he bare all these crosses, and miseries with
patience, which patience (in deed) was accompanied, with sorrow, not with a
desperate sorrow, Patience accompanied with a godly sorrow.
but with a most godly sorrow, which (as before I said) causes repentance
unto salvation: by reason of which his patience, was all his perplexity turned
into prosperity: The end of patience.
his sorrow into joy: his mourning into mirth, and his want, into a greater
wealth then he had before: So near was mine heavenly Father unto his patience,
that in the midst of his anger, in his extreme punishment, he retuned with a
most loving and fatherly affection, unto him again: and why? because that in
these affections of his, in these deep and dangerous conflictes, God is near
unto all them that suffer affliction with patience.
he yielded not, nor gave (as it were) ground unto his weakness, but taking
hold by the anckor of faith, he not only sorrowed, in such unmeasurable,
heauynes, but rather tryumphed, rejoiced, and even embraced his misery and
affliction. Psalm. 143.3.
So near is mine heavenly father, to as many as put their trust in him,
patie^tly waiting for his stretched out arm, to relieve their necessities. So
near was he to Joseph, Genesis 37.5.28, God was nere unto Joseph in his distres.
who although he were hated of his brethren, and by them as a bondslaue, sold
into a strange country, mine heavenly father turned it to his profit, and
made him governor of the whole land of Egypt, he is near unto all them that
put their trust in him, and patiently wait for his stretched out arm, In our
necessites we must refer the manner, the mean, the time to the providence of
God.
to remove their afflictions: in which afflictions and miseries, thou must not
indent with him for the time: for the manner, or mean: but refer it unto his
wisdom, to his leisure, and to his most blessed will, to be relieved: who
because he will be known to be the God of all power, the omnipotent and
almighty helper, he spares his hand, and withhouldeth his help, until the
matter be even out of the power and Judgment of man, to be relieved,
saved, or defended.

God helps when the help of man can take no place*
Who could have thought any Defense, any rescue, or any power able too have
defended the Children of Israel, from the hands of Pharaoh? And yet, their
Estate, being in deepest danger, and their lives in greateste peril: he
made the Sea (at his Commandment) too avoid, and stand bye, too give rowme,
The read sea divided it self to let^ the children of Israel to go through^
and to give a direct Pathe for the Isralytes, to pass, in plain ground: and
shut the Sea again, upon their enemies, and devoured them: So near was
he unto them, in their vttermoste dystresse: So near was he unto Daniell,
who, being in the Lions Den, in the Judgment of all men, not like to be but
devoured, God nere unto Daniell in his troubles.
was by the hand of mine heavenly Father, safelye preserved and defended. So,
wear Sidrach, Mysach, and Abednago, delivered from the hot burning Oven, by
man's Judgment, impossible to be saved, The three children delivered from the
whot Furnace.
from the for^e of the most cruel and terrible flame. So neeare, is he to them
that trust in him, that he fails them not in their greatest extremytie.
Now, if he failed not these true Believers, in such hard Conflictes: he
will fail none of his, in thease so small Callamyties: as is Poverty,
Sickness, and such like: No, in their greateste dangers, is he near them:
He has a careful eye unto all them, that, in their miseries (be they great
or small: many, or few: easy, or extreme,) in Patience, turn to him, and
in true and unfeigned repentance, appeal unto his mercy.

If he have pronounced (says the Prophet any Plagues, against any Cyttie, or
Nation: yea, against any private man: If the same City, Nation, or private
parson, shall repent: I (says mine Heavenly Father,) yea, I, Ier: 18
will repent me of yt which I have intended for their punishment.

Such, is the great goodness and tender mercy, of God, mine Heavenly Father,
toward those that (faythfullye) repent their sins, and are heartely sorry
for the same: that when he sees, a man carried into such senseless
Securytie, as thou (erewhile) did slumber in: having, as thou saydste, thy
body so well provided for, and all things so plentifullye about thee) he
opens the bowelles of his tender mercy, and powers forth sweet and gentle
Admonytions, to the end he might reclayme thee, without whippings, schurges,
or afflictions, to drive thee further in the way to amendment of life, who in
his anger has not dealt rigorously with thee, but most louinglye: who can
not attribute the cause of thine affliction to proceed from him, but of thine
own couetouse desire and inordinate worldelye carfulness, in punishing other
men by wrongful oppression to enriche thy self withal: with which, thine
heart being so choked that thou so long as it was ouercharged with (such
wrongful gotten pelf) could not perceive thine own weakness, As long as
we are choked with riches and pleasures of the world we cannot truly repent.
nor fall unto that unfeigned repentance which is the way to eternal life. And
therefore, if thou be overtaken with poverty, thank thy self: But bear it
with patience, rule thine affections, and take the want of thy former wealth,
with unfeigned praise unto mine heavenly father: saying with David: Oh Lord, it
is good for me, that I have been afflicted that mine estate is thus altered,
Psalm. 119^71. Affliction the mean to seek the Lord.
that I may seek and learn thy laws and testimonies: make thy self ready
in this small battle to fight valyauntly against all other afflictions, all
other troubles, and callamityes, whatsoever may be fall thee: for it is not thy
great abundance of wealth, thy delicate fare, thy mellodious music: no, not
high aucthoritye, honor, dignity, Gold, silver, or precious stones, Act.
14.22. By many troubles (and not by pleasures) we must enter into the kingdom
of heaven.
whereby thou must enter into that Celestial Iherusalem, but with great
afflictions, many troubles, and sharp aduersityes: must thou enter into that
eternal City. Prepare thy self therefore, I say, for although thou feel as
yet, not so much as one finger of mine heavenly father, thou must make thee
ready to bear the weight of his whole hand, which he will lay in more heavy
manner upon thee, if these gentle intreatings may not suffice to train thee to
this godly sorrow for thy former offenses, which may cause repentance unto
salvation. we must return to god when we be called, or else he will use
scurges to win us.
Let him not find thee a wild and wilful untamed Colte, whom this tender
bitte will not hold, nor retain back from thy former follyes. Least he put
a more sharp snaffle to keep thee from thy kickings, and striuings, and set
more cruel Spurs to prick thee forward to a godly life.

Learn of David to accept this exchange of thine estate, not as a let, Psa^
119.71.
but as a great help, Christ is the way that leads unto eternal life.
to the learning of the law of the Lord, which is the very way, and direct
path, that leads, unto me, who am the way, that leads too Eeternall life.
To this end, wear the Children of Israel afflicted, that they might humble
the^ selves, Deuteronomy. 8.2.3^
and be saved: for whom Daniell prayed, confessing their callamyties and
miesries to proceed of their own sins: which upon their unfeigned
repentance were remitted: Dan: 9.9.
whose afflictions, thou see, did not let, but further, their sorrow: which
causes repentance unto salvation: But thy desperate moannyng, thy ungodly
sorrow, Judge: 10.15.16.
what is it? but to show thy self an enemy unto my cross: a despiser of the
grace and mercy of mine heavenly father? an hinderer, of thine own salvation?
and a friend unto Satan, the prince of darkness? wherefore (I say) content thy
self with patience to accept not only this burden, which thou, have laid upon
thy self with thine own hands, Ungodly sorrow: enmitye to god
but what so ever hereafter shall be laid upon thee: for if thou be the child of
mine heavenly father, thou must be contented to be corrected, for it is an
argument of his care of thy salvation: for whom he loves him he punishes:
confess therefore in time with David, afflyction, an argument of gods favor.
and bewraye thine own wretchedness, thine own infirmytie and weakness, and
thy transgressions against him: and then, shall he with favor, look upon
thy miserye, 2 Samuel 16.
and in his good time shall he renew thy comfort, and releaue thee again:
refer, thy self in faith, and true obedience, unto his will: Judith 8.28.
wrestle not so wylfully against his fatherly and most loving callinges: he is
both just and merciful: he punishes, (but with favor, We have deserved more
punishments then we can bear
not in rygoure:) in love, not in hatred: for thy salvation, and not to
distroie thee: but howsoever he deals with thee, be it never so roughly,
persuade thy self thou haste deserved a thousand times, more: yea, thou art
not able to bear the least part, that may be, justly, laid upon thee: yea,
wear thou deprived of all thy bodyly comfortes: wear thy wealth clean gone:
wear thy Wife, thy Children and friends, taken from thee: wear thou
persecuted, tossed and turmoyled, with the force of cruel enemies: wear thy
body, from the soul of thy foot, to the Crown of thine head, stricken with
such vile and loathsome sickness or disease, as men did eschew thee: thy
friends, forsake thee, and had no worldly mean to help thee: Or, wear thou
pinched with the Cross of most bitter want of things necessary, too
relieve, sustain and keep thy self and Famylie: hanynge no hoape of help,
no certainty of any manner of comfort in thy necessities, but standing at the
pits brincke of present undoing for ever: what would thou do? would thou
despair? would thou give over any longer to repose thy trust in mine
heae^nly Father, and seek aid, relief, comfort, or maintenance, by other
means, then his providence, (which is his word) should assign thee? would
thou not wait a little while, in patience? We must suffer a little, ye, al
afflictions, for our saluations sake.
could thou not be contented, one moment to suffer, a little affliction, to
get eternal life? Then surely, art thou not worthy to be accounted among the
children of mine heavenly Father, for what son is he, that is worthy of his
Fathers favor, that for his fathers sake, will not (with patience) suffer one
hours hardness, or take such part, (nay some part) of the pains that his
Father sustayneth? Or that obayeth not his Fathers will, in things tending to
his own welfare? Suerly that son deserves no favor: but to be beaten with
many stripes.

And what man is he, that if some skillful Physician, do foreshowe him of
some dangerous disease beginning to grow upon his body, which he himself as
yet feels not: but to prevent a greater inconvenience, will he not be
contented, not only to bestow his money? If we can suffer pains for the
curing of the body, we must much more be contented to suffer afflictions for
our souls sake.
but for the safety of his arm, will he not be contented to suffer his finger
to be cut off: and to save his body, will he not abide his leg to be cut
off? yes, no doubt: If such cost be not too dear, nor such pains too terrible
to prevent the danger of the body: what man will not be contented, for the
safety of his soul, to cut off all whatsoever is like to indaunger the same?
And art thou so loath to cut off that, or cast from thee those things which are
the cause of thy so pernicious a disease, securetie? Do thou think thy goods
(nay, thy ill gotten goods) so dear, so helpful and so precious, as to
indaunger the death of thy soul with the deteining of them, when thou art
promised life upon the restitution of them, unfeignedly repenting? Beware I say,
beware least it fester and thy desease gather further into thine heart, As
sharp medicines be often times most curable for the bodies so the sharpest
affl^ctions, most healthful to the soul.
and so destroy both body and soul. The sicke-man, who for his healthes sake
refuses not to take the most bitterest Potions and hardest medicines, and yet
are they most grievous and most unpleasant to him for the time: yet because
their effect and their working turn to his health, he willingly receives
them: So must thou be contented for thy soul health, to accept of such bitter
afflictions and crosses in this life, as shall please mine heavenly father to
minister unto thee: which although they be sharp and unsavory for the time,
it turns all things to good, yea, to the health both of soul and body.
Thou have supped a little of the cup of poverty and want, which is but a mild
potion, a gentle medicine, and yet so contrary to disgestion, that it has
driven thee into such a frantique perplexity, that thou show thy self very
unable to take those Purgations, which must work with a more stronger effect,
to the driving out of all such noisome affections, as by the corruptible and
contagious air of Satan's breathinges, have infected thine heart, whereof if
thou be not cured, and the same cut off with the Rasour of a true and unfeigned
repentance, it will procure thee, not only death of body, but utter
destruction both of body and soul. Christ the only physician of all sick
souls.
Wherefore I say, seek remedy in time, come unto me who am the only true
Physician of all sick souls: refreshing all them that be heavy laden,
healing their spiritual deseases, if faithfully and without wavering they
seek the same at mine hands, and speedely return unto me by that true and
unfeigned sorrow for their sins, which shows it self in amendment of
life, in that true sorrow which causes repentance unto salvation. Comfort
thy self in this therefore, that thy desease is foreshewed thee, and that
Physician has taken thee in hand to cure thee, that have all power in mine
own hands: and let neither thy sins past, trouble thee, nor thine estate
grieve thee, but be only rejoicing, in that, I have promised forgiveness of
the one, and help in the other. Thou have an advocate with the father, even me
Jesus Christ the righteous, who have obtained pardon for all thy sins, and
have raunsomed thee out of the hands of Satan, a most especial benefit: All
the afflictions of this life is not answerable to the least part of the benefit
of our salvation in Christ, and therefore not to be accounted grievous.
in respect whereof, all the plagues, all the troubles, calamities and
afflictions in this life, can light upon thee, are not to be accounted
grievous, but willingly to be embraced, and patiently to be accepted, as a
fatherly calling of thee from thy self unto me: for better it is for thee to
be afflicted here in this world with bodily and short afflictions, then in the
world to come, with endless destruction. And therefore I say, bear thou not
(only) with patience, but with a thankful heart, whatsoever shall please mine
heavenly father to send thee, be it sweet or sour: for those that are his,
he corrects, and oftentimes suffers the wicked, and careless, the secure and
dissolute livers, Pro. 3.12. God punishes oftentimes the just and spares the
wicked.
to run on still in their wicked ways, wh^me of Justice he shall reward
with endless perdition: being yet so full of mercy, and so loath to have the
sinner to dye in his sins, that I most lovingly call them, intre^ting them
fayrely, to return from their wickedness and be saved: whom (if they repent
not by the gentle admonition of the word) he scourges them, Ezekiel. 33.1^.
he strikes them with his Rod of correction, by poverty, by sickness, by
loss of friends, and other adversities, to the end they may remember
themselves, and be called from their security, to place their whole trust in
him that is able to save them and to cast them away, who is able to relieve
them and to undo them: able to bring them to the deep of the grave, and to
bring them up again: who is able to pluck down and exalt: able to kill and
to make alive again. The lost Son, as long as he was in his iollitie, Luke.
15.19. Io. 8.12. A notable example worthy to be noted of the lost son.
as long as he had his prosperity, of wealth at his will, his health of body,
and things at his own desire, wanting nothing that pleased his fantasies, so
long ran he astray, followed wantonness, embraced wickedness, and employed
himself to filthiness and sin, even with greedines: But when he was touched
with poverty, when his wonted friends forsook him, and had no mean to
relieve himself, then began he to (...) his fantasies after an other fashion:
thou he made of necessity a virtue: he brideled his affecti^ns, he tamed his
evil desires, and in all humility, in true sorrow for his disobedience, he
returned again unto his father, and in great bitterness of heart, as one that
unfeignedly repented, he cried out and said. Oh father I have sinned, I have
sinned against heaven and against thee, I am no more worthy to be called thy
son: accept me as one of thine hired servants: whose submission obtained
pardon. David when he was in his prosperity, Prosperity is a spur to evil,
and adversity a prick to urge us to trust in God.
committed evil in the sight of mine heavenly father: but when he was
afflicted by the persecution of his own son Absolon, when he felt
adversity, then cried he out and confessed his iniquity, bewraying his own
wretchedness, and acknowledged the mighty power of mine heavenly father, to
whom in great bitterness of heart he prayed, saying: Oh Lord rebuke me not in
thine anger, neither chasten me in thine heavy displeasure: But have mercy
upon me for I am weak, etc. So great a let is a prosperous estate, unto the
proceeding and going forward unto that heavenly Jerusalem, to that eternal
bliss which I have purchased: and so great an help and furtheraunce is
affliction and adversity, as thou may justly lament thy worldly happiness,
and sing even with great joy, that thine estate is thus altered, to reclaim
thee from putting thy trust in transitory things, faithfully to repose the
same, in the sure defense of mine heavenly fathers right hand. Be thankful I
say, accept it as a good preparatiue, to unfeigned repentance: wherein
prostrating thy self in heart, pray faithfully, and confess thy sins
unfeignedly, and I will comfort thee again, with heavenly solace inwardly.


The sinful man. The^ show me how I should confess,
and how I ought to pray:
I do repent my sinful life,
that I have led astray.

Solace. I Will refer to instruct thee in prayer until to another day,
because the day is so far spent, and because I would first have thee to
confess thy sins, and discharge thy conscience of the heavy burden of thine
iniquities, before thou enter into that most excellent exercise of prayer, He
that is laden wit the heavy burden of sin, can never refer himself to
hea^tie prayer before he be persuaded of the remission thereof through Christ.
for the heart that is inwardly kept down with the doubt of remission of
sins through me, can never freely open it self in a perfect faith, to be
heard of mine heavenly father: and as long as thou go about to cloak thine
iniquities, and to hide them from the sight of mine heavenly father, thou can
never be assured of pardon: for thou must be assured that he that hides his
sins, shall not prosper, but he that confesses them, and forsakes them,
shall have mercy, his sins, be they as red as Scarlet, I will make as white
as wolle: and were the (...) purple, Pro. 28.13.
I will make them as white as snow. Confession, what it is.
Now, confession is, an inward constant, and continual acknowledging thy self
to be a sinful man* altogether corrupt, whose righteousness, is as a stained
and filthy cloth, in whom remains no goodness at all, for there is none that
sins not, King 8.46.
there is none that does good, none that works righteousness, no not one. All
men are subject to many infirmities, And he that says that he has not sinned,
he is a liar, he deceives him self, and in him is there no truth. No man can
say mine heart is clear, and I am clear from sin: No man can say that he
has not sinned.
If therefore every man be sinful, and none can excuse himself, but that he
deserves to be punished, that he deserves, in respect of his own goodness, to
be cast of, and to be scurged with the rod of correction: Thou can not then
say, I have not sinned, no thou can not but confess with the lost son,
that thou have gone astraye, that thou have rebelled against God mine heavenly
father, and wrought so many things against his will, that thou art no more
worthy to be accepted as his son, deserving justly to be cast of. If then
there remain no hope of thine own deserts, whereby to be accepted into his
favor again, whereby to be accepted as his son: (nay, The way to obtain the
favor (...) God is, to humble our selves and to appeal unto his mercy in
Christ.
whereby to be accepted as an hired servant) Therefore, there is no way for
thee, no mean for thee, no hope to be received again, but in all hu^blenes of
heart to fall down, as one in his own conscience guilty of death, appealing
unto the mercy of mine heavenly father, in me, who for my sake, will not
only, not turn away his face from the humble confession of thy sins, but of
his mercy most plentiful, will he meet the voice of thine humble
confession, even in the midst of thine heart: yea, and unfeigned cries, as he
heard the humble and zealous sighs of David, who when he had sinned, and
highly displeased mine heavenly father, Psalm. 32.5. The confession of David.
he went not as it were into a corner to hide his offenses wi^h the Cloak of
hypocrisy: but bewrayed his own untowardness, laid open his iniquities, and
acknowledged his sins, saying within himself: I will speak against my
self, I will reveal mine offenses unto the Lord* and all his sins were
forgiven him. Such a godly feeling had David of his sins, he entered into
consideration of his wickedness before he could thus r^tourne unto mine heavenly
father, in heart^^ confession. So enter thou into thy self, examine thine own
conscience, and look back into the whole course of thy life, and thou will
(...) ashamed to see thy miserable estate, If we would lo^ke back into the
(...) life, we shall find our selves the whole pack of us, wretched sinners.
thou will blush at the consideration of thy former life, and find thy self a
very wretched sinner: And condemn thy self worthy of far greater punishment
then thou art able to bear. Thus must thou begin to take account of thy self,
before thou can truly return, and unfeignedly confess thine iniquities unto
mine heavenly father, whose wrath is so great against sin, that as long as
thou retainest a will to go forward in sin, and have not a greater care to
return unto him, he will forsake thee: and not open the hands of his mercy
to receive thee: Make haste cherefore to return, forsake thy self, and fly
unto him, take hold of his promises: he has promised in me to receive all
sinners, truly repenting into his mercy again: I came to call the sinners,
not the righteous: wherefore, if thou be a sinner, which (unless thou flatter
thy self to deceive thy self) thou can not deny: then I say, take hold of
this promise: Cry out and say, Oh Lord, I am a sinner: I am one that have
gone astray, most wickedly have I set mine affections, and most vainly
embraced the things that can not avail me in my distress, in which I am
environed with so many dangers and troubles, as without thine help I am
utterly forlorn. Rest (I say) and stay thy self only upon the loving
promises of mine heavenly father in me, in faith: assuring thy self, that I
will strenghthen thee against all Satan's temptations: With the eye of a true
faith must we look into our former evils, and with the same eye look upon the
mercies of God, promised in Christ.
Thus I say, must thou consider thy corruption, and with the eye of a perfect
faith, look into the whole course of thy former life, and with the same eye,
to behold the mercies of mine heavenly father, most freely promised in me:
without whose free goodness there is no hope of salvation: whereby is my death
and bitter passion, made available, to wash away all the sins of as many as
unfeignedly believe, confessing themselves wretched sinners, who returning unto
mine heavenly father in a godly fear, Confession must be joined with faith and
repentance.
are accepted righteous before him. Thy confession must be joined with faith
and amendment of life: for the belief of the heart justifies, and to
confess with thy mouth makes thee safe: whereby thou must consider: that it
is not enough to cry out and say, Oh Lord, I have sinned, Romans 10.10.
I am wicked, I have grievously offended, etc. for all this is but wind, it is
but opening the mouth to none effect: but thy confession must be grounded upon
the invincible Rock of faith, whereby thou must betake thee unto his heavenly
Majesty, condemning thy self wholly and altogether: not faintly after the manner
of hypocrites, who think themselves discharged with their few words. But
with Daniell thou must cry out and say: Oh Lord we have sinned, Dan 9 5. The
confession of Daniel.
we have dealt wickedly, we have most traitorously rebelled against thee: These
words came not faintly from ye tongue, but with force and faith from the very
root of the heart. And why? because he had searched and tried, yea, he had a
feeling, an inward grief for the sins of the people: whose confession was
accepted, and whose prayer was heard.


The sinful man. Before I do confess to thee
my sin, thou do behold
The same at large: what need I the^
my sins thus to unfold.

Solace. Indeed I do behold most plainly, God beholds as well the inward
thoughts, as the outward actions.
as well the very intent of the heart, the inner part thereof, as the outward
actions, the external and visible corrupt conversation: there is no secret
thought, no imagination, that passes vnreueiled by the light of my knowledge,
but whatsoever thou do, whatsoever thou speak, and whatsoever thou
think, when and where, I see and perceive it altogether. And yet
notwithstanding, it is requisite for thee for two causes to make confession of
thine eniquities, and that openly. And why? namely, that mine heavenly father
may be known and acknowledged, to be only righteous, only good, We must
confess our sins for two causes.
yea, and goodness it self, a merciful and pacient GOD, and a most loving
father: and thy self to be altogether unrighteous, fraught with evil, in
whom remains no goodness at all. Thus must thou cast down thy self, The
first cause.
condemn thy self, and reprehende thine own corruption, and take hold only
of the goodness of GOD the Father in the merits of me his Son, by whose
death thou art delivered from death, and deserved damnation: which is an
especial cause to move thee to this unfeigned and open confession of thine
offenses. The second cause.
The second cause is to the end, that this thine open acknowledging of thy
sins, may be to the edifying of other men. Psalm. 3.6.218.18.
As thou see the confession of David to be profitable, not only unto
himself, but to others: not only to them that were then present, but even to
this day, is he to be set before the eyes of sinners, as a fit pattern to
measure their sorrows by, and to bewraye their own wretchedness, in humble
confession, and to refer themselves only to the mercies and loving promises
of God mine heavenly father, The confession of the godly men profit us.
to be relieved and comforted in their afflictions as David was: Yea, the
confessions which the faithful have made heretofore, serve now to edefie
other men: at the consideration of whose humility, and the good success of
their unfeigned confession: wherein they returned unto mine heavenly father, and
were accepted again into his favor, thou can not but be the more stirred
up, to the like manner of humbling thy self, acknowledging thy self a wretched
sinner, and to put thine whole trust and confidence in my death and bitter
Passion, and be more and more stirred up to serve and honor mine heavenly
father in newness of life, to the good and godly example of other men: who
seeing the mercy of GOD my father so plentifully showed unto thee, shall in
like manner, make haste unto the Throane of his grace, One is edified by
another unfeigned confession, Mat. 5.16.
in open confession of their sins* that so one by the example of an other:
nay, many, at ye good example of one may be edefied, and glorify God my
father which is in heaven: who delivered me over to suffer death for the
redemption of them that truly turn to me. Wherefore I say, acknowledge thy
self sinful, and greatly indebted unto me, in respect of thy many and wilful
transgressions, whereby my grace may the more appear in thee: disclaim all
deserts and merits of thine own, and cast thy self down in thine own
conceit, as one not worthy of any comfort at all at mine hands, appealing
altogether to my merits, in such sort as by thine example, other men may
learn to confess their iniquities, and condemn them selves to be guilty,
and to have deserved to be punished, and whereby they may be taken from them
selves: namely, from the proud opinions of their own good work: Psalm. 14.3.2.
for in the sight of mine heavenly father can no man by his own merits, be
accepted righteous, 2. Pet. 1.3.
but through me are they acceptable and just in his sight. And therefore, says
Job: what if I should flatter my self, Ioh. 9.15.2.
and stand in mine own co^ceipt righteous and just? when my deeds shall be
laid open, when they shall be manifested, I cannot answer one, of a thousand
things laid to my charge? Therefore says he, I will make my prayers and
supplication unto the Judge. If therefore thou be desirous to be justified, We
must lay away all our own merits before we can take hold of Christ's promises.
before mine heavenly father, thou must s^y away all deserts of thine own,
and confess that there is nothing in thee but mere wickedness, horrible
confusion and utter despair, of thine own goodness: yielding thy self
guilty of many evils. For if thou seek perfect righteousness, thou must not
stand upon thine own ability to fulfill the law: for so make thou my death
to be (...) vain (which through faith) is that true and undoubted
righteousness, Gal 5.4.
which justifies thee before mine heavenly father, Gal. 3.8. Tit. 3.7.
and make thee heir of eternal life. Through me is preached the
forgiveness of sins, and he that believes, is justified from those things,
from which he could not have bin by the law: Act. 3.38.39.
that is, by his own works. Wherefore, thou must confess me with thy mouth,
and believe in thine heart, that mine heavenly father raised me from the dead
to justify thee: Romans 10 9.10.
for with thine heart must thou believe unto righteousness, and confess with
thy mouth unto salvation. By my grace (I say) art thou saved through faith,
Ephe. 2.8.9.
and not by thine own works, be they never so glorious in the sight of the
world.


The sinful man. The^ what avail good works? are they
of none effect in deed?
And boots it not to keep the laws
that Moses first decreede?

Solace. THou must understand that (although in respect of thy good works, be
they never so many and fair in the vewe of the world, Although our
Justification come freely through faith in Christ we are not discharged of doing
our endeavor, to fulfill the law
thou may not presume upon the same, so far as to challenge for the same
the reward of eternal life: and that thou must confess when thou have done
all that thou can, thou art an unprofitable servant) it behooves thee, with
all diligence and godly care to endeavor to do all that is commanded thee in
^^ese laws of mine heavenly father, written by the inspiration of ye holy
ghost, by Moses in the two Tables, wherein consists the whole sum of that
which is required of every man to be done, in respect of the outward action and
inward working, which is, in doing good to man, whom thou see, and to love
God mine heavenly father, whom thou see not: but by the eye of that true
faith which takes his light of the Gospel of truth: whereby thou art directed
to the mean, Christ is our perfection through faith, without who^ we remain
imperfect.
which works that perfection for thee, which of thy self thou art not able
to reach unto, namely my self: without whose perfection, thou must needs
continue imperfect, and unable to do any thing that is good, by whom and to
whom, thou must pray for grace, and assistance, to do that which in those
two Tables is contained: And what (by reason of thine own weakness) thou can
not perform thereof, thou must beware that (although I have undertaken to
stand between thy self, and the curse due for the same) thou think not thy
self so discharged of performance thereof as far as thou can: least by the
careless c^sting of the burden thereof upon me, thou run headlong into those
evils that Satan shall prick thee unto, We must take heed that we neglect
not our duties in performing the law as far a^ we can, notwitstanding
Christ has undertaken to do that which we cannot attain unto.
persuading thy self, that I have undertaken to release thee of that, which
heretofore was laid on thee to be performed, and so think it needless to
do that which is commanded thee. Take heed I say, take heed, least that
this conceit draw thee into a negligent going forward to do good, and a
promise to do evil. But bring forth the fruits of amendment of life, work
righteousness and execute judgment, growing and proceeding from faith to
faith: joining thereunto a good conversation with knowledge and much patience,
accompanied with brotherly kindness and love, wherein thou must show thy self
willing to do good unto all men, 1. Pet. 1.5.6.7. Zecha. 8.16.17.
to speak the truth from thine heart, to imagine no deceit against thy
neighbor, but to do unto him, as thou would others should do unto thee:
showing thy self fruitful in the knowledge of the truth* 2 Pet. 1.8. we must
show our faith to be a true faith by our work.
confirming thy free election (in me) by the works proceeding of the Spirit
through a lively and a woorking faith, wherein acknowledging thy true and
earnest repentance, by disclayming thine own merits, thou shall, in the end,
receive that sweet and endless solace, which by my death, I have purchased,
which is the most comfortable presence, of my father in heaven, life
everlasting: without the^ which, there is nothing but utter dest^^ction.


The sinful man. Then Lord of lords, oh Solace sweet
Oh loving Jesus dear:
Whose passing power, by word of truth
created heavens clear:
The Sea, that surgeth too and fro,
the earth and Creatures all:
Thy wisdom, is surpassyng high,
thy mercies great withal.
So that, the works which thou have done,
do all depend on thee:
And I among them all, the woorst,
cry, come Lord, come to me.
Who am a Uessell, fraught with woe,
whose days are past in sin:
My nature proane to wickedness,
reteines me yet therein.
But thou that art the God of bliss
extend thy mercy mere:
Let not the furious Feend prevail,
against thy Creatures, here:
Thou can attend, before I cry,
support, before I fall:
Thou can relieve, before I crave,
forgive, before I call.
Thy grace, is of so great effect,
thy counsel (Lord) so pure,
That whom thou will preserve and keep,
remains most secure.
Thou art of grace, the giver true,
the God of mercy mere:
Who would not that Sinners die,
but turn to thee in fear.
So that (Oh Lord) abounding so,
with love and mercy store:
Thou did vouchsafe to send a salve,
to cure my cruel sore.
Thy only Son, delight and joy,
who came in human weed:
Into this vale of deep annoy,
to kill the Serpents seed.
Who did betray, and bring to woe,
our former Parents twain,
Whom thou had set in blessed state,
for aye there to remain.
And I poor wretch, the seed of sin
so subject unto ill:
Have swerued from ye word of truth
and sore transgrest thy will.
Embracing with great greediness,
my substance and my store:
Which I, by couin and deceit,
have gotten heretofore.
And in delight have past my days
as Satan ruled my will,
I framde my ^^nfies all and some.
to things peruers and ill.
Have mercy, mercy, Lord on me
who have deserved thrall.
Refuse me not, though I be dust,
by nature proane to fall.
Blot out of thine accompting Book,
what I have done amiss:
Oh, pardon my Offenses all,
and place my soul in bliss.
Wash me from all ungodliness,
make soul and body cleene:
That not a spot of filthiness,
in neither may be seen.
I do confess (O Lord) to thee,
I do confess my sin:
And do condemn my self of all,
that I have lived in:
I am a froward Child to thee,
prouokyng thee to Ire:
But, Lord, vouchsafe, call me again
I would full feign retire.
From wandering in such vanities.
to walk the ways of light,
Extend thy love, Lord, let me live,
from hence, a life upright.
I disobeyed thy Precepts,
and did what Nature would:
I did not that, that Virtue wyld:
and what, of right, I should.
Most wickedly I walked, in
the ways that were unjust:
Esteeming filthy Carcass so,
as it had not ben dust.
Oh Lord, I stood no fear of thee,
nor reuerenst thy name:
But, as a disobedient wretch.
have lead my life in blame.
Thy Laws, I cast behind my back
and do not them fulfill:
I follow with all greediness,
mine own corrupted will.
I have most lewdly, lead my life,
without remorce of mind:
Neglecting true repentance still,
to wickedness inclinde.
I roue at randone, too and fro,
from sin to sin I run:
And therein wallow, as the Sow,
in durtie soil, in Sun.
The Solace, which I should have shund
I sought with gredinesse:
And shund the Solace, which I should
have held, as happiness.
Which thou (O lord) thou do behold
yea, what I think or say:
What I have done* and what I do,
and how I gad astraye.
How I despised thy command,
and how I break thy will,
How like a senceles man I run,
by rash conceit to ill:
Wherefore, I need to say no more,
my sins, my soul annoy,
Mine heart, does harbor such conflict,
that gone is all my joy.

Solace. Despair not man, let sorrow pass,
take solace now of me:
I am the God, that never was,
nor will unfaithful be:
My mercy, is a thousand fould,
to him that does repent:
Repent (therefore) say on, be bold,
the contrite is not shent.
We must not only, confess our sins: but we must leave them, and forsake
them.
What? if thou be a sinful man,
in heart, repent, therefore:
Be sure, thou shall have pardon then
but see thou sin no more.
The Thief, that hung on tree with me,
as he gave up the Ghost:
Did crave, that he might saved be.
whose prayers were not lost:
And Marie Magdaline, that was,
a sinful woman, came
To me, in heart, repenting sin,
and I forgave the same.
By death (I say) I overthrew
the Serpent, and his train,
Mine heavenly fathers will, I did
obey without disdain.
Upon the Cross, with evil men,
my Corpse were nailed fast:
Not as a Sinner, but for thee,
when help of hope was past:
Proceed therefore, confess in haste, All men have sinned.

what thou have done amiss:
For Sin, I know, remains in thee,
as in all men there is.

The sinful man. Then Lord, I see, thou do behold
with thy supernall eye:
The creaturs which in thraldom be,
and hear when they cry:
I sinful soul, distressed sore,
in plungyng pangues of woe:
Do crave the cru^mes of mercy store
which from thy Table floe.
For, Lord, I see that thou art pressed,
to ease my sinful sore:
Refuse me not, vouchsafe me rest,
in heart, that call therefore.
Who by my sinful life, have lost,
thy love: and purchased thrall:
Extend unto me, wretched wight,
thy light, and love withal.
Oh, Lord, my God, forget me not,
hyde not thy self from me:
Although my flesh do strive to keep,
my syllie soul from thee:
Show not thine anger, as a foe,
let mercy be my stay:
It is no profit (Lord) for thee,
to cast my soul away.
Deny me not, a contrite heart:
a pensive person poor:
An woeful wretch, a sinful soul,
that knock here at thy door.
Uouchsafe, to turn thy face to me,
forgive my deeds amiss:
In fear, I do appeal to thee,
as one that guilty is:
Deal not, as my deserts do crave,
but as of mercy, thou,
Do will, and still delight to have,
all sinful hearts to bow:
Show not thy force against thy foe,
that feign would come to thee:
And pardon my Offenses all,
though Death be due to me.
Oh, plague me not (good Lord so sore
I have no force, I fall.
I never will offend thee more,
if thou vouchsafe to call,
My soul from sin, and to afford,
me Solace sweet again.
Lo, here, I do against my self,
a sinful wretch complain:
Shame does beset me round about
my self consume in woe:
I am corrupt, mine heart throughout
I wander too and fro.
From sin to sin, I run perforce,
I wander still astraye.
Wherefore, without thy due remorce,
I can not but decay.
Since first I sucked my Mothersbrest
yea, since I saw the day:
The subtle Serpent, has not ceast,
to wrest mine heart astraye.
In sin, my mother did conceive,
this cankred Corpse of mine:
And Satan seeks (Lord) to bereave,
all that (of right) is thine:
He sows (...) and wicked seeds,
in mine unstaid breast:
Whereof do grow pernicious deeds,
which breed my soul unrest.
Which I as yet cannot avoid,
they fix so fast one me:
That from my youth they have avoid,
and keep me (Lord) from thee.
So that I am full bought and sold,
between the Feend and sin:
And wickedness a thousand foulde,
mine heart does lodge within.
The good I cannot which I would,
my nature proane to ill:
Withdraws mine heart from what it should
embrace with heavenly skill.
But (Lord) in sin why should I dye,
sith thy good will is so:
To hear poor sinners when they cry,
and them redeem from woe
And give them, repaste again,
from heavens high above:
And to repentant hearts full feign,
thou showest thy self in love.
Ye* thou do save through mercy mere
those that deserve to dye,
When they to thee return in fear,
(oh Lord) now so do I:
A thousand times before this day,
thy mercies from above.
Have saved them that went astraie,
to show thy zealous love:
Our fathers, who were long ago,
when they were in dystresse:
Fell prostrate on their hearts, and lo,
thou gave them redress:
Ye, when they were incompast round
and no hope to avoid:
Thy mercy Lord did so abound,
that they were not destroyed:
Have mercy therefore (Lord) on me,
oh god on whom I call.
I wretched sinner here to thee,
on prostrate heart do fall:
Ease me again, let mercy thine,
mine woeful heart relieve.
And let not sin all goodness mine,
through loosenes thus bereave:
My soul alas, in doleful plight,
in hope of help does cry:
Oh Lord extend thy lovely light,
that shines from heaven hye:
To guide my silly soul to bliss,
by shunnyng what is ill.
High time, alas, good Lord it is,
to frame me to thy will.
Wherefore, extend thy grace again,
put forth thy helpyng hand:
Let it revive, what sin has slain,
and loosen Satan's band.
Lord Jesus come, oh come in haste,
Let Heavens Bow come down
That I a wretched wight at last,
may joy that passing Crown.
Which you, by dreadful death have won
through plu^ging panges on tree:
In love, to give the same to those,
that fear to fall from thee.
Come, come, I say, thou Solace true
and fill mine heart with joy:
My sinful soul, with grace renew,
whom Satan would destroy,
No day, no time, no minute is,
deuoyde of woe, to me:
But (oh alas,) the cause is this,
I hold me not by thee:
If thou absent thy self, my soul,
my bones, my body dust:
Corrupt, with carke of wicked will,
as Iron does with rust:
If thou absent thy self, my soul
runs headlong into ill:
And staggerryng too and fro, it reeles
and kickes against thy will:
If thou absent thy self, my soul,
like wretched wight oppressed:
Fast ^ettred in the boultes of sin,
lies groaning void of rest:
If thou absent thy self, my soul,
sinckes into darkesome thrall:
But (Lord) drive darkness far from me
send light and love withal:
So sin shall pass, and virtue slow
within my doleful breast:
Oh Jesus, come, Oh, come in haste,
to set my soul at rest.
And thus, my soul I do commend,
into thy bosom sweet:
On whom, I do in heart depend,
here prostrate, at thy feet.

Solace. Take heed, take heed, Oh sinful man, When we confess our sins, we
must take heed that (...) be not only in the tongue but from the heart.

let heart and tongue agree:
Leave off to sin, repent forthwith
and I will dwell with thee.
Cast of the Cloak, that is the cause,
to hinder thine intent:
Thy sin, and then, in deed, I will,
to thy request consent.

The sinful man How should mine heart and tongue agree?
what meanest thou therein?
I have (at large, thou may perceive)
unfolded all my sin.

Solace, I (T is not enough, to show thy self only) by outward words, to be
a sinful man: but, thou must likewise (as I have told thee before) reform
thy former froward, and perverse ways: that is: as thou know, and have
confessed thy self, heretofore to have walked in error, in darkness,
rebellyng against mine heavenly father: So would I have thee, to cleeue unto the
truth, to follow the light, Some can make a fair show of holiness outwardly
but repent not rightly inwardly: who deserve doubble punishments
and obey mine heavenly father, in performing those things, which are
commanded thee: For, there be some that can make a gay gloze and show of
holiness, by such outward protestation: when (in deed) they are far from
that true inward sorrow, which causes repentance, unto salvation: whose
dissimulation and, hypocrisy, deserves double punishment.


The sinful man Show me therefore, what must I do
and what must I obey?
Uoutchsaufe me grace, I do repent,
my gaddyng long astray:

Solace. WEll, then for as much as the day is gone, and that there is no time
to declare it now, I will defer it until to morrow, and then I will tell
thee, what thou most do, and what leave undone: In the mean time, forget not
to praise mine heavenly father, who has made thee, me who have redeemed thee,
and the holy, Ghoast who have sealed thee as one of the adopted Children,
that shall be saved:


The End of the Frydaye, or Fyfth Days Conference.
An earnest confession of sins: with a Prayer for the forgiveness thereof.
OH, miserable and most wretched creature: am I pressed down, oh Lord, with so
many evils, with such notorious sins, geuous offenses, heinous crimes, and
manifould iniquities: That I confess my self many thousand ways to have
offended thee, and to have deserved more punishmente, then I am able to bear:
Oh Lord such is mine vntowardenes, my cursed wretchedness, and senceles running
headlong, from vanity to vanity, from evil to worse: Insomuch, as, in stead
of light, I have followed darkness: in stead of the truth, embraced errors:
insteede of virtue, loved vice: and insteede of doing good, I have followed
iniquity, even with greedynes. The dregs (oh Lord) of Satan's transgression,
have so overcome me, and taken such deep root in mine heart, and taken such
sure hold of my corrupt flesh, that it brings continuallye forth the
fruits of an evil life: mine own conscience accuses me, and stands as
many witnesses against me, feeling my self even pressed down with many
sins, with innumerable transgressions against thy majesty, the least
whereof I acknoweledge, to be able, iustlye, to condemn me: Oh Lord, my
tongue, my lips, and mine heart, have rebelled against thee, my thoughts
have been evil, my words wicked, and deeds abominable before thee, yea
from mine head to my foot, there is no part, oh Lord, that can clear it
self of offending thee: wherefore, oh Lord, here do I acknowledge not only
with mine outward voice, but with an inward feeling of the heart, that I have
highly displeased thee, and wrought that, which in thine eyes is abominable:
whereby I have deserved thine heavy displeasure against me: in so much as thou
may justly turn me away, thou may cast me off and forsake me, I am
not worthy to be called thy son: Oh Lord I now feel mine own wretchedness,
and the allurements of the flesh and Satan, I confess to be altogether
deceitful and wicked, which I have esteemed and held so dear: and
acknowledge all truth, all help, comforre, and consolation, and the true
solace to proceed from thee, the fountain of all happiness: Who in man's
greatest wretchedness, even of mere love and unfeigned zeal of their salvation,
haste sent a remedy to cure their curssednes, thine own Son, Jesus Christ,
who has taken away the punishment which I have deserved, for breaking of thy
will: In whose nam and for whose sake, have compassion upon me, lay not my
sins unto my charge, whereby I have deserved eternal damnation. Oh Lord,
vouchsafe, that although I have justly deserved to dye, by reason of my
grievous sins, turn thy face in mercy, not in justice toward me. Respect
not mine offenses, but look upon that sacrifice, that oblation, which was
offered upon the cross, for the reconciliation again of those, unto thee,
which come unto thee, through him: Through whom, oh Lord I come unto thee, and
for whose deserts I crave pardon, disclayming altogether mine own merrites: Oh
remember thy most loving promise, that thou will accept his death and his
bitter passion, as a full recompense for all mine offenses, and a sufficient
ransom for all my former evils: let thine anger, oh Lord, through him be
appeased, thine heavy displeasure qualified, and love renewed: That from hence
forth, in a true and undoubted faith: I may take hold of the remission of my
sins, through him: and believe unfeignedly, that the obedience of him thy
son Jesus Christ, is made mine atonement with thee, that by his death, I am
made alive: and by his resurrection, I am made rightuous in thy sight. Let
thine holy spirit (oh blessed Lord God) assure me through the same faith,
that I am indeed received into thy favor and love again: That being thereby
truly comforted, I may enjoy the liberty of a free mind, wherein I may serve
thee, wherein I may obey thee, and whereby I may grow into a godly hatred of
the old man, and into a true and unfeigned love of righteousness: So that [from
hencefoorth] I may, in newness of life, diligently imploye my self, to the
Execution and continual woorkynge of those things, that may witness
outwardly, to the Example of other men, what I believe inwardly: casting away,
all dissimulation and Hypocrisy, the Cloak of sin: spending the residue of
my days, in a pure and sincere conversation, brynging forth the fruits*
beelongynge to amendment of life: That after this life ended, I may, through
the merittes of that, thy Son, our (only) Savior and Advocate, Ihesus
Christ: for evermore, possess the Joys of eternal life. Amen.

Oh, Lord, increase our Faith.
The Saturdaye, or sixth Days Conference, between Solace and the Sinful man.
Wherein, Solace, shows him, what is to be done, and what left undone, to
attain to the perfection of Christianytie.

The Sinful man. GOOD Solace, lo, here I attend
as one that longes to hear:
What I must do and leave undone:
I give attentive ear:

Solace. IF thou (dilligently) attend this Day, and retain in memory, those
things, that I have heretofore declared unto thee, thou shall perceive the
Sum of thy Duty toward mine heavenly father, as also thy duty toward
other men: whereby you may live an upright, and a godly life, to the service
and honor of God, profitte of thy neighbor, and salvation of thine own
soul: to the vanquishing of Satan, dispising of the world, and to the
mortifying of thine own flesh: So that the Devil shall not fray thee, the
world deceive thee, nor thy flesh annoye thee.


The sinful man. Good Solace, then proceed in have,
true comfort now appears:
This comfort does abandon woe,
and wipe off all my tears.

Solace. IN deed so it will, if thou attentively hear it, faithfully believe
it, and truly follow it. But thou have heard before, that it is not enough
for thee to say (with the mouth) thou will, or confess with thy lips that
thou have offended: but thou must perform in deed, and reform thy
conversation yea, thou must have thine heart fraughted, with such godly
cogitations, and virtuous desires, as may bring forth the fruits of that
sorrow, which (as before is said) causes repentance unto salvation: that
thine actions outwardly, and thine affections inwardly, may appear to be
grounded upon that true faith, which is the fountain of all good works,
whatsoever: without ye which, thy works are not only unprofitable, Works
without faith are abominable.
but mere abominable. By which faith, thou must believe, the promises touching
thy salvation, to vee wholly accomplished and performed, through my death and
passion only: and not in respect of thine own good works, be they never so
many: And yet art thou bound by all means possible to endeavor thy self to
do good unto all men, and to decline from evil. We are bound to do good unto
all men.
And for that purpose, have I called thee from that error wherein thou walk,
deceiving thy self with vain and transitory pleasure of this world, to
bring thee unto the light of truth, to draw thee from thine Idolatry.
(wherein thou gave worship) (as it were) unto thy great abundance: The
Covetous man esteems his aboundan^ as his god.
esteemyng thy gold as thy GOD) to serve mine heavenly father, thy living GOD,
and loving Creator: to follow that which is god, and to eschew and avoid
that which is evil, only, to work the will of mine heavenly father, which
is set down, and declared* in the two Tables, containing ten precepts:
wherein, as in a glass thou may behold, what thou ought to do, and what
to leave undone: The sum of the whole commaundeme^ts is love. Ex^ 20.2. Mat,
22.37. Gall: 5.14.
The sum and whole effect whereof is comprehended, only in love: namely, in
loving God above all things, and thy neighbor as thy self, and to hate all
things that make against the fulfilling of the same love.


The sinful man. Uouchsafe, good Solace, to declare,
now, more at large to me:
These ten Precepts, which do set forth
the way to come to thee.

Solace TH^^, attend thou diligently, and first consider, We must esteem the
commandments as the very word of God.
that these precepts are not of so small moment, as yt, they should be accepted
as the commandments of man, but to be esteemed, as the very word of mine
heavenly father: who, (to make the same of the greater credit and
authority, among men) joined his own person, his glorious majesty, to the
same his words: God joined his majesty with the word and came down to deliver
the same.
and came visiblye down in a flame of fire upon mount Synaye: to deliver them,
after a far more glorious and wounderfull manner, then man could do:
couplinge his own glory, with the word: to the end, that the same, should
not be so little accounted of, so slenderly regarded, or the aucthoritye
thereof rejected, as a thing of small effect, as words (commonly) are esteemed,
as a puff of wind, now hard, and by and by forgotten: But because it should be
of an everlasting and permanent continuance, they were written in tabl^ of
stone: and such was the weightines of the matter, that mine heavenly father,
thought not the words of a man, no, not of an Angel, of sufficient
authority, or credyte, to deliver the same: And therefore, came he himself
down, after such a wounderfull manner, as that the mount Synaye, at his
presence, Mount Sinay smoaked and trembled at the presence o^ the Lord.
smoaked as a fournace, trembling and quakinge miraculouslye: whereby thou
may perceive, yt whosoever dyspiseth his Prophets, and the performance of his
commandments, dispiseth his word, and so contempneth god mine heavenly father
him self: for he that dyspiseth the one, contempneth the other. Therefore
must thou not so lightly way these precepts, the will of mine heavenly
father, but highly reverence them, attentively hear them, duly follow them,
and faithfully believe them, Psa^: 19.7.
which are perfect, converting the soul: The testimony of the Lord is pure,
and gives wisdom unto the simple: and in performing them is their great
reward: which reward (yet notwithstanding) thou may not account thy self
worthy of, when thou have done that which is in the law commanded thee, as
far as is possible, for to fulfill the same, in all points, so exactly as is
required, When thou have done all that thou can, thou art an unprofitable*
servant
thou can not: but when thou haste done all that thou can, thou may
confess thy self an unprofitable seruante: nay, examine the former course of
thy life, with that which mine heavenly father has commanded thee in the
law, and thou shall not only find thy self guilty of the breach of one, but
of all the commandments: for, if thou break and transgress one, He that
breaks, one commandment* is guilty of all 2 Cor: 3, 5. Rom: 8.8.
thou art guilty of all. And as mine Appostle Paul says, thou art not of
thy self able to think a good thought: much less to fulfill the whole law,
for they that are in the flesh cannot please God, but thou art called from the
wisdom of the flesh, which is death, to the wisdom of the spirit, which is
life: whereby thou may be directed to fulfill that righteousness, which the
law requires: namely, to love mine heavenly father with all thine heart,
with all thy mind, with all thy strength, and thy neighbor as thy self:
wherein, consists the perfect righteousness of the law. Now, to declare the
same more at large, and to rehearse the same (particulerly) for thy better
instruction, know this, The first commandment
that the first of the same ten precepts is a prohibition, or forbidding:
Gen: 1^1.
that thou should^st have any other God or Gods, but mine heavenly father,
only, who has made thee, Act. 14.15. Gen: 56, 2.4
the whole world, and all things therein contained: who, Exodus: 12.2*
as he delivered the people of Israel from their bondage, and captivity,
(wherein they were grieved, Rom: 6.20.
by the tirannye of Pharaoh, King of Egypt) by the hands of Moses and Aaron,
Heb: 2.14
so has he delivered thee and all mankind, by the sacrifice of my body upon
the cross, from the bondage of sin, By the death of Christ are we deli^ered
from the bondage of Satan.
from the tyraunte of Satan, and from the fear of death, and hell: which (if
there were none other) were such an especial benefit, that it might (...) thee
to such an inward acknowledging of his inestimable love, that in respect of
that, that when thou were following the ungodly lusts and feeding the
unlawful desires of thine untamed flesh, runnynge rashly forth in that
broad way that leads unto death, he vouchsaued to send me his only son,
to call thee, and to with-drawe thee from the same and to set thee in the way,
that leads unto eternal life: thou canste not but account him thy god, and
be moved to the willing service of him: To which especial benefit, if thou
join and call to mind, the residue of his aboundaunt mercyes, wherein he
voutchsafeth thee all things, necessary and expedient, to the mayntenaunce of
this mortal life, and suffers thee not to want the thing which may relieve
and comfort thee in all necessities: and especially, if in faith thou fall unto
him, in my name, requiring the same, thou may be assured to obtain all
things at his hands, which are requisite for thee: not only, I say, for the
body, but (which is most precious) for the soul, which could not, but have
continued in a most miserable and most dampnable estate, had not he given me,
Christ has answered that and discharged us of that we remain accursed for.
unto the death, for the redemption thereof: who (as I have before assured
thee) have answered that for thee, for which thou remaynedst accurssed:
namely, for not performing all things contained in the law: That have I done
for thee, obeying the will of mine heavenly father therein, whose mercy so
abounded, that he has accepted thee unto his favor again, through me,
without whom thou hadste never been reclaimed, but perished in thy sin: In
which his so singular benefits and superaboundant mercies, he declares
himself to be thy very true and only God* and therefore forbids thee to
have any other God but himself, Mat. 4.10.
whom thou must worship, obey, serve, trust unto, believe and call upon,
giving him, Act. 2^20.21. Heb. 11.6.
as well by outward profession as by inward love and affection, unfeigned
praise, Luke 4.8.
and honor, imparting the same to none other: Least (as David says) thou
forget the name of the Lord thy God, Psalm. 44.20.21.
and hold up thine hands to strange Gods. Mat. 4.10.
Worship thy Lord thy God, therefore, and see that him only thou serve and
truly obey: and that with the same true worship, We must worship God as we
are commanded in his word.
which is commanded thee in his word, as by prayers, supplications, and
giuinge of thanks, magnifying him in the greatness of his mercy, wherein he
aydeth, releeueth, comfort and defends them, In all our suits we must fly
unto god through Christ.
that being distressed, faithfully call upon him, not running unto any Saint,
or Angel, but unto him, only, in and by me, who am the way, and mean to
bring them unto him I am, the mediator and aduocat, by who^ only and by none
other, thou may have free passage unto mine heavenly father, as well for
heavenly as earthly blessings: which if thou seek at his hands by any other
means, then only by me, thou deceiuest thy self: for I have taken upon me to
obtain it freely for all them that faithfully ask it of him through me,
alone, not joining any other in their prayers, It darkneth the mercies of
Christ, to join any with him in prayer.
(for any part of their welfare bodily or ghostly) with me: for that it does
so shadow and darken my mercies, and free obteyning things necessary for
them, that I cannot be seen in the fullness of my grace, by reason of such
imparting my office to other, whose help cannot avail thee in thy distress.
There is none other God (I say) but mine heavenly father, Esa. 45.21,
who is a just God, a merciful God, and a Savior: look upon him in me, who
am the brightness of his glory, the ingraued form of his person, Heb, 1.3.
equal with him (as thou have heard before) wherefore, faithfully, repair thou
in all thy necessities to him through me, and thou shall be saved: every knee
shall bow unto him, and every tongue shall swear by him, in whom is all
righteousness and strength, and all that provoke him shall be ashamed. Remember
these things therefore, Esa. 44.21.
and be reformed: cast away al trust in any besides him, who has put away thy
transgressio^s like a Cloud, and thy sins as a Mist: turn unto him through
me, who have redeemed thee: worship him, serve him, and pray unto him only,
in and by me, and by none other: neither Saint or Angel. Beware of that
ancient blindness, wherein men have fallen down to worship, not only Saints
and Angels, but very stocks and stones, painted pictures, and such like:
wherein consists no help. Mine Evangelist John professes that he fell down
to worship the Angel, Revel, 22.9.
and that the Angel said unto him, see thou do it not, for I am thy fellow
servant, and the fellow servant of thy brethren the Prophets, and of them
that keep the words of this Book: worship God, whereby thou may perceive
that worship and service belongs unto mine heavenly father only, and to none
other. And therefore does he forbid thee, The 2 commandment. Deuteronomy. 4.15.
to make unto thy self any graue^ Image, or ye likeness of any thing in heaven
above, or in the earth beneath, or waters under the earth, We must make us no
graue^ Image.
to fall down thereunto, and to give it honor or reverence as a God, or
intending to worship my heavenly father in it: no, he cannot abide to be
worshipped, praised or prayed unto in any visible Image, but in me his son,
only, because he himself is invisible, and inco^prehensible, whose ears are
open and attentive unto the Prayers made in my name: and stopped, that he will
not* only, not here the^ (that are made in the name of another) but pronounces
them accursed and confounded, that fall down to graven Images, to serve them,
Psalm. 97.7.
and that glory in their Idolles: And therefore, says the Wiseman. Let not the
inue^tio^s of me^, deceive thee, nor the unprofitable labor of the Caruers or
Paynters, Wis. 15.4.
miscarie thee, nor the Images which they make (who have eyes and see not:
ears, and hear not: mouths, and speak not: and which are set forth with
diverse goodly and golden colors) move thee to bow unto the^: But some have
said: why? we bow not to the Idol, A foolysh objection.
we serve not the Image: but our intent is to serve God, and to be the oftener
put in mind thereof, by the Image: and therefore, ye intent, not (only) not to
be misliked, but very necessary and good. But be thou assured, Sap. 11.5:
yt for this device, there is no warrant in the word of mine Heavenly father.
But (as ye Wiseman says: the sight thereof stirs up ye ignorant to fall down
before ye dead image, Romans 1.23.
which has no life: whereby they turn the glory of ye incorrubtible god, to ye
similitude of a corruptible man, of beasts, and birds, and such like: provoking
mine heavenly father to such high indignation, for turning his truth unto a
lie: for worshipping and serving the creature, forsaking the Creator, who is
blessed for ever and ever: that he smites their hearts with such blindness,
that they cannot glorify him as they ought, but run headlong according to
the imagination of their own hearts: professing themselves to be most wise,
when in deed they are very fools. Which foolishness of theirs, mine heavenly
father has by his word brought to light: signifying, The natural devises and
foolish conceits of men prevail not with God. Luke 8.12.

The true worship of God is hearing and doing his word.

God is a ielous God.


that such natural devices and foolish conceiptes of men, prevail not with
him: But that the hearing of his word and doing thereof, is the only worship
that pleases him: without the which, he accepts no service, bear it never
so fair a show in the eyes of mortal men. Therefore thou must understand,
that in prohibiting thee to worship such graue^, moulten, or painted Images, he
forbids thee all other worshipping of him, invented by man: And therefore is
he called a ielous God, who cannot abide that thou should have any other
God, or to join with him any other in thy prayers, for thy welfare: for that
he of himself, (as he is of power to do all things) so is he willing and
ready for my sake, freely to do al things which belong unto thy safety: He
has a most loving and a most tender affection, toward all such as come in
that true worship, unto the Throane of his mercy: not reposing the hope of
their help, in any besides him alone: because that he would have them to
attribute the whole mean of their relief and comfort unto him, and to
account them selves (as in deed they are) most bound and beholden unto him,
and depend wholly upon his goodness, and to acknowledge him the only author
and worker of their happiness: which they cannot do, if they repose a
quantity of their trust in any other, or think that their devised worship
has been the mean of their relief, and their benefits received: for that,
as they have imparted their confidence in the help of others, so can they not,
but imparte the thanks unto them whom they worship together with mine heavenly
father, and so take they away the due praises from him, to whom al honor,
praise, and worship, (of right) belongs. And therefore, in this
Commandment, he threatens vengeance unto all such as prostitute and lay
open their faith unto others, which is due only unto him: and that he will
punish them to the third and fourth generation, Hos. 2.4.
that shall be found guilty therein. And therefore he pronounces them haters
of him, that cast their love upon any other then himself: and I will have no
pity upon their children, but with the fire of my jealousy will I burn upon
such as hate me (says he) even unto the third and fourth generation: and
promises to be merciful unto thousands of them, God is merciful unto
thousands of the^ that love him and keep his commandments.
which love him and keep his Commandments: whereby it appears, that the
cheifest worship wherewith he is pleased, is love: not that love which is
divided and given part unto him, and part unto an other, but that love
wherewith thou must love him with all thine heart, with all thy strength, and
with all thy soul: which is an acceptable worshipping of him: for he that
loves him with all his heart, reserueth no love for an other, in respect of
any hope remaining in his heart, to be relieved by any other means the^ by him
alone: to which love is joined, the doing of such things as are acceptable and
pleasant in his sight, which are contained in his word, The word of God is the
only rule whereby we must direct the worshipping of him.
the rule of the true worshipping: which is, the doing of that which pleases
him, and the leaving undone of those things which displease him: for it is the
second point of the true worshipping of God to keep his Commandments, and to
serve him according to the prescript rule of his word, and not by such blind
devotion, as is not warranted by the same, and which is not grounded upon the
alone love of mine heavenly father, nor flowing from the fountain of that holy
spirit, whereby the children of mine heavenly father, cry Abba father: Romans
8.15.10.
and which bears witness unto their spirits, that they are adopted and made
ye children of him, through that faith which works by love, Gal. 5.4.
and from whence do flow al good works, as a badge whereby the true
worshippers are discerned and known: to which effect, does mine Evangelist
John testify, saying: John 14.23.
He that loves God keeps his word. But he that imparteth the worship of him
with any other, he affirms with his own mouth that he loves him not, but
hates him: on who^ he has decreed to take vengeance in his posterity, in
many generations. Wherefore, if thou have heretofore by prayer, or otherwise
worshipped or served any, together, with mine heavenly father, or by bowing thy
self to Images, or by any other Supersticious manner, not warranted by his
word, persuaded thy self, to have pleased him, think thy self not only
deceived, but thereby to have deserved the curse which he has pronounced
against Idolaters, in their posterity, many generations: now therefore,
examine thy self, and and see whether thou have served mine heavenly father
only in this love, and done all that which he has commanded thee in the Law
to do: And thou shall see thy self yet under that heavy curse, for not
performing that which is commanded the: what is there then to be done? thou
must presently mortify and keep down those affections, which draw thee into
this disobedience, and come nearer unto mine heavenly father, in performing
those duties which are enjoined thee by his word, which thou must set before
the eyes of thine heart, as a profitable rule or scholemaster, to direct thee
unto me, on whom thou must take hold by faith in love, as the true and only
mediator and mean to bring thee unto mine heavenly Father, without the aid
or assistance of any other: insomuch as thou may stand assured in me, that
thou art freely acquitted and discharged of that curse (through the mere
mercy of mine heavenly father) which, (without me) threatens destruction,
not only unto thy self, but to thy posterity, by many generations: whereby
thou may perceive, that where the law opens unto thee nothing but thy
corruption, (as the ministry of death) thou have yet nevertheless salvation
promised in me, through faith: 2. Cor. 3 The law, the ministry of death.
whereby thou may apprehende and take hold thereof, to thine unspeakable
comfort, acknowledging thy self only beholden unto me for the same, and to
none other: no, not to thine own good works.

The third Commandment prohibiteth and forbids thee to take the name of
mine heavenly father in vain: The third commandment
which is, that for as much as he is thy God, and has prescribed unto thee in
his word, the manner and mean how thou ought to worship him, and truly
serve him: which is, (as before (...) said) (to love him and to keep his
Commandments) thou art by this commandment, enjoined to perform it
accordingly, and not to omit this true worship, or to join the same with any
other, (not agreeable to his word) for that it is a derogation of his glory,
and a taking of his most glorious name in vain, when thou obseruest not his
will in performing his precepts, in such sort as his name may be honored
thereby. And thereby thou may perceive, that such as live in this world
carelessly, and without fear of transgressing his will, are by this
Commandment, understood to take his name in vain. As also those, that as
soon as (by reason of any s^ight occasion) their natures are stirred up, to a
certain choloricke humor, or their affections moved, fall by and by into most
horrible and blasphemous oaths, in such outrageous, and unseemly manner, that
sighting (as it were) against his most glorious Majesty, they seek to trample
his due honor under their feet. And that not only such perjured and
forsworn persons, Not only perjured persons, but all those that unadvisedly
use the name of God, are guilty of the taking of his holy name in vain.
as either for their own lucre, for the avoiding of punishment or shunning of
shame, fear not to make mine heavenly father (the author of all truth) the
defense of their most abominable and false lies. But those common swearers,
whose mouths by reason of custom, run over (as it were) most irreverently,
even in common speech, with most blasphemous and indecent oaths: which who so
uses, (bear he otherwise never so fair a show of living uprightly in his
vocation) dishonoreth his maker, and heapeth his displeasure against himself,
against the day of vengeance: for it is no excuse to s^y: why? although my
tongue use now and then to swerue, it is but a custom, mine heart stands as
it ought, and rightly affected toward God. Assure thy self this excuse is
v^ine: for such filthiness proceeding out of the mouth, The tongue bewrays
the affe^^ion of the heart.
bewraieth the heart to be unclean, and very irreverently disposed.
Wherefore, if thou have been or be now thus corrupted with the dregs of such
blasphemy, cast it out, cease to swear, vainly or untruly, by mine heavenly
father, or by me his Son: who am one with him, or by any other thing: and
say not, tush, The Lord will not hold him (...) abuses his name.

A lamentable thin^* that one man will not believe another without swearing.


it is but a foolish custom, or small matter: beware I say, beware, for it is
no small matter: for mine heavenly father will not hold him guiltles, that
thus abuses his holy name. But such is the slender credit now adays,
remaining among men, that the one will not believe the other, without pauning
his faith and his troth, in buying, in selling, in gaming, and even in
familiare conference: a grievous and a lamentable thing: for which such
blasphemers shall not escape unpunished. In things that we are allowed to
swear, we must swear by none other then by God himsel. And why.
Thou art also forbidden by this Commandment, to swear by any other thing,
the^ by mine heavenly father, and that in matters, wherein an oath is tolerable
and commanded, much less in frivolous and vain causes: for that thou take
to record, and referrest ye judgment of the cause to him by whom thou
swearest: and therefore if it be by any besides mine heavenly father, thou
take away his honor, and give it to an other, and so intitulest the
creature, with that superiority which is due only unto thine everlasting
creator. Mat. 5.34.
Whereby thou art forbidden to swear by heaven or by earth, but for the
confirmation of the truth, and determining of strife and controversies
between men: Heb. 6.16.
he has vouchsafed the use of his own name, (which is his word) to be taken
as a witness of the truth: wherein thou must have a special regard, that
thou take not him as a witness in an untrue matter, John 1.1.
but with great reverence, to use it to the decyding and manifesting of matters
of great importance, having only the superiority over all creatures, 1.
King. 8.31.32
to justify righteousness, and to bring the wickedness of the wicked upon
their own pates. Wherefore, it behooves thee to examine thy former life, and
to consider whether thou have not taken the name of mine heavenly father in
vain: either by neglecting, and not performing his precepts and thy duties
commanded thee by his word: whether there have been such a due regard in
thee, of the fulfilling that which the word has directed and appointed thee
to do, and avoided that which by the same word thou were forbidden: whether
thou have refrayned thy tongue from blasphemous oaths, and from taking any
other to witness in matters of doubt, then my heavenly father: wherein if thou
be guilty, thou shall not escape unpunished: unless in my name thou speedely
return, to the true service of my heavenly father again, whose mercy
extends unto thousands of them, that love him and observe his will.
Wherefore, leave of to walk any longer in the ways, that may lead thee from
ye reverent honoring of God mine heavenly father, Proueb. 13.13.
and from a godly fear to offend him: for he that dispiseth his word, shall be
destroyed: but he that fears the Commandment, shall be rewarded.

The fourth, commands thee to keep holy the Saboth day, The 4. Commandment.
which is the seventh day wherein mine heauely father after the finishing of all
his Creatures, rested from his work and sanctified it: upon which day has he
commanded thee to cease from thy labors and daily business, Genesis 2.2.3.
and to refer thy self to such godly exercises, as may be to the glory of
his name: namely devout prayers and giving of thanks, What we ought to do
upon the Saboth day.
hearing his word, as also, (which is the principal mystery of this Saboth
day,) thou must rest from the works of the old man, as the fulfilling of the
lusts of the flesh, to tame thy perverse affections of thine heart, and wholly
to employ thine endeavor to the will of mine heavenly father, For the Prophet
says, Esa. 56.2.
that he is blessed that does this, and the son of man that takes hold on
it: he that keeps the Saboth and polluteth i^ not, and keeps his hands
from doing any evil. If thou abstain from thine own wicked ways upon the
Saboth day, and consecrate it as glorious unto the Lord, Esa. 5 8.13.14.
honoring him, not seeking thine own will, nor speaking a vain word: Then
shall he lift thee up upon the high places of the earth, and bless thee: The
chief hallowing of the Sabbath day is ceasing from sin.
for the true observation and hallowing of the Saboth day is, ceassing from
sins, which are thine own ways, by reason of that corruption which is
rooted in thy perverse Nature: whereby thou bring forth the fruits of
wickedness. Thou must therefore, remember, that the Saboth or seaueth day,
Householders are bound to see their families upon the Saboth day to serve God,
and to avoid evil.
as it is a day wherein thou must cease from thy worldly and bodily labors, so
to cease from doing things displeasing mine heavenly father, which may not be
for that day only: but all thy life: Thy Servants, thine Oxen, thy Cattle,
and all which is within thy gates, must likewise that day leave their labors,
and refer them selves to rest, wherein thou haste to consider, that it is
thy charge and duty to see unto, The untowardness of children and servants,
does argue the fathers and masters coldness in the service of Cod.
and have regard unto thy servants and family this day: to keep them from
wantonness and looseness of life, and to exhort and provoke them to the
Service of mine heavenly father, to spend as well that day therein, as all
other days in the week, in thine own private business and labor, whom if
thou suffer to run and gad abroad to wantonness and sin, like untamed
Coltes, and like str^y sheep that seem to have no guide: It can not but
bewray thine own coldness in the true service of God, and then ungodly
behavior growing by thy careless regard, to see them to perform their
duties to GOD and man: will be a witness against thee: that thou have not
hallowed the Saboth day, in such decent manner, as is commanded thee. It
pleased mine heavenly father, to give thee the use of six days in (seven) to
labor: thy self and thine, in thy worldly business, contenting himself with
one day to be served in, (not to the end that in these six days there
should be no regard of him, we must serve God, not only on the Saboth day,
but every day: and how.
or wherein he expects no service at thine hands, but thou must serve him
daily and continually in prayers and supplications, and in executing thy
vocation, with truth and honest dealing, which he accepts as a pleasant
service of him) and in the seventh to imploye thee wholly to the truly keeping
holy thereof. As ceasing from doing thine own will which is corrupted, Gal. 5
24. Col 3.5.
with Covetousness and uncleanness, and to mortefie thine own evil desires,
and inordinate affections, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which is
Idolatry: We may account the Saboth only ordained to take our bodily rest in.
wherein thou have to take heed, that thou account not this day, ordained
only for corporal rest, (as too many do) or the end thereof to be for a
time of banqueting, playing, sporting, wantonness, excess, vnreuerent
meetings, and indecent behavior: as the more part by their ungodly
conuersations, bewray their opinions to be quite contrary to mine heavenly
fathers most gr^^ious institution thereof: for where it ought to be a time, for
the body to refresh it self with rest, and the soul to be comforted, with
hearing the word and service of God mine heavenly father, The Saboth day abused.
the same day is made more wearisome to the body, by unseemly practices, and
pastymes, and the soul more entangled with vices then before: in so much, as
the remembrance of that days wantonness, holds their minds subject, to
desire that day again, wherein to fall to their wonted wallowing in
wickedness. In which Commandment, thou have to consider how thou have
resisted and suppressed thine evil affections and ungodly desires: And how
thou have endeavored thy self to the service of mine heavenly father: And
whether according to the truth and prescript rule thereof thou have led thy
life: wherein (as thou can not excuse thy self, but acknowledge thy self
guilty and worthy of reproof) so have thou free passage unto mine heavenly
father through me, We have free passage to God through Christ.
by whose death and bitter passion, the curse which was due for the not
performing thereof is taken away, and his mercy ready: if in a true faith thou
betake thy self unto me, thine only Mediator anv Savior, carefully
suppressing thine evil affections, and so much the more, cosidering that my
righteousness is made thy righteousness, wherein thy godly and zealous
endeavor, shall please mine heavenly father, and be acceptable, not for the
worthiness thereof, but through my deserts, and mere merits.


The sinful man. This sweet conclusion co^forts me,
who can not but confess:
That these thy Laws like wicked wretch,
I daily do transgress.
But since thou freely do obtain,
the love of God for me:
Uouchsafe me grace to mortify,
my sins to come to thee.
And since the night draws on so fast,
pass to the rest in haste,
I will attend unto the end,
forgive offenses paste.

Solace. THen remember thou, that these four commandments which thou have
already heard, do perfectly instruct thee to the service of mine heavenly
father, and wherein his glory and true worship does consist, namely, to
acknowledge him the author of all thy welfare, both of body and soul: and by
his mercies to be stirred up, to do those things yt may please him, and to
beware of joining any in worship with him, or to give him other worship the^ is
warranted and prescribed by his word: To be careful in doing those things, yt
may be to the glory of his name, and to avoid that, yt by any means may
dishonor ye same: And lastly, to humble thy self, truly acknowledging the
corruption of thine heart, condemning thine own ways and works, and to
endeavor thy self to subdue the same: for that it is the free mercy and
goodness of mine heavenly father: through the merits of me his son, that
sanctifies and justifies thee, and not thine own works. In which four
former Commandments, is directly set down the su^me of thy duty
appertaining to God mine heavenly Father: It is the free mercy of God in
Christ that justifies us.

The service of God that is not joined with the love of our neighbor, is not
acceptable.


Who, to the end, that thou should witness thine obedience unto himself
outwardly, he has prescribed unto thee those duties which thou ought to
perform toward other men: for that service and worship of God, is not
accepted, which is not joined with the love of thy brethren, neither is thy
charity to other men any thing accounted of, where it is not grounded upon
that unfeigned love of God, which proceeds of a true faith and sincere service
of him: 1. Io. 5.2. A testimony who are the children of Cod. 1. Ioh. 3.15.
for he that loves mine heavenly father, and keeps his commandments,
shows a sufficient witness, that he loves the children of God: and as John
says, We know that we are translated from death to life, because we love the
brethren. So yt it apeareth to be a sufficient testimony of a blessed estate,
when thou for his sake, do truly perform those duties which he has
commanded thee unto men. The fifth co^maundemen^ Mat. 15.4. Mar. 7.10.
The first whereof is, to honor thy father and thy mother: for who so curses
father or mother, let him die the death: but he that truly obeieth them, and
behaueth himself reverently, as well inwardly (heartely endeavoring him self, to
aid them, to help them, and submitting his will unto their wills, in things
honest,) as in outward reverence, nurture, and seemly behavior: such a one I
say, has a blessing promised: namely, to have his days prolonged upon the
earth, and to be filled with all good things. And on the contrary, the
stubborn, stife-necked, and graceless children, Disobedient children God will
punish.
shall be rooted out, and taken away by untimely death, from the land which
mine heavenly father has given them. In which Comaundeme^t, thou must
understand thy self, not only to be enjoined to use reverence, and to give
honor unto thy parents: namely, to those that were the ministers of the
bringing thee into this life: but unto all Magestrates, Superiors and
Ministers, who^ he has ordained, as Instruments, Romans 13.^.
by whom to conueye such graces and benefits upon thee, Whom we ought to
reverence.
as are necessary and expedient for thee: toward whom this Commandment
wills thee, so to behave thy self in all thine actions, as may witness of
thine inward love and reverence toward them. It behooves thee not lightly to
way the benefit, The office of a Magistrate most necessary, being duly
execucuted.
proceeding from the due execution of the office of the Magistrates, who are
the messengers and ministers of God, to administer Justice, to punish those
that are wicked in this world, and to stop their violence, wherein they daily
seek, to rush in and to overthrow the estate of the good: by them is the
tyrannouse and bloody sword of the wicked kept and held back from the
throats of the godly: The benefit that the Mag^strate brings unto the
commonwealth* by executing his authority. Romans 13.4.
By them are the righteous defended, and the ungodly punished. And therefore
must thou accept them as the ministers of God for thy wealth: and to become
subject unto them: not only for fear of punishment, but for conscience sake,
in respect of the benefit thou receiuest, by their authority. The Elders,
says mine Apostle, are worthy of dubble honor: especially, they which labor
in the word and doctrine: whereby it appears, 1 Timothy 5.17. (...) ministers
of the word of G^d, worthy double honor.
that thou art not discharged of thy duty required by this Commandment,
when thou have done thy duty to thy father, that begat thee, and thy mother
that bare thee, but that thou owe a dubble duty to such as open the will of
mine heavenly father unto thee, Preachers the (...) of our souls.
which is the preacher and minister of his sacred word: who are the Nurces and
foster fathers of thy soul, breaking unto thee the bread, and giving thee the
water of life, whom thou must hear with reverence: for that they are the
messengers of mine heavenly father, to inuit thee to the banquet of eternal
salvation. The father ought to have a care to the bringing up of his Children,
and seruanrs.
By which Commandment, now thou may perceive that thou art bound to honor
thy father and mother, al Magestrates and ministers of God, and to afforde them
reverence, not only in outward conversation, but in inward desire of their
welfare. And further thou must understand, that as children by this
Commandment are bound to use all reverence to their Parents, Magistrates
ought to have a care to execute their duties.
subjects to their Prince and Magestrates, and all men unto the ministers of
the word, of my heavenly father: so belongs there a care to be in Parents,
to see their children and servants to be brought up and instructed: not in
wantonness: not in careless proceeding, from pleasure to pleasure, from vice to
vice: The Ministers and Preachers ought to show the will of God not only by
word but in life.
but in the due knowledge, sincere service, and true worship of his holy name:
And the like care to rest in the hearts of all Magestrates, to execute their
duties justly, to show them selves sharp in the punishment of vice, and
subduing of the wicked members of the Realm, and to extol and defend with
the sword of their authority, the godly and virtuous: which godly care also,
there ought especially to be in the Preachers of his word: not only as they
have freely received, even so freely to give, using their tallentes to the
increasing of the knowledge of his word: where, and into what City, Town or
place soever they shall come, by the preaching of the word only: but to
express and show forth the same likewise in life, in conversation, and
manners, that men seeing their good works, may glorify my father which is in
heaven. The negligence of Parents dangerous.
But the negligence of Parents, in instructing their children and servant in
my fathers will, or rather their fond foolish and vnparentike love which they
(through a blind affection) bear unto their children, they suffer them (nay
thrust them forward, by their peevish pampring them up in pride) to run into
all wilful wickedness, to kick against God, and their Superiors, giving
them the raynes of liberty: seldom or never restraining them with the bridle
of correction, until too late, when neither fair words will win them,
stripes stoop their stubbornness, nor any correction call them from their
looseness of life: until the Magestrate (who bears not the sword for
naught) (even of Justice) turn them over to the scourge of the law, which (to
the great grief and heartbreaking of the Parents) (when it is too late)
takes them out of the land, which the Lord had given them, by an untimely
death: And so both the children and parents in danger of the curse, which
follows the not regarding to fulfill this Commandment: whereby it
appeareeh, that this Commandment, binds the Parents as well of duty, to
see their children brought up in fear and knowledge of my heavenly fathers
will, as it does the children to do reverence unto them. Magistrates ought to
have a care to their duties.
And therefore ought Magestrates likewise, to look unto their charge and
office: wherein their negligence, is ye cause of many euilles: their
parcialitie in punishing the wicked, pricketh the ungodly forward to many
noisome attemptes: not only prejudicial to their own souls, or to the hurt
or loss of one particular or private man, but to the hazard of the disturbance
of an whole Commonweal. So dangerous is the sparing of Justice, upon just
deseruinges: wherein sometimes affection, Sparing of Justice dangerous.
sometimes countenance, and oftentimes Bribes, do stop the passage of just
execution, to the clering of the offender, and oppressing the offended: Three
things lets unto justice.
whereby they deserve not only the just sentence of death against them selves,
but encourage the wicked to wallowe in their wickedness, and take (as it were)
the good opinion of the good, from that which deserves the ill opinion of
none. It remains as a part of this Commandment, that as the ministers and
Preachers of the word, are allowed such due reverence in respect of their high
function and office: Ministers (...) Preachers ought to regard their calling.
so it behooves them especially to execute the same, according to the divine
will of him, whose ministers they are called: And that is, to preach his word
truly, and to answer that in their outward conversation and life, which they
pronounce with the mouth: that the good fruits which spring of their good life,
may testify before men that they are sent: and that they be true messengers:
Mat. 21.19. Mar. 11.13.14. Preachers must beware least they show themselves as
trees that bear only leaves and no fruit.
trees that have not only leaves but fruit: least that when my heavenly
father comes, he wither them up with ye breath of his mouth, and so from
thenceforth serve to no other purpose but for the fire, which never shall be
quenched. Thou see therefore, the cause for which this Commandment was
given, was to teach thee, not only thy duty toward thy father and mother,
but also toward Magistrates, and other Superiors, and Ministers: and wherein
Parents are put in mind of their due regard of the godly erudition of their
children: Magestrates of the due execution of their office: and Ministers of
the word, to declare the glory of mine heavenly father, as well by their life
as by their doctrine.

The 6. Commandment
The second commandment of the second Table forbids thee to kill: the
meaning whereof, is not only, that thou should not by open violence, We
must not kill: the m^aning thereof
run upon thy neighbor, and bereue him of his life, but also forbids thee
to use any kind of rigorous dealing against him, We must relieve our brethren
wherein we are able.
yea, and further, it binds thee, to love him, in such sort, as whatsoever he
wa^teth, thou art by this commandment bound to help him and relieve him, so
far forth, as by any means, lies in thy power or ability to do: This
commandment (I say) does not only prohibit violence, wrong and hatred
against thy neighbor, but moves thee unto compassion and mercy, whereby
thou may appear and show thy self to be the child of my heavenly father,
in being merciful as he is merciful: And not to be so far from pity and
compassion, as being moved by some occasion, have shut up the bowels of thy
compassion, against such as stand in need, and crave relief at thy hands, and
so rather increasing their misery and grief, then mittigating the same
through their aid, which hardness of thine heart argues little humanity, and
less christianity, to remain in thee. Those I say that are not moved, nor
touched with the wantes and griefs of heart, Hardness of heart, an argument
of little christianity.
of a another man, nor moved to compassion with the lamentable opening of the
poor man's estate fulfilleth not this commandment, much less does he whose
heart is so hardened, or his mind so choked with the coueitous desires of this
world, that he witholdeth the laborers hire, Ier. 22.13. we ought not to
withhold the workema^s hire.
and the workemans wages: against whom, the Prophet cries out and says, Woe
unto him, that builds his house by unrighteousness, and his Chambers without
equity: He uses his neighbor without wages, and gives him not for his
work. An error in the wealthy.
But this is every wealthy man's case: he thinks his poor Neighbor or
Tenant to be bound of duty to work with him without wages, and to labor
without any hire at all: Yea, though his neighbors business be undone, and
want wherewith to relieve himself, which is flatly against this Commandment.
But let this commandment drive thee to the considerattion of thy former life,
wherein thou shall see thy self to have manifestly offended: in not only
winking as it were, and stopping thine ears, to the end thou would not see
thy poor neighbors wantes, nor hear the begging pitiful ^ries of the poor,
hardening thine heart in such sort, as thou did not only show no
compassion, but made a pray and spoil of other men: and in (...) of relief,
thou gave them increase of their miseries and wants: As for example, thou
can not deny, but thou tookest away that poor living, which Simple thy
Tenant had, and thrust him clean out of all that he possessed: which
cruelty of thine, stuck so nere his heart, that he thought himself, or
rather wished himself to have been bereft of his life: and yet thou thoughtest
he should have yielded of duty: such cruelty, We must avoid this cruelty to
theit brethren.
yea, such ordinary and daily cruelty ascends up into the sight of mine
heavenly father, who beholds the same with an angry countenance, and is
displeased with such extremetie: which is now in these days, accounted honest
and lawful means, This now a days* not accounted cruelty, that can be
cloaked with some cunning devise.
when in deed nothing is accounted cruelty, that can be cloked with any
cunning devise, to defraude poor men of their living: no, mere murder is
oftentimes set at liberty, and innocence suppressed. But who so flattereth
himself, with this frivolous and vain imagination, that nothing can be
committed against this Commandment, A vain imagination.
but only murder, and in the mean time runs into hatred of his brother,
witholdeth the workemans hire, oppresses the poor by extortion and usury,
feeds not the hungry, releeueth not the needy, nor helps his brother in
his necessity. Let him assure himself: that his careless conceit will cause
the curse due for the breach of this Commandment, deservedly upon his neck.
For thou must consider this, that as mine heavenly father can not abide evil,
but punishes the same, when, and in whomsoever be finds it, so whether it be
in ye heart hidden from the sight of man, spoken with the tongue, or committed
with the hand, he hates the same if it be in the heart inwardly, and not
executed, he pronounces it of like effect as if it were done, and therefore,
he that hates his brother is a manslaier, yea, whosoever is angry with his
brother unadvisedly, shall be culpable of judgment, and whosoever shall say unto
his brother, 1 Ioh 3.2^* Mat 5.20.
thou fool, shall be worthy to be punished in hell fire. Thou must therefore
beware of this d^ngerous and most pernicious, evil hatred against thy brother,
and cast it clean out of thine heart, and take heed that rash and unadvised
words bewray not thine inward affection, to savor of the same, but place in
steed thereof such an unfeigned love toward all men, that thy merciful
dealing with men, may show thine inward affection, to be right and truly
settled toward GOD thine heavenly Creator: an example whereof, A notable
example of co^passio^ in Job. Job. 19.12.
thou may see in Job: Whose pitiful compassion toward all such as were in
extremity, was such, that he delivered the poor, that cried, the fatherless
and him yt had none to help him: the blessing of him that was ready to perish
came upon me (says he) and I caused the Widows heart to rejoice. Even so,
see that thou impart according to thine ability, to the comfort of my needy
members: least in that great and fearfully day, it be said unto thee among the
damned persons: Depart from me ye cursed, mat. 25.41.
into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his angels: For I
was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat, a thirst, and ye gave me no drink,
etc. Let this therefore, move thee to open the bowels of pity, and to show
compassion upon those that want, wherein thou have heard, consists an
acceptable deed before mine heavenly father, insomuch as it appears, that
those shall be saved, that show mercy unto the poorest, and least of his
members: and those damned, that shut up their compassion from them. And
therefore open violence and wilful murder is not only to be avoided, but
also all hardness of heart and uncharitable dealing toward thy neighbor and
poor brethren.

The third Commandment of the second Table forbids thee to commit
adultery: The 7. Commandment
a most horrible and a most detestable offense in the sight of mine heavenly
father: for which he caused to perish in one day three and twenty thousand:
the sharpness of which Scurge, 1. Cor. 10.8. Adultery an henous offense
against God.
argues the great hatred which my heavenly father hears toward ye kind of
sin. It is wickedness and iniquity to be condemned: a fire yt deuoureth al to
destruction, and consumes not only the substance, but corrupts the body and
destroys the soul. Job. 31.11.12.
And therefore (says the wise man) he that commits adultery with a woman,
is destitute of understanding: he that does it, destroys his own soul, he
shall find a wound and dishonor, Pro. 6.31,
and his reproach shall never be put away: wherefore, abstain from
fornication, dedicate thy body as a vessel of holiness, wholly unto mine
heavenly father. Be not deceived, 1. These. 4.3.
for Fornicators, Idolaters, Adulterers, nor Wantons, 1. Cor. 6.9.
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. But there be some, that for a Buckler
to defend their uncleanness and wantonness of life, take hold (as a sufficient
excuse) to say, A vain and wicked excuse.
the flesh is weak, and therefore, if they fall now and then through
frailety, they make light account of the matter: but take heed, for this
cloak can not cover thy filthiness: this defense will be as a two edged sword,
to cut thine own Soul, from that most glorious inheritance prepared for such
as under the buckler of a true faith fight against al ungodly lusts of the
flesh, and subdue those evil desires and affections, that rise up against the
divine will of mine heavenly father: The excuse of the frailty of our flesh a
vain excuse 1. Cor. 6.15.
The excuse of the frailty of their flesh, could not stay the hand of mine
heavenly father, from striking those three and twenty thousand for their
fornication and whoredom: know thou not that thy body is a member of God?
and will thou make it the member of an harlot? beware of it, for he that
coupleth himself with an Harlot, becomes one body with her, and so excludes
himself from being any longer the member of me Jesus Christ. Thou must learn
therefore to walk in those ways, wherein mine heavenly father has promised
conduction and continual protection through me, which is, not to follow
thine own perverse desires, but to yield thy self to such holiness of life and
godly conversation, as thou may stand certainly assured of mercy and favor
at the hands of mine heavenly father. The frailty of thy corrupt flesh (thou
say) draws thee into many noisome and dangerous desires, often yielding
unto the will of natural reason, whereby thou fallest into breach of this
Commandment. What is the cheifest matter that mainteineth this kind of fire,
The principal means that draw us to lust.
and feeds those ungodly affections in thee? If thy dulnes can not conceive
it, know this, that idleness, the mother of evil thoughts, evil company
the practice of impiety, evil speech the spectacle of ungodly behavior,
glotony, the mayme of temperance and sobriety, and excess in apparel, the
mistres of pride, are the spurs that prick the weak flesh forward to the
fulfilling and putting in practice of the ungodly motions, That which we little
suspect, soonest overcomes us.
that spring from the evil and ungodly affections of the heart. Take heed of
these things therefore, they are the subtle instruments of Satan, that lie in
continual wait to entangle thee against this Commandment, which can so much
the more easily entrap thee: by how much they are little suspected of thee,
natural reason tells thee, that it is lawful for thine heart to imagine
what it lists and why? because it woorketh only inwardly, and shows not
the desire in outward action, but I say, that who so looks upon a woman to
lust after her, Math. 5.28. Evil thoughts forbidden.
that man has committed adultery with her already: Then (I say) that it is
not sufficient for thee to say I did no such thing, I have not committed this
external action, whereby I have been apprehended or called in question before
the magistrate, but it behooves thee to enter into thy cogitations, and to
subdue this intent, and when Satan begins to batter the Walls of thine heart
with such wicked desires, meet him with a strong faith, and tumble him down
with the Weapon of a chaste mind, that he make no spoil of thine honest and
chaste behavior. Marriage a mean to avoid fornication^ 1. Cor. 7.36.
But to avoid the danger of this assault, there is a mean provided, namely,
wedlock, which is honorable, whereunto thou art not only licensed but
commounded: but not rashly or unadvisedly, but in the Lord, which is, to make
thy choice so, as that love and godly affection (not unto lust, Chaste wedlock
pleases God.
but unto a chaste life) move thee thereunto: for that, as adultery is
abhorred and deserves punishment, so the chaste and godly uniting of man and
wife, well pleases mine heavenly father, whereunto he promises many blessings.
Wherefore, Idleness must be avoided.
thou must beware of letting the reins of thine evil affections loose, to
run whether the same shall move thee, as also to beware of idleness, which
has so darkened the minds and dulled the senses of many, that in steed of
godly meditations, they entertain ungodly and unchaste desires, the smoke
whereof, The company of the wicked to be avoided.
breaks out and ascends into the nostrels of the eternal judge, who sees,
how secret soever it be: Thou must also beware and have due regard to shun
the familiarity of such as have their hearts infected with the poison of this
disease: who stick not, most filthily to execute ye horrible fact, but most
impudently among their companions, vomit out their detestable behavior in open
words, The shameless slaves of Satan.
like the shameless slaves of Satan, not only to the bewraying of their own
most wicked* and damnable life, but to the infection and encouraging of others,
to their lewdnes, by their so impudent and arrogant impiety, Their examples
pernicious.
whose examples more draw unto vice, then the virtuous conversation of the
honest and godly can move unto virtue. For such fellows as ca^ behave
themselves after such shameless and impious manner, are now reputed proper,
merry, and pleasant conceated fellows: and those that are civil and honest,
They that ca^ roll out an hours talk of his filthy behavior are now
reckoned merry and pleasant conceated fellows, and more esteemed then the
civil men.
reckoned and accounted (and for the most part) contemned and condemned, as
silly souls and doltish fools, whose simplicity, whose chastetie, and whose
innnoce^t life, shall one day laugh those brave and pleasant conceated
fellows, (who now laugh at them) to scorn. It is not their painted gestures,
their glorious gloss of speech, nor brave attire shall stand to plead for, but
against them: understand therefore, that not only, the outward action of
fornication, nor the inward desire, but every idle and wanton word is forbidden
by this commandment. But these things are little suspected (thought and word)
to be any thing at al against this Commandment, but be not deceived, evil
words corrupt good manners, 1. Cor. 15.33.
and out of the heart proceeds evil thoughts, adulteries, fornication and
uncleanness, for which things sake, comes the wrath of God upon the
children of disobedience, Mar. 7.21.
wherefore embrace continency and chastetie, not only in outward behavior,
but let thy heart be void of vain and vndece^t thoughts, and thy tongue free
from unseemly and ungodly speech, that as thy body is the member of me, so it
may for evermore continue.

Ephe. 5.6. The eight commandment, whereby we are forbiden to steal.
The fourth Commandment of the second Table, forbids thee to steal, which
is, to take that which is proper unto another man, and employ it to thine own
behooue: or otherwise to dispose that, which is not of right thine own,
contrary to the true property of the same thing, which Commandment reaches
not only, to the forbidding thee, by open, or privy violence to take thy
neighbors goods, or by other sinister means to filch or to steal, to rifle
or rob him of that which he has: but also it plainly prohibiteth thee, by
any fraudulent means, to deceive or defraud him, of any thing that is his:
which Commandment, as it is expressed briefly in these words: What is meant by
stealing.
Thou shall not steal: so is it to be understood, that under the name of
stealing, are all those cunning devises, which are used in wares, bought and
sold, as also in all other dealings between men, brought within the compass of
this Commandment. And therefore, not only robberies, pickinges, and such
unlawful means, as are punishable by the laws and ordinances of a Realm,
are to be avoided, but al other means whatsoever used to the obteyning of an
other man's goods, which are not grounded upon that love which every man by the
prescript word of mine heavenly father, is bound to bear toward his
neighbor: which is, to do that unto an other, which he desires to be done
unto himself: We may use no mean to enrich our selves to the loss of another
man.
and therefore behooves it all men to have a diligent eye unto this
Commandment, that they enterprise nothing, to enrich them selves to the
hinderaunce or loss of an other man: considering that it is contrary to their
own natures, willingly to be robbed of that they have, to be defrauded,
deceived, Our own vnwi^lingnes to be ill dealt withal, should guide us to
deal well with other.
or by any means beguiled, or extorted upon: and therefore should they hold
their own unwillingness in that behalf, as a necessary rule to guide their
dealinges aright with other men. But this cuttes deep, the stricktnesse (then)
of this Commandment bringes within the breach thereof, the most of al
callings, the more to be lamented. And the reason is, that desires of men's
private gain, hang so in their light, that they can by no means see, Our
private gain hangs in our light: that we can not see when we do wrong to other
men.
their doings to other men, that their natures would be loath to suffer to be
done unto themselves. As for example: tell me, admit thou had been Tenant
unto Simple, and Simple had been thy Landlord, (...) were good (...) every
rich (...) would consider this.
could thou have found in thine heart, willingly to have surrendered thy
title of thy living at his request, and to have deprived thy self of any place
of refuge, for thy self, thy wife, or children, to have satisfied his greedy
desire? or could thou have been contented, with a willing mind (at his
pleasure) to have augmented thy rent, or have given so great an Income, as the
payment thereof should so pluck thee upon the knees of a poor estate, as thou
should not be able in many years to recover thee again, or by reason of
the greatness of thy rent yearly, thou could not be able to lay up a penie
for a pound, at the years end? nay, not able to maintain thine estate with
such credit, as thy vocation requires? no, thou could not willingly abide,
nay, thou could not suffer it with patience: And yet, see the hardness of
thine heart, see the blindness of thy covetous desires: thou could find in
thine heart, not only to pinch poor Simple thy Tenant, not only with an
Income, great and grievous* but also with an excessive rent: but in the end,
to join flattery with threatninges, and thereby expellest him shortly after,
from the thing he so dearly bought: proceeded this dealing with him from this
love, which thou ought to bear toward all men? Think thou that this
(although it bear not with it the burden of open reproach, as public theft
and robberies do) comes not within the compass of this Commandment? yes
no doubt: The covetous man robs many,
for under color of thine own title, thou have robbed the poor man, three
times: by a greeuons fine, by a great rent: and last of al, by depriving him of
his right: for neither of which, thine injurious deeds, toward him, art thou
able to plead not guilty, before that heavenly Judge, that will one day take
account of the least of the^. Therefore, Love, the be^^ rule to measure our
doing with other men.
the way to keep thee from breach of this Commandment, is to measure thine
actions and dealinges with other men, by the rule of perfect love, calling to
mind thine own unwillingness, to be hardly dealt withal by an other man:
not only in these cases before recited, but in bargayning, buying, selling,
and other affairs whatsoever: Men of occupation must look unto their dealing^
wherein men of occupation whatsoever, have to look unto their doings,
whether they proceed of yt love, or not, or otherwise: nay, they may assure
themselves, that their covetous desire of unlawful and ungodly gain, will
heap upon their heads, the punishment pronounced against the transgressors
of mine heavenly fathers will. Thou see then, that all ungodly gain is
herein forbidden: then cannot unmeasurable Usurie excuse it self, Usury
cannot excuse it self.
though under color of tolleration of a reasonable gain, it be cloaked, to ye
overthrow both of the giver and taker: although the taker can flatter himself
a while, with his ungodly enriching himself with the goods of other men, yet
may he assure himself, that he has pawned (for a little foolish and
transitory mucke of the world) both body and soul into the hands of Satan,
Pro. 28.8. Psalm. 15.5. Mat. 6.34.
never to be redeemed, without true repentance in me, Jesus Christ. So that
it behooves thee, not only to beware of open violence and robberies, but of
all such fraudulent and deceiptfull dealing, as may be an hinderaunce unto thy
neighbor.

The ninth Commandment: wherein we are forbidden to bear false witness. Mat.
19.18.
The fifth Commandment of the second Table, forbids thee to bear false
witness against thy neighbor: which is, to justify and to maintain an
untruth in open place of Justice and judgment, against him: wherein, also the
tongue is enjoined to shun (through want of love) to speak, not only any
thing, to the loss or hinderaunce of thy neighbor, in his goods, but also
which may take away or deprive him of his good name and credit: for a good
name is chosen above great riches, and loving favor is above silver, and above
gold. And therefore, We may not hurt the credit or good fame of our neighbor.
art thou by this Commandment prohibited, to speak any thing, which may
raise any slander or bring any blot unto him by any means. As it does (too
often) fall out in these days, that either of malice and ill will, against the
party, or for affection and love to his adversary, or in hope of gain, many
are lightly wanne to depose an vntroath before a Judge, or Magistrate, which is
a thing most heinous, in the sight of mine heavenly father: as may appear by
the punishment, that he provided for those that transgressed therein: Deuteronomy.
19.18.19 A punishment provided for such as did hurt their neighbor in goods or
good name.
namely, that the false witness bearer, should be rewarded with the self same
punishment, that the crime whereof they accused another, laid justly upon the
offender. And therefore, let him that wrongfully charge and accuses an
other, make his just account, that when all secrets shall be reueiled: God,
which is the aucthor of all truth, will find him guilty, of sufficient
matter (even in Justice) to cast him into utter destruction, The tongue an
unruly evil.
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. This Commandment ought to be
diligently regarded, and had in continual remembrance, for that it is a good
bridle to keep back the tongue (which is an unruly evil) from over rash
judgments, and more hasty then upright verdictes, not only in causes of
great weight and moment, but in matters of small importance: for as it
forbids all men to give a false testimony, in any cause depending between
party and party, before the Judge or Magistrate: so does it charge the Judge,
not rashly or unadvisedly, The Judge must be circumspect in giving judgment.
to pronounce his sentence of judgment, but with due deliberation and
indifferency, to consider and way such circumstaunces, as may best procure the
equity of the cause to come to light: wherein there is to be warely avoided
al those means and occasions of parcialitie: namely, respect of persons in
judgment, malice, affection and bribes, which are the poisons that infect the
hearts, Things to be avoided of a judge.
and blind ye eyes of those Judges, who^ the love of justice, nor fear of the
highest Judge, can not direct to the punishment of the wicked, and setting free
of the poor oppressed: and in whose eyes it seems no great matter, to give
sentence to the bearing out of an evil matter: But let such be assured, that
he that bears the sword of all Justice, (having no respect of persons) will
one day take account of these Judges, that have given their sentence to the
overthrow of the right of any man's cause, to justify that which in all
equity ought to be condemned: and will with the sword of his Justice cut off
such parciall ministers from the inheritance of his eternal bliss: for can
there be a more heinous or more execrable offense against mine heavenly father,
A great offense before God, yea a most execrable offense, to g^^e judgment
against the truth.
then to awarde him the crown of a just man, that deserves the reward of a
wicked person? And on the contrary to give judgment of execution against him,
whose cause deserves the sentence of victory? A thing most odious in the
sight of him, whose eyes of Justice does not only see such manifest and open
judgments, but beholds their hearts, wherein they wish (and with
circumstaunces endeavor) to bolster out the evil causes of evil men, as much as
in them lies, to the mayntenaunce of wickedness, and overthrow of Justice.
Wherefore, oh Judges, consider whose places ye supplye, whose authority you
have, and how you execute your duties in so high a calling: have no respect of
persons: say not to the wicked, thou art righteous, Pro. 14.23.
least the people curse and abhore you: but rebuke the wicked, and defend the
righteous, that the blessing of goodness may come upon you: And that in the
great and fearful day* you may stand before him that shall give judgment,
according to every man's deserts. Further, this Commandment includes within
the compass thereof (as flatly against the same) the wresting of the true
sense and meaning of words, or writings, wresting men's words and writings to
a co^tra^ie meaning, is to be avoided.
contrary to the truth of the meaning thereof, and otherwise then it would be
found, if it were decided by an indifferent Judge, which is a most pernicious
practice, put in ure when I was in this world, tossed and tormented by the
wicked Jews, where there were witnesses came in against me, affirming that I
said, I could destroy the Temple and build it again within three days, Mat.
26.61.62.
quite contrary to the meaning of my words: The words of Christ wrested to a
wrong sense.
who meant the Temple of my body, and not their Temple of Jerusalem? So is it
now a common matter among men, to construe ye words of their deeds, as
Obligations, A pernicious practice.
Leases, and all other writings, to a sense by all cunning quillets that can be
found, by the skilfullest and cunningest Lawyers, to frustrate their own
deed, their own manifest act, clean contrary to the true meaning thereof, as
though their cunning devised law tricks, (as long as by circumstaunce, of
sophistical arguments, the matter could be cloaked with reason) should without
the breach of this Commandment, wipe away the apparent right due unto one, to
lay it upon an other, who in Justice has none: how can that man that thus
seeks to overthrow his own act, or that Lawyer that works the means, be
able before GOD to discharge themselves, when their own consciences shall
accuse them, that they have swerued from the true intent and meaning of his
own deed: A foolish and mod wicked devise to ou^^throwe a man's own deed,
when his conscience can accuse his meaning to be so. Many spend great sums of
money in Law, to prove them selves to swerue from their true meaning.
a most dangerous enterprise no doubt unto them both. But it is lawful (they
say) for a man to overthrow his own deed, if it be not formal, if it want
the words that bind as fast as iron fetters, yea, though he can confess that
his meaning was so, yet they say that the law tells him, it is void, and
that he is at liberty to take the advantage, if he will: yes, it is all fish
that comes unto the Net: men will spend more then the value, but they will
prove them selves to swerue from their own meaning. A lamentable thing, that
law the mistress of Justice, should be so darkened through the hard
consciences of men, that she should seem to pluck in her hand from giving
every man his right: contrary to the true meaning of the law maker, and to the
purpose of this Commandment: which as it forbids openly to give false
testimony in any matter: so to do any thing to the hinderaunce of other men,
in goods or good name.

The last Commandment forbids thee, The tenth commandment wherein we are
forbidden to covet any thing that is our neighbors.
not only (as before is said) to take away any thing by fraud or violence
from thy neighbor, which was by the action or deed doing: but this comes
nearer to search thy very heart, and to reprove the very desire of things
that are thy neighbors, as his house, his wife, his Servant, his Maid, his
Ox, his Ass, or any thing that he has. Thou art commanded to settle all
thine affections, Luke 10.27.
thoughts and desires of thine heart, only in God mine heavenly father. But if
thou be carried away with the desires of thy neighbors goods, how fulfillest
thou this Commandment? Wherefore it behooves the to cast away these ungodly
desires, of thy neighbors house, his Land, his living, his commodities and
profits, and with a determinate consent, to place them on good things, on
things that may be equally beneficial to thy neighbor, as to thy self: that
in heart thou may by a true faith, assure thy self, that thou love God
above al things, and thy neighbor as thy self. Thou know thandt I have
pa^de the ransom both for thy body and soul, We may not suffer our thoughts
to wander after vain desires.
and therefore keep thy self under mine obedience, without letting thy
thoughts run hither and thither, to inkindell such desires in thine heart, as
will not be quenched until it break out into such an inexstinguishable flame,
of burning affection to thy neighbors goods, that it burn up and consume, all
love and fear of mine heavenly father: and so tie thine imaginations
altogether to the Pillars of such vanities, as may draw thee into destruction
both of body and soul. But some will say, why? it is lawful for me to think
what I list, who can control me? It is a common saying, Although thoughts are
free, God will one day take account of them.
that thoughts are free, but although it be free to think (as in deed in
respect of men, thoughts are not seen,) nor understood, as of one by
another.) But there is one that searches the very hearts and raines, in
whose sight the thought appears manifestly, wherein he expects and wills
such obedience to be, as it may carry with it, a show of love to him above
all things, and to thy neighbor as thy self. Thou have been warned before in
the other Commandments, to beware of such a resolute and determinate des^re
of thy neighbors goods, as carries with it, a full persuasion and will to have
it accomplished: which thou have heard to be an equal offense in ye sight of
mine heavenly father with the deed it self: But in this commandment, thou
art forbiden to give enterteinme^t to the very bare thought: Our thoughts
although they be not accompanied with a resolute intent to do the thing is to
be avoided in evil.
notwithstanding thou give no resolute consent thereunto, namely that if thou
had fit opportunity, thou would perform that whereunto thy thought has
moved thee: Thou must not (I say) suffer thy thoughts to wander (by carnal
liberty, upon vain and wicked things: but upon those things that are good and
godly: where evil thoughts are, there is not love: that love which is required
of thee toward mine heavenly father: 1. Cor. 5.6. Love thinks not evil.
for that love thinks not evil against him whom it loves, neither does it
rejoice in iniquity: that love ought thou to bear toward thy neighbor,
so shall thy thoughts be preserved from thinking any evil, or prete^ding any
wrong against him: for he that truly loves another, imagines nothing that he
knows may be hurtful or a hindera^ce unto him: as in wishing his goods, house
or land, or any other thing, which is proper unto him. Of which thou can not
clear thy self: no not of a settled and resolute consent to desire thy poor
Tenaunts house and living, which in the end brought forth the very effect of
thy desire, Thought brings fo^^h desire, and the desire never leaves, until
the purpose be brought to pass.
by pulling it from the poor man in deed: now thine own experience can tell
thee, that the thought brought forth the desire, and the desire never was
quenched, until it had accomplished the thing desired: which is an argument
sufficiently strong to prove, that evil thoughts (wherein are settled no
certain consent) are to be subdued, for otherwise, they will thrust thee
forward in the broad way that leadeath unto destruction. Now therefore, if
such danger lie so secretly lurking in the thought, which danger men least
suspect, it behooves thee to look about the, and to resist al evil, not
only of the outward action, of the determinate consent, or in the word, but in
the very thought. Look into this commandment, and into thy corruptible
nature, yt brings forth the weeds of wickedness in such plentiful manner, as
thou shall feel not only wickedness in thy thoughts, in thy desires, and
resolute purposes, but in thy very actions and dealings amongst men. And so to
have manifestly transgressed the whole Law, for which transgression there is
due, the just reward of death.


The sinful man. Alas, then in what case am I?
if death be due to me:
What does avail, yt I have heard
so many things of thee?
What shall I do, mine heart impleat
with fearful pangs of woe:
Had been as good at first as now,
to yield unto my foe.

Solace. WHat, have thou so soon forgotten, that thou have a Mediator, me
Jesus Christ, who have satisfied, and fulfilled all things to thy discharge?
And that I remain with mine heavenly father for ever, making intercession for
the forgiveness of thy sins? Turn unto me, in forsaking thine evil and
wicked life: and I will appease mine heavenly fathers wrath: so that in
mercy, By the law is our corruption reueiled.
he shall return again unto thee, as thou have heard. Thou have in these
former Commandments, heard all thine infirmities reueiled, thy wicked life
reproved, and thy corruption manifested, for that feeling and perceiving thine
unrighteousness, and setting the same (as it were face to face with the law)
thou may see thine own wretchedness, whereby thou might stand convicted
in thine own conceits of all merits of thine own, The righteousness of
Christ reputed ours.
and be forced to fly unto me: whose righteousness shall be reputed thy
righteousness, mine obedience, thine obedience: my merrites thine, and my
death to purchase thee eternal life. Wherefore, give over the opinion of thine
own good works, and cleave unto the mercies of mine heavenly father, in me: and
so much the more, by how much (now) thou may see thine utter decay
without me. By the law we see, that without Christ we can not be saved.
But thou may beware that thou (in respect of thy salvation promised in me)
neglect not these duties enjoined thee, toward mine heavenly father, and thy
neighbor, as has been told thee before: but (so much the more) endeavor thy
self to perform the^, and that lovingly and faithfully: not in the outward
show only, but with the inward affection of the heart, embracing that with a
godly desire, which thou art commanded, and hatefully eschewing that which
thou art forbidden to do: assuring thy self by a lively and working faith,
that thou art sealed with the holy Spirit, proceeding from my father and me,
freely by my merrits, without any deseruings at all of thine own, to eternal
salvation.


The sinful man. Now does that Solace sweet appear
which thou have promised me:
And that mine own deserts are not
the mean to come to thee.
Thy merits are mine only stay,
thy mercy mere extend:
Let faith in thee direct my life,
my words and thoughts amend.
The darkesome night is come, I see
there is no longer stay:
Tell me, good Solace, need I not
come yet an other day.

Solace. THou see that I have spent these six days, in calling thee from
thine error, and instructing thee, what thou ought to do, to reform thy
wicked life: yet remains there some thing else for thee to be exercised in, to
mayntaine that favor of mine heavenly father toward thee, which I have
purchased for thee. And therefore (although to morrow be the Sabbath day,)
which (as thou have learned) it behooves thee to sanctify with ceasing from
all worldly labors, and to give thee to divine exercises: yet for as much as all
mine endeavor tends to the safety of thy soul, I would have thee to repair
hither again to morrow, when I will declare unto thee the residue, breefly,
that belongs unto thee, and that behooves thee to learn to the finishing of
all the course of thy life, that after this life ended, through my merits thou
may enjoy eternal salvation.


The sinful man. With willing mind I will attend,
mine heart does long to see
Those heavenly joys, wherein I trust
at last to live with thee.

The end of the Saterdaies Conference, between Solace and the sinful man.
A PRAYER TO God the Father, for pardon, in Jesus Christ, for transgressing his
Commandments, and for grace, to be directed to the true fulfilling of the
same.
OH God, my God, oh fountain and welspring of al mercy and loving kindness,
vouchsafe (favorably) to look down, upon my corruption and wickedness: and
set before the eyes of thy Justice, the merits of thy Son Jesus Christ, for
whose deserts and due obedience sake, leave to be angry and turn to me in
love: take away the curse, which is due for my transgressions, and wilful
disobedience. Alas, what should become of me, if I should receive according to
my deserts? for which there is nothing due but the just reward of death. For,
merciful Lord God, when I compare the whole course of my life past, with the
righteousness of thy divine institutio^s and most sacred Commandments, I
find my self a very Traitor, a most monstrous Rebel against thee, the God of
my welfare. Oh Lord, when the Justice and just judgments of thy divine
Majesty, show themselves unto my deserts, whereby my conscience accuses me,
to have deserved eternal death, I cannot but fall into utter despair, of
being acquitted before thee. Only herein a^ I comforted (sweet Lord) that I
have pardon promised, in the death and merits of thy dear Son, mine only
Savior and Redemer, Jesus Christ: in whose name I here present and prostrate
my self unto thee, and for his sake, most humbly pray thee, to forgive my
transgressions, and to pardon al my sins: vouchsaueing me grace from
henceforth faithfully and truly to frame all my desires, unto the fulfilling
of all thy most godly Commandments, and that in unfeigned love of thee above
all things, and to show the same outwardly, to the performance of my duty to
my neighbors, whom thou have commanded me to love, succor, help, relieve,
and do unto, as I would that other men should do unto me. Grant me sweet
Lord, for Jesus Christ's sake, grace to do that which I am commaunden in thy
laws, and carefully to shun and avoid that which I am herein forbidden,
that I may keep not only mine hands, but all mine actions and doings, yea,
mine heart and thoughts free from displeasing thee. And for as much as my
corruption, keeps down mine understanding, and will, so that I am not able
to perform that which I ought, but am ready to do that which I ought not:
vouchsafe to accept the merits of thy Son Jesus Christ, as a sufficient
discharge for that which I cannot do, and for his sake to forgive mine
insufficiency to perform thy will: Sweet God, Amen.

THE SVNDAYE, and last days Conference, between Solace and the sinful Man:
Wherein Solace directs him in prayer, which is the principal and last
work, belonging to the attainement of eternal life, by faith in Christ.

Solace. WHat art thou so early here this morning (oh man?) thou show thy
self, now to be very desirous of my solace, as it seems by thy diligent
attendaunce this morning.


The sinful man. Ye, Solace, lo I look for thee,
mine only comfort dear:
Whose comfort now I find, in deed,
proceed from heavens clear.
And therefore I attend on thee,
mine only guide and stay:
Whom thou do call, I see cannot
gad like a wretch astray.
Mine heart is set to secke the way
(through thee) yt guides to bliss:
Whereby I shall at last possess
the joy, that perfect is:
Which I in heart by faith do feel,
though in this vale of woe:
Where Satha^s forces fell abound,
and sins by custom grow.
Which vale, I long to leave in haste,
to take my rest with thee:
In heavens hye, where only joy
and nothing else can be.

Solace. THou do well to be wearied and grieved at the vewe of those
abuses, and daily offenses which thou perceiuest in the world, to move mine
heavenly father to displeasure, (which in deed are many and great) and to
have a longing desire, to leave them and to give them over, to the end thou
may the more freely come unto me. But thou must beware thou kick not nor
murmur against mine heavenly father, We may not grudge or murmr, when we are
in any trouble.
in respect of any misery, temptation or trouble to befall thee here in this
world, and to be discharged or unburdened thereof, to wish for death, but
referring thy cause unto his omnipotent and merciful providence, in hearty
and faithful prayers, through me. Wait his good pleasure, arming thy self
manfully to fight against Satan, and his wicked ministers: we must arm our
selves to fight against Satan and his wicked ministers. John 16.21.
assuring thy self through an undoubted faith, that whatsoever thou shall ask
my heavenly father in my name, he shall give it thee: I am thy Mediator, by
whom thou shall be sure to obtain al things, both for body and soul. Ask
therefore (I say) in my name: for I pray unto mine heavenly father for thee,
for whose sake he shall give thee al things, that thy joy may be full.


The sinful man. Alas I know not how to ask,
nor what true prayer is:
I long to learn so sweet a mean,
to bring my soul to bliss.
Wherefore, declare to me in haste,
how I must pray aright:
Mine heart is set to seek the thing,
so pleasant in thy sight.

Solace. TRue and faithful prayer, The chief service of God, is faithful
prayer.
is the principal service, wherewith God mine heavenly father is honored and
pleased: for that thereby is thy faith manifested, and which bears witness
openly, that thou expectest all help, all relief, all happiness and welfare,
to come from him alone: acknowledging him thine only defense, thine only
rock, and sure refuge in the day of thy tribulation: who most lovingly calls
thee to come unto him in thy necessity. So yt thou may be assured, that he
is most ready and willing to hearken unto thy petitions, and to grant thy
requests. Psalm. 50.15. Our prayers must be faithful and unfeigned.
Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and I will deliver thee. Which calling
of thine, must be faithful, without hypocrisy: that is, it must be unfeigned
and zealous even from thine heart, as a sure and certain testimony, that thou
accomptest him thine only helper and defender, and that thou reposest thy
trust only in him, as the fountain of all good, whatsoever, and from whence
thy zealous and unfeigned prayer, shall draw (as from the headspring of al
relief) the pure water of continual comfort: namely, in this world, all
things which shall be expedient and necessary, and in the end, All our cares
ought to consist, in the obteining of eternal salvation.
eternal salvation: wherein consists the whole care, which thou art in this
life teyed unto, and not so much to seek the transitory defense of thy
mortal body, nor things apperteining thereunto, as the preservation of thy
soul, which shall live for ever and ever: wherein thou must beware that the
affections which are naturally toward the body, exceed not, nor blind thine
understanding in such sort, as thou seek for superfluous means for the
preservation thereof, In respect of our souls, we should have no care of the
body.
and neglect those things wherein the safety of thy poor soul consists:
which is the worship of mine heavenly father, attributing unto him, both
outwardly, in thy deeds, and inwardly in thine heart, those duties and
preheminences, which by the prescript rule of his divine word, thou art bound
to yield and do unto him: the cheifest and most acceptable manner whereof, is
this: zealous, hearty and faithful prayer, which thou must direct unto him
alone, through me his Son: by whom and by no other means, thou may freely
come unto him: reueyling thy necessities, opening thy wants, bewraying thy
weakness, confessing thy sins, and yielding al laud unto his holy name,
and all possible thanks and praises for his most bountiful loving kindness
toward thee: Wherein our prayers must consist.
in which several points ought thy prayers to consist: namely, in confessing
thy sins: for he hears not sinners: that is, such as have no feeling of
their own corruption, God hears not sinners.
and fall not to unfeigned repentance, and seek not forgiveness of their
sins, in me: And therefore, above all things, seek first atonement with my
heavenly father: yea, and that whenever thou go about to ask any thing at
his hands, think that thou art a sinner, and that the remission thereof in
true repentance is promised in me: to whom all the Prophets bear witness,
Act. 10.
that through my name all that believe in me, Romans 5.
shall receive the remission of their sins: By whom, being justified by
faith, thou have peace with mine heavenly father. To whom, as thou art bound to
make all thy pr^^ers: so must they be made in and by me, by whom thou have
boldness, through faith to go unto him, even to the seat of his grace: Ephe.
3.
And having reconciliation and atonement with him through me, and free access
unto the throane of his Majesty, in faith lay open thy necessities, assuring
thy self, that whatsoever thou pray unto him for, We must in (...) lay open
(...) necessi^^^s before (...) in the (...) of Christ.
be it for spiritual or temporal benefits in my name, he shall give it thee:
for I am the Mediator and high Bishop that make continual prayers for thee,
and no man comes unto the father but by me. And therefore, if thou abide in
me, and my words abide in thee: ask what thou will, and it shall be done for
thee. Wherefore, it behooves thee duly to consider that I am only the mean,
Luke 11.
whereby thy petitions are heard, and for whose sake they were granted, and all the promises fulfilled. 1 Cor. 20. W^ may not ^ooke to have ^^ace with (...),
nor to obtain our (...) in the name, or (...) the sake of any other then
Christ only. Heb. 1 2. 1 Cor. 1.30. Thanckesgiuing a princi^^^^ part of ^^ayer.
And that there is none other, neither Saint nor Angel, or other, through
whom, or for whose sake thou may look for peace with God my heavenly father
(who^ thou have offended) but my self alone, to who^ were all the promises made,
being heir of all things, and who am made unto all the faithful, wisdom and
holiness, sanctification and redemption: and wherefore? namely, that whosoever
rejoices, should rejoice in mine heavenly father through me: and to attribute
every good gift, and every perfect gift unto him, (from whom al goodness
proceeds) and that with continual thanckesgiuing, which is, the third
principal point of this especial worship and service of God, namely, unfeigned
prayer: wherein, when thou have referred thy self, and reueiled unto him in my
name, either the multitude of thy sins, and grievous tra^sgressions: and
feeling thy self through a lively faith, to be united unto his grace and
favor again, or when thou have declared unto him thy corporal or spiritual
wants, as of a competent living, of defense in danger, tranquillity of mind,
peace with thy neighbors, success in thy vocation, good health of body, or of
any other thing necessary for thy relief: and thou (according to thy request)
have been heard and comforted: It behooves thee, not as a thanckles person to
run on in petition only, but to acknowledge the bountiful mercy of mine
heavenly father, in forgiving thy sins, and to yield him all possible
thanckes for his protection, for his superaboundant loving kindness, wherein he
has relieved thee, defended thee, and preserved thee from those evils,
wherein, without his aid and outstretched arm thou could not but have
perished: and those mercies of his, not only to commend for a time, but
continually, for that thou stand in a continual present need of his
favor: without the which, every day, every hour, and every moment, brings
with it evils enough to overthrow thee, yea, both body and soul: Wherefore, I
say, it behooves thee, The first point of prayer, is confession of our sins,
and to crave atonement for the same in Christ.
to the discharge of thy duty in this so precious a work, prayer: first, to
confess thy sins, and to seek atonement and peace with GOD mine heavenly
father, through me, in a lively faith. Secondly, to make thine humble prayers
for corporal or spiritual necessaries: and for the gift of them, not to rest
unmindful or thankles, but yielding unfeigned thanks, not only inwardly in
heart: The second point, request for corporal or spiritual benefits.
but showing the same in the reformation of thy life, to the glory of his name:
and to the end, that other men seeing such success in thy serving of God, may
be the better allured to the like: The third, is thanckesgiuing.
and that all men may learn to acknowledge themselves relieved, maynteined,
defended and saved by me, and by none other: without whom, no man comes to
mine heavenly father: and without whose mediation and intercession, None
comes unto God, but through Christ.
(prayers) by whom, to whom, when, wherefore, and howsoever they be made, are
not only, not available, but mere abominable. But he that prays faithfully
in my name, shall have the experience and trial, that mine heavenly father
regards the same, and that by comforting and duly releeuing them, whenever
they shall open their griefs and wants unto him: Although God know what we
need, we must pray, and why*
who although he understand before what thou need, and could relieve thee
without asking: his will is: that thou should approache unto his throne of
grace, in faithful and zealous prayer: that when thou art relieved, and have
obtained the things thou desiredst, thou should acknowledge his goodness
toward thee: and be the more assured, and rest in the more lively and constant
hope, of the continuance of his loving favor and mercies toward thee, and for
the same, to be the more stirred up to be thankful. But thou say, thou
know not how to pray, or what to desire: the spirit shall then direct
thee: namely, Romans 8.6.
the holy ghost shall teach thee, he shall healpe thine infirmity: he shall
make request for thee, and that with inward gronings and sighs of heart, in
such wise, as the tongue can not express. The flesh is weak, and often
keeps down that zealous and earnest outward show, which shall be a
testimony of a devout and godly mind, but the spirit groaning inwardly, lifts
up the heart in such sort: as the very sighs thereof are accepted with mine
heavenly father, and known according to the desire thereof, although it be
not uttered in open words: And therefore thou must understand, that it is not
sufficient (to the discharging of this duty of zealous prayer) to utter many
words, The words of the mouth, without the lifting up of the heart, is not
available in prayer.
or to use long and tedious circumstances in outward speech, unless the heart
(being guided and directed, by the spirit) inwardly groan, accompanying the
tongue in the outward word: that so the heart and tongue being linked together,
by undoubted faith, present thy necessities, before mine heavenly father, in my
name, and so make the same acceptable: for the tongue is but the isntrumental
mean or witness of the mind, whereby to set forth the goodness of mine
heavenly father toward thee: The heart must be the guide of the tongue.
So that unless the heart which is the guide of the tongue, be truly
affected, the tongue must needs, either very coldly, or clean contrary to
Christian duty, in that behalf, or in outward show, glorious, as an
hypocrite, or else utter nothing at all: so that the true worship, the faithful
service, and the acceptable sacrifice of prayer, consists in the unfeigned
zeal of the heart, and not in the outward word. For he that searches the
heart, understands the very sighs of the spirit, and grants thy desires:
such as are measured and limited, by the word of truth, proceeding from the
same spirit, and not those that proceed of the corrupt flesh, which longs
always, contrary to the spirit: and which seeks to tie the will of mine
heavenly father, to the vain motions thereof: namely, in prefixing and setting
down means, the manner and time of help, and relief: as did the Priest, who
had limited mine heavenly father a time for their delivery, whom that godly
woman Judith, Judith 8.13. Judith reproved the priest for limiting a time unto
God for the delivery of the people.
rebuked (as appears in the History) for his so tempting God. Thou must
therefore wait his heavenly pleasure in patience, not limiting or apointi^g
^im the mean, the way, the time or season, when or how to defend thee, to
relieve thee, to save thee: but to commit thee wholly unto his will and
providence, looking faithfully upon him in patience, with continual prayers,
that he for my sake will grant such success unto thy desires, as seems
convenient in ye eyes of his wisdom, commend (I say) thy ways unto his
wisdom, and trust in him, and he will bring it to pass for thy best: look upon
the poor children of Israel, Psalm. 36. The children of Israel delivered out of
their great danger, by the prayers of Moses.
who being environed with danger round about: the Sea was before the^, the
Mountains on each side of them, and Pharaoh with an huge host pursuing and
following them: in so much, as there was nothing but mere despair of their
delivery: their danger was such, that all man's devises were vain: policy
was to no purpose, no counsel could avail them: but see the wonderful power
and mercies of mine heavenly father: who beholding their imminent danger, (at
the prayers of Moses) made a way for them to escape: in which his prayers, he
prefixed not the manner, the time, nor mean to be helped: but encouraging the
people to trust in God mine heavenly fathers right hand, and neither to
murmr, to fear, or despair, but to refer themselves in faith unto his
will: who parted the red Sea in sunder, and led the people of Israel through,
and devoured their enemies with the same. Lo, thou see that he helps when
the help of a man is vain, God can help when man's help is vain.
and when all hope of help (in respect of men) is past, then is his power
greatest, and his help nearest. Let this therefore learn thee, that whether
the present danger of enemies dismay thee, poverty oppress thee, or any
other necessity or grief anoy thee: despair not of help, betake thee unto
my heavenly father in my name: In our necessities, we must refer us to God in
prayer
confess thy sins, and show him thy troubles: open thy necessities, and
declare thy cause unto him in most faithful prayer: not coldly, or weakly
from thy lips, but zealously and effectually from the heart, lifting up thy
mind unto the heavens: not suffering thy thoughts to roue abroad after other
helps, but fixed only with the eye of a true faith upon mine heavenly fathers
alone aid, for my sake: and assure thy self, that in a time most convenient
and most acceptable, he shall defend thee, he shall relieve thee, and he
shall help thee: as thou shall say, that the right hand of ye Lord has
wrought it for thee. We must wait Gods good time in our delivery.
Thou must therefore wait his ^easure, and with patience abide his good time,
in all humility, and duetiful obedience. As David did, who being expulsed his
Kingdom by his own Son: David's humility in his extremity.
in obedience offered his prayers unto mine heavenly father: saying. If I shall
find favor in thy sight, oh Lord, thou will establish me again in my
Kingdom. But if thou shall say unto me. Thou do not please me, I am ready
to obey thee, do with me what thou will. See his humility, which
(notwithstanding the heavy burden of the rebellion of his own Son,) he
showed in great patience, which engendered that hope, that at the last (at the
will of mine heavenly father) was answered, with the thing it desired. The
humility of Job in all his adversity.
Such humility and obedience had Job: who when all his children were taken
away, his cattle destroyed, and howses and all his substance consumed, he
betook him unto the Lord: saying. Oh Lord, naked came I into the world and
naked shall I return to earth again, thou have given and thou have taken
away, now blessed be thy name for evermore: Who in his extreme misery
dispayred not, neither limited a time of his relief, but referring himself
unto mine heavenly fathers will, in perfect patience, was in the end helped and
wonderfully relieved. Wherefore I say, thou may be assured of relief in all
thy necessities, if thus thou betake thee in my name unto mine heavenly fathers
will. Look upon the three children in the hot Oven, Dan. 3.
who choosing rather to dye then to commit Idolatry: cried out faithfully:
saying. Our God whom we serve, can deliver us: But if he will not, know this
oh King that we will not worship thy God. Which three children were in the Oven
and not consumed: mine heavenly father was ready to deliver them: they did not
indent and compou^d with him, that if he would deliver them, they would defy
the Image of Nabugodoazer, but referred themselves unto his providence, in true
obedience. So, what danger, necessity, or trouble soever thou hap to fall
into, thou must with David and these three children, submit thy self unto mine
heavenly fathers will, without appointing the manner or time to be relieved. And
with Job to say: the name of God be praised for evermore. Cast thy care upon
mine heavenly father in my name, he shall nourish thee, he shall defend thee,
relieve and succor thee, and shall not suffer thee to be in perpetual
trouble. And therefore thou must pray in hope, and that always: not being
weary for that thou have an end of thy troubles, and relief in thy
necessities promised, Luke 18.1. There is an end of our troubles promised unto
our prayers, but when or how we must refer to God. 1. These. 5.
when, in what manner, by what means, thou may not appoint: but whether he
tarry long ere he help thee, or send thee relief presently, it is for thy
best. And therefore, in all thy prayers thou must ad this: if it be his will:
for that he knows what is most convenient for thee, what is for thy benefit,
and whereof thou art altogether ignorant. But rejoice always: pray continually:
in all things be thankful: for this is the will of God mine heavenly father, in
me his Son, toward all men.


The sinful man. What are the things, for which I ought
most specially to pray:
Instruct me, that from hence I may
thy sacred will obey.

Solace. IN deed, We ought to consider that our Prayers be grounded upon the
word of God.
it behooves thee to have consideration, what thou requirest at mine heavenly
fathers hands: who although he will thee to come freely unto him, and he will
help thee, he does not admit thee to come in such wise, as that thy petitions
should vary from his word: wherein he has prescribed unto thee, what thou
should ask: namely, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
just, Phil. 4.8^
whatsoever things apperteine unto love, whatsoever things are godly,
virtuous, and tending to ye glory of his holy name. In these things, ought
thou to be careful, and for such things to make thy zealous and hearty
prayers in my name, and thou shall obtain both corporal and spiritual
things to thine unspeakable comfort. Ioh. 16.23.24.
But thou must put a difference, We must put a differenc^ between corporal and
spiritual things when we pray: and how.
between the things thou prayest for: namely, to ask spiritual things, as
forgiveness of sins, and to be preserved from sin and eternal death, for
the gift of the holy Ghost, and for everlasting life, without any condition, in
a true faith: for I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he re^^rne
and live. And therefore, thou may take (...) of reconciliation in me, and
assure thy self of eternal life. In the same faith also (as thou have heard)
thou may fly unto him in my name, Mark* 11.26.27 Before we pray, we must
put of all hatred against our brother.
for all thy corporal necessities: but with this condition: namely, if it
please him: And it is required of thee, that before thou enter into this so
excellent and so precious a work, thou, examine thy self, namely, whether
hatred against thy brother, malice, desire of revenge, or any other
uncharitable matter be depe^ding between any other and thy self: If so, then
behooves it thee^, before thou approach unto mine heavenly father, in
requesting any thing, spiritual or temporal, to grow into a godly desire of
unity, and from thine heart to forgive whatsoever thou have against any man,
that mine heavenly father may forgive thee. Luke. 11.12. The form of Prayer
whereupon all our prayers must be grounded.
For know this, that if thou forgive not those that have offended thee (be it
never so highly) mine heavenly father will not pardon thee of thine offenses,
which are many and great against him. But being in a charitable desire of other
men's welfare, as of thine own, thou have free access through me, unto mine
heavenly Father, to whom thou may come boldly for things appertaynig both to
body and soul: as thou art taught by these words. Our father which art in
heaven hallowed be thy name: thy kingdom come, thy will be done, in earth as
it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread: and forgive us our offenses,
as we forgive them that have offended us: And lead us not into temptation: But
deliver us from evil. In which brief form of prayer, consists the whole
sum, both of spiritual and corporal requests. And whatsoever thou ask,
it is comprehended within this prayer, or otherwise, it is without any warrant,
and therefore not to be granted. And therefore, by this rule: it behooves
thee to guide all thy petitions: for in this form of prayer are contained
things eternal, things spiritual and corporal, things present, and things to
come: which things only, ought to stir up thy dull mind, to faithful and
hearty prayer.


The sinful man. Declare thou these things more at large,
(good Solace) that I may:
In faith be stirred up in thee,
for what, and when to pray.

Solace. THen understand, that by this form before recited, thou art taught,
not only that prayer is necessary, and that it is commanded as a principal
service and worship of mine heavenly father: but thou art directed to whom, and
for what to pray. Thou must pray therefore, yea, 1. Tim. 2. we must pray*
continually. Mat. 24.
above all things: to whom? to mine heavenly father: for what? especially for
things tending to eternal salvation, and then for bodily necessaries: when?
continually, least thou fall into temptation. Thou must pray unto mine heavenly
father: why? because he is God eternal, omnipotent maker and creator of all
things, the preserver, the defender, the saftie and life of all, and without
whose divine providence nothing can continue. Bu^ by whom, or by whose, or what
means, Ioh 16.
does he hear thee, and grant thy requests? only by me: and whatsoever thou
shall ask of him in my name, he shall give it thee. And therefore, whenever
thou praiest, thou must be faithfully persuaded, that he is fatherly affected
toward thee, we must pray for the hallowing of Gods holy name.
and is become so favorable unto thee, for my sake, that he both hears thee
and will grant thy requests. And therefore ought thou to call him father:
who for my sake, accepts thee as his son, giving thee whatsoever is
necessary for thee. And for that cause ought thou to be subject and
obedient unto his will in all things, In all our prayers we must have a care of
the magnifying of his holy name.
and to pray for the setting forth, and sanctifying of his holy name: which is,
to have his word truly taught, lovingly embraced, diligently followed, and him
to be worshipped according to the truth thereof in all things. And therefore,
when thou intendest to pray, either for good things to be given thee, or
evil things to be taken from thee, thou must have a principal regard to the
magnifying of his holy name, and to the setting forth of his most worthy
praises* for his mercies, and goodness, with ardent desire, that his holy name
may be hallowed, we must pray that bis kingdom may come.
and his kingdom come. That is, that his holy spirit would so direct thee in
all thy doings, thoughts and desires, that thine heart vary not from his
will, but be so settled in the performaunce thereof in all things, that true
humility, unfeigned love, undoubted hope, and constaunt faith may begin in
thee, that tranquillity and peace of conscience, which may assure thee, through
me, to be the heir of his everlasting kingdom, to the overthrow of Satan's
rule, and destruction of all his power, whereby he endeavors to lead all
mankind into utter destruction. Pray therefore, that his kingdom may come:
Joel* ^
which is his holy spirit, which he has promised to power out upon those
that earnestly desire it, which shall guide thee to the true service of mine
heavenly father here in this world: until such time as I shall appear in the
Clouds to change thy mortal body, and place it in that kingdom, wherein thou
shall remain in bliss unspeakable for ever. We must pray that his will may
be done.
Thou must pray also that mine heavenly fathers will be done in earth, as it
is in heaven: that is, that not only thy self, but all the people of the earth
may do that which in his word is prescribed and commanded to be done: and
that there may be such obedience, such love, and such godly behavior in this
world, among men, as is required to be: that as the Angels in heaven are
obedient unto his will and commandments, whereby he is glorified there: so he
might be obeyed, to the magnifying of his name here in earth. And therefore art
thou commanded, faithfully to pray unto him, that he would vouchsafe to
govern all men: as Princes, Pastors and Teachers, Governors and Magistrates,
that they may perform his will here in earth, as it is done in heaven: And
that all men may execute their vocations truly, to the praise of his holy
name. In which three former petitions thou have to learn, that it behooves
thee principally in thy prayers, to regard the glory of God mine heavenly
father.

And now attend, and thou shall perceive, that as thou art commanded in the
former petitions, to have respect only unto the honor of mine heavenly
fathers name. So art thou also lovingly called, We are permitted to come unto
God throuh Christ for corporal blessings.
to crave corporal blessings, namely, for such things as are necessary and
expedient for the maintenance of this life, by this petition. Give us this day
our daily bread, which comprehends in it, not only, request for bread: but
for a competent living and good success in thy vocation: namely, that he will
bless it, and make thy travail prosperous, in such sort, as by the fruits
thereof, thou may be able, without unlawful means to live, and be rather
helpefull then burdensome to others. Yea* thou have warrant in this petition,
to crave all things belonging to this life, not only sufficiency of food and
apparel: Psalm. 107.6. Through prayers the hungry are fed.
but also health of body, and other temporal benefits. The Prophet declares
in the Psalms, that hungry and thirsty souls, wandering in the wilderness,
called unto mine heavenly father, and were relieved, and sent away replenished.
Yea, Prisoners delivered.
those rhat lie in prison: and in the shadow of death, fast bound in misery
and iron, without all hope of healpe, calling upon him, in hearty and faithful
prayer, are heard, their prayers granted, and they delivered. Such also as are
afflicted, The sick are healed.
and pining away with sickness and heaviness of heart, humbling themselves
unto him in prayer: are cured of their diseases. When thou art (therefore) in
such or any other affliction, be it sickness, imprisonment, poverty, In what
danger soever we be in, we have warrant hereto, come in faith to God, and to
be relieved.
danger of enemies, or any other trouble whatsoever: refer thee to the
consideration of this petition, and there shall thou find, that thou have
sufficient warrant to fly unto mine heavenly father in my name in hearty
prayer, for deliverance from thy distress: who is nere unto all them that call
upon him, yea, Psalm. 145 18.19. As Well the rich as the ^oo^e ought to pray for
daily bread. Neither labor nor store can help without Gods blessings.
to all that call upon him, in truth, he will fulfill the desire of them that
fear him, he will hear their prayers and save them. In this petition
(therefore) it behooves thee, and all, as well the rich as the poor, to
consider, that it is not great abundance of riches, and store of all worldly
things, nor the labor, industry, and earnest diligence of their vocations,
but the only blessing of mine heavenly father: whereby their store is
preserved, and the labor of their hands so prospered, as it serves for the
preservation of their mortal lives. And therefore all men ought so to refer
them selves, unto mine heavenly fathers will (be they poor or rich) in
zealous and hearty prayer, as that, in the good success both of their store
and calling, they may refer the glory unto him, Pro. 10.^2.
the aucthor of all their welfare: and whose blessing it is that makes rich,
and releeueth the poor.

We must pray for forgiveness of sins upon condition.
Thou have heard before, that it behooves thee in all thy prayers, first to
crave forgiveness of thy sins, and reconciliation with God mine heavenly
father through me. And in this former most excellent form of prayer, which
must be thy direction to all thy prayers, thou art warranted, to ask for
remission of thy sins: But upon this condition: namely, that thou forgive
freely and from thine heart, all those that have offended thee: Wherein thou
have then to consider, that if thou come unto mine heavenly father, endewed (as
before thou have been taught) with especial love of him, and unfeigned love
toward all men, come freely and boldly unto him in the name of me, thy
continual Mediator, and crave in a true faith, that for my sake he will
forgive thy sins, and receive thee again into his favor: assuring thy
self, that having me the high Bishop praying for thee, Romans 5.
through whom, thou being justified by faith, art at peace and at one with God
mine heavenly father. Think therefore diligently upon the forgiveness of thy
sins, in me: and whenever thine own unworthiness, through fear, so
cloyeth thy poor conscience, that thou think nothing but condemnation due
unto thee. Cast the eyes of thine heart, through a lively faith, upon my
merits, (standing at no time upon thine own deseruinges) crave
reconciliation and remission for my sake: assuring thy self to be heard, and
received into mine heavenly fathers favor again. We may not account our
selves righteous in our own conceits. 1. ^o. 1.
And beware thou stand not righteous in thine own conceit: for if thou say
thou have no sin, thou deceiuest thy self, and there is no truth in thee:
but if thou confess and acknowledge thy sins, I am faithful and righteous,
remaining an Advocate for thee unto mine heavenly father, to obtain thee
forgiveness, and to cleanse thee from all thine iniquity. Now, whenever
thou approachest unto mine heavenly father, in my name, for remission of
sins, call to mind that to the promise of forgiveness, is annexed this
condition, We must have regard to this condition.
that thou forgive al others that have trespassed against thee: wherein it
behooves thee to be circumspect and careful, to weed out all malice, all
hatred, dissension and hypocrisy out of thine heart: together with all other
impediments that may let thy free coming unto mine heavenly father: namely,
all sin and iniquity, truly repenting thee thereof, that thy conscience
being made clean, condemn thee not, but that thou may come boldly and
freely unto the Throane of grace, and in my name receive whatsoever thou shall
ask.

And for that, that Satan, the Prince of this world is so vigilant and
diligent to draw men into many noisome attempts, whereby they may decline from
mine heavenly Father, and follow him: whereby vice may be embraced, and
virtue forsaken: We must crave strength of God to withstand temptations.
iniquity set up, and justice and equity suppressed: evil regarded, and
goodness defaced. It behooves thee, in all thy prayers, to make mention of thy
frailty, with humble request unto mine heavenly Father, in my name: that he
will strengthen thee, against all assaults of wicked Satan: who seeks by all
means to overthrow thee, whereof thou have had sufficient experience of late:
and in whose conflictes thou have been utterly overcome, had not I assisted
thee: not only in the covetous desires, and inordinate cares of this world,
wherewith he infecteth many, but in his most dangerous assault, wherein he
sought to drown thee in utter despair: his policies are very deceitful,
The chiefest weapon to withstand ^athan, is a true faith.
his hatred to wards godliness so great: and his assaults so sharp: as it
behooves thee to have thy weapons prepared for defense, that he batter not the
walls of thy Soul, with the shot of sin, and temptations to sin: but that
thou may be able to withstand him, and to keep him from entering into thy
soul: and that is by no other mean, then by a true and an undoubted faith in
me, who have already vanquished him, whereby thou shall also resist him: but
for as much as thine own strength is mere weakness, thy force very frailty:
apt rather to yield, then able to withstand him: thou art willed to come for
strength against his temptation, unto mine heavenly father, by faithful
prayer, in my name: that those temptations wherewith he endeavors to draw
thee into destruction: namely, the things that may offend mine heavenly
father: as contempt of his word, Idolatry, Covetousness, Drunkenness,
Malice, Envy, Theft, despair in trouble, and to use sinister and unlawful
means in poverty, or any kind of vice overcome thee not: but to be
preserved from all things that are ungodly and dangerous to thy soul: for
which (also) thou art willed to pray: namely, for deliverance from evil, in
which word is comprehended, whatsoever may be displeasaunt and offensive unto
mine heavenly father: from the tyranny of Satan, and from all miseries, both
bodily and gho^i^y: We may not pray only for our selves, but for the whole
Church.
not only private, appertayning only unto thy self, but for the whole Church:
that she being delivered from all calamities, thou may be partaker of the
blessings powered upon the same in this life: namely, the true knowledge of my
Gospel and fruition thereof: and after this life inherit the Kingdom,
prepared for the ^^ect of mine heavenly father from the beginning.

Now have thou heard, what things thou must pray for: namely, things eternal,
which are tending to the honoring of mine heavenly fathers name, who has been
before all worlds, for spiritual things: which are those things, that tend to
the salvation of thy soul: and for corporal things, What ought to stir us
up to prayer.
which tend to the maintenance of this present life. The consideration of which
things ought to stir thee up to continual and faithful prayer: wherein (as
before is said) it behooves thee to weigh unto whom thou praiest, and by
whose means thy prayers are acceptable, and thy petitions granted. Thou
praiest unto God mine heavenly father: who made and created thee, and all the
world, thou have access unto him, through me his Son: for whose sake, and
by whose mediation, thy prayers are heard: 1. Cor. 14.
those prayers that are made by the spirit and understanding, not unadvisedly,
or at adventure, but in faith and truth. And to the end, that thou may be
assured, that it is mine heavenly father, only, that both hears thee and will
help thee, thou must retain in thy continual remembrance, how and in what
manner he has declared himself to be the only and true God, and that not only
in making thee, and all creatures else, whom by his mighty power he likewise
preserves, but especially in sending me his only Son into the world, 2.
Cor. 4.4. Col. 1.15.
to take human nature upon me, to be familiarlie conuersaunt with man on
earth, to show mine heavenly fathers will, the Gospel of eternal truth: his
lively and very perfect Image unto men: God has reueiled himself unto us in
Christ.
to the ^^de that they should pray only unto him, who has reueiled himself by
me, as appears by many and evident testimonies: whereby thou may and
ought daily and diligently to exercise thy faith, and therein, We must
avoid vnthanckfulnes.
without wavering to address thy self unto the Throane of his grace in my
name, of whom he gave testimony to be his only Son, and for whose sake,
he has promised to give thee all things, both corporal and spiritual, which
thou shall faithfully pray for in my name, and be assured to receive the
fruit of thy faithful prayer. But now, thou must beware, least (as before is
said) thou be found unthankful after the receiving of the blessings of my
heavenly father, of what kind soever they be: For, thanksgiving is an
acceptable worship unto him: for that thereby he is acknowledged the giver and
disposer of those things that tend to thy benefit, and he that gives him
praise, glorifieth him. And this belongs unto the righteous and godly ones
only: as the Prophet witnesses, saying: The voice of joy and deliverance
shall be in the tabernacles of the righteous: Psalm. 1.8.15. The Godly, only
praise God.
saying: the right hand of the Lord has done valiauntly. Thus must thou at
all tims, for all things, and above al things, give thanks, not only, for the
comfort of the present benefit which thou receiuest at the hands of mine
heavenly father, but also, for that thou have received an assured token of his
favor: wherein, thou may peaceably pass the whole course of thy life in
full assurance, that for my sake thou art at peace with him. For, if thou omit
and neglect this due worship of thanksgiving, when thou have received any
singular benefit, or delivery from any kind of danger, or riddaunce from any
calamity, thou deemest mine heavenly father to be the aucthor thereof, He
that is not thanckefull for the benefits of God, denies him to be the author
of them.
and attribute the mean of thy relief to fortune: whereby thou dishonorest
him, and quenchest that faith whereby thou ought to be persuaded, that what
good soever light upon thee, he sends the same as a certain token and pledge
of his especial favor and love toward thee.


The sinful man. Lo then I see that prayer is,
through thee, the mean to have:
What so I want, if that in faith,
and truth, the same I crave.
And that unfeigned thanks, I must
give, for his passing love:
Wherein he does vouchsafe relief,
from heavens high above.

Solace. IT is even so, look therefore unto the performance thereof,
accordingly, together with the residue of those duties, which thou art bound
unto, toward mine heavenly father: as also toward thy neighbors. And beware
least thou look back, and return to thy former wickedness, to thine old
vomit. Thou art now cured, When we be once reclaimed, we must beware of
turning to our old iniquity.
sin no more, least a worse thing happen unto thee: I have broken the bands
of Satan, wherein thou wast fast tied, thou art now at liberty: Be
watchful therefore, and trust in mine heavenly father, pray continually, and
offer the sacrifice of praise and thanckesgiuing: cease not to do good: but
refuse to do evil. Walk all the days of thy life in this narrow way that
tends to eternal life: and shun the broad way that leads unto death:
wherein thou have walk in time past, but now being reclaymed, avoid it:
that this life once ended, we must walk the narrow way that leadeath unto life.
thou may without fear, in a clear conscience appear and enter into that
blessed estate, wherein you shall find nothing but such surpassing eternal joy:
and so sweet solace, as neither tongue can declare, the ear has not heard,
the eye seen, neither can the heart of man conceive the sweetness thereof:
The reward of the righteous.
wherein thou shall live for ever, and receive such a beautiful Diadem and
Crown of glory, at the hands of mine heavenly father, as passes all
understanding. Wherefore, persevere in the truth here, embrace it unto the
end, without fainting: take hold of the promises in faith, rejoice in me. Let
the foolish and momentarie pleasures of this world go: The pleasures of this
word, the baytes of Satan.
esteem them not, they are the baytes of Satan, to allure thee to the broad
way: but be wary, avoid his entisements, wherewith he endeavors to draw
men into destruction, and such as obey him, shall have no part of the promised,
blessed inheritance: but have their portion in hell fire, to whom I will say,
Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, The end of the wicked.
into everlasting torments, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
Look therefore unto thy self while thou have an acceptable time: be sober and
watchful unto the end. Mine heavenly Father bless thee, and the holy Ghost
guide thee to all goodness for evermore, Amen.


The sinful man. AL thanks and praise oh Lord I do
in humble wise commend:
To thee who do such solace sweet
unto poor sinners send.
Wherewith thou have revived so,
my sinful soul from woe:
That tongue cannot thy praises due,
for want of wisdom show.
But yet as far as heart and tongue
can give, I yield to thee:
Accept it Lord, though passing thanks
thou do deserve I see.
For when I was in sinful plight,
in Satan's bands oppressed:
Thy tender Son came down to me
to show the way to rest.
My soul did harbor all that was
unto my soul annoye:
But he has fraught ye same again,
with all surpassing joy.
My darkness he has turned to light,
wherein I see the way
That leads to life, and how to shun
what led me long astray.
The pleasant shows and fawning cheer
of worldly wealth, I see,
The fond delights and peevish toys,
did work but ill for me.
Therewith I was puffed up aloft,
with plumes of pride so hye:
That nothing did remain for me,
but just desert to dye.
For, sin a thousand fold, I did
within mine heart retain:
A burning zeal there was in me,
to heap up foolish gain.
My heart was led with deep delight,
mine eyes did gaze awrye:
My truethles tongue within mine head,
for greedy gain did lie.
No pity or compassion was,
within my careless breast:
A thousand cares of worldly wealth
my wicked heart possessed.
I thought not on an others woe,
I pass not for his pain:
I spared not to pinch the poor,
to reap my self the gain.
And thus I lived long secure,
in sinful soil a sleep:
Till Solace came and did awake
me, out of slumber deep.
And set before my blinded eyes,
the reckles race I run:
Which now I see I must forsake,
or rest (for aye) undone.
Wherefore all praise in heart I yield,
oh Lord of Lords to thee:
Unto thy Son, and holy Ghost,
for thus receiving me.

Psalm. 119. Oh how sweet are thy words unto my throat, yea, sweeter then
honey unto my mouth.

1. Cor. 15. Death where is thy sting? hell where is thy victory? the sting of
death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks be unto God,
who has given us victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.


A farewell to the Book.
I If thou (oh silly Book) do chance
to light into the hand
O Of any, such as takes delight,
each others work to scand:
H Hear with good will what they will say:
take not in grief, disdain.
N No Book so good, but gets reproof,
and trifeling toys the gain.
N No praise exspect, way not dispraise:
each man will verdict give
O Of thee and me, but have regard
how he or they do live.
R Rash judgment does unstayed minds,
in each degree bewray:
D Disdain thou not the deadly doomes,
therefore of such as they.
E Even so, farewell, in ragged show,
thou must depart from me:
N Not pullisht as some pleasant Books,
that profit less then thee.
Si Deus nobiscum quis contra nos.
FINIS.

