The Tragidie of Ferrex and Porrex, set forth without addition or alteration
but altogether as the same was showed on stage before the Queens Majesty,
about nine years past, vz. the xviij. day of January. 1561. by the gentlemen
of the Inner Temple.

Seen and allowed. etc.

Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate.

The argument of the Tragedy.
Gorboduc king of Britain, divided his realm in his life time to his sons,
Ferrex and Porrex. The sons fell to discention. The younger killed the elder.
The mother that more dearly loved the elder, for revenge killed the younger.
The people moved with the cruelty of the fact, rose in rebellion and slew both
father and mother. The nobility assembled and most terribly destroyed the
rebels. And afterward for want of issue of the prince whereby the succession
of the crown became uncertain, they fell to civil war, in which both they
and many of of their issues were slain, and the land for a long time almost
desolate and miserably wasted.

The P. to the Reader.
WHere this Tragedy was for furniture of part of the grand Christmasse in the
Inner Temple first written about nine years ago by the right honorable
Thomas now Lord Buckherst, and by T. Norton, and after showed before her
Majesty, and never intended by the authors thereof to be published: yet one W.
G. getting a copy thereof at some yongmans hand that lacked a little money and
much discretion, in the last great plage. an. 1565. about v. years past, while
the said Lord was out of England, and T. Norton far out of London, and
neither of them both made privy, put it forth excedingly corrupted: even as if
by means of a broker for hire, he should have entised into his house a fair
maid and done her villainy, and after all to bescratched her face, torn her
apparel, berayed and disfigured her, and then thrust her out of doors
dishones^ed. In such plight after long wandering she came at length home to the
sight of her friends who seant knew her but by a few tokens and marks
remaining. They, the authors I mean, though they were very much displeased
that she so ran abroad without leave, whereby she caught her shame, as many
wantons do, yet seeing the case as it is remediless, have for common hones^e
and shamefastness new apparelled, trimmed, and attired her in such form as
she was before. In which better form since she has come to me, I have
harbored her for her friends sake and her own, and I do not dout her parents
the authors will not now be discontent that she go abroad among you good
readers, so it be in honest company. For she is by my encouragement and others
somewhat less ashamed of the dishonestie done to her because it was by fraud
and force. If she be welcome among you and gently enterteined, in favor of the
house from whense she is descended, and of her own nature court^ously disposed
to offend no man, her friends will thank you for it. If not, but that she
shall be still reproched with her former missehap, or quarelled at by envious
persons, she poor gentlewoma^ will surely play Lucreces part and of her self
die for shame, and I shall wish that she had tarried still at home with me,
where she was welcome: for she did never put me to more charge, but this one
poor black gown lined with white that I have now given her to go abroad
among you withal.

The names of the speakers.
Gorboduc, King of great Britain. Videna, Queen and wife to king Gorboduc.
Ferrex, elder son to king Gorboduc. Porrex, younger son to king Gorboduc.
Cloyton, Duke of Cornwall. Fergus, Duke of Albanye. Mandud, Duke of Loegris.
Gwenard, Duke of Cumberland. Eubulus, Secretary to the king. Arostus, a
counselor to the king. Dordan, a counselor assigned by the king to his eldest
son Ferrex. Philander, a counselor assigned by the king to his youngest son
Porrex. Both being of the old kings counsel before. Hermon, a parasite
remaining with Ferrex. Tyndar, a parasite remaining with Porrex, Nuntius, a
messenger of the elder brothers death. Nuntius, a messenger of Duke Fergus
rising in arms. Marcella, a lady of the Queens privy chamber. Chorus, four
ancient and sage men of Bri^taine.
The order of the domme show before the first act, and the sigsignification
thereof.
First the Music of Uiolenze began to play, during which came in upon the
s^age six wild men clothed in leaves. Of whom the first bare in his neck a
faggot of small sticks, which they all both severally and together assayed with
all their strengthes to break, but it could not be broken by them. At the
length one of them plucked out one of the sticks and brake it: And the rest
plucking out all the other sticks one after an other did easily break them,
the same being severed: which being conjoined they had before attempted in
vain. After they had this done, they departed the stage, and the Music
ceased. Hereby was signified, that a state knit in unity does continue strong
against all force. But being divided, is easily destroyed. As befell upon Duke
Gorboduc dividing his land to his two sons which he before held in Monarchy.
And upon the discention of the brethren to whom it was divided.

Actus primus.
Scena prima.
Viden. Ferrex. VIden. The silent night, that bringes the quiet pawse,
From painful travails of the weary day,
Prolonges my careful thoughts, and makes me blame
The slow Aurore, that so for love or shame
Does long delay to show her blushing face,
And now the day renewes my griefull plaint.

Ferrex. My gracious lady and my mother dear,
Pardon my grief for your so grieved mind,
To ask what cause tormenteth so your heart.

Viden. So great a wrong, and so unjust despite,
Without all cause, against all course of kind!

Ferrex. Such causeless wrong and so unjust despite,
May have redress, or at the least, revenge.

Viden. Neither, my son: such is the froward will,
The person such, such my missehappe and thine.

Ferrex. Mine know I none, but grief for your distress.

Viden. Yes: mine for thine my son: A father? no:
In kind a father, not in kindlinesse.

Ferrex. My father? why? I know nothing at all,
Wherein I have misdone unto his grace.

Viden. Therefore, the more unkind to thee and me.
For knowing well (my son) the tender love
That I have ever borne and bear to thee,
He grieved thereat, is not content alone,
To spoil thee of my sight my chiefest joy,
But thee, of thy birthright and heritage
Causeless, unkindly, and in wrongful wise,
Against all law and right, he will bereave:
Half of his kingdom he will give away.

Ferrex. To whom?

Viden. Even to Porrex his younger son,
Whose growing pride I do so sore suspect,
That being raised to equal rule with thee,
Me thinks I see his envious heart to swell,
Filled with disdain and with ambicious hope,
The end the Gods do know, whose altars I
Full often have made in vain, of cattle slain
To send the sacred smoke to heavens throne,
For thee my son, if things do so succeed,
As now my ielous mind misdemeth sore.

Ferrex. Madame, leave care and careful plaint for me,
Just has my father been to every wight:
His first injustice he will not extend
To me I trust, that give no cause thereof:
My brothers pride shall hurt him self, not me.

Viden. So grant the Gods: But yet thy father so
Has firmly fixed his unmoved mind,
That plaintes and prayers can no whit avail,
For those have I assaied, but even this day,
He will endeavor to procure assent
Of all his counsel to his fond devise.

Ferrex. Their ancestors from race to race have borne
True faith to my forefathers and their seed:
I trust they eke will bear the like to me.

Viden. There rests all. But if they fail thereof,
And if the end bring forth an ill success:
On them and theirs the mischief shall befall,
And so I pray the Gods requite it them,
And so they will, for so is wont to be.
When lords, and trusted rulers under kings,
To please the present fancy of the prince.
With wrong transpose the course of governance,
Murders, mischief, or civil sword at length,
Or mutual treason, or a just revenge,
When right succeding line returns again,
By Jove's just judgment and deserved wrath,
Bringes them to cruel and reproachful death,
And roots their names and kindredes from the earth.

Ferrex. Mother, content you, you shall see the end.

Viden. The end? thy end I fear, Jove end me first.

Actus primus.
Scena secunda.
Gorboduc. Arostus. Philander. Eubulus. GOrb. My lords, whose grave advise and
faithful aid,
Have long vpheld my honor and my realm,
And brought me to this age from tender years,
Guidyng so great estate with great renown:
Now more imports me, than erst, to use
Your faith and wisdom, whereby yet I reign:
That when by death my life and rule shall cease,
The kingdom yet may with unbroken course,
Have certain prince, by whose undoubted right,
Your wealth and peace may stand in quiet stay,
And eke that they whom nature has preparde,
In time to take my place in princely seat,
While in their fathers time their pliant youth
Yeldes to the frame of skillful governance,
May so be taught and trained in noble arts,
As what their fathers which have reigned before
Have with great fame derived down to them,
With honor they may leave unto their seed:
And not be thought for their unworthy life,
And for their lawless swaruynge out of kind,
Worthy to lose what law and kind them gave:
But that they may preserve the common peace,
The cause that first began and still mainteines
The line all course of kings inheritance.
For me, for mine, for you, and for the state,
Where of both I and you have charge and care,
Thus do I mean to use your wonted faith
To me and mine, and to your native land.
My lords be plain without all wrie respect
Or poisonous craft to speak in pleasyng wise,
Lest as the blame of ill succedyng things
Shall light on you, so light the harms also.

Arostus. Your good acceptance so (most noble king)
Of such our faithfulness as heretofore
We have employed in duties to your grace,
And to this realm whose worthy head you are,
Well proves that neither you mistrust at all,
Nor we shall need in boasting wise to show,
Our truth to you, nor yet our wakefull care
For you, for yours, and for our native land.
Wherefore (O king) I speak as one for all,
Sith all as one do bear you egall faith:
Doubt not to use our counsels and our aides,
Whose honors, goods and lives are whole auowed
To serve, to aid, and to defend your grace.

Gorb. My lords, I thank you all. This is the case.
Ye know, the Gods, who have the sovereign care
For kings, for kingdoms, and for commonweals,
Gave me two sons in my more lusty age.
Who now in my decayeng years are grown
Well toward typer state of mind and strength,
To take in hand some greater princely charge.
As yet they live and spend hopeful days,
With me and with their mother here in court.
Their age now asks other place and trade,
And mine also does ask an other change:
Theirs to more travail, mine to greater case.
When fatal death shall end my mortal life,
My purpose is to leave unto them twain
The realm divided into two sundry parts:
The one Ferrex mine elder son shall have,
The other shall the younger Porrex rule.
That both my purpose may more firmly stand,
And eke that they may better rule their charge,
I mean forthwith to place them in the same:
That in my life they may both learn to rule,
And I may joy to see their ruling well.
This is in sum, what I would have ye wey:
First whether ye allow my whole devise,
And think it good for me, for them, for you,
And for our country, mother of us all:
And if ye like it, and allow it well,
Then for their guydinge and their governance,
Show forth such means of circumstance,
As ye think meet to be both known and kept.
Lo, this is all, now tell me your advise.

Aros. And this is much, and asks great advise,
But for my part, my sovereign lord and king,
This do I think. Your majesty does know,
How under you in justice and in peace,
Great wealth and honor, long we have enjoyed.
So as we can not seem with gredie minds
To wisshe for change of Prince or governance:
But if we like your purpose and devise,
Our lyking must be deemed to proceed
Of rightful reason, and of heedefull care,
Not for our selves, but for the common state,
Sith our own state does need no better change:
I think in all as erst your Grace has said.
First when you shall unload your aged mind
Of heuye care and troubles manifold,
And lay the same upon my Lords your sons,
Whose growing years may bear the burden long,
And long I pray the Gods to grant it so,
And in your life while you shall so behold
Their rule, their virtues, and their noble deeds,
Such as their kind behighteth to us all,
Great be the profits that shall grow thereof,
Your age in quiet shall the longer last.
Your lasting age shall be their longer stay,
For cares of kings, that rule as you have ruled,
For public wealth and not for private joy,
Do wast man's life, and hasten crooked age,
With furrowed face and with enfcebled lymines,
To draw on creepyng death a swifter pace.
They two yet young shall bear the parted reign
With greater ease, than one, now old, alone,
Can welde the whole, for whom much harder is
With lessened strength the double weight to bear.
Your eye, your counsel, and the grave regard
Of Father, yea of such a fathers name,
Now at beginning of their sondred reign,
When is the hazard of their whole success,
Shall bridle so their force of youthful heates,
And so restreine the rage of insolence,
Which most assailes the young and noble minds,
And so shall guide and train in tempred stay
Their yet green bending wits with reverent awe,
As now inured with virtues at the first,
Custom (O King) shall bring delightfulness.
By use of virtue, vice shall grow in hate,
But if you so dispose it, that the day,
Which ends your life, shall first begin their reign,
Great is the peril what will be the end,
When such beginning of such liberties
Uoide of such stays as in your life do lie,
Shall leave them free to randon of their will,
An open pray to traitorous flattery,
The greatest pestilence of noble youth.
Which peril shall be past, if in your life,
Their tempred youth with aged fathers awe,
Be brought in ure of skillful stayednesse.
And in your life their lives disposed so,
Shall length your noble life in ioyfulnesse.
Thus think I that your grace has wisely thought,
And that your tender care of common weal,
Has bred this thought, so to divide your land,
And plant your sons to bear the present rule,
While you yet live to see their rulinge well,
That you may longer live by joy therein.
What further means behouefull are and meet^
At greater leisure may your grace devise,
When all have said, and when we be agreed
If this be best to part the realm in twain,
And place your sons in present government.
Whereof as I have plainly said my mind,
So would I here the rest of all my Lords,

Philand. In part I think as has been said before,
In part again my mind is otherwise,
As for dividing of this realm in twain,
And lotting out the same in egall parts,
To either of my lords your graces sounes,
That think I best for this your realms behofe,
For profit and advancement of your sons,
And for your comfort and your honor eke.
But so to place them, while your life do last,
To yield to them your royal governance,
To be above them only in the name
Of father, not in kingly state also,
I think not good for you, for them, nor us.
This kingdom since the bloody civil field
Where Morgan slain did yield his conquered part
Unto his cosins sword in Camberland,
Contains all that whilome did suffice
Three noble sons of your forefather Brute.
So your two sons, it may suffice also.
The more, the stronger, if they gree in one.
The smaller compass that the realm does hold,
The easier is the swey thereof to welde,
The nearer Justice to the wronged poor,
The smaller charge, and yet enough for one.
And when the region is divided so,
That brethren be the lords of either part,
Such strength does nature knit between them both,
In sondrie bodies by conjoined love,
That not as two, but one of doubled force,
Each is to other as a sure defense.
The nobleness and glory of the one
Does sharp the courage of the others mind,
With virtuous envy to contend for praise.
And such an egaluesse has nature made,
Between the brethren of one fathers seed,
As an unkindly wrong it seems to be,
To throw the brother subject under fecte
Of him, whose peer he is by course of kind,
And nature that did make this egalnesse,
Often so repineth at so great a wrong,
That often she rayseth up a grudginge grief,
In younger brethren at the elders state:
Whereby both towns and kingdoms have been rased,
And famous stocks of royal blood destroyed:
The brother, that should be the brothers aid,
And have a wakefull care for his defense,
Gapes for his death, and blames the lyngering years
That draw not forth his end with faster course:
And often impacient of so long delays,
With hateful slaughter he preuentes the fates,
And heaps a just reward for brothers blood,
With endless vengeance on his stock for aye.
Such mischiefs here are wisely met withal,
If egall state may nourishe egall love,
Where none has cause to grudge at others good.
But now the head to stoop beneth them both,
Ne kind, ne reason, ne good order bears.
And often it has been seen, where natures course
Has been perverted in disordered wise,
When fathers cease to know that they should rule,
The children cease to know they should obey.
And often ouerkindly tenderness
Is mother of unkindly stubbornenesse.
I speak not this in envy or reproach,
As if I grudged the glory of your sons,
Whose honor I beseech the Gods increase:
Nor yet as if I thought there did remain,
So filthy cankers in their noble breasts,
Whom I esteem (which is their greatest praise)
Undoubted children of so good a king,
Only I mean to show by certain rules,
Which kind has graft within the mind of man,
That nature has her order and her course,
Which (being broken) does corrupt the state
Of minds and things, even in the best of all.
My lords your sons may learn to rule of you.
Your own example in your noble court
Is fittest guyder of their youthful years.
If you desire to see some present joy
By sight of their well rulynge in your life,
See them obey, so shall you see them rule,
Who so obeys not with humbleness
Will rule with outrage and with insolence.
Long may they rule I do beseech the Gods,
But long may they learn, ere they begin to rule.
If kind and fates would suffer, I would wisshe
Them aged princes, and immortal kings.
Wherefore most noble king I well assent,
Between your sons that you divide your realm,
And as in kind, so match them in degree.
But while the Gods prolong your royal life,
Prolong your reign: for thereto live you here,
And therefore have the Gods so long forborne
To join you to them selves, that still you might
Be prince and father of our common weal.
They when they see your children ripe to rule,
Will make them room, and will remove you hence,
That yours in right ensuynge of your life
May rightly honor your immortal name.

Eub. Your wonted true regard of faithful hearts,
Makes me (O king) the bolder to presume,
To speak what I conceive within my breast,
Although the same do not agree at all
With that which other here my lords have said.
Nor which your self have seemed best to like.
Pardon I crave, and that my words be de^^ed
To flow from hearty zeal unto your grace,
And to the safety of your common weal.
To part your realm unto my lords your sounes,
I think not good for you, ne yet for them,
But worste of all for this our native land,
Within one land, one single rule is best:
Divided reigns do make divided hearts.
But peace preserues the country and the prince,
Such is in man the gredy mind to reign,
So great is his desire to climb alofte,
In worldly stage the stateliest parts to bear,
That faith and justice and all kindly love,
Do yield unto desire of soueraignitie,
Where egall state does raise an egall hope
To win the thing that either would attain.
Your grace remembers how in passed years
The mighty Brute, first prince of all this land,
Possessed the same and ruled it well in one,
He thinking that the compass did suffice,
For his three sons three kingdoms eke to make,
Cut it in three, as you would now in twain.
But how much British blood has since been spilt,
To join again the sondred unity?
What princes slain before their tunely hour?
What wast of towns and people in the land?
What treasons heaped on murders and on spoils?
Whose just revenge even yet is scarcely ceased,
Ruthefull remembrance is yet raw in mind.
The Gods forbid the like to chance again:
And you (O king) give not the cause thereof.
My Lord Ferrex your elder son, perhaps
Whom kind and custom geues a rightful hope
To be your heir and to succeed your reign,
Shall think that he does suffer greater wrong
Than he perchance will bear, if power serve.
Porrex the younger so vpraised in state,
Perhaps in courage will be raised also.
If flattery then, which fayles not to assail
The tender minds of yet unskillful youth,
In one shall kindle and increase disdain,
And envy in the others heart inflame,
This fire shall waste their love, their lives, their land,
And ruthefull ruin shall destroy them both.
I wish not this (O king) so to befall,
But fear the thing, that I do most abhor.
Give no beginning to so dreadful end.
Keep them in order and obedience:
And let them both by now obeying you,
Learn such behavior as beseemes their state,
The elder, myldenesse in his governance,
The younger, a yelding contentedness.
And keep them near unto your presence still,
That they restreyned by the awe of you,
May live in compass of well tempred stay,
And pass the perilles of their youthful years.
Your aged life draws on to febler time,
Wherein you shall less able be to bear
The travails that in youth you have sustained,
Both in your persons and your realms defense.
If planting now your sons in further parts,
You send them further from your present reach,
Less shall you know how they them selves demean:
Traitorous corrupters of their plyant youth,
Shall have unspied a much more free access,
And if ambition and inflamed disdain
Shall arm the one, the other, or them both,
To civil war, or to usurping pride,
Late shall you rue, that you ne recked before.
Good is I grant of all to hope the best,
But not to live still dreadlesse of the worst.
So trust the one, that the other be forsene.
Arm not unskillfulness with princely power.
But you that long have wisely ruled the reigns.
Of royalty within your noble realm,
So hold them, while the Gods for our auayles
Shall stretch the thread of your prolonged days.
To soon he clambe into the flaming carre,
Whose want of skill did set the earth on fire.
Time and example of your noble grace,
Shall teach your sons both to obey and rule,
When tune has taught them, time shall make the^ place,
The place that now is full^ and so I pray
Long it remain, to comfort of us all.

Gorboduc. I take your faithful hearts in thankful part*
But sith I see no cause to draw my mind,
To fear the nature of my loving sons,
Or to misdeme that envy or disdain,
Can there work hate, where nature planteth love:
In one self purpose do I still abide.
My love extends egally to both,
My land suffiseth for them both also.
Humber shall part the marches of their realms:
The Sotherne part the elder shall possess:
The Notherne shall Porrex the younger rule:
In quiet I will pass mine aged days,
Free from the travail and the painful cares,
That hasten age upon the worthiest kings.
But lest the fraud, that ye do seem to fear,
Of flattering tongues, corrupt their tender youth,
And wrythe them to the ways of youthful lust,
To cl^^yng pride, or to revenging hate,
Or to neglecting of their careful charge,
Lewdely to live in wanton recklessnesse,
Or to oppressing of the rightful cause,
Or not to wreke the wrongs done to the poor,
To tread down truth, or favor false deceit:
I mean to join to either of my sons
Some one of those, whose long approved faith
And wisdom tried, may well assure my heart:
That ^^ynyng fraud shall find no way to c^epe
Into their ^ensed ears with grave adiuse*
This is the end, and so I pray you all
To bear my sons the love and loyalty
That I have found within your faithful breasts.

Arostus. You, nor your sons, our soueraign lord shall want,
Our faith and service while our lives do last.

Chorus. When settled stay does hold the royal throne
In steadfast place, by known and doubtless right,
And chiefly when descent on one alone
Makes single and vnparted reign to light:
Each change of course vnioynts the whole estate,
And yeldes it thrall to ruin by debate.
The strength that knit by fast accord in one,
Against all foreign power of mighty foes,
Could of it self defend it self alone,
Disioyned once, the former force does lose.
The sticks, that sondred brake so soon in twain,
In faggot bound attempted were in vain.
Often tender mind that leads the parciall eye
Oferring parents in their childrens love,
Destroys the wrongly loved child thereby
This does the proud son of Apollo prove,
Who rasshely set in chariot of his sire.
Inflamed the parched earth with heavens fire.
And this great king, that does divide his land,
And change the course of his discending crown,
And yeldes the reign into his childrens hand,
From blisfull state of joy and great renown,
A myrrour shall become to Princes all,
To learn to shun the cause of such a fall.

The order and signification of the domme show before the second act.
First the Music of Cornettes began to play* during which came in upon the
stage a King accompanied with a nombre of his nobility and gentlemen. And
after he had placed him self in a chair of estate prepared for him: there came
and kneled before him a grave and aged gentelman and offered up a cup unto him
of wine in a glass, which the the King refused. After him commes a brave and
lusty young gentleman and presents the King with a cup of gold filled with
poison, which the King accepted, and drinking the same, immediately fell down
dead upon the the stage, and so was carried thence away by his Lords and
gentelmen, and then the Music ceased. Hereby was signified, that as glass by
nature holds no poison, but is clear and may easily be seen through, ne
boweth by any art: So a faithful counselor holds no treason, but is
plain and open, n^ yeldeth to any indiscreet affection, but gives wholesome
counsel, which the ill advised Prince refuses. The delightful gold filled
with poison betokens flattery, which under fair seeming of pleasant words
bears deadly poison, which destroyed the Prince that receives it. As befell
in the two brethren Ferrex and Porrex, who refusing the wholesome advise of grave
counselors, credited these young Paracites, and brought to them selves death
and destruction thereby.

Actus secundus.
Scena prima.
Ferrex. Hermon. Dordan. FErrex. I marvel much what reason led the king*
My Father, thus without all my desert,
To reave me half the kingdom, which by course
Of law and nature should remain to me.

Hermon. If you with stubborn and untamed pride
Had stood against him in rebelling wise,
Or if with grudging mind you had envied
So slow a slidyng of his aged years,
Or sought before your time to haste the course
Of fatal death upon his royal head,
Or stained your stock with murder of your kyn:
Some face of reason might perhaps have seemed,
To yield some likely cause to spoil ye thus.

Ferrox. The wrekeful Gods power on my cursed head
Eternal plagues and never dying woes,
The hellish prince, adiudge my dampened ghost
To Tantales thirste, or proud Ixions wheel,
Or cruel gripe to gnaw my growing heart,
To during torments and unquenched flames,
If ever I conceived so foul a thought,
To wisshe his end of life, or yet of reign.

Dordan. Ne yet your father (O most noble Prince)
Did ever think so foul a thing of you.
For he, with more than fathers tender love,
While yet the fates do lend him life to rule,
(Who long might live to see your ruling well)
To you my Lord, and to his other son:
Lo he resignes his realm and royalty:
Which never would so wise a Prince have done,
If he had once misdemed that in your heart
There ever lodged so unkind a thought.
But tender love (my Lord) and settled trust
Of your good nature, and your noble mind,
Made him to place you thus in royal throne,
And now to give you half his realm to guide,
Yea and that half which in abounding store
Of things that serve to make a welthy realm,
In stately cities, and in fruitful soil,
In temperate breathing of the milder heaven,
In things of needful use, which friendly sea,
Transportes by traffike from the foreign parts,
In flowing wealth, in honor and in force,
Does pass the double value of the part,
That Porrex has allotted to his reign.
Such is your case, such is your fathers love.

Ferrex. Ah love, my friends? love wrongs not who^ he loves.

Dordan. Ne yet he wrongeth you, that gives you
So large a reign, ere that the course of time
Bring you to kingdom by descended right,
Which time perhaps might end your time before.

Ferrex. Is this no wrong, say you, to reaue from me
My native right of half so great a realm?
And thus to match his younger son with me
In egall power, and in as great degree?
Yea and what son? the son whose swelling pride
Would never yield one poinct of reverence,
When I the elder and apparaunt heir
Stood in the likelihode to possess the whole,
Yea and that son which from his childish age
Enuieth mine honor and does hate my life.
What will he now do, when his pride, his rage,
The mindful malice of his grudging heart,
Is armed with force, with wealth, and kingly state?

Hermon. Was this not wrong, yea ill advised wrong,
To give so mad a man so sharp a sword,
To so great peril of so great missehappe,
Wide open thus to set so large a way?

Dordan. Alas my Lord, what griefull thing is this,
That of your brother you can think so ill?
I never saw him utter likely sign,
Whereby a man might see or once misdeme
Such hate of you, ne such vnyelding pride.
Ill is their counsel, shameful be their end,
That raising such mistrustfull fear in you,
Sowing the seed of such unkindly hate,
Travail by treason to destroy you both.
Wise is your brother, and of noble hope,
Worthy to welde a large and mighty realm.
So much a stronger friend have you thereby,
Whose strength is your strength, if you gree in one.

Hermon. If nature and the Gods had pinched so
Their flowing bounty, and their noble gifts
Of princely qualities, from you my Lord,
And powrde them all at ones in wastfull wise
Upon your fathers younger son alone:
Perhaps there be that in your prejudice
Would say that birth should yield to worthiness.
But sith in each good gift and princely art
Ye are his match, and in the chief of all
In mildness and in sobre governance
Ye far surmount: And since there is in you
Sufficing skill and hopeful towardness
To weld the whole, and match your elders praise:
I see no cause why ye should loose the half.
Ne would I wisshe you yield to such a loss:
Lest your mild sufferaunce of so great a wrong,
Be deemed cowardishe and simple dread:
Which shall give courage to the fiery head
Of your young brother to invade the whole.
While yet therefore sticks in the peoples mind
The lothed wrong of your disheritaunce,
And ere your brother have by settled power,
By guile full cloak of an alluring show,
Got him some force and favor in the realm,
And while the noble Queen your mother lives,
To work and practice all for your avail,
Attempt redress by arms, and wreake your self
Upon his life, that gayneth by your loss,
Who now to shame of you, and grief of us,
In your own kingdom triumphs over you.
Show now your courage meet for kingly state,
That they which have auowed to spend their goods,
Their lands, their lives and honors in your cause*
May be the bolder to mainteyne your part,
When they do see that cowarde fear in you,
Shall not betray ne fail their faithful hearts.
If once the death of Porrex end the strife,
And pay the price of his usurped reign,
Your mother shall persuade the angry king,
The Lords your friends eke shall appease his rage.
For they be wise, and well they can forsee,
That ere long time your aged fathers death
Will bring a time when you shall well requite
Their friendly favor, or their hateful spite,
Yea, or their slackenesse to auaunce your cause.
" Wise men do not so hang on passing sta^^
" Of present Princes, chiefly in their age,
" But they will further cast their reaching eye,
" To view and weye the times and reigns to come.
Ne is it likely, though the king be wroth,
That he yet will, or that the realm will bear,
Extreme revenge upon his only son.
Or if he would, what one is he that dare
Be minister to such an enterprise?
And here you be now placed in your own,
Amyd your Friends, your vassalles and your strength.
We shall defend and keep your person safe,
Till either counsel turn his tender mind,
Or age, or sorrow end his werie days.
But if the fear of Gods, and secret grudge
Of natures law, repining at the fact,
Withholde your courage from so great attempt:
Know ye, that lust of kingdoms has no law.
The Gods do bear and well allow in kings,
The things they abhor in rascal routes.
" When kings on slender quarrels run to wars,
" And then in cruel and unkindly wise,
" Command theftes, rapes, murders of innocents,
" The spoil of towns, ruins of mighty realms:
" Think you such princes do suppose them selves
" Subject to laws of kind, and fear of Gods?
Murders and violent theftes in private men,
Are heinous crimes and full of foul reproach,
Yet none offense, but decked with glorious name
Of noble conquestes, in the hands of kings.
But if you like not yet so ho^e devise,
Ne list to take such vauntage of the time,
But though with peril of your own estate,
You will not be the first that shall invade:
Assemble yet your force for your defense,
And for your safety stand upon your guard.

Dordan. O heaven was there ever heard or known,
So wicked counsel to a noble prince?
Let me (my Lord) disclose unto your grace
This heinous tale, what mischief it contains,
Your fathers death, your brothers and your own,
Your present murder and eternal shame.
Hear me (O King) and suffer not to sink
So high a treason in your princely breast.

Ferrex. The mighty Gods forbid that ever I
Should once conceive such mischief in my heart.
Although my brother has bereft my realm,
And bear perhaps to me an hateful mind:
Shall I revenge it, with his death therefore?
Or shall I so destroy my fathers life
That gave me life? the Gods forbid, I say.
Cease you to speak so any more to me.
Ne you my friend with answer once repeat
So foul a tale. In silence let it die.
What lord or subject shall have hope at all,
That under me they safely shall enjoy
Their goods, their honors, lands and liberties,
With whom, neither one only brother dear,
Ne father dearer, could emoye their lives?
But since, I fear my younger brothers rage,
And since perhaps some other man may give
Some like advise, to move his grudging head
At mine estate, which counsel may perchance
Take greater force with him, than this with me,
I will in secret so prepare my self,
As if his malice or his lust to reign
Break forth in arms or sodeine violence,
I may withstand his rage and keep mine own.

Dordan. I fear the fatal time now draws on,
When civil hate shall end the noble line
Of famous Brute and of his royal seed.
Great Jove defend the mischiefs now at hand.
O that the Secretaries wise advise
Had erst been heard when he besought the king
Not to divide his land, nor send his sons
To further parts from presence of his court,
Ne yet to yield to them his governance.
Lo such are they now in the royal throne
As was rash Phaeton in Phoebus carre.
Ne then the fiery stedes did draw the flame
With wilder rando^ through the kindled skies,
Than traitorous counse^^ now will whirle about
The youthful heads of these unskillful kings.
But I here of their father will inform.
The reverence of him perhaps shall stay
The growing mischiefs, while they yet are green.
If this help not, then woe unto them selves,
The prince, the people, the divided land.

Actus secundus.
Scena secunda.
Porrex. Tyndar. Philander. POrrex. And is it thus? And does he so prepare,
Against his brother as his mortal foe?
And now while yet his aged father lives?
Neither regardes he him? nor fears he me?
War would he have? and he shall have it so.

Tyndar. I saw my self the great prepared store
Of horse, of armor, and of weapon there,
Ne bring I to my lord reported tales
Without the ground of seen and fearched troth.
Lo secret quarrels run about his court,
To bring the name of you my lord in hate.
Each man almost can now debate the cause,
And ask a reason of so great a wrong,
Why he so noble and so wise a prince,
Is as unworthy rest his heritage?
And why the king, misseledde by crafty means,
Divided thus his land from course of right?
The wiser sort hold down their griefull heads.
Each man withdrawes from talk and company,
Of those that have been known to favor you.
To hide the mischief of their meaning there,
Rumors are spread of your preparing here.
The rascal numbers of unskillful sort
Are filled with monstrous tales of you and yours.
In secret I was counseled by my friends,
To have me thence, and brought you as you know
Letters from those, that both can truly tell,
And would not write unless they knew it well.

Philand. My lord, yet ere you move unkindly war,
Send to your brother to demand the cause.
Perhaps some traitorous tales have filled his ears
With false reports against your noble grace:
Which once disclosed, shall end the growing strife,
That else not stayed with wise foresight in time
Shall hazard both your kingdoms and your lives.
Send to your father eke, he shall appease
Your kindled minds, and rid you of this fear.

Porrex. Rid me of fear? I fear him not at all:
Ne will to him, ne to my father send.
If danger were for one to tarry there,
Think ye it safety to return again?
In mischiefs, such as Ferrex now intendes,
The wonted courteous laws to messengers
Are not observed, which in just war they use.
Shall I so hazard any one of mine?
Shall I betray my trusty friends to him,
That have disclosed his treason unto me?
Let him entreat that fears, I fear him not.
Or shall I to the king my father send?
Yea and send now, while such a mother lives,
That loves my brother, and that hates me?
Shall I give leisure, by my fond delays,
To Ferrex to oppress me all unware?
I will not, but I will invade his realm,
And seek the traitor prince within his court.
Mischief for mischief is a due reward.
His wretched head shall pay the worthy price
Of this his treason and his hate to me.
Shall I abide, and treat, and send and pray,
And hold my yelden throat to traitors knife?
While I with valiant mind and conquering force,
Might rid my self of foes: and win a realm?
Yet rather, when I have the wretches head,
Then to the king my father will I send.
The bootelesse case may yet appease his wrath:
If not, I will defend me as I may.

Philand. Lo here the end of these two youthful kings,
The fathers death, the ruin of their realms.
" O most unhappy state of counselors,
" That light on so unhappy lords and times,
" That neither can their good advise be heard,
" Yet must they bear the blames of ill success.
But I will to the king their father haste,
Ere this mischief come to the likely end,
That if the mindful wrath of wrekefull Gods,
Since mighty Ilions fall not yet appeased
With these poor remnantes of the Trojan name,
Have not determined by unmoved fate
Out of this realm to raze the Brittishe line,
By good advise, by awe of fathers name,
By force of wiser lords, this kindled hate
May yet be quentched, ere it consume us all.

Chorus. When youth not bridled with a guiding stay
Is left to randon of their own delight,
And welds whole realms, by force of soueraign sway,
Great is the danger of vnmaistred might,
Lest skillesse rage throw down with headlong fall^
Their lands, their states, their lives, them selves and al^
When growing pride does fill the swelling breast,
And gredy lust does raise the climbing mind,
Oh hardly may the peril be represt,
Ne fear of angry Gods, ne laws kind.
Ne countries care can fiered hearts restrain,
When force has armed envy and disdain.
When kings of fore^ette will neglect the read
Of best advise, and yield to pleasing tales,
That do their fancies noisome humor feed,
Ne reason, nor regard of right auailes.
Succeding heaps of plagues shall teach to late,
To learn the mischiefs of misguided state.
Fowie fall the traitor false, that undermines
The love of brethren to destroy them both.
Woe to the prince, that pliant care ^nclynes,
And yeldes his mind to poisonous tale, that flows
From flattering mouth. And woe to wretched land
That wastes it self with civil sword in hand.
Lo, thus it is, poison in gold to take,
And wholesome drink in homely cup forsake.

The order and signification of the domme show before the third act.
First the music of flutes began to play, during which came in upon the
stage a company of mourners all clad in black betokening death and sorrow to
ensue upon the ill advised misgouernement and discention of brethren, as
befell upon the murderer of Ferrex by his younger brother. After the mourners
had passed thryse about the stage, they departed, and than the music ceased.

Actus tertius.
Scena prima.
Gorboduc. Eubulus. Arostus. Philander. Nuntius. GOrb. O cruel fates, O mindful
wrath of Gods,
Whose vengeance neither Simois stained streams
Flowing with blood of Trojan princes slain,
Nor Phrygian fields made rank with corpses dead
Of Asian kings and lords, can yet appease,
Ne slaughter of unhappy Pryams race,
Nor Ilions fall made level with the soil.
Can yet suffice: but still continued rage
Pursues our lines, and from the farthest seas
Does chase the issues of destroyed Troy.
" Oh no man happy, till his end be seen.
If any flowing wealth and seemyng joy
In present years might make a happy wight,
Happy was Hecuba the wofullest wretch
That ever lived to make a myrrour of,
And happy Pryam with his noble sons.
And happy I, till now alas I see
And feel my most unhappy wretchedness.
Behold my lords, read ye this letter here.
Lo it conteins the ruin of our realm,
If timely speed provide not hasty help.
Yet (O ye Gods) if ever woeful king
Might move ye kings of kings, wreke it on me
And on my sons, not on this giltlesse realm.
Send down your wasting flames from wrathful skies,
To reave me and my sons the hateful breath.
Read, read my lords: this is the matter why
I called ye now to have your good advise.

The letter from Dordan the Counselor of the elder prince.
Eubulus reads the letter. MY soneraigne lord, what I am loath to write,
But lothest am to see, that I am forced
By letters now to make you understand.
My lord Ferrex your eldest son misledde
By traitorous fraud of young vntempred wits,
Assembleth force against your younger son,
Ne can my counsel yet withdraw the heat
And furyous panges of his enflamed head.
Disdain (says he) of his disheritance
Arms him to wreke the great pretended wrong,
With ciuyll sword upon his brothers life.
If present help do not restrain this rage,
This flame will wast your sons, your land, and you.
Your majesty's faithful and most humble subject Dordan.


ARostus. O king, appease your grief and stay your plaint.
Great is the matter, and a woeful case.
But timely knowledge may bring timely help.
Send for them both unto your presence here.
The reverence of your honourage, and state,
Your grave advice, the awe of fathers name,
Shall quickly knit again this broken peace.
And if in either of my lords your sons,
Be such untamed and vnyelding pride,
As will not bend unto your noble hestes:
If Ferrex the elder son can bear no peer,
Or Porrex not content, aspires to more
Than you him gave above his native right:
Join with the iuster side, so shall you force
Them to agree, and hold the land in stay.

Eub. What means this? Lo yonder comes in have
Philander from my lord your younger son.

Gorb. The Gods send joyful news.

Phil. The mighty Jove
Preserve your majesty, O noble king.

Gorb. Philander, welcome: but how does my son?

Phil. Your son, sir, lives, and healthie I him left.
But yet (O king) the want of lustful health
Could not be half so griefefull to your grace,
As these most wretched tidings that I bring.

Gorb. O heavens, yet more? not end of woes to me?

Phil. Tyndar, O king, came lately from the court
Of Ferrex, to my lord your younger son,
And made report of great prepared store
For war, and says that it is wholly meant
Against Porrex, for high disdain that he
Lives now a king and egall in degree
With him, that claims to succeed the whole,
As by due title of discending right.
Porrex is now so set on flaming fire,
Partly with kindled rage of cruel wrath,
Partly with hope to gain a realm thereby,
That he in have prepares to invade
His brothers land, and with unkindly war
Threatens the murder of your elder son,
Ne could I him persuade that first he should
Send to his brother to demand the cause,
Nor yet to you to stay this hateful strife,
Wherefore sith there no more I can be heard,
I come my self now to inform your grace,
And to beseech you, as you love the life
And safety of your children and your realm,
Now to employ your wisdom and your force
To stay this mischief ere it be to late.

Gorb. Are they in arms? would he not send to me?
Is this the honor of a fathers name?
In vain we travail to assuage their minds,
As if their hearts, whom neither brothers love,
Nor fathers awe, nor kingdoms cares, can move,
Our counsels could withdraw from raging heat.
Jove slay them both, and end the cursed line.
For though perhaps fear of such mighty force
As I my lords, joined with your noble aides,
May yet raise, shall repress their present heat,
The secret grudge and malice will remain,
The fire not quenched, but kept in close restraint,
Fed still within, breaks forth with double flame.
Their death and mine must peaze the angry Gods

Phil. Yield not, O king, so much to weak dispeire.
Your sons yet live, and long I trust, they shall.
If fates had taken you from earthly life,
Before beginning of this ciuyll strife:
Perhaps your sounes in their vnmaistered youth,
Loose from regard of any living wight,
Would run on headlong, with unbridled race,
To their own death and ruin of this realm.
But since the Gods, that have the care for kings*
Of things and times dispose the order so,
That in your life this kindled flame breaks forth,
While yet your life, your wisdom, and your power.
May stay the growing mischief, and repress
The fiery blaze of their inkindled heat:
It seems, and so ye ought to deem thereof,
That loving Jove has tempred so the time
Of this debate to happen in your days,
That you yet living may the same appeaze,
And add it to the glory of your latter age,
And they our sons may learn to live in peace.
Beware (O king) the greatest harm of all,
Lest by your waylefull plaints your hastened death
Yield larger room unto their growing rage.
Preserve your life, the only hope of stay.
And if your highness herein list to use
Wisdom or force, counsel or knightly aid:
Lo we, our persons, powers and lives are yours,
Use us till death, O king, we are your own.

Eub. Lo here the peril that was erst foresene,
When you, (O king) did first divide your land,
And yield your present reign unto your sons,
But now (O noble prince) now is no time
To wail and plain, and wast your woeful life.
Now is the time for present good advise.
Sorrow does dark the judgment of the wit.
" The heart unbroken and the courage free
" From feeble faintness of bootelesse despeire,
" Does either rise to safety or renown
" By noble valor of vnuanquisht mind,
" Or yet does perish in more happy sort.
Your grace may send to either of your sons
Some one both wise and noble personage,
Which with good counsel and with weighty name,
Of father, shall present before their eyes
Your hest, your life, your safety and their own,
The present mischief of their deadly strife.
And in the while, assemble you the force
Which your commandment and the spedy have
Of all my lords here present can prepare.
The terror of your mighty power shall stay
The rage of both, or yet of one at lest.

Nun. O king the greatest grief that ever prince did hear,
That ever woeful messenger did tell,
That ever wretched land has seen before,
I bring to you. Porrex your younger son
With soden force, invaded has the land
That you to Ferrex did allotte to rule,
And with his own most bloody hand he has
His brother slain, and does possess his realm.

Gorb. O heavens send down the flames of your revenge,
Destroy I say with flash of wrekefull fire
The traitor son, and then the wretched sire.
But let us go, that yet perhaps I may
Die with revenge, and peaze the hateful gods.

Chor. The lust of kingdom knows no sacred faith,
No rule of reason, no regard of right,
No kindly love, no fear of heavens wrath:
But with contempt of Gods, and man's despite,
Through blodie slaughter, does prepare the ways
To fatal scepter and accursed reign.
The son so lothes the fathers lingering days,
Ne dreades his hand in brothers blood to stain.
O wretched prince, ne do thou yet record
The yet fresh murders done within the land
Of thy forefathers, when the cruel sword
Bereft Morgan his life with cosyns hand?
Thus fatal plagues pursue the guilty race,
Whose murderous hand imbrued with giltlesse blood
Asks vengeance still before the heavens face,
With endless mischiefs on the cursed brood.
The wicked child thus bringes to woeful sire
The mournful plaintes, to wast his very life.
Thus do the cruel flames of ciuyll fire
Destroy the parted reign with hateful strife.
And hence does spring the well from which does flow
The dead black streams of mourning, plaints and woe.

The order and signification of the domme show before the fourth act.
First the music of Howb^ies began to play, during which there came from
under the stage, as though out of hell three furies. Alecto, Megera, and
^tesiphone, clad in black garments sprinkled with blood and flames, their
bodies girt with snakes, their heds spread with serpents in ste^d of hear, the
one bearing in her hand a Snake, the other a Whip, and the third a burning
Firebrand: each driving before them a king and a queen, which moved by furies
unnaturally had slain their own children. The names of the kings and queens
were these. Tantalus, Medea, Athamas, Ino, Cambises, Althea, after that the
furies and these had passed about the s^age thrice, they departed and than the
music ceased: hereby was signified the unnatural murders to follow, that is
to say. Porrex slain by his own mother. And of king Gorboduc and queen
Uiden, killed by their own subjects.

Actus quartus.
Scena prima.
Viden sola. VId. Why should I live, and liuger forth my time
In longer life to double my distress?
O me most woeful wight, whom no mishappe
Long ere this day could have bereued hence.
Might not these hands by fortune, or by fate,
Have perst this breast, and life with iron rest?
Or in this palace here, where I so long
Have spent my days, could not that happy hour
Once, once have hapt in which these hugie frames
With death by fall might have oppressed me?
Or should not this most hard and cruel soil,
So often where I have pressed my wretched steps,
Sometime had ruthe of mine accursed life,
To rende in twain swallow me therein?
So had my bones possessed now in peace
Their happy grave within the closed ground,
And greadie worms had gnawen this pyned har^
Without my feeling pain: so should not now
This living breast remain the ruthefull tomb,
Wherein my heart yelden to death is graued:
Nor driery thoughts with panges of pining grief
My doleful mind had not afflicted thus.
O my beloved son: O my sweet child,
My dear Ferrex, my joy, my lives delyght.
Is my beloved son, is my sweet child,
My dear Ferrex, my joy, my lives delight.
Murdered with cruel death? O hateful wretch,
O heinous traitor both to heaven and earth.
Thou Porrex, thou this damned deed have wrought,
Thou Porrex, thou shall dearly bye the same.
Traitor to kin and kind, to sire and me,
To thine own flesh, and traitor to thy self.
The Gods on thee in hell shall wreke their wrath,
And here in earth this hand shall take revenge,
On thee Porrex, thou false and caitife wight.
If after blood, so eigre were thy thirst,
And murderous mind had so possessed thee,
If such hard heart of rock and stony flint
Lived in thy breast, that nothing else could like
Thy cruel tyrants thought but death and blood:
Wild savage beasts, might not their slaughter seru^
To feed thy gredie will, and in the midst
Of their entrails to stain thy deadly hands
With blood deserved, and drink thereof thy fill?
Or if naught else but death and blood of man
Might please thy lust, could none in Britain land,
Whose heart betorne out of his panting breast
With thine own hand, or work what death thou would,
Suffice to make a sacrifice to peaze
That deadly mind and murderous thought in thee?
But he who in the self same womb was wrapped,
Where thou in dismal hour receiuedst life?
Or if needs, needs, thy hand must slaughter make,
Moughtest thou not have reached a mortal wound,
And with thy sword have pearsed this cursed womb,
That the accursed Porrex brought to light,
And given me a just reward therefore?
So Ferrex yet sweet life might have enjoyed,
And to his aged father comfort brought,
With some young son in whom they both might live.
But whereunto waste I this ruthful speech,
To thee that have thy brothers blood thus shed?
Shall I still think that from this womb thou sprung?
That I thee bare? or take thee for my son?
No traitor, no: I thee refuse for mine,
Murderer I thee renounce, thou art not mine.
Never, O wretch, this womb conceived thee,
Nor never bode I painful throws for thee.
Changeling to me thou art, and not my child,
Nor to no wight, that spark of pity knew.
Ruthelesse, unkind, monster of natures work,
Thou never sucked the milk of woman's breast,
But from thy birth the cruel Tigers teates
Have nursed thee, nor yet of flesh and blood
Formde is thy heart, but of hard iron wrought,
And wild and desert woods bredde thee to life.
But can thou hope to escape my just revenge?
Or that these hands will not be wrooke on thee?
Do thou not know that Ferrex mother lives
That loved him more dearly than her self?
And does she live, and is not venged on thee?

Actus quartus.
Scena secunda.
Gorboduc. Arostus. Eubulus. Porrex. Marcella. GOrb. We marvel much whereto
this lingering stay
Falls out so long: Porrex unto our court
By order of our letters is returned*
And Eubulus received from us by hest
At his arrival here to give him charge
Before our presence straight to make repair,
And yet we have no word whereof he stays.

Arostus. Lo where he commes and Eubulus with him.

Eubulus. According to your highness hest to me,
Here have I Porrex brought even in such sort
As from his weried horse he did alight,
For that your grace did will such have therein.

Gorboduc. We like and praise this spedy will in you,
To work the thing that to your charge we gave.
Porrex, if we so far should swerve from kind,
And from those bounds which law of nature sets,
As thou have done by vile and wretched deed,
In cruel murder of thy brothers life,
Our present hand could stay no longer time,
But straight should bathe this blade in blood of thee
As just revenge of thy detested crime.
No: we should not offend the law of kind,
If now this sword of ours did slay thee here:
For thou have murdered him, whose heinous death
Even natures force does move us to revenge
By blood again: and justice forces us
To measure death for death, thy due desert.
Yet since thou art our child, and since as yet
In this hard case what word thou can allege
For thy defense, by us has not been heard,
We are content to stay our will for that
Which justice biddes us presently to work,
And give thee leave to use thy speech at full
If ought thou have to lay for thine excuse.

Porrex. Neither O king, I can or will deny
But that this hand from Ferrex life has reft:
Which fact how much my doleful heart does wail,
Oh would it might as full appear to sight
As inward grief does pour it forth to me.
So yet perhaps if ever ruthefull heart
Melting in tears within a manly breast,
Through deep repentance of his bloody fact,
If ever grief, if ever woeful man
Might move regreite with sorrow of his fault,
I think the torment of my mournful case
Known to your grace, as I do feel the same,
Would force even wrath her self to pity me.
But as the water troubled with the mudde
Shows not the face which else the eye should see.
Even so your irefull mind with stirred thought,
Can not so perfectly discern my cause.
But this unhappy, amongst so many heaps,
I must content me with, most wretched man,
That to my self I must reserve my woe
In pining thoughts of mine accursed fact,
Since I may not show here my smallest grief
Such as it is, and as my breast endures,
Which I esteem the greatest misery
Of all misschappes that fortune now can send,
Not that I rest in hope with plaint and tears
To purchase life: for to the Gods I clepe
For true record of this my faithful speech,
Never this heart shall have the thoughtfull dread
To die the death that by your graces dome
By just desert, shall be pronounced to me:
Nor never shall this tongue once spend the speech
Pardon to crave, or seek by suit to live.
I mean not this, as though I were not touchde
With care of dreadful death, or that I held
Life in contempt: but that I know, the mind
Stoupes to no dread, although the flesh be frail,
And for my gilt, I yield the same so great
As in my self I find a fear to sue
For grant of life.

Gorbodue. In vain, O wretch, thou show
A woeful heart, Ferrex now lies in grave,
Slain by thy hand.

Porrex. Yet this, O father, hear:
And then I end. Your majesty well knows,
That when my brother Ferrex and my self
By your own hest were joined in governance
Of this your graces realm of Britain land,
I never sought nor trauailled for the same,
Nor by my self, nor by no friend I wrought,
But from your highness will alone it sprung,
Of your most gracious goodness bent to me.
But how my brothers heart even then repined
With swollen disdain against mine egall rule,
Seeing that realm, which by descent should grow
Wholly to him, allotted half to me?
Even in your highness court he now remains,
And with my brother then in nearest place,
Who can record, what proof thereof was shewde,
And how my brothers envious heart appearde.
Yet I that judged it my part to seek
His favor and good will, and loath to make
Your highness know, the thing which should have brought
Brief to your grace, and your offense to him,
Hoping my earnest suit should soon have won
A loving heart within a brothers breast,
Wrought in that sort that for a pledge of love
And faithful heart, he gave to me his hand.
This made me think, that he had banished quite
All rancour from his thought and bare to me
Such hearty love, as I did owe to him.
But after once we left your graces court,
And from your highness presence lived apart,
This egall rule still, still, did grudge him so
That now those enumous sparks which erst lay raked
In living cinders of dissembling breast,
Kindled so far within his heart disdain,
That longer could he not refrain from proof
Of secret practice to deprive me life
By poisons force, and had berest me so,
If mine own servant hired to this fact
And moved by troth with hate to work the same,
In time had not bewrayed it unto me.
When thus I saw the knot of love vnknitte,
All honest league and faithful promise broke,
The law of kind and troth thus rent in twain,
His heart on mischief set, and in his breast
Black treason hid, then, then did I despeire
That ever time could win him friend to me.
Then saw I how he smiled with slaying knife
Wrapped under cloak, then saw I deep deceit
Lurk in his face and death prepared for me:
Even nature moved me than to hold my life
More dear to me than his, and had this hand,
Since by his life my death must needs ensue,
And by his death my life to be preserved,
To shed his blood, and seek my safety so.
And wisdom willed me without protract
In spedie wise to put the same in ure.
Thus have I told the cause that moved me
To work my brothers death and so I yield
My life, my death, to judgment of your grace.

Gord. Oh cruel wight, should any cause prevail
To make thee stain thy hands with brothers blood:
But what of thee we will resolve to do,
Shall yet remain unknown: Thou in the mean
Shall from our royal presence banished be,
Until our princely pleasure further shall
To thee be showed. Depart therefore our sight
Accursed child. What cruel desrenie,
What froward fate has sorted us this chance,
That even in those where we should comfort find,
Where our delight now in our aged days
Sold rest and be, even there our only grief
And depest sorrows to abridge our life,
Most pyning cares and deadly thoughts do grow?

Aros. Your grace should now in these grave years of yours
Have found ere this y^ price of mortal joys,
How short they be, how fading here in earth,
How full of change, how brittle our estate,
Of nothing sure, save only of the death,
To whom both man and all the world does owe
Their end at last, neither should natures power
In other sort against your heart prevail,
Than as the naked hand whose stroke assayes
The armed breast where force does light in vain.

Gorbod. Many can yield right sage and grave advise
Of pacient sprite to others wrapped in woe,
And can in speech both rule and conquer kind,
Who if by proof they might feel natures force,
Would show them selves men as they are in deed,
Which now will needs be gods. But what does mean
The sorry chere of her that here does come?

Marcella. Oh where is ruth? or where is pity now?
Whether is gentle heart and mercy fled?
Are they exiled out of our stony breasts,
Never to make return? is all the world
Drowned in blood, and soncke in cruelty?
If not in women mercy may be found,
If not (alas) within the mothers breast,
To her own child, to her own flesh and blood,
If ruthe be banished thence, if pity there
May have no place, if there no gentle heart
Do live and dwell, where should we seek it then?

Gorb. Madame (alas) what means your woeful tale?

Marcella. O fillie woman I, why to this hour
Have kind and fortune thus deferred my breath,
That I should live to see this doleful day?
Will ever wight believe that such hard heart
Could rest within the cruel mothers breast,
With her own hand to slay her only son?
But out (alas) these eyes beheld the same,
They saw the driery sight, and are become^
Most ruthful records of the bloody fact.
Porrex (alas) is by his mother slain,
And with her hand, a woeful thing to tell,
While slumbring on his careful bed he restes
His heart stabde in with knife is rest of life.

Gorboduc. O Eubulus, oh draw this sword of ours,
And pearce this heart with speed. O hateful light,
O loathsome life, O sweet and welcome death.
Dear Eubulus work this we thee beseech.

Eubulus. Pacient your grace, perhaps he lives yet.
With wound received, but not of certain death.

Gorboduc. O let us then repair unto the place,
And see if Porrex live, or thus be slain.

Marcella. Alas he lives not, it is to true,
That with these eyes of him a perelesse prince,
Son to a king, and in the flower of youth,
Even with a twinke a senseless stock I saw.

Arostus. O damned deed.

Marcella. But hear his ruthefull end.
The noble prince, pearst with the sodeine wound,
Out of his wretched slumber hastily start,
Whose strength now failing straight he overthrew,
When in the fall his eyes even new unclosed
Beheld the Queen, and cried to her for help.
We then, alas, the ladies which that time
Did there attend, seeing that heinous deed,
And hearing him often call the wretched name
Of mother, and to cry to her for aid,
Whose direful hand gave him the mortal wound,
Pitying (alas) for naught else could we do)
His ruthefull end, ran to the woeful bed,
Dispoyled straight his breast, and all we might
Wiped in vain with napkins next at hand,
The sodeine streams of blood that flushed fast
Out of the gaping wound, O what a look,
O what a ruthefull steadfast eye me thought
He fixed upon my face, which to my death
Will never part fro me, when with a braide
A deep fet sigh he gave, and therewithal
Clasping his hands, to heaven he cast his sight.
And straight pale death pressing within his face
The flying ghost his mortal corpse forsook.

Arostus. Never did age bring forth so vile a fact.

Marcella. O hard and cruel hap, that thus assigned
Unto so worthy a wight so wretched end:
But most hard cruel heart, that could consent
To lend the hateful destenies that hand,
By which, alas, so heinous crime was wrought.
O Queen of adamant, O marble breast.
If not the favor of his comely face,
If not his princely chere and countenance,
His valiant active arms, his manly breast,
If not his fair and seemly personage,
His noble limnies in such proportion cast
As would have wrapped a silly woman's thought,
If this might not have moved thy bloody heart.
And that most cruel hand the wretched weapon
Even to let fall, and kiste him in the face,
With tears for ruthe to reaue such one by death:
Should nature yet consent to slay her son?
O mother, thou to murder thus thy child?
Even Jove with justice must with lightning flames
From heaven send down some strange revenge on thee.
Ah noble prince, how often have I beheld
Thee mounted on thy fierce and traumpling stead,
Shining in armor bright before the tilt,
And with thy mistress sleue tied on thy helm,
And charge thy staff to please thy ladies eye,
That bowed the head piece of thy friendly foe?
How often in arms on horse to bend the mace?
How often in arms on foot to break the sword,
Which never now these eyes may see again.

Arostus, Madame, alas, in vain these plaints are shed,
Rather with me depart, and help to swage,
The thoughtfull griefs that in the aged king
Must needs by nature grow, by death of this
His only son, whom he did hold so dear.

Marcella. What wight is that which saw y^ I did see,
And could refrain to wail with plaint and tears?
Not I, alas, that heart is not in me.
But let us go, for I am grieved anew,
To call to mind the wretched fathers woe.

Chorus. When greedy lust in royal seat to reign
Has re^t all care of Gods and eke of men,
And cruel heart, wrath, treason, and disoaine
Within ambicious breast are lodged, then
Behold how mischief wide her self displayes,
And with the brothers hand the brother slayes.
When blood thus shed, does stain the heavens face,
Crying to Jove for vengeance of the deed,
The mightic God even moves from his place,
With wrath to wreke: then sendes he forth with speed
The dreadful furies, daughters of the night,
With Serpents girt, carrying the whip of ire,
With hear of stinging Snakes, and shining bright
With flames and blood, and with a brand of fire.
These for revenge of wretched murder done,
Do make the mother kill her only son.
Blood asks blood, and death must death requite.
Jove by his just and everlasting dome
Justly has ever so requited it.
The times before record, and times to come
Shall find it true, and so does present proof
Present before our eyes for our behoof.
O happy wight that suffres not the snare
Of murderous mind to tangle him in blood.
And happy he that can in time beware
By others harms and turn it to his good.
But woe to him that fearing not to offend
Does serve his lust, and will not see the end,

The order and signification of the domme show before the fifth act.
First the drommes and sluites, began to sound, during which there came forth
upon the stage a company of Hargabusiers and of Armed men all in order of
battle. These after their pieces discharged, and that the armed men had three
times marched about the stage, departed, and then the drommes and fluits did
cease. Hereby was signified tumults, rebellions. arms and civil wars to
follow, as fell in the realm of great Brittayne, which by the space of fifty
years and more continued in civil war between the nobility after the death
of king Gorboduc, and of his issues, for want of certain limitacion in
succession of the crown, till the time of Dunwallo Molmutius, who reduced the
land to monarchy.

Actus quintus.
Scena prima.
Clotyn. Mandud. Gwenard. Fergus. Eubulus. CLot. Did ever age bring forth such
tirants hearts?
The brother has bereft the brothers life,
The mother she has died her cruel hands
In blood of her own son, and now at last
The people lo forgetting troth and love,
Contemning quite both law and loyal heart,
Even they have slain their sovereign lord and queen.

Mand. Shall this their traitorous crime unpunished rest?
Even yet they cease not, carried on with rage,
In their rebellious routes, to threaten still
A new blood shed unto the princes kin,
To slay them all, and to vproote the race
Both of the king and queen, so are they moved
With Porrex death, wherein they falsely charge
The giltlesse king without desert at all,
And traitorously have murdered him therefore,
And eke the queen.

Gwena. Shall subjects dare with force
To work revenge upon their princes fact?
Admit the worst that may, as sure in this
The deed was foul, the queen to slay her son,
Shall yet the subject seek to take the sword,
Arise against his lord, and slay his king?
O wretched state, where those rebellious hearts
Are not rent out even from their living breasts,
And with the body thrown unto the fowls
As carrion food, for terror of the rest.

Ferg. There can no punishment be thought to great
For this so grievous cryine: let speed therefore
Be used therein for it behooves so.

Eubulus. Ye all my lords, I see, consent in one
And I as one consent with ye in all.
I hold it more than need with sharpest law
To punish this tinnultuous bloody rage.
For nothing more may shake the common state,
Than sufferance of vproares without redress,
Whereby how some kingdoms of mighty power
After great conquestes made, and flourishing
In fame and wealth, have been to ruin brought,
I pray to Jove that we may rather wayle
Such hap in them than witness in our selves.
Eke fully with the duke my mind agrees,
Though kings forget to govern as they ought,
Yet subjects must obey as they are bound.
But now my lords, before ye farther wade,
Or spend your speech, what sharp revenge shall fall
By justice plague on these rebellious wightes,
Me thinks ye rather should first search the way,
By which in time the rage of this vproare
Might be repressed, and these great tumults ceased.
Even yet the life of Brittayne land does hang
In traitors balaunce of unequal weight.
Think not my lords the death of Gorboduc,
Nor yet Videnaes blood will cease their rage:
Even our own lives, our wives and children dear,
Our country dearest of all, in danger stands,
Now to be spoiled, now, now made desolate,
And by our selves a conquest to ensue.
For give once swey unto the peoples lusts,
To rush forth, on, and stay them not in time,
And as the stream that rowleth down the hill,
So will they headlong run with raging thoughts
From blood to blood, from mischief unto ^oe,
To ruin of the realm, them selves and all,
So giddy are the common peoples minds,
So glad of change, more wavering than the sea.
Ye see (my lords) what strength these rebels have,
What hugie nombre is assembled still,
For though the traitorous fact, for which they rose
Be wrought and done, yet lodge they still in field
So that how far their furies yet will stretch
Breat cause we have to dread. That we may seek
By present battle to repress their power,
Speed must we use to levy force therefore.
For either they forthwith will mischief work,
Or their rebellious roares forthwith will cease.
These violent things may have no lasting long.
Let us therefore use this for present help,
Persuade by gentle speech, and offer grace
With gift of pardon save unto the chief,
And that upon condition that forthwith
They yield the captains of their euterprise,
To bear such guerdon of their traitorous fact,
As may be both due vengeance to them selves,
And wholesome terror to posterity.
This shall, I think, scatter the greatest part,
That now are holden with desire of home,
Weried in field with cold of winters nights,
And some (no doubt) stricken with dread of law.
When this is once proclaimed, it shall make
The captains to mistrust the multitude,
Whose safety biddes them to betray their heads,
And so much more because the rascal routes,
In things of great and perilous attemptes,
Are never trusty to the noble race.
And while we treat and stand on terms of grace,
We shall both stay their furies rage the while,
And eke gain time, whose only help suffices
Withoten war to vanquish rebels power
In the mean while, make you in redynes
Such band of horsemen as ye may prepare.
Horsemen (you know) are not the commons strength,
But are the force and store of noble men,
Whereby the vnchosen and unarmed sort
Of skillesse rebels, whom none other power
But nombre makes to be of dreadful force,
With sodeyne brunt may quickly be oppressed.
And if this gentle mean of proffered grace,
With stubborn hearts cannot so far avail,
As to assuage their desperate courages.
Then do I wish such slaughter to be made,
As present age and eke posterity
May be adrad with horror of revenge,
That justly then shall on these rebels fall.
This is my lord the sum of mine advise.

Clotyn. Neither this case admittes debate at large,
And though it did, this speech that has been said
Has well abridged the tale I would have told.
Fully with Eubulus do I consent
In all that he has said: and if the same
To you my lords, may seem for best advise,
I wish that it should straight be put in ure.

Mandud. My lords than let us presently depart,
And follow this that likes us so well.

Fergus. If ever time to gain a kingdom here
Were offered man, now it is offered me.
The realm is reft both of their king and queen,
The offspring of the prince is slain and dead,
No issue now remains, the heir unknown,
The people are in arms and mutynies,
The nobles they are busied how to cease
These great rebellious tumultes and vproares,
And Brittavne land now desert left alone
Amyd these broils uncertain where to rest,
Offers her self unto that noble heart
That will or dare pursue to bear her crown.
Shall I that am the duke of Albanye
Descended from that line of noble blood,
Which has so long flourished in worthy fame,
Of valiant hearts, such as in noble breasts
Of right should rest above the the baser sort,
Refuse to venture life to win a crown?
Whom shall I find enmies that will withstand
My fact herein, if I attempt by arms
To seek the same now in these times of broyle?
These dukes power can hardly well appease
The people that already are in arms.
But if perhaps my force be once in field,
Is not my strength in power above the best
Of all these lords now left in Brittayne land?
And though they should match me with power of me^,
Yet doubtful is the chance of battailles ioyued,
If victors of the field we may depart,
Ours is the scepter then of great Brittayne*
If slain amid the plain this body lie,
Mine enemies yet shall not deny me this,
But that I dyed giving the noble charge
To hazard life for conquest of a crown.
Forthwith therefore will I in post depart
To Albanye, and raise in armor there
All power I can: and here my secret friends,
By secret practice shall solicit still,
To seek to win to me the peoples hearts.

Actus quintus.
Scena Secunda.
Eubulus. Clotyn. Mandad. Gwenard. Arostus. Nuntius. Evb. O Jove, how are these
peoples hearts abusde*
What blind fury, thus he adlong caries them?
That though so many books, so many rolls
Of ancient time record, what grievous plagues
Light on these rebels aye, and though so often
Their cares have heard their aged fathers tell,
What just reward these traitors still receive,
Yea though them selves have seen deep death and blood,
By strangling cord and slaughter of the sword,
To such assigned, yet can they not beware,
Yet can not stay their lewd rebellious hands,
But suffering lo foul treason to distaine
Their wretched minds, forget their loyal heart,
Reject all truth and rise against their prince.
A ruthefull case, that those, whom duties bond,
Whom grafted law by nature, truth, and faith,
Bound to preserve their country and their king,
Borne to defend their common wealth and prince,
Even they should give consent thus to subvert
Thee Britain land, and from thy womb should spring
(O native soil) those, that will needs destroy
And tuyne thee and eke them selves in fine.
For lo, when once the dukes had offered grace
Of pardon sweet, the multitude missledde
By traitorous fraud of their ungracious heads,
One sort that saw the dangerous success
Of stubborn standing in rebellious war,
And knew the difference of princes power
From headless nombre of tumultuous routes,
Whom common countreies care, and private fear,
Taught to repent the error of their rage,
Laid hands upon the captains of their band,
And brought them bound unto the mighty dukes.
And other sort not trusting yet so well
The truth of pardon, or mistrusting more
Their own offense than that they could conceive
Such hope of pardon for so foul misdede,
Or for that they their captains could not yield,
Who fearing to be yielded fled before,
Stale home by silence of the secret night,
The third unhappy and enraged sort
Of desperate hearts, who stained in princes blood
From traiterous furour could not be withdrawn
By love, by law, by grace, ne yet by fear,
By proffered life, ne yet by threatened death,
With minds hopeless of life, dreadlesse of death,
Careless of country, and awelesse of God,
Stood bent to fight, as furies did them move,
With violent death to close their traitorous life.
These all by power of horsemen were oppressed,
And with revenging sword slain in the field,
Or with the strangling cord hanged on the tree,
Where yet their carryen carcases do preach
The fruits that rebels reap of their vproares,
And of the murder of their sacred prince.
But lo, where do approach the noble dukes,
By whom these tumults have been thus appeasde.

Clotyn. I think the world will now at length beware
And fear to put on arms against their prince.

Mand. If not? those traiterous hearts that dare rebel,
Let them behold the wide and hugie fields
With blood and bodies spread of rebels slain,
The lofty trees clothed with the corpses dead
That strangled with the cord do hang thereon.

Arostus. A just reward, such as all times before
Have ever lotted to those wretched folks.

Gwen. But what means he that comes here so fast?

Nun. My lords, as duty and my troth does move
And of my country work a care in me,
That if the spending of my breath auailed
To do the service that my heart desires,
I would not shun to embrace a present death:
So have I now in that wherein I thought
My travail might perform some good effect,
Uentred my life to bring these tydinges here.

Fergus the mighty duke of Albanye
Is now in arms and lodges in the field
With twenty thousand men, hither he bendes
His spedy march, and minds to invade the crown,
Daily he gathers strength, and spreads abroad
That to this realm no certain heir remains,
That Brittayne land is left without a guide,
That he the scepter seeks, for nothing else
But to preserve the people and the land,
Which now remain as ship without a stern.
Lo this is that which I have here to say.

Cloyton. Is this his faith? and shall he falsely thus
Abuse the vauntage of unhappy times?
O wretched land, if his outrageous pride,
His cruel and vntempred wilfulness,
His deep dissembling shows of false pretense,
Should once attain the crown of Britain land.
Let us my lords, with timely force resist
The new attempt of this our common foe,
As we would quench the flames of common fire.

Mand. Though we remain without a certain prince,
To weld the realm or guide the wandering rule,
Yet now the common mother of us all,
Our native land, our country, that conteines
Our wives, children, kindred, our selves and all
That ever is or may be dear to man,
Cries unto us to help our selves and her,
Let us advance our powers to repress
This growing foe of all our liberties.

Gwenard. Yea let us so, my lords, with hasty speed.
And ye (O Gods) send us the welcome death,
To shed our blood in field, and leave us not
In lothesome life to longer out our days,
To see the hugie heaps of these vnhappes,
(...) now roll down upon the wretched land,
Where empty place of princely governance,
No certain stay now left of doubtless heir,
Thus leave this guidelesse realm an open pray,
To endless storms and waste of civil war.

Arostus. That ye (my lords) do so agree in one,
To save your country from the violent reign
And wrongfully usurped tyranny
Of him that threatens conquest of you all,
To save your realm, and in this realm your selves,
From foreign thraldom of so proud a prince,
Much do I praise, and I beseech the Gods,
With happy honor to requite it you.
But (O my lords) since now the heavens wrath
Has reft this land the issue of their prince,
Since of the body of our late sovereign lord
Remains no more, since the young kings be slain,
And of the title of descended crown
Uncertainly the diverse minds do think
Even of the learned sort, and more uncertainly
Will parciall fancy and affection deem:
But most uncertainly will climbing pride
And hope of reign withdraw to sundry parts
The doubtful right and hopeful lust to reign:
When once this noble service is achieved
For Britain land the mother of ye all,
When once ye have with armed force represt
The proud attemptes of this Albanian prince,
That threatens thraldom to your native land,
When ye shall vanquishers return from field,
And find the princely state an open pray
To gredie lust and to usurping power,
Then, then (my lords) if ever kindly care
Of ancient honor of your auncesters,
Of present wealth and noblesse of your stocks,
Yea of the lives and safety yet to come
Of your dear wives, your children, and your selves,
Might move your noble hearts with gentle ruth,
Then, then, have pity on the torn estate,
Then help to salve the welneare hopeless sore
Which ye shall do, if ye your selves withholde
The slaying knife from your own mothers throat.
Her shall you save, and you, and yours in her,
If ye shall all with one assent forbear
Once to lay hand or take unto your selves
The crown, by color of pretended right,
Or by what other means so ever it be,
Till first by common counsel of you all
In Parliament the regal diadem
Be set in certain place of governance,
In which your Parliament and in your choice,
Prefer the right (my lords) with respect
Of streugth or friends, or what soever cause
That may set forward any others part.
For right will last, and wrong can not endure.
Right mean I his or hers, upon whose name
The people rest by mean of native line,
Or by the virtue of some former law,
Already made their title to advance.
Such one (my lords) let be your chosen king,
Such one so borne within your native land,
Such one prefer, and in no wise admit
The heavy yoke of foreign governance,
Let foreign titles yield to public wealth.
And with that heart wherewith ye now prepare
Thus to withstand the proud muading foe,
With that same heart (my lords) keep out also
Unnatural thraldom of strangers reign,
Ne suffer you against the rules of kind
Your mother land to serve a foreign prince.

Eubulus. Lo here the end of Brutus royal line,
And lo the entry to the woeful wrack,
And utter ruin of this noble realm.
The royal king, and eke his sons are slain,
No ruler restes within the regal seat,
The heir, to whom the scepter longes, unknown,
That to each force of foreign princes power,
Whom vauntage of our wretched state may move
By sodeine arms to gain so rich a realm,
And to the proud and gredie mind at home,
Whom blinded lust to reign lead to aspire,
Lo Britain realm is left an open pray,
A present spoil by conquest to ensue.
Who sees not now how many rising minds
Do feed their thoughts, with hope to reach a realm?
And who will not by force attempt to win
So great a gain, that hope persuades to have?
A simple color shall for title serve.
Who winnes the royal crown will want no right,
Nor such as shall display by long descent
A lineall race to prove him lawful king.
In the mean while these ciuel arms shall rage,
And thus a thousand mischiefs shall unfold,
And far and near spread thee (O Britain land)
All right and law shall cease, and he that had
Nothing to day, to morrow shall enjoy
Great heaps of gold, and he that flowed in wealth,
Lo he shall be berest of life and all,
And happiest he that then possesses least,
The wives shall suffer rape, the maids defloured,
And children fatherless shall weep and wane,
With fire and sword thy native folk shall perish,
One kinsman shall bereave an others life,
The father shall unwitting slay the son,
The son shall slay the sire and know it not,
Women and maids the cruel soldiers sword
Shall perse to death, and silly children lo,
That play in the streets and fields are found,
By violent hand shall close their latter day.
Whom shall the fierce and bloody soldier
Reserve to life? Whom shall he spare from death?
Even thou (O wretched mother) half alive,
Thou shall behold thy dear and only child
Slain with the sword while he yet suckes thy breast.
Lo, giltlesse blood shall thus each where be shed.
Thus shall the wasted soil yield forth no fruit,
But dearth and famine shall possess the land.
The towns shall be consumed and burnt with fire,
The peopled cities shall wax desolate,
And thou, O Britain, whilome in renown,
Whilome in wealth and fame, shall thus be torn,
Dismembered thus, and thus be rent in twain,
Thus wasted and defaced, spoiled and destroyed,
These be the fruits your civil wars will bring.
Hereto it commes when kings will not consent
To grave advise, but follow wilful will.
This is the end, when in fond princes hearts
Flattery preuailes, and sage read has no place.
These are the plages, when murder is the mean
To make new heirs unto the royal crown.
Thus wreke the Gods, when that the mothers wrath
Naught but the blood of her own child may swage.
These mischiefs spring when rebels will arise,
To work revenge and judge their princes fact.
This, this ensues, when noble men do fail
In loyal troth, and subjects will be kings.
And this does grow when lo unto the prince,
Whom death or sodeine hap of life bereaues,
No certain heir remains, such certain heir,
As not all only is the rightful heir,
But to the realm is so made known to be,
And troth thereby vested in subjects hearts.
To owe faith there where right is known to rest.
Alas, in Parliament what hope can be,
When is of Parliament no hope at all?
Which, though it be assembled by consent,
Yet is not likely with consent to end,
While each one for him self, or for his friend,
Against his foe, shall travail what he may.
While now the state left open to the man,
That shall with greatest force invade the same,
Shall fill ambicious minds with gaping hope,
When will they once with yelding hearts agree?
Or in the while, how shall the realm be used?
No, no: then Parliament should have been holden,
And certain heirs appointed to the crown,
To stay the title of established right,
And in the people plant obedience,
While yet the prince did live, whose name and power
By lawful sommons and authority
Might make a Parliament to be of force,
And might have set the state in quiet stay.
But now O happy man, whom spedie death
Depriues of life, ne is enforced to see
These hugie mischiefs and these miseries,
These civil wars, these murders and these wrongs.
Of iu^^ice, yet must God in fine restore
This noble crown unto the lawful heir:
For right will always live, and rise at length,
But wrong can never take deep root to last*


