A PROGRESS of Piety. OR The harbor of Heavenly hearts ease, to recreate the
afflicted Souls of all such as are shut up in any inward or outward
affliction.

By John Norden.

Romans 12. Continue in Prayer. LONDON Printed by I. Windet for I. Oxenbridge,
and are to be soulde in Paul's Church-yarde at the sign of the Parrot. 1596.



TO THE MOST famous christian Queen Elizabeth, by Gods especial favor, Queen
of England, France and Ireland, defender of Gods eternal truth.
YOUR Majesty's most gracious acceptance of a poor former travail of mine,
The Mirror for the multitude, (my most dearly beloved Sovereign) Emboldeneth
me, once again in all loyal obedience, humbly to beseech the same to afforde
the like gracious acceptance of this Progress unto heavenly hearts ease: which
although it might have carried a more base title, in regard of mine
unworthiness, yet considering the course of the treatise, and the estate of
the time, whose happiness and hearts ease, is of some censured after the
quantity and quality of every particular man's worldly felicity, I thought
it not unfit, under your Majesty's most royal protection, to give it that
title, for that it leads unto the true peace of the inner man: who (howsoever
the body in bodily things, fare in this life) ought only to be comforted
and eased with the due contemplation of Gods most divine love, ready help, and
provident regard of our inward and outward miseries: wherewith we can not but
be touched in some measure while we live here.

And because we have here no continuing city, but seek one to come, it
behooves us to go out of the camp of these worldly cares, and take our
progress in the way of piety, unto that heavenly harbor where we shall rest
through the assurance of Gods love toward us, in this life, inwardly endued
with such ease of the heart, and peace of conscience, that whatsoever affliction
or cross, thwart our endeavors, yet shall we rest as the Saints of God, in a
heavenly hearts ease, until we come to that heavenly City, new Jerusalem,
where we shall have full fruition of all happy and heavenly hearts ease for
ever.

Now forasmuch, most dear Queen, as that your gracious lenity, affords
acceptance unto the least show of loyal love, thereby enciting many to show
themselves willing, to present their travails unto your sacred view: I the
worst and unworthiest, in all humility presume to reach out the hand of my
hearty zeal, and unfeigned love, to be laid even under the feet of your
most sacred will and disposition: And would think me your most happiest
poor subject, might it please your Majesty fauourablye to accept this my
poor Progress.

Your Majesty's most happy subject in seeing your gracious days, whose end
God grant I never see. John Norden.

The Authors Prayer which he used in the performing of this work.
OH merciful and wise god, what am I that I should take thy word into my
mouth? That I should undertake to celebrate the praises of thy name, being a
man of polluted lips, of a defiled heart, and of a corrupt conversation before
thee.

I do acknowledge against my self (good Father) that I deserve not to be
heard when I cry, so ignorant am I of my self, unable rightly to pray for my
self, but rather to be rejected: and especially presuming to set down rules
and directions to teach others to pray.

But in all humility (my good God) I enter into thy presence, craving pardon
for my sins, and thy directions in my proceedings, who saydst unto David,
Open thy mouth, and I will fill it, oh fill me with thy divine knowledge, and I
shall be filled, and show thy glory to posterities. Thou that said unto
Paul, My grace is sufficient for thee, assist me with that grace, and enable
me to perform those things through the strength thereof, which in love of
thee I have conceived, and in thy fear have purposed to publish, to the glory,
and comfort of thy children. Amen

O Lord increase my faith,
A preparation to Prayer.
Ephesians. 6. 10 MY brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the strength of his
might.

11 Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the
assaults of the devil.

12 For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities,
against powers, against worldly governors, the princes of the darkness of this
world.

13 For this cause take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able
to resist in the evil day. And having finished al things stand fast.

14 Stand I say, and your Ioynes girded about with verity, having on the
breast plate of righteousness.

15 And your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace

16 And above all take unto you the shield of faith, wherewith you may be able
to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked.

17 And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit; which is the
word of God.

18 And pray always with all manner supplication in the spirit, and watch
thereunto with all perseverance.

Being thus furnished in the Lord, we may proceed on in our progress, with
this precogitation following.
A Psalm wherein is set forth the love of God toward us, wherein he
accepts us to come unto him, for whatsoever we need: fit at all times to be
sung.
O What a joyful thing it is
to sing unto his praise:
Who lovingly imbraceth his,
and guides them in his ways?
He calls such as are oppressed,
and helps them by his might,
The poor oppressed gain the^ rest,
the wronged have their right.
O come therefore, and let us fall
and humble us on knee,
In hearty zeal, and then he shall
of bondmen make us free.
His mercies great and manifold,
forthwith he will extend:
His favors far surpass the gold,
whose glory shall have end.
Let us therefore sing out in zeal,
that people all may know:
That he to his does still reveal
his secrets here below.
His heavenly hearts ease they shall find.
who do perform his will.
But worldly men continue blind,
vainly conceited still.
O teach us Lord, teach us in love,
what we should do and say,
Give us direction from above,
how we should rightly pray.
That we to thee may honor give,
and to our children show,
How thou thy servants do relieve
that want thine aid below.
A motion to Prayer, that God by his holy Spirit will teach us how to pray.
LEt us consider how willing and ready our good God is to harken unto the
desires of all such as hunger and thirst for the riches of his grace, God is
willing and ready to give his spirit to them that pray for it.
without which such is our poverty, That we know not what to ask as we ought:
We know not what to ask without the spirit Romans 8. 25, 27.
But the spirit helps our infirmities, and makes request for us with sighs
which can not be expressed. And although that flesh and blood be so corrupt,
Flesh and blood ignorant of things necessary to be prayed for.
that it always groueleth on the puddle of worldly cares and the better part,
namely the inner man, in the mean time is forgotten, and stands endangered
to fall into many evils, yet having the earnest of this spirit, 2. Cor, 1. 22.
and 5. 5.
we may boldly come unto our GOD, who has promised to send the same: if we
ask it at his hands, ^e will give it in such abundance and full measure that
by the virtue thereof we shall be able to pray according to the will of God.
Romans 8. 17
This is the co^forter which Christ promised to send unto us, The Spirit of
God the promised comforter
even the holy Ghost, Ioh. 14. 26.
which should teach us all things. And without it we know nothing. Words with
out the spirit of God are vain.
And alas what were it for us to fall down before God in most reverent
outward manner, pouring forth a huge heap of words from the lips, not having
this inward director: Surely it were but to spend time to no purpose: The
effect of the spirit.
It is the Spirit that cries in our hearts, Abba father. The spirit of a man
knows only the things that are of man: The spirit of man understands only
outward things.
but the Spirit of God knows and desires the things that are of God, And
the natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God: 1 cor 2. 11.
verse. 14. 15.
for they are folishnesse unto him. But he that has the spirit of God, The
spirit of God discerns all things.
he discerns all things. Let us therefore pray in the holy Ghost, Iud^ ^0
let us pray always with all manner prayer and supplications in the Spirit.
Ephe. 6. 1.


And let us pray continually for the aid of this sacred guide, the holy Spirit
of God, which will both move us unto, and direct us in all things that are
requisite to the due performance of this godly exercise.

The prayer for the aid of Gods Spirit.
FOrasmuch (dear Father) as every man living is of him self before thee as a
beast, neither knowing thee, nor the things concerning their own duties,
unto thee, I, as one of the most perverse, filthy and corrupt, do here humble
my self before thee, begging at thy hands, that which thou have promised to
give unto as many as ask it of thee, thine holy spirit, that sacred comforter,
which reuealeth thee and thy will to the simple and ignorant, which also
stirs up the minds and inward affections of thy children to call upon thee,
it prepares the hearts, and opens the mouths of thy children, to celebrate
thy name. Bestow it therefore, good father, bestow it upon me thy poor
creature, and upon all thy children. And grant that although all of us are of
corrupt affections, and of polluted lips, yet we may be besprinkled with
that heavenly Isope, that we thereby may have our hearts cleansed from the
corrupt affections of the world, and the eyes of our understandings opened,
that we may see the good things that we should ask, that our feet which are
fettered with the cares of vain things may be set at liberty, that we may
walk the right way unto the kingdom of heaven, that the hands of our souls,
may apprehend and take hold of the riches and righteousness of thy son Christ
Jesus: And that by the aid of the saine spirit, we may cast of all
impediments, lets and incumbra^ces that detain us from coming unto thee.
Sanctify me within and without, wash me and I shall be whiter then snow. Let
thy truth and thy spirit meet together in my soul, that my prayer may enter
into thy presence. And that thine ears may incline unto my humble petitions:
so shall I declare thy loving kindness in the morning, and thy truth in the
night.

Thou know whereof we be made, thou forgettest not that we are but dust, and
unprofitable people: not fit, apt, or able of our selves to pray unto thee,
or praise thy name.

Wherefore good Father, enlighten us and teach our hearts rightly to conceive:
and our tongues, freely to speak, what may be to thy glory and our comfort:
allure us to seek thee, and grant that our hearts may rejoice in thee, and
that we may live and die in thee. Amen.

Let us now seek the Lord, let us seek his strength, yea let us seek his
face continually. Psalm. 105: 4. O Lord increase our faith.
A motion to prayer for Queen Elizabeth.
FOrasmuch as experience it self teaches, As the Prince is, so are the people?
that as an evil Prince draws the greatest part of his subjects unto the
same profession and course of life which the Prince professes and takes, and
so the Prince and people, as it were bound unto sin, pass together in the
way of death: so the good and godly prince, both by good example of life, and
by sacred laws, enciteth and wins his people to the heavenly course, which
tends to the obtaining of freedom of soul and body to life eternal. And as
the former is sent in judgment unto a people for their punishment, Queen
Elizabeth was given a token of Gods love.
and his long continuance to be lamented, so is the other given as a blessing,
and a most special token of the love of God, for whose long and prosperous
rain, every subject is in duty bound lovingly, zealously, and faithfully, to
pray unto God. The blessings that we have by Queen Elizabeth


If so, what have we to say: what have we to do, and what have we to think of
our gracious Queen, chosen of the Lord him self, and miraculously preserved,
and lovingly given us for our most special good, by whom we have the freedom
and liberty of the Gospel, which is the path to our heavenly hearts ease,
which before her days we know was stopped by with the briers and thorns of
persecution and death, and now laid open again as a most evident token that
the lord by her sacred government will lead the people through the wilderness of
all the divisions, hurliburlies, and tumults in this world, and to that end
has raisd up many zealous, grave, and religious Counselors, and godly
ministers, who do direct the whole progress and marching on of her obedient
people in the path of a godly profession of the word of God, whereby at length
they shall com to that pleasant land of knowledge, where they shall even in this
life enjoy the heavenly hearts ease, the peace of a good conscience without
reproof. We must have consideration of our duties to our gracious Queen for
many causes.
Therefore it is most expedient that we should call to mind our duties which
we ow unto her Majesty, not only in regard of y^ commandment, which Paul
sets down to Timothy, That supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving
of thanks, 1. Tim. 2. 1. 2.
should be made for kings, and such as are in authority: but also in regard of
the daily experience of her most sacred government, which is such and so
gracious, No nation has had like benefit as England has had, not only of the
Gospel, but of long peace.
as the like benefit has not been extended to any nation before us. And
therefore that we may avoid negligence in that behalf, let us according to the
former counsel of Paul, pray for her Majesty's prosperous continuance amongst
us. We must pray for our gracious Queen that God will bless her with all
comforts.
Let us make intercession for her perseverance and going on, in her sacred
duty to God, as she has begun, and that he will prevent the evils which
her adversaries maliciously pretend against her. And finally, let us give
thanks for her so long comfortable being our nursing mother, that she may so
continue (if it please God) to the shutting up, and finishing of all time upon
the earth, that she with us, and we with her may meet our savior Christ Jesus
together in the clouds, when we shall enjoy our absolute hearts ease in heaven.

If we consider the perilous estate of our tune wherein we live, The peril
of our time gives us occasion to pray for Queen Elizabeth.
and the danger of our days, we shall find great occasion to humble our
selves before the Lord in prayer for her, that the bright beams of his favor
may shine unto us even in her (who as we see) hungreth and thirsts for the
peace, comfort, and good of us her people, And especial cause to pray for
Queen Elizabeth.
who being taken from us, we know not whether the Lord will send us (in regard
of our forgetting his so great a benefit in her) a David or a Saul: and
therefore it behooves us to pray that God will lengthen her days upon the
earth, for the further comfort of his Church. The dangers of foreign countries.


If we look into the present estate of our neighbors in foreign parts, it
will (if we be not careless) strike us with terror, give us cause also to
pray for Queen Elizabeth.
least that God for our sins should also turn our peace into war, our
plenty into want, and our comfort in her, to misery and trouble by foreign
enemies.

Let this and many other deep occasions, carry us into a desire to cry unto
our God for his continual love toward her, whose prosperity is ours, whose
health is our happiness, and whose continuance is our comfort. The right hand of
the King of kings hold her up.

The Prayer for the Queen.
OUr omnipotent and mighty God, that gouernest Kings and kingdoms, whose
power exceeds the power of all Potentates of the earth, we acknowledge thy
mercy, we commend thy wisdom, and praise thy mighty power: in that thou have
so like a loving Father, established the peace of thy church here in this our
land: and in that thou have cast out the adversaries of Israel, and planted
us, as thine own people in their steeds. Which weighty work (O good father)
such is thy strength, that thou have enabled thine handmaide, not by tyranny,
but by truth: not by cruelty, but by loving kindness, to establish in this
our realm: who has confirmed the same to thy obedience: and has reduced many
of thin adversaries from disobeying theee, to love thee, from not knowing thee,
to serve thee. And therefore, good father, we magnify thy name, we extol thee
with praise: And so much the more, good father because she has through thee,
driven back our enemies, and in thy name, and by thy power, trodden down such
as rose up against her and us: and above all, for that under her we have tasted
how sweet, loving, and comfortable thou art toward us. And thy fame in her is
spread from one nation to another people, yea from one end of y^ earth to the
other: and all the nations of the world do see and consider that great is her
God, for the wonders that thou have done for her, are marvelous in the eyes
eue^ of her enemies: for when men rose up against her, they prevailed not, but
stumbled and fell. The experience of thy continual favor increases yet
daily: even to thy perpetual praise. Wherefore, good father, be still mindful
of her, and bless us in her, continue thy loving kindness, and make her days
joyful that she may see the increase of thy glory to shine in this land, as
the Sun in his strength. And let her foes be beaten down on al sides, let not
one of the^ be able to stand in her presence: grant her continual peace and
true happiness, govern her well, and sanctify her affections, and beautify
her crown with the glorious ornaments of godliness, of wisdom, of
knowledge, of faith, of zeal, and true humility before thee, that she may
continue a spectacle of sincerity to all posterities. And that the Princes of
the earth may see her godly proceedings, and in a godly emulation, endeavor more
and more to follow her good and gracious example. And let al her people
practice evermore to serve thee, and to celebrate thine everlasting praises in
her behalf. Hearken unto her from heaven and unto us for her, behold her from
above, and grant that she may openly confess, that all her strength, al her
comfort, and salvation comes from thee. Thou art her strength, thou art her
castle, thou art the author of her perpetual safety.

Give unto her thy judgments, O Lord and thy righteousness unto her council,
that they may judge thy people with righteousness, and thy folk with equity.

O let the mountains bring peace, and the little hills righteousness unto thy
people. Let there be no decay, no leading into captivity, nor any cause of
lamentation in our land: but let thy truth prevail: let thy peace continue,
and let her godly proceedings take effect under thee, to the gracious governing
of all thy people. Let thy word break forth, and the glorious beams thereof
shine forth, and banish the obstinate and stiffnecked ignorance of such as
delight in vanities. And to this end (good father) exalt thine anointed, let
thy hand assist her, and thy right arm hold her up. And let not her foes
prevail against her: So shall she sing forth thy praise, and we her people
for evermore give thanks unto thee, for thy loving hand and favorable care of
her saving health. Amen.

O Lord increase our faith.
A praise for her Majesty's most gracious government.
Rejoice O England blessed,
Forget thee not to sing:
Sing out her praise yt brought thee rest
from God thy mighty king.
Our God and mighty king,
our comforts has renewde.
Elizabeth our Queen did bring.
his word with peace endewde.
His word with peace and love,
she planted and it stands:
Her helper was the king above,
she brings it from his hands.
She brings it from his hand,
his counsel and decree:
That she a Hester in this land,
should set his children free.
None rules here but she,
her heavenly guide does show:
How al things should decreed be,
to comfort high and low.
Oh sing then high and low,
give praise unto the king:
That made her Queen: none but a foe,
but will her praises sing.
All praises let us sing.
to King of kings above:
Who sent Elizabeth to bring,
so sweet a taste of love.
A short Prayer for the Queen.
OH Lord almighty. King all sufficient, the governor, pre^eruer and
continual protector of princes to whole beck and will all kings of the earth
are subject, look in mercy and favor upon the estate of thy servant our
Queen Elizabeth. Be unto her a safe refuge in all times of danger, and let
thine holy spirit, be unto her a continual guide of all her imaginations,
actions and proceedings: And for as much as thou beholdest, the present danger
of the estate of us thy little flock of this Realm, in that the enemy of thy
Sons Gospel, vaunteth himself against us, thy poor people and against her
our defender under thee. Be both to her and us a tower of strength, and fight
thou with them that fight against her and us, and be with our armies when
soever they shall encounter the adversary, that she thy servant and we thy
people her subjects, may still show our selves thankful unto thee for thy
protection, and covet more and more to serve thee in all truth and holy zeal
as becomes us in all things, grant these things (good Father) in the merits
of Jesus Christ our savior, in whom as thou art well pleased, be pleased to
bless, preserve and direct our Queen, to comfort, defend and support us, and
either to bring our enemies to a perfect peace, in embracing thy truth with us,
or to confound their devises and power for ever, Amen.

Oh Lord increase our faith.
A short Confession of our Sins.
MOst gracio^s God, and loving Father in Jesus Christ, pure and holy, I
Confess unto thee mine unrighteousness which makes me unworthy to come
before thee, not only in regard of mine original corruption, which I traduced
from disobedient Adam: But in regard of my continual sins, and actual evils
which I daily commit against thee, whereby I can not but become offensive unto
thee, and ever lo^^ ^^me in thy sacred eyes. But a ^s such is mine estate,
being considered, as it is in and of my self, that I can bring forth no better
fruits, then the tree of Adams disobedience, whose roots as they are sin,
so bear they sin in me, and consequently procure death and destruction. But
dear Father, as by Adam sin entered and took hold of him self and all his
posterity. So by thy Son we are all Justified by our adoption into his
righteousness of thy free love: If we take hold of thy promises in him, and
become obedient as he is obedient unto thee. And therefore dear Father
howsoever our corruptions as they are in us, of our selves have be wrapped us
in bondage to sin and death, let thy Sons merits be unto us a sufficient
ransom for our everlasting liberty, not only to come freely unto the throne
of thy grace, but in the end to obtain the joys eternal with him in heaven.
Amen.

O Lord increase our faith.
A motion to a Prayer for the forgiveness of our sins.
Having thus cast our selves down before our God in true humility, wherein
we have acknowledged that we are so polluted with sins, and so tied with the
chains of death, that there is no evasion or mean in our selves, or by our
selves to escape the snares of Satan, that lurketh lik a roaring Lion seeking
who^ he may devour. We must now endeavor to findout the mean, how to be made
at one with, We must seek how to be reconciled to God.
and be reconciled unto our God again. Wherein thus much we are first to
consider, that as by Adam all men have sinned, and have deserved death by
sin: even so by Christ we are cleansed from sin, and stand again in the
favor of God, the father by faith in him: Whom also we have to be an Advocat
to God our heavenly father, and he it is that obtains pardon for all our
sins. Christ reconcileth us to God our ostended heavenly father.
It is the passion and most innocent death of Jesus Christ, the immaculate
Lamb, which is a sufficient reconciliation for our offenses. And therefore he
says, If any man sin, he has an Advocate with the father, even Jesus Christ
the righteous. That is, if any man acknowledge his offenses truly before God,
and that he is sinful, impure and corrupt, and does faithfully submit
himself unto the favor of God in Christ, without standing to justify himself
righteous. ^ho has the benefit of Christ's death
Such a one has the benifite of Christ's death, and such a one shall be
partaker of the deserts of Christ: wherein he shall obtain pardon for all his
sins. But he that will not thus throw himself down before the Lord, and
cry out against his own unworthiness, and say that he is a sinner, and unable
of himself to obtain remission of sins, there is no place of mercy for such a
one. For Christ came to call, not ye righteous, Mat. 19. 13.
such as were in their own conceit, 1. Tim* 15
holy, pure, just, and without sin, but sinners (such as did so confess and
acknowledge the^ selves) to repentance. Whom Christ came to call
Such sinners as are sorry for their sins, and repent them of their evils:
such Christ himself calls, saying Come unto me Al ye that labor, and are
heavy laden, 2. Pet. 3. 9.
and I will ease you. Our God is patient, and would have no man perish, but
would that al men should come to repentance. And therefore, he sent his son
Christ Jesus, Mat. 2. 28
to give himself a ransom for all that repent and truly believe in him.

We were in bondage and captivity, Christ is our ransom
and he most franckly took upon him to ransom us with a great price, Mat. 26.
28
even his blood, which blood he shed for many, for the remission of sins: not
for all, but for such as truly repent and amend their lives: They that run on
still in sin have no profit of the merits of Christ.
for they that run on still in their sins, howsoever they flatter
themselves, they are left unto themselves, and the merits of Christ work not
for them: his death to them is none advantage. And we therefore must take heed,
left that we deceive our selves with this, Ioh. 1. 19.
that he is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world And that
thereby every man in the world is so included, and every man's sins by him so
taken away without repentance, The effects of faith
that we have scope to sin, because he takes it away. But we must take
hold of his merits by faith, which faith will work in us a detestation of
sin, and ade^^re to, reform evil in our selves, and to be reconciled unto
God in amendment of life. For it appears that the whole world was polluted
and defiled with sin, The whole world was dead in sin.
and that the whole world naeded a mean to be cured of that great misery, and
to that end came Christ, men to save all that repent and believe the Gospel: to
such is the glad tidyinges of salvation sent, as well unto the Gentile as to
the Jewe, to the bond, All are called to salvation.
as to the free, to all people and nations of the world, Wherein appeared the
unspeakable love of God, not that we loved him first but that he loved us, and
sent his son to be a reconciliation for our sins, 1. Ioh. 3. 1^.
It was he that bare our sins in his body on the tree, that being dead to
sin, should live in righteousness, 1, Pet. 2. 22.
by whose stripes we are healed.

Being then healed of this deadly evil, even of death it self, let us
speedily repent unto our good God in hearty repentance, How we must repe^^*
casting aside, and g^uing over all the deceitful works of darkness: and
let us pray that he will vouchsafe us forgiveness of our sins, wherein of long
time we have lived. Let us be earnestly sorry that we have spent the time
past of our lives, after the lusts of the Gentiles, 1. Pet. 4. 1.
licentiously and wickedly, in wantonness, in lusts, drunkenesse, gluttony;
covetousness; and in abominable I do latrie. To day if we will hear his voice
let us not harden our hearts: But having laid open our weakness and
infirmities, with an ardent desire to reform our lives: God is ready to
receive us if we unfeignedly repent.
let us boldly approach unto our merciful God, who seeing us a far of,
namely, unfeignedly purposing to amend our lives, he will come with his spirit
and meet us, Luke 15. 20.
and will embrace us with the arms of his love, and will put on us the robes
of his own righteousness. Lo his mercy is from gen^^^tion to generation to
them that fear him. Luke 1. 50.
And therefore let us fear no more, for we are freely justified by grace,
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be
a reconciliation through faith in his blood, Romans 3, 24* 25
to declare his righteousness by the for giuenes of our sins that are passed.

O let us not therefore despise the riches of his bountifulness and patience,
and long suffering, Romans 2. 4.
knowing that the bountifulness of God leads us to repentance. Gods
readiness to receive us
Let us fall down before him therefore, and he will hear us up; let us cry
out, and he will hea^e us, let us fly unto him, and he will come and meet us and
embrace us. If you sins were as red as skarlet, he will make them as white as
snow. Therefore will every man that is godly make his prayer unto him, Psalm, 326
in a time when he may be found. Psalm, 34, 22,
The Lord redeemeth the souls of his servants, and none that trusts in him
shall perish.

I should have fainted, but that I believed to see the goodness of the Lord in
the land of the living. Psa. (...).

The prayer for the forgiue-of sins.
O God of my salvation, I have acknowledged my sins unto thee, I have not
hidden mine iniquities. For thus (my good God) I thought, I will confess my
wickedness against my self unto thee, O Lord, forgive the punishment of my
sins, unto thee O Lord, I cry, O my strength be not far from me lest that if
thou answer me not, I be like them that go down unto the pit. Remember not
the sins of my youth, nor my rebellions, but according to thy kindness
remember thou me, even for thy goodness sake remember thou me: gracious and
righteous thou art, and thou teach sinners in the way. O turn thy face
toward me, let thy loving favor and mercy evermore be extended, for I am
miserable, sinful and poor. And I come unto thee the fountain of all help,
forgive my sins, wash me and I shall be clean; let me taste of thy old
loving kindness, who haste ever been ready to forgive, ever ready to help,
ready to receive the complaint of the poor, ready to receive the miserable, to
embrace them that return from their evil ways, as appears by David, by
Peter, by Marie Magdalene, and many other who repenting their sins, have
found favor. Our fathers called upon thee, and thou did hear them, they
trusted in thee, and were delivered, they depended upon thee, and were not
confounded. Wherefor have mercy upon me, O God, have mercy upon me according
to thy great mercies, and according to the multitude of thy compassions do away
mine iniquities. O cleanse me from my secret sins, and cover my known
sins with the righteousness of thy Son* remove mine iniquities far away
from me, and be not angry with thy servant for ever. O enter not into
judgment with me, for if no flesh before thee be justified, what shall become
of me, who have ^o highly sinned?

Lord, my God, full of mercy, I appeal unto thee, I fly unto thee, I rest
upon thee, leave thy displesure against me, and howsoever weak and unable I
be to stand in thy presence, oh let thy spirit of strength hold me up, and say
unto me, fear not, for my grace is sufficient for thee. I take hold of thy
love, and I rest upon thy favor in Christ, reject me not, though there be no
good in me: power down that absolute good thing, even thy grace, and let it
direct me to amendment of my corrupt life. Thou have said that thou art well
pleased in Christ thy Son: in him be thou also pleased with me, and receive
me again into thy love through his merits, by whom every sinner receives
free access unto thee. And although I for my part (most loving God) be a
vessel full of faults and filthynes, although I be no more worthy to be
called thy Son, although I be a servant most unprofitable, yea, a withered
and starued branch, who have lost the quicknes and vigor of thy blessed spirit,
and am good of mine own proper nature, for nothing but for the fire. Yet, good
Father, have mercy upon me, have patience with me, cast me not from thee, but
rather endue me again with a new spirit, and a lively feeling of thy
pleasure, and will, and ableness to do thereafter, that I may fill up the
residue of my days in sincerity, in holiness, in righteousness, and in the
due service of thee, in faith unfeigned, and in all singlenes of heart and
soul, that from henceforth, insteede of straying from thee, I may dwell, and
be shrouded under the shadow of thy wings, that in steed of sin, which
heretofore has miscarried me, I may embrace piety, godliness, and true zeal:
and in steed of ignorance, whereby I have gone so long astray, I may take hold
of the knowledge of thy sau^ng truth. And let it be as a lantern unto my feet,
and a light unto my paths, that so I may rest safe in thee, through a lively
faith which never deceives And grant that I may carefully perform what thou
likest, howsoever disliking it be unto me, and may watchfully avoid what thou
lothest, howsoever liking it be unto me. For I acknowledge, good father, that
flesh and blood savor nothing of the things belonging unto salvation: but I
wait in the spirit for thy loving kindness and mercy promised in Christ thy
Son, in whom I am bold with deep sighs of the heart to cry, Lord
forgive mine offenses, remit mine iniquities, cover my sins, and lay not my
former evils unto my charge.

Good Father, give the knewledge of salvation unto me, and to all thy people,
by the remission ^f our sins, through the bowels of thy tender mercies, that
we may perceive in our minds both comfort, peace, and gladness of thy holy
spirit, which may begin a new life in us, pleasing thee. And for the beter
perfourming of our duties unto thee, from henceforth quench all the corrupt
motions of our minds, striving with thy divine pleasure, and restore again in
us the image of thy divine light, which was lost, that being thus inwardly
renewed in our minds, we may reform us outwardly in our conuersations, and may
sing aloud unto thee, and may serve thee with gladness, and come always unto
thee with joy. Amen.

O Lord increase our faith. Sing unto the Lord a new song, O Sing unto the Lord
a new song Psalm. 96. 1.

Sing unto the Lord, and praise his name, declare his salvation from day to
day. verse. 2.

To the praise of God, for the forgiveness of our sins.
WHat shall we do to thee O God
for all that thou have done?
Whose love from us remoues ye rod,
which our offenses won.
Thy Son has brought us peace again
and made us one with thee
Although our sins deserved pain,
his cross has made us free.
O how shall we requi^e thy love,
what recompense is due,
To thee or him? help from above
our sinful lives renew,
The best reward that we can give,
it helps not thee at all:
Yet thou in bounty do receive,
us wretched wights in thrall.
Great is thy glory, love and might
thy mercies have no end;
Al thanks and praise to thee in right
each heart should still extend.
But we poor sinners may cry out
against our selves and say:
Our purest deeds like filthy clout,
our gross conceits bewray.
No stay is in our crooked will,
a rash consent we give:
To teach delight, that seeks to kill
our souls, wherein we live.
But now thy saving health extend,
thy mercies sweet prepare.
And salve our sores: let us amend,
and break thou Satan's snare.
A short prayer for the forgiveness of sins.
OH Father everlasting, merciful and full of pity, I do acknowledge my
self sinful, whereby I have deserved punishment in thy heavy displeasure;
But I have an advocate even Jesus Christ the righteous, and he has redeemed me
from all fear of death, if I truly repent mine evils, and form my life
according to thy will, wherefore most dear Father in him, sanctify me again
and wash me clean through his blood, ^ouer me with the precious and most
glorious robe of his integrity and obedience, and in him forgive my sins,
and for his sake; remember them no more, but rather supply the wants of all
spiritual graces and gifts in me, of ^aith, of knowledge, of love, of
patience, of repentance, of obedi^nce and true reformation of my ^ife, that
being renewed again and regenerate in him, I may morti^^e all my corrupt and
filthy affections, and live in all holiness, ^ighteousnesse and true zeal,
all ^he days of my life, that when his frail body shall return to ^ust, my
soul may ascend where Christ my Savior sits at thy ^ight hand at the time
appointed, my soul and body may receive ^he fullness of the joys prepared ^or
thine elect in thy relestiall Pa^adise, Amen.

Oh Lord increase my faith.
A motion to a prayer, tending to the obtaining of true mortification of our
sinful affections, without the which we cannot please God.
Having acknowledged our sins, and corrupt affections before our God, and in
Christ his son, having obtained attonment with him, and yet resting in our
selves sinful and miserable, and of our selves unable to obtain the favor of
God, and being obtained, not able to stand without his continual aid: we must
seek by all means to frame all our actions in his fear, knowing this that it
is not enough for us to have found the mean how to be reconciled unto God, We
must seek to keep the favor of God.
but we must use the means also (being reconciled) to retain and keep him
out favorable God still, which is by mortifying of those evils in us, which
break forth unto his dishonor. We must leave sin Yet this is not enough,
We also must cleave unto righteousness, and exercise our callings to Gods
glory: It is not enough to forsake sin, but we must cleave unto righteousness.
we must not only eschew evil, but we must do good, we may not only seek
peace and atonement with God, but we must ensue and follow it. Psalm. 1. 1. etc.
It is not enough for us not to walk in the counsel of the scorner, and
wicked persons or not to stand in the way of sinners, but we must delight in
the law of the Lord, and that not for a time, and then to return to our
vomit and vanity again, according to the course of the world, who thinks
not enough to cease from evil for a time, and to serve the Lord at seasons
ordinary, but we must exercise our selves in his word, and that continually,
day and night: Psalm, 1. 8,
And we must gird up the loins of our minds, and be sober, and trust
perfectly on that grace that is brought unto us in the revelation of Jesus
Christ, as obedient children, not fashioning our selves unto the former facts
of ignorance, but as he which has called us is holy, so let us be holy in all
manner of conversation, pleasing God, Not making our boast of our own hearts
desire, 1 Pet. 1. 13. 14. 15.
as the covetous, who blesses himself in his own wealth and prosperity, and
contemns the Lord: grounding the foundation of our hope upon vain things,
Things may offend God. which carry coulor to be lawful
wher^by oftentimes we are stirred up to execute things offensive unto God,
which yet may carry coulor of warrant by the law of man, wherein the inward
affections of the heart appear not only not mortified, but rather revived to
sin. If we duly look into our desires, we shall find out few or none that
truly tend to that mortification which is required, but rather to the
advancing of the pride of our flesh against the humility of the spirit. The
first (...) become a godly man
Let none think it irksome or tedious to leave this, that the first step to
the perfection of a godly man, is, to deny himself: which denial, is keeping
under of all the corrupt motions which rise in our selves, and covet to break
forth in action contrary to that which our God has commanded: and if that be
hard to perform, that which is further required is more hard, and they are the
words of Christ himself, Mat. 16. 24
which I dare not deny. Mar. 8. 34.
If any man (says he) will follow me, let him forsake himself: and yet that
not enough, Let him take up his cross and follow me. And in another place, If
any man will come after me, let him deny himself, Luke 9. 23.
and take up his cross daily and follow me. We are commanded to forsake our
selves: and to deny our selves, wherein we may see the great necessity of this
mortification, and how severely it is enjoined us. If we forsake our selves,
whether shall we fly to leave our selves? we must understand that we, as long
as we are in the body, are at home in the flesh, where many corruptions lurk,
and therefore if we will forsake our selves, We must forsake our selves.
we must suppress the evils in our selves, and by the spirit ascend up from
our carnal habitation, and dwell with the Lord in continual contemplation of
his will, in a daily desire to be with him: thus also must we deny our selves:
for when the motions of the flesh do, as it were entreat the mind and soul
to consent unto that which is unlawful, we must presently check our selves,
and in an inward godly aunsweare, repel the proud desires of the flesh, We
must deny the desires of the flesh.
Which savor not the things that appertain unto life, but unto death, and
therefore necessary to be denied. Thus if we carry our affections within the
compass of the Lords good pleasure, we shall then easily attain unto the
other part, namely to take up the cross, that is, accept willingly the
miseries, troubles afflictions, and persecutions, which may happen unto us: but
so long as we are carried away with the alluringes of the world and the flesh,
we shall say as Peter said unto his master (sauo^ing of the flesh, and not of
the spirit) Save thy self, How dangerous it is to (...)
go not to Jerusalem to fall into trouble: so shall we always covet pleasing
things, but poyson^d things, as riches, preferment, honor, ease, idleness,
negligence in our calling, excess in buildinges, superfluous diet most
devilish attire, and what evil accompanies not this: Many gross faults are
thought no faults.
It is thought an easy fault, nay, no fault, to be envious, to be a glutton,
to be drunken, to be a blasphemer to receive rewards against justice, to be
partial in judgment, if it lean but a little awry, and especially if it be
not seen of men. But this liberty of the flesh will be one day restrained, and
Gods mercies detained from such libertines, who although they cannot, nor will
forsake or deny themselves as yet, it may please God to rowse them out of this
forgetfullnesse, and strike their hearts with such a feeling of his
displeasure, that they may cast off their affections of the flesh, and measure
all their thoughts, words, and works by the spirit: Prayer necessary to
mortification
and therefore it is good to pray unto the Lord for his assistance therein,
knowing this, that he that cannot forsake himself, and deny himself, howsoever
he flattereth his own security, and integrity, wherein he foolishly
persuadeth himself that he follows Christ, he is far from Christ, and
surely he will say unto him in the last day, No excuse will serve.
I know thee not, It is not the buying of a farm, the proving of oxen, nor the
marriage of a wife, that can excuse us, continuing in the flesh and fleshly
desires.

It is not enough to observe the letter of the law: The observation of the
letter of the law excuses not.
For then we may still continue manslayers in wrath toward our brethren, we
may commit adultery, by lusting we may sin in our communication, exceeding
yea and nay. And therefore must we abstain from all appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 7. 5. 22.
and in all purity both of soul, mind and body, through the power and strength
of the spirit of God, endeavor continually to forsake and deny our selves,
being made free from sin, let us become the servants of righteousness, Romans 6.
18. 19
and let us give all our members instruments of righteousness, in holiness and
pureness. When we were in the flesh, sin had power in our members, bringing
forth fruits unto death. Romans 7. 5. 6.
But now being delivered from sin, we must serve the Lord in newness of
spirit, No good dwells in our flesh.
and not in our old conversation There dwells no good thing in our flesh, for
we may feel continual rebellions therein, which repugne the law of the
spirit: which law gives strickt commandment against the affections of the
flesh, and would have all the corrupt motions thereof to be utterly denied. And
therefore let us fight manfully against all evils, in what degree so ever they
rise against the spirit.

We must carefully watch the doors of our hearts, We must be watchful against
sin.
with the weapons of the spirit, least that sin creep into our inward
parts, which obtaining the consent of our minds, yea but a little, it will
take such advantage by pleading possession, that it will be hard to remove it.
And therefore let us prevent the entry of sin, by mortifying the deeds of
the flesh, so shall it never bear fruit in us to death. Romans 1. 11^
And surely if the spirit that raised up Christ dwell in us our mortal bodies
shall be quickened by the same spirit: How we may be known to be the sons
of God.
And so quickened, that it shall bring forth the fruits of true mortification
in us. And then shall we be known to be the sons of God, even by that badge
of denying our selves.

Let us pray therefore unto the Lord that he will sanctify us within, Romans 11
16.
that he will make our whole lump holy* the root and the branches holy, If
our hearts be pure, all our actions will likewise be pure. We must hunger and
thirst for righteousness, if we will be blessed with the righteous. We must
run the race of the godly if we will receive the reward with the godly: we
must subdue our evils, and conquer our corrupt motions, as do the godly, if we
will be crowned with the godly. We must have our hearts, hands, and all the
parts of our bodies knit together in one consent, The inward affections and
outward actions must concur.
to the true forsakinge and denyinge of our selves. The inward show and outward
affections must concur in the same: so shall we be both outwardly approved
and inwardly assured that we have the spirit of truth, and so consequently
that we are the Lords, who will always attend our safety, if we thus carry
our selves before him.

Read the 15. Psalm, learn it and have it in thine heart, and observe it in
thy proceedings, and it shall teach thee what it is that is required of thee to
become a fit man to enter into the kingdom of God.

The Prayer for mortification.
O Righteous God, and merciful Father, who art so pure and clean, that there
is no evil dwells with thee, no corruption rests in thy sight, But he that
walks uprightly, he that works righteousness; and speaks the truth from
his heart, he is accepted with thee: such a one thou love, such a one thou
receiuest, and such a one shall rest in thy holy hill. But on the contrary,
he that walks after his own hearts desires, he that yeldeth unto the
corrupt motions of flesh and blood, and cloaketh iniquity under the show of
godliness: such a one do thou hate, such a one does thy soul abhor, and
such a one shall not come near thee: he may pray and shall not be heard, he
may cry and call, but thou will not help him. Wherefore my good God, since
there is required in all men the sincerity and true inward zeal of the
soul, and an absolute killing of the motions of the flesh, and mortifying af
all fleshly affections. Look favorably upon me, in whom do dwell an
innumerable troop of foolish fantasies, a heap of sinful affections, I find
and feel, that though many times to will, be present with me, yet to perfo^rme
is not in my power: sin prevails, and death through sin swalloweth me
up: so that I rest in darkness of sin, and that by giving scope unto mine
own perverse will: And so long good Father, as I dwell in this house of flesh
and blood, detayned downe-warde with the pleasing and entising things thereof. I
cannot master my corrupt desires. I cannot bridle mine affections: but in
steed of true mortification, I break out into such outrage, by consent of all
my members, that my affections extend from conceiving evil, to performing of
evil, from desiring to sin, to commit sin, even with greediness. And yet
such is my miserable estate, being thus in my self, that flesh and blood
flattereth it self, and concludes, that whatsoever I purpose in an evil
desire, so that it break not forth into open gross wickedness, that I am
holy enough, that I am as sincere as is requisite, and that I stand too
fearful of thy judgments, when thou know, that all and every the least
conceit of sin, breaking into action, in what covert measure or mean degree
soever, it by and by endaungereth my soul, and deserves sudden judgment.
And therefore let it please thee, that as thy dear son through thy
surpassing love, has reconciled all such unto thy favor again, that are
truly penitent: so let thy holy spirit continually work to the taming of
unbridled flesh, and let me by the same spirit, never leave more and more to
seek and endeavor to subdue my gross affections, until I come to a true and
absolute mortification of all* the evils that rise up in me: so shall I deny
and forsake my self and follow thee: so shall I leave my self and come unto
thee: I shall hate my self and love thee: I shall conquer my self and serve
thee.

Good Father, thou see that I am most weak, and without the continual
woorking of thy grace, I can not in any measure suppress my desires, but
rather they the more strongly rise in me: I cannot deny my self, but rather I
deny the working of grace in me, I do not only not mortify my sins, but
sin rather reuiueth and becomes strong in me insomuch as it brings forth
fruit not unto life, but unto death. Therefore I beseech thee sanctify me,
that I defile not my self with the filthiness of the flesh, or fleshly
things, howsoever they seem to please me. Let me not be deceived with the
pleasing judgment of wordly men, who affirm sin to be no sin, darkness
to be light, and light to be darkness: Atheism to be religion, and
sanctity to be sin: covetousness to be good husbandry, and charity to be
folly, hatred and revenge to be manhood, and love to be cowardice, swearing
to be courage, and meekness to be madness, pride to be decency, and
comeliness to be beastly. Oh good Father, many are the enormities that rise
up in us, and defended not only as things tolerable, but as things laudable:
oh mortify therefore, mortify these evils, let us no longer be besotted with
ye filthy fashions of the corrupt world: extinguish the flames of carnal
desires, repress the raging lusts of the flesh* and grant that we may shun,
and with due watchfulness avoid all things that have but the appearance of
cuil: that being thus inwardly subdued, I may make outward profession, that
whatsoever I do, it may be simply grounded upon the truth of a good
conscience, in singleness of the spirit, in newness of life. And let me
still retain this in memory, that I can not follow mine own will, and thy
word. I may not impart my affections to the deeds of the flesh, and the
works of the spirit. I can not walk in darkness and light, the way of
death, and the way of life, I cannot serve thee and sin. Direct me therefore*
good Father, direct me in my whole life, and separate me from the world and
worldly things, and let me dwell with thee in all godly meditations, and
contemplations, and let me use the things in this world, as if I used them
not, let me live in this life, as if I were dead to sin: and being thus
truly mortified in the body, and quickened in the spirit, let me look in
continual watchfulness, for the dissolution of this my mortal body, that my
soul may ascend: and in the end both in soul and body, I may for evermore
enjoy the eternal joys of heaven. Amen.

O Lord increase our faith.
This tends to a true denial of ourselves, in mortifying our affections,
whereby we over greedily embrace the pleasures of this world.
COrrupt and filthy are we all,
the proudest man is dust:
No comfort here: we live in thral.
and linger here in lust.
The sweetest of delights that we
can choose to please our will:
what brings it us? who does not se
that pleasures turn to ill?
Art thou a man whose state is great
if pomp exalt thy mind:
What then? Thy soul with sin impleat
bewraies thy plesures blind.
A doleful bell does wait to ring.
when thou secure shall die:
what song of glory can thou sing
when corpse in grave shall lie?
What shall avail thy lofty looks?
whereat the poor do quake.
And what thy Machauilian books
whose cursed slights for s^ke?
Thy brauest buildings high in state
thy golden gods but dust:
Thy Thrasoes and thy Gnatoes mate
no more shall serve thy lust.
Thy formal friends that fawn on thee
and please the time for gain:
will sigh in show: but shrink from the
when most thou groanst in pain:
The rich array which here does make
thy stinking carcass gay:
Thy foe, when thou art gone, will take
and laugh; and thou in clay.
No state so strong, no man so sure,
no office or degree:
Can grant us warrant to endure,
beyond our time we see.
Why then does flesh triumph, and brave
it self in pleasing days:
Yet sinks in sins, at last the grave
our gross farewell displaies.
Oh then in have and happy time,
bid all this trash farewell:
Ye high and low of dung and slime,
to day leave of to swell,
Subdue ye pride, deny your will,
now mortify your lust:
No share else in Gods holy hill,
ye have, to hell ye must.
A motion to Prayer tending to the obtaining of the kingdom of God.
IT has pleased Almighty G^D in great measure of mercy to call us home unto
him, to confess our sins, which although they be great and many, yet through
the abundance of his love, he has taken them away through the merits of his
son. And only craves this, that we will forsake our selves, and follow him:
wherein we are moved to seek the Lord our God* and to frame our selves to
that course that may bring us wholly unto him, being the fountain of all
goodness, which we can receive either in soul or body

And forasmuch as he saw the corruptions of our hearts to be such, as they
brought forth oftentimes, perverse and contrary desires, tending most
especially to worldly and fleshly things: He in favor directed us especially
what to crave at his hands, namely, To seek the kingdom of God and the riches
and righteousness thereof. And then shall all things necessary both to body
and soul be administered unto us. In so much as it appears that the
foundation of al our petitions, tending to bodily relief, must be builded,
not upon our own rash conceits, as to ask what our natural disposition will
lead us unto: But to seek the word of God, the knowledge of Christ, and the
things of the body being of small moment, shall be cast upon us by the loving
providence of our good God. Although in deed the kingdom of God be not meat
and drink, it consists not in the outward man, as in promotion, in riches,
in beauty, in honor, in health, in friends, nor in whatsoever pleasures of
flesh and blood: no, not in ceremonies and traditions invented by man: not in
the outward word, neither in whatsoever is seen with the external eye. But it
consisting in spiritual feeling, taste, and use, in the sincere and pure
knowledge, exercise, and comfort of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, perfourming
the will of God here in earth.

And herein it is required, Luke. 6. 20.
that we be poor in spirit, Math. 5. 4.
to hunger and thirst for righteousness, Esa. 61. 2. 3.
to be meke to be merciful, Psalm, 37, 11.
to be pure in heart, and gladly, Psalm. 24. 4.
Suffer persecution for righteousness sake. Math. 5. 10.
We must be loving, 2. Cor. 9, 5^
liberal, pitiful, patient in troubles, and in all things we must frame
and conform our words, works and thoughts, to do the will of our heavenly
father.

To him we must fall down to be strengthened in faith* without which we cannot
retain this kingdom, the lively and effectual word: which that it may be
purely preached without fraud, deliue^^ without vain glory: received and
practiced, without faltring or fear we must pray unto our God, who has
promised and will perform, to send us his aid, to keep us upright in this
glorious path to eternal life. And we must pray unto him, that he will make
our understandings capable of the truth of his will, and what he requires
at our hands in seekinge of this his kingdom. That he will frame our lives in
all simplicity of faith, submitting our selves wholly unto his word, casting
down our own imaginations, and every proud conceit of our selves: that
through meekness, in true knowledge and obedience, we may be made meet
partakers of the everlasting kingdom of God.

Having obtained this spiritual feeling of the will of God, in his word, and
being sealed up through faith in a longing desire* for all spiritual
perfection, let us proceed to the execution of our callinges, which may
aunsweare the commandment of God herein. Let us continually seek new and
daily means by hearing the word preached, by stirring up one of an other,
and by giving sacred examples of virtue and godliness, that our callings may
be made sure, to be founded and established in this kingdom.

Then may we freely approach unto our God, and he will receive us: we may call
on him, and he will hear us: we may beg of him, and he will give us al things
necessary for body and soul. He is our almighty king, and he will defend us:
he is our merciful God, and he will relieve us: and he is our, merciful
father, and he will feed us, cloth us, and teach us. And at last, he will
crown us with the glory of his son, he will make us as the saints in
heaven, and we shall receive the inheritance of everlasting bliss. And
therefore let us seek and pray unto him, that we may obtain this principal
and chief foundation of all true comfortes in this life, the kingdom of his
Son Christ Jesus.

The prayer for the kingdom of God.
O Most gracious God and loving father, it has pleased thee to command us,
first, and before all things, to seek thy kingdom, and the riches and
righteousness thereof, with promise that then al things necessary for body and
soul shall be given us: wherefore good father, since that our unableness is such,
that we cannot attain unto this high matter of our selves, vouchsafe to
prepare our hearts, that at this time and always, we may above all things,
hunger and thirst for this righteousness, the absolute mean of our true
comfort: without which all our comfort is but care: our wisdom, but
foolishnes, our glory, but shame: our riches, but poverty: our godliness
impiety: and all our prayers sin. Wherefore good father, I humbly pray thee
in the behalf of all thy children, that thou will pour into our hearts, a
godly consideration of our imperfections, not being endued with this absolute
integrity: that we may see our poverty, and nakedness, not being enriched and
clothed with this riches, and weeds of sanctity: that we may feel how
ready we are to pine for want of this food of our souls, thy sacred word,
the glorious Gospel of Christ, wherein consists this heavenly kingdom,
which kingdom O Lord teach us to find.

Endue us with thy holy spirit: pour into our hearts that sacred gift which
thou have left for our comfort, to lead us to this kingdom, that may direct
us in all truth, that may manifest in us the knowledge and exercise of thy
word, wherein rests that spiritual happiness, which here by faith, we see
as a shadow far off, which one day shall be manifest to our absolute joy and
salvation.

In the mean time good Father, sanctify our hearts with heavenly
contemplations, and sanctified meditations, that our joy which now is but in
part, may be daily enlarged through the divine fruits of love to thy law,
faith in thy promises, and of hope that our joy shall be full at the appearinge
of thy son. So shall the kingdom of thy son appear in us, and we which
wander in the darkness of this polluted world, shall appear manifestly to
be the heirs of thy kingdom, through faith testified by the fruits of a
sanctified life.

And to the end good father, that thy kingdom may daily more and more appear
and increase, grant free and comfortable passage to thy word and Gospel of
Christ, that it may be plainly, purely, and plentifully preached. And
vouchsafe to increase the number of the laborers in this work, who may
faithfully and diligently work therein. That through the same, thy people,
which now sit in darkness, may be enlightened, that such as are far off may
come near: and they that are without, at thy good pleasure may be brought into
this kingdom: that we may all put on that sanctif^ed garment of a new life
and sincere conversation, which may approve us to be thy children, and
Citizens of thy kingdom: and that as bec^mmeth thy sons, we may be reformed
in our lives.

Give us thine holy Spirit, that we may believe thy word, and thereby so
direct our lives* that we in all vertuousnes and godliness of conversation, may
finish our course upon earth: And afterward live with thy Son in eternal
bliss. And seeing thy kingdom is not meat and drink, neither consists in
ceremonies and traditions devised by man; neither comes it with observations,
neither is it in word, but in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy
Ghost, and in power: Grant that we all may be truly regenerate and borne
new by the holy spirit, and may no longer spend the days of our lives in the
lusts of the flesh, in the vanities of the mind, and in pride of life. But may
eleuate and raise upward all our affections, even unto thy holy hill, from
whence comes the life wherein we live, the help whereby we stand, and the
power whereby we are defended. And be thou present good Father, in all readiness
to support us being weak, to relieve us being poor, and to train us up in all
heavenly knowledge, being altogether ignorant.

And let every of thy children that thirst after that righteousness, be filled
with all good things within and without, that we may go forward in daily
exercise of piety and godliness, in knowledge, in faith, in love, in hope, and
in true zeal, that we may live within the compass of thy fatherly protection,
die in thy love, and be in the end crowned with the glorious merits of thy
Son in heaven. Amen.

O Lord increase our faith.
For the kingdom of God.
THe God of blis,
Who faithful is,
His sacred word does send:
To teach us all,
On him to call,
And to his laws attend.
His kingdom pure,
Which shall endure
For ever: does begin
In those that know,
How here below,
To mortify their sin.
And they that will
Embrace with skill;
The way that trains to blis,
Shall quickly see,
That they shall be
Reformde from things ami^.
O God above,
Look thou in love,
On all that long to see:
Thy saving health,
Thy heavenly wealth,
And glorious kingdom free,
Thy kingdom show
To us below:
That wander here aw^y.
Direct our feet,
Thy statutes sweet,
To us thy folk discrie*
Oh be not slack,
But what we lack,
With speed let us obtain
For thou do feed,
Such as have need,
Thou do no poor disdain.
A short Prayer for the obtaining of the kingdom of God.
OH Father merciful, and everlasting, be merciful unto us, and give unto us a
feeling of thy blessed will, open unto us the way of true knowledge, prepare
our steps, to walk a right, that in all the course of our lives, we may be
guided aright and savor more of heavenly then of earthly things: And let our
whole delight be to meditate righteousness: Let us embrace equity, and
execute justice, let us abound in love, mercy, sanctity, and true holiness,
and furnish us largely with all spiritual graces, whereby we may continually
seek thine everlasting kingdom, and practice the righteousness thereof for
evermore: illuminate our understandings by thy spirit, and let thy word be our
whole comfort, and the use thereof our continual delight. And abandon from our
thoughts, all superfluous cares of worldly things, that we may show our
selves: by a continual holy meditation of thee and things above, may use the
things of this life, as if we used them not, knowing this and assuring our
selves by thy promises, that if we seek and covet to have our conversation, on
things spiritual, all carnal things expedient shall be given us by thee, to
whom be praise for ever. Amen.

O Lord increase our faith.
A short Prayer for Mortification.
OH Lord* mighty and merciful, who did create man in the beginning simple,
sincere, pure and without sin, in which is innocence, he then represented
thine own image, who art pure and without spot of sin, yet such was man that
he fell from thee, by disobedience, whereby he corrupted his ways, and became
far unlike unto thee, defiled with all vanities, wherein alas, we all of us
wallow the most with greediness and all in overmuch neglect of our duties,
wherefore most dear f^ther in Jesus Christ, create in us new thoughts new
affections, and new wills, shape in us true obedience that we all may mortify
and kill all sin, and vain inclinations, which in us rise up against thee.
Let sin no longer hear rule in us: But let thy grace more and more abound,
that all that we do think or speak, may be sauouring of our godly desires
of heaven and heavenly things. And let all earthly and carnal delights become
of no price in our hearts, that so we may be approved not only before men,
to be as we ought but to thee to be as thou requirest in Christ Jesus our
Lord.

O Lord increase our faith.
A most necessary Motion to a Prayer tending to the comfort and preservation
of the Church of Christ, worthy to be dulye considered in these days.
THere is none so ignorant (I trust) but well knows, and is fully satisfied,
that our good God by the operation of the Spirit, through the preaching of his
word, has gathered together a great multitude of people out of all parts
of the world, whom he has endued with the knowledge of himself, and whom
he has chosen sincerely to serve him to call on his holy name, and to
celebrate his praises in this world: How the whole, strength is knit together
though the members be scattered.
which company of people, though far and near scattered, he has so united
and knit together in one faith, in one baptism, and in one sincere course of
doctrine, taught and left unto us by Christ our savior. That he our savior
disdaineth not to call them his Church in whom he will be served, and in
whose hearts and souls he vouchsafes to dwell* even by his holy spirit, he
disdaineth not to accept this Church as his spouse and wife, affording himself
to be her husband: he is the head, Ephe. 5. 22.
and this faithful company the members. 2. Cor. 11. 2
This church of God is holy: Reu 21. 2. 9
it is sanctified in Christ Jesus, Ephe ^. ^3
and every member thereof is a saint by calling: Col 5. 24.
Whosoever is of this fellowshippe and company, 1. Cor. 1, 2.
and is truly joined unto that head Christ Jesus, Every member of the Church
is joined unto Christ.
is so separated from the wicked, that he lives in Christ, and Christ in him.

And forasmuch as we al know that Christ our savior, when he came in the
flesh: and being present in the world, Mat. 28. 18.
though he were Lord of all, Col. 2. 10.
became as a servant, humbling himself, and was of no reputation among men:
but was scorned, derided, whipped, spit at, and in most base manner abused, and
at last he was crucified: yet was he pure, innocent, steadfast, patient,
faithful, and did love his enemies, and prayed for them. All this he did and
suffered, to the end that his Church and every member thereof, should learn
of this their head, and be guided by this their husband, how and in what course
to carry themselves in this present world.

And for that man of himself is ignorant and weak, The spir^t of God dwelle^^
in his Church.
^he has left his own example for his children to follow, and his spirit to
guide this his Church, that it step not aside, to an unknown husband: But
that in all obedience, they should perform what he commands, The true
Church is the image of Christ.
and carefully avoid what he forbids.

Christ being now ascended, and sitting in the heavens at the right hand of
his father, has left this his Church as his image, here in earth to be
scorned, scoffed, whipped, afflicted, persecuted, and eue^ massacred, murdered
and spoiled, by the enemies of his cross, And every member of this Church
must lay down his account before hand, and reckon what it will cost him, and
he shall find that it will amount unto no less, than persecution, trouble,
enemies, and even death it self, The church must suffer persecution.
if he will truly follow his master Christ. And this portion is the very badge
whereby his Church, and the true members thereof are known: It is the touch
stone and trial of our professions. And to the end that we may the more
exactly follow him, he commands us to forsake our se^ues, and* to take up
his cross, and patiently abide and bear whatsoever trial shall be laid on
us by his enemies, who if they spared not him being the head, they will not
forbear the members. If they called him, even our master, Belzabub, what
reproach will they not give us? if they crucified the Lord of glory, much more
will they persecute his children.

It appeared, as soon as the master was taken away, the servants were
despised; when the shepherd was gone, the sheep wandered abroad, and all the
children of God were tried, The lot of God^ children.
some by mockings and scornings, some by bonds and imprisonment, some were
^ewne in pieces, some stoned, some slain with the sword, some wandered up and
down in sheep skins, destitute of comfort, afflicted and tormented, Heb. 11
36* 37. 38.
some wandered in the mountains and in the wilderness hiding themselves in caves
and dens of the earth, and none escaped the hand of the enemy, and yet they
were such as the world was not worthy of. 2. Cor. 1^^ 24. 33.
Paul the Apostle was mightily persecuted of the Jews after he became a
member of this Church. Peter and John were also bitterly persecuted. Stephen
most miserably handled, Act. 4. 3.
and at last stoned. Act. 6. 12.
All the Apostles and Disciples of Christ were persecuted, Act. 7. 58.
and hauock was made of the Church of God, Act. 8. 13.
in so much as all such as took on them the profession of Christ, or had but
the name of Christians, were forced to taste of the cup whereof their master
tasted. And we that follow them in prof^ssion, must be contented to follow
them in troubles, to take up the cross, and to bear what the world will lay
upon us. There is no way to the kingdom of heaven, but by Christ, and there is
no way to Christ, but by tribulation

The wicked do continually seek to oppress such as are true of heart, they make
sharp their swords, they bend their bows, and dispose their arrows in the
stringes, Psalm. 11. 3.
coveting to shoot at those that fear God. The Kings of the earth band
themselves, and the Princes of the world assemble themselves together against
God and his church. Psalm. 2. 2.
England, since it has come to the taste of true religion, has tasted how true
it is that is said, that they that will live vprightlie, shall have many that
will rise up against them. How has the rage of Satan appeared against us,
with bitter threats from Spain, with excommunications and condemnations from
Rome? how have we bin labored to have been seduced by Priests and Seminaries,
The practices of the enemies of the Church of God.
from our bounden love and duty, not only toward her Majesty but toward
our God? if cursings, if blessings, if disswasions, or persuasions, if threats
of hell, if promises of heaven, if throwing down, or exalting high, if fear
of fire and sword could have prevailed, we had fallen and forsaken God ere this
day: how have they sought the death and destruction of our gracious Queen, and
grave Counselors, by enchantments, by magic, by murder, and by all deuilish
practices? Have we not bine environed by Fleetes of foes at sea? by armies of
rebels by land, and endaungered by hidden Traitors at home? has there ye^ any
of their conspiracies prevailed? has not God stood our defense? has not our
Christ, the head of our Church stood in the gap against these trecheries and
tumultes? and does there not herby appear a Church militant, a Church still
driven to defend it self: and a Church malignant, a Church fraught with
malice against the truth? A Church militant and a Church malignant,
a Church offended, and a Church offending, a Church suffering, and a Church
persecuting,? And who does not see how manifestly it appears* that our Church
is that Church which resembles our head Christ Jesus in suffering, and the
other to be the Church resembling their father the Devil, by massacring and
killing* who seeing his kingdom to be nee^e at an end, and noting how his
Church and the reprobates company diminishes, begins to enkindle the
coals of dissension between kings and kingdoms, and stirs up traitors
under color of teachers, murderers in the name of catholics, and devils
under the habit of a religion: by whom the whole world is at this day set all
in a flame, and they labor by all means, to pervert with the venom in their
tails, the consciences of al true Christians, and where they see they cannot
prevail by the truth, they seek it by tyranny: in the place and steed of
mercy, they use massacres, The badge of the Antichrist an Church.
in steed of peace which the truth imbraceth, they stir up wars, and in
steed of love (the badge of Christians) they execute all hatred, even to
blood. If we look into late years, we shall find in France how thousands
of the Church of God have been murdered, The ^roubles in France.
some in their beds, some in the streets, some in the temple, some preaching,
some praying, and whosoever was noted to serve god aright, was swallowed up in
this deuilish fury: and for that the more they striued to suppress the truth,
the more seeing it to prevail, they by the instigation of the adulterer of
Rome proceed on to new devises, sparing neither old nor young, great, nor small,
but take all by the throat even their Kings, and with butcherly hands defile
their palaces with most cruel murder, killing every innocent, even such as
can but name the Lord Christ, and him serve as their only redeemer in the
lowest measure, do they most cruelly cut off with untimely death.

Is it not therefore high time for the poor Church of God, in regard of this
bloody work of the Devil, to pour forth continual ardent prayers unto our
God for his present help in this trouble? And howsoever we rest in great
measure freed from massacres and open murders here in England, through the
loving hand of our good God, yet are we not without continual occasions,
England has great cause to pray.
to move us to godly supplications, that God in his mercies will continue our
favorable God for ever, and that he will be still mindful of us, that we
fall not into our enemies hands, who (as we see) practice by all kinds of
policies to press in upon us, to deal with us as they have dealt with other
nations: nay to make us to be no more a people.

The remembrance of our little persecution in the time of Queen Marie, The
persecution in Queen Mary's time, a mean to (...)
may move us to due obedience unto our God, who did speedily deliver us by the
gracious hand of our most sacred Queen Elizabeth in whom, under our good God,
we have been this 39 years almost complete, so happily defended, that we have
had free scope to serve our God in truth: whereas we see other nations to be
so suppressed by the heavy hand of the wicked man, that none dare stand up to
profess God, but with present torture.

Oh let us therefore be thankful to our mighty God, for his help in all former
dangers, and pray, that we may show our selves as wise as Serpents, and as
innocent as doves, that we may stand sound and unblameable in our professions,
in faith strong, in love unfeigned, and constantly perseuering in this
inviolable truth, that the gates of hell, nor the tyranny of the evil man
prevail not against us, that the fond and idle fury of that Romish Idol
terrify us not, whom together with his worshippers, our alsufficient God
laugheth to scorn: who, as we see, and have tasted, has by his providence
turned their practices to their own perdition, all their plots, snares, and
pittes to catch themselves: is not this marvelous in our eyes? But the truth is
great, and it prevails.

It is the Lord that has done this great thing. It is he that drives back
the heaven, Psalm. 44. 2
and that planteth his church, it is he that destroys the adversaries, and
makes his own people to grow, Psalm. 29. 2
it is he that gives strength unto his people, and blesses us with peace. Why
then do the foolish heathen thus rage, why do these peevish people murmr
against the church of Christ in vain? Psalm. 2. 1
When their hope was to have prevailed with their peeuishly termed (invincible
army) they stumbled and fell: The enemies, hope comes to naught
the hand of the just God was against them and his mighty hand cast them into
the bottom of the sea, and with his power he confounded their devise: and
howsoever they seem to continue malicious, and in a deep desire to cut us
off, and to dispeople us, let us not fear, but duly call upon the name of
God, our head and husband, and he will break their bows, he will shiuer
their spears in sunder, their own swords shall pearce themselves, and their
own bullets shall rent themselves in pieces.

Let us therefore continually fall down before him in prayer, If God will that
we suffer, let us glorify him therein.
and in due obedience unto his word, submit our selves unto his will, and if
he will that we suffer for his name and truethes sake, let us glorify him in
our sufferinges, knowing this, that a crown of life is laid up in store for
as many as take his yoke with patience, and faithfully endure unto the end.

If it please him, he can make wars to cease from one end of the world to
the other: but if it be his pleasure to raise up new evils against us for our
sins, let us acknowledge his judgments to be just, and our deserts to be
vile. And let us serve him continually, without fear of them that can but kill
the body, and can not annoy the soul, then shall nothing separate us from this
our Christ, Nothing must separate us from Christ.
nor from the unity of his Church, neither tribulation, nor anguish, nor
persecution, nor famine, nor nakedness, nor peril of the sword, nor death, nor
life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come nor height, nor depth, nor any creature, neither Pope, Spaniard,
Turk, nor Infidel, nothing shall separate us from the love of God, which is
in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Let every member then of this true Church, with all power and diligence,
endeavor to approve himself, by knowledge, by faith, by prayer, by humility,
and patient abiding the Lords leisure in all things: so will our loving God
keep us under the shadow of his wings, and preserve us as the apple of his
eye, that we may grow up, and bring forth fruit a thousand fold, to the
glory of his name: and whether by life or by death, he has decreed to
glorify us, let us take either in all godly obedience unto his will, and
present our continual prayers unto his Majesty, for the comfort and
preservation of the universal Church.

The Prayer for the church of God, to be said at all times, and especially in
dangers.
O Almighty God and everliving Father, who have vouchsafed to gather unto thy
self an holy company out of all nations of the world, whom thou have most
gloriously entitled with the names of thy Church, thy spouse, and thy members,
and whom also thou teach, love, and feedest: whom also thou so tenderly
considerest, that howsoever the wicked, even thine enemies, do seek to annoy
it, thou so defendest, gardest and blessest it, that no hair of the head or
the least member thereof falls, much less any one of that company
perishes, or is trodden down, without thy providence. Yet* good father, such is
thy pleasure, that while this company shall dwell in earthly vessels, it is as
a ship tossed and tumbled with the cruel storms and dangerous waves of the sea,
of continual persecutions subject to often assaults of the enemy, dashed
sometime against the sword, sometime beaten with slanders, backbitings,
reproaches, and sometime to beatings, buffettings, crossings: and sometime to
massacres, murders, and most cruel death. It is never free from peril, it is
always and by all means tried. There is no comfort, no joy, no rest, as long
as it is in this life, but in hope, waiting patiently the comfortes and
consolations in heaven.

It continually depainteth out the sufferings, the crosses, and ignominious
course which Christ himself was forced to suffer here in earth In so much as
it is made known to be thy Church, by the continual calamities which here in
this life it endures.

Good father, thou see how the heathen do rage, and how the froward people of
the earth do murmr against thee in these thy members: how the Kings of the
earth band themselves, and the princes assemble and consult together against
thee, thy Christ, and against his Church. But make thy people strong in faith,
that we may break their bands, and cast their cords from us: For salvation
belongs unto thee; and thy blessing is upon thy people. Thou see, O Lord,
thou see how the wicked bend their bows, and make ready their arrows, that
they may secretly shoot at thy children, and to hit them that fear not. But
thou righteous Lord, love righteousness, thy countenance does behold the just,
and thine hand shall hold them up. Withdraw not therefore thy tender mercies from
thy Church: let thy mercy and thy truth always preserve it: for thou see
that innumerable trobles are raised against it, but send thou thy light and thy
truth, and let knowledge, faith and true obedience in lowlines and zeal, lead
it: and by thy mighty hand preserve it in thy holy mountain, and let it
always rest in thy tabernacles: furnish it with all joy and gladness, and gird
it about with strength. Let it through thee be able to thrust back her
adversaries and in thy name, tread down such as rise up against her. Let thy
church continually sing, The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I
fear? the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? In the
time of trouble and danger, hide thy people in thy tabernacle in the secret
place of thy pauilion: hide them, O Lord, and set them upon a sure rock, that
when the wicked, even their enemies and their foes come upon them to devour
them, let them stumble and fall. Be thou our strength and shield, Thou give
strength to thy people, and blessest them with peace. But, good Father, thou
see that the wicked furiously rage, and endeavor to rush in upon thy
sanctuary, they imagine mischief against thy church, and seek by all means
to devour thine inheritance. They lay snares, O Lord to entrap thy spouse, and
to dismember thy Christ. They take wicked counsel, and in deceit do they
work all their diuises: they ^^y wait for the righteous company, and seek to
destroy them. But they shall not be destroid in the perilous time. For thou,
Lord, have promised to stand in the defense of thine own people: Thou have
saved us from our adversaries; and have put them to confusion that hate thy
people.

Up Lord, and behold, how yet the enemy seeks to destroy us: O hide not
thy face, forget not our misery and affliction: thou God, art the king of all
the earth, thou raignest and rulest over the heathen: therefore will we not
fear. The Lord of hosts is with us* the God of Jacob is our refuge, yea,
this God is our God for ever and ever: he is the guide of his Church, and he
it is that will come and will not keep silence, a fire shall devour before
thee, so that thine enemies shall not be able to stand in thy presence, they
shall be scattered abroad and come to shame suddenly. Thou God have given a
banner to them that fear thee, that it may be displaide in testimony of thy
truth. That thy beloved, even thy spouse, may be delivered: ^ that every
member of thy church may dwell in thy tabernacle for ever, and may rest under
the covering of thy wings, when the wicked shall fall and be utterly
discomforted. Oh ^ow terrible art thou in thy works? through the greatness of
thy power shall thine enemies be subject unto thee. And although thou
sufferedst the wicked to ride even over our heads, although we have bin forced
to pass through fire and water: yet have thou delivered us, and brought us
into a wealthy place, where thy word and Gospel, even the truth of our
salvation, is freely delivered. Wherefore, O God, arise, let thine enemies be
scattered: Let them that hate thee, fly before thee, as the smoke vanishes,
so let thine enemies be driven back: let them not come near thy sanctuary.
As wax melts before the fire, so let the enemies of thy Church perish at thy
presence, and let thy people be glad: let thy congregations sing and rejoice,
let thy beloved leap for joy. O send down thy gracious rain upon thine
inheritance, refresh the weary members of thy Church, such as have felt the woe
of thine enemies: Let them be recomforted: Let the solitary poor man that
thirsts for thy saving health, be filled with the hid treasures of thy love.
Deliver the unprisoned, and let the children now in captivity, be set free.
Wound the heads of the obstinate and stiffenecked adversaries of thy church,
and bruise the hairye scalps of such as seek to destroy thy people. Destroy the
company of the spearemen, and the multitude of the proud* whose hearts are
lifted up against thy people. Scatter those idle and evil affected ones, whose
delight is in war: so shall all kingdoms of the earth seek thee, and the
nations dispersed, shall attend unto thy voice, and all such as know thee,
shall sing forth thy praises, yea, they shall sing unto him that rides upon
the high heavens, and ascribe al power unto thee, our great God, our mighty
king, our husband and head. O God of hosts, cause thy face to shine upon us,
and we shall be saved.

O Lord increase our faith.
A Praise of Gods favor in protecting his Church, comfortable to the faithful.
Sing faithfully unto God our strength: sing aloud unto the God of Jacob. Psalm.
81. 1.
Our God is good, why should we the^
so long neglect his praise?
His help does pass the help of me^
whose laws and love decaies.
But lo, the love of God endures.
from day to day it stands:
His spouse to love and live he lures,
and breaks her cruel bands.
He sends his word, and gives her light,
his gospel feeds his flock,
His people only take their flight,
to him their lively rock.
On him they stay, on him they stand band,
and he extends his aid:
He breaks with truth the doleful
whereat his Church dismayed.
No pompous Pope, no Spaniard proud,
no direful drum of foe:
No shaft, no shot, no rainles cloud
can daunt his spouse with woe:
What though the peevish man of sin
his bloody badge display.
What if he vainly vaunt to win?
be still: he shall decay:
The proudest of our foes shall fall,
their stoutest strength shall rue;
The stately strumpet fraught with gall,
shall faint, and all her crew.
Jehovah yet, his Church shall save,
and with his hand defend:
Who then will rest a popish slave?
and not our Englands friend.
Breath out thy word, O God our guide,
let it be published so:
That it may stand and still abide,
and teach thy Church to grow.
Let truth prevail, let faith abound
let all reform their ways:
Our Queen preserve, her foes confound,
send peace in all her days.
A Prayer for the Church of Christ.
MOst gracious God and loving Father, in Jesus Christ, look in favor upon the
estate of thy Church generally dispersed through the whole world, and whom by
the mal^ice of Satan and tyranny of Antichrist, thou see continually
assailed, with many dangers: Be thou therefore a castle and defense, a buckler
and rock, strong and forceable to withstand the fury and force of all
adversaries, and for the better comfort endue it continually with faith
unfeigned, wherein it, and every member thereof, may safely run and repair
under the shadow of thy wings, whenever peril appears. Graciously guide
and govern it, be present with it, and take the defense thereof into thine
own hands, to whom it specially and alone belongs, and let it hold on the
true course of professing and practicing thy true Religion, that the
adversaries may have no cause to condemn it through sin, which howsoever it
may seem to dwell in the most godly, while we live here: yet let us always
have an eye and diligent watch over our thoughts, words and actions, that our
light may shine to thy glory, our good, and example of other, in peace and
war, in comfort and calamity, and not be dismayed at the noyes and report of
the greatest danger. Amen.

O Lord increase our faith.
A motion to a Prayer, wherein the soul must arm it self against dangers of
the time, in regard of false doctrine.
CHrist forseeing in the days of his flesh, that after his departure, his
Children should be in danger to be seduced from his sincere truth, by the
ministers of Satan, false Prophets, and lying teachers: has very graciously
given us a forewarning to take heed of such as enter in amongst us in sheeps
clothing, who are inwardly ravening wolves: Mat. 7. 15.
who should privily bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord, who
has brought them, and who bring upon themselves swift damnation: yet many
shall follow their destructions, by whom the way of truth is evil spoken of,
It was prophesied long ago, that in the latter days (even in the days
wherein we live) should rise up very dangerous doctrines: 2. Pet 2. 1. 2.
and Satan should transform himself into an Angel of light: Satan and his
ministers, change them selves into angels of ligh^.
and false Apostles, having put on the person (as it were) of Christ himself
and of his Apostles, should creep into the hearts of Gods children, and so
enchant them with their counterfeit holiness, that many through their hypocrisy
should be deceived: Many such have in our days risen us, and have carried great
show of being of the flock of Christ, but by their actions have showed them
selves very deuourers of the sheep of Christ, There are many kind^ of deceivers
and have sought to suck the blood of his saints: of which kind of deceivers,
there are many kinds (and they most subtle and wily in their generation)
and therefore it behooves the children of God, to be careful, watchful, and
obedient unto the will and word of God, which is the line whereby we must direct
our course, to sail aright unto the harbor of the heavenly truth. We must
touch the compass of our hearts with the loadstone of truth, whereby we shall
be able to eleuate all our affections unto the heavenly day star Christ Jesus,
that no counterfeit stone of man's deceitful opinions, shall draw us from the
course unto our heavenly harbor, the kingdom of God, where we shall enjoy our
true and heavenly hearts ease, even in this life.

Let us therefore pray, that we be not miscarried by the deceits of the wicked
pilot satan, whose directions are merely indirect, and whole sails are
deecitfull, Satan's bark a deceitful and a secure ^radle
being glorious to the eye: and the bark wherein he carries his unhappy
passengers, seems to be a most secure cradle, gliding on without tempest or
wave, until it come to the end of their race, where alas they fall into the
gulf of perpetual perdition: such a master is he, and such mariners are his
false Prophets* that they delight flesh and blood, and all their course seems
sweet, but short: and sour merchandise shall they have, that pass in the
pinnise of his poisoned errors.

Let us therefore be watchful, and fly his painted poison: for we may be
soon miscarried, if we enter but one step into this course. Let us call to mind
that Paul has forewarned us of a very perilous gulf, Act. 20. 29. 30.
wherein without great watchfullnes and prayer, we may easily fall, and that
is; into perverse opinions, drawn thereinto by such as should enter in even
amongst our selves, yea, of our selves, eue^ of the fellow teachers in our
congregations, that should speak perverse things, yea, and draw disciples
after them: The strength of whose enchantments we have seen, even in our own
Church of England, whose perverse doctrines might be recited, but more fitly
omitted: the spirit speaks evidently, that in the latter tunes some shall
depart from the faith, and shall give heed unto spirits of error, and
doctrines of deuels which speak lies through hypocrisy, 1. Tim. ^. ^.
and have their consciences burned with an hot iron.

Let us harken unto the word of the Lord, and unbrace it: Therefore let us
covet in all obedience and meekenes to be taught the truth* pray for
understanding and fulfilling of the same, that we may be able to discern these
false prophets, and dreamers of dreams, of whom Moses also forewarned the
children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 1^ (...) ver. 6*
willing them not to hearken unto the idle fantasies of men who prophecy unto
us lies, and teach us vanity, that speak the visions of their own hearts,
and that teach those things that they themselves have invented of their own
brains, Ier. 2^* (...).
and which they have not learned out of the word of the Lord, and yet say, The
Lord has said it, being puffed up and yet know nothing but doting about
questions and strife of words, whereof comes envy, strife, raylings, 1.
Tim. 6. 4.
evil surmisings, etc. And yet fear not nor blush to make the Lord of heaven
the author of their lies and vanities: The impudency of false prophets.
who being enemies of God, very traitors against his crown, kingdom, and
dignity, stick not to color their deuilish practices, peevish opinions, and
gross errors, with the word of God, when indeed the word of God bewrays
them, confuteth them, and confounds them. 2. Cor. 12. 13. 14. 15.
Are not these false apostles deceitful workers (says Paul,) transforming
them selves into the Ministers of Christ, and into his Apostles.

Such a strong deceiuer arose of late even yesterday, Hacket a counterfeit
Christ.
that hideous Hacket, stirred up by Satan, who was tra^sformed into no less
in arrogation of title, then into Christ himself having on a kind of habit of
holiness, his heart fraught with a ^egion of Deuilles, who poured out mighty
blasphemies against God, high treasons against her innocent Majesty, and most
detestable practices against his country. And yet a Christ: nay, a cursed
caitife, in whom was performed the saying of Christ our Savior, that there
should arise false Christ's, that should show such strength of error, It is
dangerous to dispute with false prophets
that if it were possible, the very elect should be seduced by them. And surely
it is dangerous for the weaker sort to touch them in discourses, in
disputations, or any conference, unless it please god to arm them strongly with
the sword of the spirit, that by the sword of truth they may be enabled to
confound them in their arguments, for the very true Christians may often fall
through frailty, Christians through frailty may fall into errors.
in some conceit of things evil to be good, and good things to be evil: and
specially when it shall carry color of Godliness to conceive it so. And
many times it falls out that evil things carry color to preach unto us
good, as in the adherents of this wicked man, the two Gentlemen that were
deceived by him, and drawn to enter into an unlawful action: that that action
carried color of love, in that they preached repentance unto their country:
it carried color of Religion, in that they preached as Messengers sent from
God: But see how all these gay shows were mingled with mischeifes, Whereunto
a counterfeit show of godliness may tend.
tending to stir up vprores and tumults among the people, and to raise an
evil opinion and disloyalty in the subjects toward her Majesty: and
moreover, it tended to envy and wicked zeal, to bring Magistrates into
contempt. All which preach unto us that it is time for all estats to look about
them, to be watchful, and to be ready to stand in the day of trial: for these
are persecutions raised against the highest, even by such as are with us in
some outward shows, but not of us as the issue of their works declare: but in
my poor opinion, this their preaching publishes unto us gods displeasure, for
overmuch security. If they being false Prophets preach unto us repentance: It
is time for Gods Ministers to preach repentance and amendme^t of lif^
it is time for the true Ministers of God to cry out for repentance: for God
many ways preaches unto us repentance and amendment of life. And because the
devil to an evil purpose preaches that which may admonish us, let us use the
means to learn how to amend what is to be amended: so shall we tread him
and his purposes under our feet, and God himself will send preachers to
publish his pleasure, and to declare his truth with warrant of his word, whose
exhortations shall not be by deceit, nor by uncleanness, nor by guile, but as
they were allowed of God, and to whom the Gospel being committed: they shall
speak, not as they that please men, but God, which shall approve their
hearts. By whose doctrine also we shall be able to find out all the false
Prophets that endeavor to miscarry us. The aptest mean to bring men into the
captivity of errors, Ignorance the mother of errors.
and erroneous teachers, is ignorance of the word, which would God it were
merely banished the Church of God that through knowledge we might wade in the
true word, and by the same distinguish and ^ull out the poison of all perverse
teachers, and cast it in the fire of utter oblivion. That the hearts of true
Christians might be comforted, and all the congregation of God knit together in
love. And that all the ministers of God might proceed in one rule, Col. 2, 2.
and might al mind one thing in the lord, that nothing be done of contention or
vain glory, but that in meekness of mind every man esteem other better
than himself. Phil. 3. 16
What moved these two Gentlemen, Ardington and Coppinger, to run that course,
but vain glory and ignorance of the word, without the knowledge whereof, the
intricate and hidden subtlety of that wicked monster Hacket, could not be
descried, who bewitched them with forgetfulness of their duties to God, and
their most gracious Queen: for that they searched not the counsel of God,
neither builded their proceeding upon his word: but pricked on by the fling of
singularity and vain glory, brake out into desperate and irreligious terms,
laying open, as it were, before all the world, their own corruptions, and the
deuilish affections of that wicked man, The end of Hacket that counterfeit
Christ*
that counterfeit Christ, that forged king, who was deservedly crowned with a
halter in Cheap, according to the words of Paul, 2. Cor. 1^. 15.
that the end of these men shall be according to their works.

It is time for the Children of God to take warning and be watchful,
considering these dangerous times, wherein swarms of falfe prophets do every
where fly to and fro to disquiet the godly, as papists, Brownists, Anabaptists,
the Family of lust and lewdness, termed the family of love: and many other
dangerous sects, 2. Tim. 2. 1^
who seek to quench the ardent zeal of sincere Christianity, striving about
words which is to no profit, but to the perverting of the hearers. But let us
pray that our Ministry may show it self approved unto God, and that our
Ministers need not to be ashamed, but may divide the word of truth aright,
that they may stay profane and vain bablings which increase to more
ungodliness: 2. Tim, 2. 25 16.
And that they may keep the pattern of the wholesome word which they have
learned in faith, and which they may teach in love in Christ Jesus. For such is
the subtilty of this wicked workmaster, who has sent forth these hellish
haruest-men, that some one of these his subtle sects in show, meets, and as
it were, matcheth every godly endeavor and sincere course that the children of
God do practice in deed, 2. Tim. 6. 25
only to unpaire the credit of a right Christian life in Gods sincere children,
by the opposition of science, falsely so called.

We know that it is the duty of every child of God, to ^oe good works to
approve his faith, by which faith he is justified. And we see that the devil
has stirred up a doctrine of works that by them men are justified, and
therefore such as stand upon their own justification, carry themselves in show
answerable in mortal sincerity to the most godly: when yet they hang in the
Spiders web of sin, because they imagine that God will thank them because
they do that which he has commanded them. And yet by the mouth of God
himself they are condemned for unprofitable servants. Luke 17. 9. 10.


We know that true Christians do thirst after the word, and desire to be fed
with the food of the Gospel. And therefore desire to repair unto sermons, and
to be studious in the word. And we may see how the Devil provides to blemish
this Christian virtue, The Devil endeavors to blemish every sincere
exercise.
by stirring up even of his wicked ministers to perform the same, as did the
southsayers of Pharao, and at length to break out into gross and most
palpable evils to the end that the fall of them that stood not, should blemish
the zeal of right godly affected.

Again, we know that it is the duty of Christians to shun swearing, and
blasphemy, to give continual thanks for Gods benefits, to instruct their
families, and to pray for, and with them. And we see that the devil having
emulation hereat, endeavors either to draw such as exercise this sincere
course of life into some action to discredit their profession, or else
stirs up some counterfeit of his in some show, to perform this integrity,
that at the last by some notable fall, 2. The. 2. 15.
he may bring all other sincere professors into ignominy. Therefore, brethren
stand fast, and keep the instructions which ye have been taught either by
words or by the examples of the apostles. The Devil practices to blemish to
preachers of the word.
For above the rest of his dangerous practices, mark how he endeavors to
blemish the profession of the Gospel, even in the Ministry, and in the sound
preachers of the word, by drawing them into some gross evil or other, to the
end that he may bring all the godly and zealous workmen of the Lord into
contempt, blinding the eyes of the world, and thereby raises a false opinion of
the very sacred truth.

By this we see, that even now is come the time of trial, and now it will be
found out who are Gods children in show, and who in deed, it will appear, who
will continue unto the end: for if we give consent to strange doctrine, to
new devises, to false and counterfeite ways, whereunto we are daily moved,
then shall we be vagabonds from the Church of God, howsoever we seem to
dwell in the same, and to be members of it in outward show, then will God in the
last day say, I know you not, howsoever we say we have prophesied and preached
in his name.

Oh let us therefore pray, that we may hold on a true course, and keep the
line of the truth, without going to the right or left hand, What the true
professors must look for.
howsoever subject we shall then be to slanders, to scoffs, to reproaches, to
imprisonmentes, and sometime to death it self.

Happy are we that have the book of life laid open before us, wherein is
contained the way to Gods kingdom, and whereby we may take the path to our
heavenly hearts case, A consideration of the controversies in our own Church.
and that without reproof, whereof we may rejoice.

And for a farther cause to move us to go unto god in prayer, let us somewhat
consider the controversies which of late have risen by the work and instigation
of the devil, even in our own Church, amongst our own guides in our own native
land: how it has raised a scruple and doubt in some that are not altogether
grounded in the knowledge of the word, Whether they should obey the Maiestrate
in Ecclesiastical causes. And, whether there should be a superiority or
equality in the Church governors. These, and many other cauils has he
raised, to hinder the preaching of the Gospel, which is greatly to be
lamented, and an establishment of concord amongst our selves to be sought and
heartily prayed for. The word warranteth our obedience unto Magistrates, and
therefore, woe be unto him that will teach us contrary doctrine. Let us endeavor
to perform our duties, and give unto God that which is Gods, and unto Caesar
that which belongs unto Caesar. And for the controversy of the inequality
of Church governors, it is to be considered that there are several functions
in the Church, and every function has his several person and place, let us
therefore pray that every person may measure his calling by the word, and limit
his superiority or inferiority, as they are therein directed, then shall not
the people of God want their due food in regard of humane contentions. Oh that
every one would enter into his own conscience, and as much as in him lies,
cast away all carnal consideration, and what the word of God warranteth, let
him hold, and give no ground to the cauillers, and shun the contrary.

And for us that are the common people, that must expect to be fed by the
ministry, let us pray for their unity, and that God will give them humble
spirits, vigilant and watchful eyes, knowledge, love, zeal, and constancy,
that the false prophets may be abandoned, and the true ministers of God be
esteemed and embraced as the Ministers of God, Let us obey them that have the
oversight of us, Heb. 13. 17
and submit our selves, for they watch over oursoules, as they that must give
accounts, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief, for that is
unprofitable for us, knowing that false prophets are the enemies to the cross
of Christ, Phil. 3. 18. 19.
whose end is damnation, 2. Tim 2. 21
whose God is their belly, and whose glory is their shame, which mind earthly
things. If any man therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel of
honor, and sanctified and meet for the Lord. And therefore let every man pray
unto God that they may all speak one thing, and that there may be no
dissentions amongst us, but we may be knit together in one mind, and in one
judgment, so shall the glory of God appear, and our Church prosper.

The Prayer against false Prophets, errors and Schisms, and for increase of
Christianity.
FOrasmuch, good Father, as the ^atter times of the ^orlde are come upon us,
and we are by thy divine providence, allotted unto these dangerous and evil
days, wherein, as we have been foretold, many false prophets, and perverse
teachers, dreamers of dreams, and lying Apostles, are risen up: and Satan
that wicked serpent has turned himself into an Angel of light, and his
Ministers into the form of thy Son Christ, and his Apostles, whereby he
endeavors to continue his kingdom, and to hinder the passage of thy divine
word, to exalt error, and to stop the truth, to confirm vanity, and to
blemish thy word. And forasmuch also, good father, as that man of sin, the son
of perdition, heretofore foretold to come, is already come, and has
established his seat of pride, and sends abroad his lying Ministers to
seduce such as have not sufficient taste of thy word, and whom thy grace
directs not, to beware of his wicked practices. Grant (oh merciful God)
that we may through the assistance of thy divine spirit, be wise in thee, and
be so guided by thee, that the deceiving devises of these lying spirits,
withdraw not our minds, hearts and souls, from the true embracing of thy
sacred word. Grant (O Lord) that we wander not from the path of thy heavenly
kingdom, but may constantly and firmly persevere in thine infallible truth
unto the end, and may banish all errors and show of falshoode, and abide in
the unity of thy true Church, and Christian religion for ever: let no
deceitful thing miscarrie us, let not the craft and subtlety of Satan, nor
the hypocritical habit of holiness, (wherewith many of the children of
perdition are clad, to deceive the simple and true of heart) prevail with us.
Defend us, good father, from erroneous sects, and let us not in any sort
join with the schisms and divisions of the world: for (good Father) as they
are many, so are they in many sorts dangerous, for they all carry show of
truth, some mixed with the truth, and all of them defended for a truth* in so
much as the truth it self is little, yea, least of all maintained, but
suppressed, persecuted, and vpbrayded, eue^ with the titles of error, heresy,
falsehood, novelty, cause of tumults, of rebellio^s, and contempt of
Magistrates, and such like persecutions: which how contrary it is, thou
know. It is hard therefore, unless thou vouchsafe the light of thy holy
spirit, to discern between these, and as hard to stand without being
seduced through their subtilties: send down therefore thy grace, and direct us
in thy truth, and gather us together in one sound profession: enable us to
conceive aright the things that belong unto salvation, and keep us from such
as come into the Church in sheeps clothing, but are inwardly ravening wolves,
which spare not thy flock, but cruelly devour thy beloved sheep, with the
poison of erroneous doctrine: and root out the tares, cockle, and darnell of
error, already sown, from the good seed of thy word.

And forasmuch (good father) as the case stands so, that who so will profess
thy name, and seek to sanctify the same in a sincere and right course of
life, not bending his affections, or yielding liking to the wicked course of
this world, in whose proceedinges stands but the shadow without the
substanciall fruit of sincerity, cannot wade through this vale full of
confused corruptions, but he shall fall into the hands of such as carry the
titles of Christians, and will yet seek Antichristianlie, to impose themselves
against him, with y^ bitterness of their vpbraydings, to quail (if it were
possible) and to discomfite, nay, to seduce even the faithful from the sincere
service of thee. And this (dear Father) is dangerous unto the weak and feeble
ones, wherefore give us aid and strength, that we slide not by their slipperie
practices from a constant perseverance in the inviolable truth, but rather may
with all willingness, not only lay down our goods, and all natural respects,
but even life it self, rather than to show our selves as broken bows, to
start aside with every blast of vain doctrine, and thereby be carried away
into vanity and error.

And according unto thy promise, vouchsafe that whenever any of thy children,
for the testimony of their faith in thee, and for their ardent zeal in thy
word, shall be apprehended* reproved, or exacted before Princes or rulers,
howsoever unlearned or unable, they shall be in respect of deep literature, or
worldly wisdom, thine holy spirit may enlighten their understandings, give
knowledge unto their hearts, and utterance unto their lips, that they may be
able to speak and defend thy truth, to the utter confutation of such false
teachers as shall withstand the same: and give them al^o knowledge and
boldness, that the high looks, and the thundering threats of the mighty
adversaries dismay them not: so shall thy name be glorified, thy word
magnified, and thy poor children sing forth the praise of thy might and
majesty, with heavenly wisdom in worldly foolishness, and in the end be
crowned with the diadem of eternal felicity, with thy Saints in bliss.
Amen.

O Lord increase our faith.
Against false Prophets, and deceitful teachers.
O God that guid'st that faithful flock,
and leadst it by thine hand,
That gave it water of thy rock
in dry Arabia land.
Give grace to us to fly the men,
that teach thy word awry;
Of who^ thy son forewarnd us when
he did their sleights epsy.
He did foresee hypocrisy
should lurk in godly weed,
And wolves in sheeplike tire to lie
and on thy sheep to feed.
The subtle serpent shroudes his wiles
attyrde like Angel bright.
And false Apostles fraught with guiles.
do counterfeit the light*
The man of sin that sits on hie,
with triple crown on pate,
And lifts his leudnes to the sky,
holds saving Christ in hate.
He sends his subtle sots by swarms
through all the world: to win
Thy children pure by wicked charms
to draw their souls to sin.
Keep us thy children Lord, therefore,
direct us by thy grace,
That their inchantmentes may no more
our zeal sincere deface
And let thy truth be still our guide,
that we thereby may know
Their falsehood, who do start aside,
and fly the subtle foe.
A motion tending to prayer, that al estates may govern themselves according
to their duties.
WE often offend all the sort of us in this point, namely, in attributing more
unto our wealth, our worldly wisdom, our offices, our places and high titles,
Our good liking of our high estates, dangerous.
our callings, and our skill, in whatsoever art or faculty, then indeed we
ought: for by over good conceit of any of these, we imagine that all good
success comes of our selves: inso much, as the wealthy seem to be secure,
in regard of their abou^dance of all things, and think they have need of
nothing, and therefore seldom or never fly unto God for succor, but seek it
in their chests.

The politic and wise according unto the world, are careless of the counsel
of God, of his directions and assistance, because in their generations, they
are wiser than the children of light, and so deep are they in their own self
judgment, that it is impossible for them to be deceived. They that have high,
profitable and honorable offices, which is in this life the greatest worldly
gift that God bestows upon man, what avails it if they execute such high
places without the due observation of the sincerity of conscience, violated
with corruption and violence toward inferiors, and with cruelty toward
such as offend them? A sincere conscience must accompany a high office or
calling.
These high callings, honorable or profitable offices, will render unto the
abusers of the same, the reward of eternal ignominy in the end.

The baser sort of men, Too good opinion of our skill in manual occupations,
dangerous.
such as in their arts, faculties, and manual occupations, do exceed other in
skill and excellency, they wax arrogant, and eleuate themselves above other,
and in their conceits despise other, yet in the end besot themselves, and fall
into miserable contempt, even of the most basest.

Since then that these high gifts often times make us to forget our selves and
God: Every m^^ must consider why he was pl^ced in his calling.
it is good and most expedient for every man in his calling, to look into the
end for which he was called thereunto, and to proceed unto the performance
and execution thereof, according to the commandment of God, in truth, in zeal
of a good conscience, and in all humility and meekness: knowing this, that
otherwise our callings will be crossed, and that in judgment* Saul was worldly
wise and a mighty king and one that stood in the place of high honor and
dignity: Yet because he thought his wisdom better than in deed it was, the
Lord pulled him down from his kingly throne, to ignominy and shame. Job was
welthy yet he was brought to extreme poverty, Job. 1. 3.
to show the uncertain estate of rich and wealthy men. Achitophel was wise and
politic, in so much as his counsel was accounted as the Oracle of God, 2, Sam.
16. 23
yet because it was not seasoned with the truth, in the fear of God, it turned
to his own shame, ^, Sam. 17. 23.
and at last his counsel being contemned, he hanged himself. The Judges that
accused Susanna falsely, were men of authority, yet for that they abused their
authority, they were found worthy of death. Demetrius was a cunning artificer,
and under color of his skill, and by reason of the gain which he got by the
same, he was moved to drive others of the same mystery, not having the fear
of God, not only to forsake religion, but to raise tumult against Paul. So
that we see* that not one of these excellent gifts or rare qualities, Our
callings them selves can not relieve us.
are of them selves able to comfort or relieve us, but rather of them selves to
draw us into diverse evils, yea and breed in us greater inconveniences than if
we were destitute of them. And therefore it behooves every one of us, to crave
the assistance of god, and the direction of his grace, that we may guide our
professions, and use his gifts wisely, reuere^tly, and humbly, knowing that it
comes not of our selves to perform any good in what place or calling soever
we be, howsoever rich, howsoever glorious, No calling without the fear of God
prospe^eth ever.
howsoever wise, howsoever cunning we are, without the fear of God we are yet
poor, ignominious, foolish and ignorant, and very sots, and nothing that we
take in hand shall prosper to the end, howsoever it fare with us for a time.

We may not show our selves swine, who seek their draffe and acornes, and
their whole nouriture from the earth, never looking up to the hand that gives
it, nor to the tree from whence they fall. We live not by bread only, that we
sow and reap of the earth: we get not our wealth by our own wisdom, but by
the providence of God, by his word, and by his promises which we apprehend and
receive by the hand of faith: and therefore must we look up unto the hill,
from whence comes our help, we must fly unto the Lord, who blesses our
wealth, our wisdom, our authority, our knowledge, and our occupations: for
he sets in authority, and pulls down, he gives wisdom, and besotteth
it, he instructs us in arts, sciences, and in our occupations, and he
blesses and curses us in them, as we show our selves in duty obedient unto
him, so he shows himself ready willing, and able to bless and help us.

It is not enough to be able in some measure to discharge our duty, in our
offices and callinges, but we must pray that we may discharge the same truly,
which we cannot do without the blessing of God. Except the Lord build the
house, Psalm. 127. ^ 2. etc.
they labor in vain that build it. Except the Lord keep the city, the
watch men wake in vain. All our endeavors and labors are to no purpose,
except the Lord bless the end. It is in vain for us to rise early, and to
go to our rest late, and in grief to eat our bread, verse. 20
unless the Lord give a blessing unto our labors and studies.

Wherefore let us repair unto our good God, with humble hearts in faithful
supplications: that he will give us ableness to perform our callings
skilfully and religionslie, that in quiet of conscience we may eat the
fruits of our labors, and so prosper in all that we take in hand, that our
brethren be neither deceived by us, nor our selves forced to use any unlawful
thing for our own relief, which may offend the Lord.

The Prayer that every man may live uprightly in his calling.
O God of all comfort, and giver of all consolation, forgive my sins, cleanse
me, and wash me from all iniquity, which disable me to perform my calling,
in such sincerity as becomes me. And through the blood of thy Son,
purify my heart, and my imperfections, increase my knowledge and sanctify
mine affections with thy grace, that my sins being forgiven, I may rest in
thy favor, and in thy favor find continual comfort, and be daily blessed
with new gifts: that I may be found perfect in my calling, seasoned so with a
lively faith in thee that thy holy spirit may continually dwell and bear rule
in me, and lead me to the due performance of those things which thou requirest
to be done in my calling: that all unnatural affections being truly
mortified, I may only rest in thee, and rely on thee, and be ruled by thee in
all things.

Good Father, grant that I may take the direct and right course in my vocation
to eternal life. In which course consists the inward peace of the soul,
which is only delighted in thine inviolable truth, reueiled by thy Son, and
left unto us in his word and last will. In which his last will and Testament
are comprehended all necessary rules, and the sacred discipline, whereby thy
children are to guide them selves in their several callings: which directions,
are comprehended in three principal virtues, by thee bestowed upon them that
seek them at thy hands, in the name of thy son, faith hope and love: which
three are so united and knit in one, that they dwell altogether in thine elect
children: and so precisely direct them through thy grace, that they go not
awry in their callings.

I therefore (good Father) being of mine own wisdom ignorant, and of mine own
power unable to comprehend the height, the length, and depth of my calling,
instantly beseech thee, in mercy to behold me, an imperfect creature* without
these virtues, and so adorn me with them, that I, may be made perfect in all
good works of the spirit, that my bodily labors be not in vain in thee.

Grant also, that I may join with all my trauailles, labors, affections,
desires, and endeavors, faith with faith, knowledge with knowledge, temperance
with temperance; patience with patience, godliness with godliness, brotherly
kindness, and with brotherly kindness love: that I be not unfruitful in my
calling. But may acknowledge thy son Christ Jesus, and in him to have peace
of conscience: that I may be patient in troubles, long suffering in wronge^:
meek in trials: faithful in expecting help in distress, rejoicing in heart,
quieted in mind, in hope to enjoy at thy hands, and in thy good time,
whatsouer makes to the true comfort of my soul, and the relief of my body.
That in all truth and inward feeling of thine aid, my calling may be made
perfect, and sealed with the seal of thine own spiritual approbation. So
shall I thine unworthy creature, and all such as thou have committed to my
charge be directed in the true knowledge of thee, and sustained with things
necessary while we live here.

Oh blessed Lord and loving father, except thou thus direct me, I cannot
stand, but shall fall into many miseries. For no estate, no degree, no
calling, office function, or trade of life, can prosper or be rightly
performed, without thy continual aid, direction and providence.

Therefore Lord, guide me by thy spirit, increase my faith, give me wisdom
and ablenes in all things to execute calling as I ought: and to the execution
thereof, bless all my members, make them apt and ready instruments to perform
their duties, that in no point I fail in a Christian proceeding therein. And
bridle in me the nature of flesh and blood, which (unless thou season my
affections by thy spirit) will so much the more glory, by how much thou have
exalted me to worldly preferment, and enable me to live in this world, in
higher reputation than other men, whereunto flesh and blood is ready to
attribute chiefest hearts ease. And by that subtle shift, Satan many times,
moves us to rely upon vain things. And therefore (good Father) vouchsafe so
to ground all mine affections upon thy fear, that I be not miscarried in my
calling, from the true obedience unto thee, without which neither honor,
profit, friends, wealth, wisdom, or any other blessing of thine, can steed,
relieve, or comfort me.

Be present therefore, good and gracious Father, with me, and grant that all
things that I take in hand, may begin in knowledge, proceed in fear of thee,
and end in love, that my whole course of life may be blessed with good effect,
in all my endeavors. That neither mine enemies rejoice at my miseries, the
godly be offended at my rashness, nor my estate hindered by my foolishnes.
Good Lord grant this for thy sons sake. Amen.

For Gods direction in our callings.
O God of Gods, O father great,
thou guide of all degrees:
The high and low look up to thee
attendant on their knees.
We have our being and our food,
our wisdom and our skill:
Our high estate, all honor eke,
and callings at thy will.
Al kings receive their scepters pure
and diademes from thee:
Thou make the^ apt to rule a land
else they unable be.
Thou give sage and sacred men,
and Senators most grave:
To guide thy people in the hestes,
that fit them best to have.
Thou chosest eke the godliest ones
and meetest men, to be
The preachers of thy satred will,
who learn to teach from thee.
Thy grace does guide their lips aright
else speak they all awry:
Thou art the fountain full of love,
whereof they drink or die.
The porest thou do frame to skill,
the lowest learnes to live:
Each hand taks hold of art from thee,
thou do all blessings give.
Else all their curious cunning fails
our labors loose their grace:
In vain we travail, and our toil
turns us to poorest place.
Since then (good father) each degree
depend on thee for aid:
The high and low, wealthy and wise
else rest they all vnstaide.
Bless all thy people in their charge
our callings all direct:
Teach Prince and people in the way
that graceth thine elect.
A motion to a prayer, wherein the soul must arm himself to suffer crosses,
and therefore it is necessary to call to mind what is to be done when
affliction comes.
Every one that walks aright, The poor man's entertainment in this progress.
shall suffer affliction: under which title of affliction, are comprehended all
troubles crosses and calamities whatsoever, be it poverty, sickness,
imprisonme^ts, enemies loss of goods, slander, banishment. or whatsoever
other aduertie. And all these, The godly and the wicked are troubled, but in
diverse sorts.
or some part of them do all the children of God especially taste, but in love
although sometime the wicked are touched with them also, in the Lords
judgments: But for the most part the wicked come not into misfortune like other
men, The worldly estate of the wicked.
but are lusty and strong, and flourish like green bay trees, laying up great
heaps of riches for their children. And contrariwise, the godly, such as fear
God and walk in his ways, such as tremble to sin, they are pinched with
poverty, they are visited with sickness, they are imprisoned, they are
persecuted* slandered, The estate of the godly in this life.
and taste of all the perverse things of the world, according to the saying of
David, Psalm. 6. 2. 33
Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of
all. He hears the poor, and despises not his prisoners: Such as are shut up
in the afflictions of the world, as was David, who was persecuted of Saul, and
crossed by his own son Absolon: Genesis 39. 20.
As Joseph, who was imprisoned for his sincerity and continency, whose hard
and evil entreatment is specified Psalm. 105. Jeremy the holy prophet of god,
Ier. 20. 2.
was likewise imprisoned and buffeted, fettered and evil entreated, for doing
the message of God. Daniel, Dan. 6. 6.
for that he refused to commit Idolatry was cast into the Lions den. Elias was
pursued by the wicked ministers of Iezabel, to have been slain, But let us
mark how the Lord works. He wills us to call upon him, The Lord works
^or his children.
in the time of trouble, and he will hear us and ease us. So these men cried
unto the Lord, Psalm. 50. 15.
and he delivered them out of their distress. Psalm. 107. 1^
He did not only deliver David, but made him a king. He did not only set
Joseph free, but made him chief ruler of the kings household, Genesis 41. 4^
he was exalted out of prison to promotio^: so were Jeremy, Daniel, Elias, and
all Gods children delivered. We also read of Peter, Paul, Silas, and many
other: the end of whose troubles, are comfortablie wrought by the living hand
of the Lord by prayer. Prayer draws ^^onbles to a good end.
Yet oftentimes the Lord permits his children to be most deeply plunged in
misery, in such sort as flesh and blood often doubts whether it be possible
that there may be any mean to deliver it, for we see that we stick fast) as
David ^aith) in the deep mire of troubles, Psalm. 62. ^
where no stay is, where is no comfort at all, no friend to aid ^s, no mean to
rid us, but the cruel ^reames and merciles waters run ^s it were over our head.
Psalm. 71. (...)
The lord ^heweth his children great troubles and adversities, but he turns
unto us again, he re^iueth us, and takes us up from the deep of the sea. So
did he help the children of Israel, even through the red sea: the story of
Gods great goodness and power therein is manifest, and comfortable to gods
children, Exodus 17. 6.
how he fed them in the barren wilderness with bread from heaven, Psalm. ^14. 8.
and how he gave them drink of the hard rock. Exo. ^6. 13.
Sampson being ready to die with thirst, Psalm. 78. 6.
the Lord gave out a fountain of water out of the tooth of the ia^^one of an
Isse to comfort him. Iud. 15. 19
Elias being hungry, Gods providence in feeding his children.
had meat sent him from God by a Raven: the Lord can and will, if he see it
expedient for us, make us bread of stones, he preserves his children in the
furnace of the most cruel fiery trial. The children of GOD walk through fire
and water, Psalm. 6. 12
but the Lord brings them into a weal thie place, Genesis 32. 10.
as he did Jacob, who came over Jorden with his staff only, but he returned
very rich, God blesses his children with good things, and when we begin to
shrink through the extremity of our afflictions, yet he will extend his
hand, as he did unto Peter, and will hold us up, that we perish not in the
waters of trouble, Psalm. 6^. (...)
Let us the^ cast our burden upon the Lord, and he shall nourish us, he will
not suffer the righteous to fall for ever. Let us take up the cross and follow
our master Christ, Psalm. 55. (...)
who has framed out this progress before us, and tasted of the crooked
passage of the world. God is our hope and strength yea a present help in
trouble: Psalm. 46. ^
he is ready always to be found, why should we then fear, or be
faint-hearted, though we fall into misery, as though some strange thing
happened unto us? Let us be patient, and wait a while, for it is the way that
the godly have walked before us, and have been comforted. David before he was
troubled went awry, Affliction a necessary mean to draw us to God.
he fell from his duty to God, but after he was touched with the crosses of
the world for his disobedience, he began to ^ooke back again from whence
he was slidden, and acknowledged, that it was his sins that had plucked
down Gods anger against him. So he reformed his heart, and confessed, that it
was good for him that he was troubled. So let every one of us acknowledge that
our miseries are but messengers to reu^ke us from sin* and to keep us in aw of
our God, Affliction (...) of Gods love, and (...) prosperity the (...).
who is so loving unto us, that he will not suffer us to fall, but will by and
by whip us for our fault, if not, it is an argument that he begins to leave
us to our selves, to fill up a greater measure of sin, against the day of
vengeance. Thus he suffers ye wicked to wallow in their pleasures, in health,
in wealth, in friends, in continual prosperity and to have, as it were all
hearts eas^ in this world: but alas, it is a dangerous slumber wherein they ar^
cast by the heaviness of sin, wherein they lie fatting in all delights but at
last, they come to the everlasting slaughter And far bett^^ were it that they
had suffered wa^ in steed of wealth, A (...) saying to secure men.
sickness in (...) of health, sorrow in steed of ioy^ pains in place of
pleasure, and (...) misery and affliction in steed their delights in this
life, which is but for a moment, rather than to perish, for their pleasure
eternally. But alas, what is this counsel to the wise of this world? it is
foolishnes. I will therefore speak again to the poor, to the miserable, to the
imprisoned, to such as li^e as though they were already dead, in regard that
the world affords them no comfort, and whose life seems unto the
prosperous a very madness, a very hell, and an ignominious life. To such I say
thus and would with them to take up their crosses with patience, and follow
Christ. And let them not fear, though the earth be moved, and though the
mountains fall into the midst of the sea, though the waters thereof rage, and be
troubled, and the mountains shake at the surges of the same, for there is a
river whose streams shall make the^ glad, for God is in the midst of it. And
thereof gives he the thirsty to drink, and therewith washes he away the
tears from the eyes of his afflicted children, and pours abundance of
comfortes upon all such as long for his ready help: and let them know this,
Psalm. 9. 18.
that the poor shall not always be forgotten. The hope of the afflicted
shall not perish for ever: Gods fatherly care of his children.
the Lord is a refuge for the poor, a refuge in the time of trouble: he
forgets not the complaint of the poor. But for the oppression of the
needy, and for the sighs of the poor, I will up, Psalm. 22. 3
says the Lord, and will set at liberty whom the wicked has imprisoned.
psalm. 18, 2.
The Lord is our rock, and our fortress, it is he that delivers us, he is
our strength, let us trust in him, our shield, the horn also of our
salvation, and our refuge: he is not as the world, who loves only the
glorious, The world loves things famous and glorious, The Lord despises not
the poor.
the rich, and such as are famous in the world, and who abhors the needy,
the base, the poor, and miserable. But the Lord loves and regards, he
favors and releeueth the poor: he hides not his face from him that is in
misery: but when he calls upon him, he hears him, and releeueth him: And
howsoever miserably we be^ crossed: let us be comforted, for the porest that
trusts in him shall eat and be satisfied. They that seek him, shall want no
manner of thing that is good: although for a time, we be tried and cast down,
and most miserably tossed in this cruel world, and though we seem to walk
through the valley of the shadow of death, let us not fear, for God is with
us, his rod and his staff will comfort us: he will prepare a table for us in
the sight of such as seem to say of us. God has forgotten them: he shall
anoint our heads with the oil of inward comfort: he will fill our cup, The
world adds sorrow to him that God visits.
and our joy shall be full. psalm. 69. 16.
And although it fall out with the godly in this world, that when they are
afflicted, the wicked, nay, sometimes such as carry great color of
Christianity, are ready to persecute them whom the Lord visits, and stick
not to ad more sorrow unto their grief, whom the Lord touches with any
cross. It is no new thing, for experience it self teaches it, and it is
become a proverb, that one mischief follows another, and all troubles come
together: and to verify it every evil is made to fall upon the afflicted man,
and the world adds misery to misery, wha^ then? shall Gods children dismay
at this? God forbid: nay, which is more, we see, that if it please God to pull
us down from prosperity to adversity, from ability and weal^^, to disability
and poverty, as many times the most godly are by the hand of God, in love: How
do our ancient friends and familiar acquaintance slide from us, as though
they knew us not? They scorn to see us, (...) dearest friends fly from us in
our troubles.
and they pass by us, nodding the head, saying reprochfully, he trusted in
God, but see his misery: and if there be any cause, they will have a blow at
him, Psalm. 38. 11.
that is already stricken: and they think it service to God, to vex them that
are vexed, and to afflicte the afflicted. And surely, if without offense I may
make the comparison, the men of this world may be likened to a company of
dogs, who will join all together upon a poor curre, that is already
ouermatched. And so do the cruel men, hand in hand join together to oppress
the oppressed And therefore al such as fear God, The whole world is set against
the Godly.
arm you against troubles, for the whole world is set against you. Are ye
poor? it will seek your further misery: are ye slaundered? it will speak
more evil of you: have ye enemies? it will also hate you: are ye any way
afflicted? it will seek to pull you utterly down. But stand valiantly, fight
a good fight against all these crosses, not with the hand of revenge, but with
patient abiding: so shall ye find rest at the last. Cast all your care upon
God, 1 Pet. 5. 7.
for he cares for you, his eyes are always over the righteous, 2 Pet. 3. 12.
and his ears continually open unto their prayers. Grudge ye not therefore at
the prosperity of the worldly men, who live here in all pleasure and
wantonness, nourishing their hearts as in the day of slaughter: Ephesians. 5. 5. ^
although they seek to kill you, and to oppress you, be patient unto the
coming of the Lord, settle your hearts, for his coming draws near, and
take the Prophets for an example of suffering adversity, and of long patience,
who accounted them blessed which endured: They that suffer are bl^ssed.
consider the patience of Job, and his misery, and mark what end the Lord
made, for assuredly, the Lord is very pitiful, and merciful, wh^ although
sorrow* mourning, and tears endure for a night, he sends joy again in the
morning: although father, mother, and friends forsake us, the Lord takes us
up: although we may not look for outward comfort while we live here. (...).
9. 10.
Yet let us suffer affliction, let us sorrow and weep, let our laughter be
turned into mourning, and our joy into heaviness: let us cast down our selves
before the Lord, and he will lift us up. He has said, (...) ^3. 5.
I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee. Howsoever we fall, we shall not
perish, for the Lord puts to his hand, and therefore may the poor
afflicted build his comfort upon this promise, and say, Psalm. 37. 24. Verse, 6.
The Lord is my helper, neither will I fear what man can do unto me.
Hearken yet ye poor children of God, what David says to comfort you, I have
been young and now am old, Psalm. 37.
yet saw I never the righteous forsaken, nor their children to beg their
bread. Has not God chosen the poor of this world, Iam. 2. 5
that they should be rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he
promised to them that love him? Wherefore let them that suffer according to the
will of God, commit their souls to him in well doing, 1. Pet. 4. ^
as unto a faithful Creator. And rejoice ye in as much as ye are partakers of
Christ's suffering, verse. 13.
that when his glory shall appear ye may be glad and rejoice. In the mean
time, let us repair unto him in prayer.

A very necessary prayer in time of trouble, crosses, and afflictions.
O Lord God, my most loving Father, and creator, who of thy frank and free
favor have called me into this world, and placed me in the same, when I
wa^dred as a poor pilgrim, a miserable and distressed wretch^ for whom thou
heretofore have vouchsafed to provide things necessary and expedient, and
have also given me prosperous and gracious success in my proceedinges. But of
late, my sins have made a separation between thy favor and my necessity,
in so much as I now feel thy heavy hand of judgment, wherein I am bereaved of
some of thy woonted comfortes, in so much as it seems that thou set thy
self, as it were against me: but alas, what am I earth and ashes, that thou
should contend with me? let it rather please thee (good Father) to refresh
me with the timely showers and pleasant dew of thy loving assistance, that
where I am now low, I may be exalted to thy protection: being poor, I may be
enabled to live: being base, or of little or no credit in the world. I may be
beloved and embraced, and comforted of thee: behold my poverty, consider mine
affliction, and weigh my miseries: For innumerable troubles have compassed me,
my sins have taken such hold upon me that I am not able to look up. Oh let
it please thee (good Father) to deliver me, make have (O Lord) to relieve me,
though I be poor and needy: O think thou on me, thou art my helper and my
deliverer, oh make no long tarrying: O (my God) why have thou fergotten me?
thou art the God of my strength, why have thou put me away: up (my God) why
sleep thou, awake, be not far off for ever, wherefore hidest thou thy
face, and forgettest my misery and affliction? my soul is beaten down, I
have no aid, no comfort, all my consolation is come to an end, therefore rise
up, O succor me, rise up, O my helper, rise up, O my castle, rise up, O my
refuge, rise up and restore me again, thou God of my comfort, Thou rock, and
my fortress, my strength, my shield, the horn also of my salvation, and my
refuge.

Thou have promised to be a refuge for the poor, a refuge in due time, even in
affliction. I am poor and in misery, help me, for baine is the help of man.
They that know thy name, will trust in thee, for thou never failest them that
trust in thee. The poor shall not always be forgotten, the hope of the
afflicted shall not perish for ever. Thou have promised to bless our victuals,
and to satisfy the poor with bread. Innumerable are thy mercies, and that my
soul knows right well, and I thirst after thee in a barren and dry land: I
wait thy relief, in this miserable time, wherein there is no comfort: but thou
vpholdest them that fall, thou releeuest all that are ready to perish, and
therefore do the eyes of all wait on thee, and thou give us all meat (...)
due season: open thine hand, and fill us with thy blessings. Divide the red sea
of this cruel, evil, and hard world, that we may pass through our days
without danger, satisfied with every good thing: open the hard rock, and give
us the water of comfort to drink, send us the Manna of thy love and ready
help, that we may be filled with all good things. Stand in the gappe
between us and our adversaries, that our enemies oppress us not. Increase the
oil and meal of our stock and store, that we may have sufficient, not only
to feed and cloth us, but to relieve thy poor children, and to pay what we
owe unto all men, that we owe nothing to any man but good will Great art thou
(oh God) and great is thy power, yea, thy wisdom and providence is infinite,
and past finding out: Work therefore (good Father) work for me thy poor
wretched creature, that have no mean to help or relieve my self. Help thou me
(O my God) that I may say and confess, I sought my God, and he heard me, and
delivered me out of all my troubles.

Oh turn thee (good Father) turn thee toward me, and have mercy upon me,
for unless thou hold me up, I shall fall, unless thou stay me, I shall be
overthrown, and unless thou relieve me, I shall utterly perish.

Oh, the remembrance of thy love is sweet, the experience of thy power
recomforteth my soul. It was thou, O Lord, that sentest Elias food by a
raven, even so can thou by unexpected means send comfort unto thy children,
even in raising up the most cruel men of the world to relieve them. It was
thou that deliueredst Daniel from the Lions, and thou can deliver us from the
cruel men of the world. It was thou that directedst the hand of David to kill
Goliath, and thou can teach our fingers to fight and withstand them that rise
up against us. It was thou that filledst many thousand people with a small
show of bread and Fishes, and it is thou that can feed thy servants that
call upon thee even with little in show, and can increase it as thou will. It
was thou that did save thy three children in the furnace from the force of
the fire, and thou can preserve us in the fiery trial of this world. It was
thou that deliueredst Paul and Sylas out of prison, and thou can deliver thy
children out of whatsoever captivity. It was thou that did work for Joseph,
that his imprisonment turned to his promotion, and thou can turn al our
calamities to our comfort. It was thou that raysedst me from my mothers breast
unto this estate wherein I am, and thou can preserve me, feed me, and hold
me up for ever: yea (good God) I, even I by experience, can sing of thy
goodness, yea, the goodness of the Lord endures for ever, the mercies of the
Lord endure for ever, the love of the Lord endures for ever, the power of the
Lord endures for ever, yea, the willingness and the readiness of the lord to
relieve the afflicted, indureth for ever, yea, let all such as heretofore have
been dull of belief, now see and consider, that great is the God of Abraham,
of Isaak, and of Jacob, yea, our God, the God of all the believers, whose hand
is mighty to save, his mercies infinite, his love wonderful, his providence
past finding out: when sorrow comes in the evening, thou Lord, sendest joy
again in the morning: when I am in need, thou releeuest me, when I am in
danger, thou comfortest me, when I am sick, thou make my bed, and curest my
disease. When have I come unto thee, and have been rejected? Never has my
complaint been put back, but lovingly hard, and my petitions granted, so that
I rest assured of thy continual help. I am forced (good Father) to seek thee
daily, and thou offerest thy self daily to be found, whenever I seek, I
find thee, in my house, in the fields, in the Temple, and in the high way:
Whatsoever I do thou art with me, whether I eat, or drink, whether I write,
or work, go, or ride, read, meditate, or pray, thou art ever with me
wheresoever I am, or whatsoever I do, I feel some measure of thy mercies and
love. If I be oppressed, thou defendest me, if I be envied, thou gardest me,
if I hunger, thou feedest me, whatsoever I want, thou give me. Oh continue
this thy loving kindness toward me for ever, that all the world may see thy
power, thy mercy, and thy love, wherein thou have not failed me, and even mine
enemies shall see that thy mercies endure forever.

O Lord increase our faith.
A song of praise for Gods present help in trouble.
I I Praise my God who lends his ear
unto my poor complaint:
Whose ready help preue^ts ye fear
which causd my soul to faint.
O Out of the myry clay his hand
raisd me, and set me where
I do enjoy a pleasant land,
he only set me there.
H He, even he, that Daniels God,
who shut the Lions jaws,
Rescues my soul from dredful rod
and from men's cruel paws.
N Now will I sing unto my rest,
my rock, and fortress sound:
Who holds me up yt am oppressed,
I else should fall to ground.
N No poor estate, no fretting foe,
no crosses shall dismay
My soul, that sits al safe from woe,
in God my sacred stay.
O Out of his storehouse he does se^d
what may relieve my thrall,
He brings my sorrows to an end,
and gives me joy withal.
R Relief alone comes from above,
our God is nigh at hand,
He poures his blessings down in love,
he fructifies our land.
D Draw near therefore afflicted wights,
he calls you for your ease,
Be wise, avoid al humane slights,
he will your griefs appease.
E Incline thine ear, o father dear
in love relieve our need.
In David, Job, and Joseph were
thy mercies seen in deed.
N No end thereof, ye same remains,
thy mercies, power and love,
Are ready pressed to ease my pains
my help is from above.
A motion to a thanksgiving in the morning.
IT is a necessary thing while we live here, that we should be continually
exercised in a due contemplation of Gods mercies toward us, All seasons give
us occasion to praise God.
and there is no time, but necessarily administreth unto us great and daily
occasions to celebrate the name of the Lord.

If we look into the day, wherinto we enter rising out of our beds, a
thousand things open themselves unto the view of our eyes, whose glory and
beauty, put us in mind of our far surpassing glory to come, as also of our
frailty, and ignominy present. For what are we of our selves, We men of our
own nature far worse than the flowers of the field.
in regard of the flowers of the field, whose beauty and hew, may make us
blush, and indeed to tremble, in respect of our casual and short continuance
here, had we not a certain assurance of a more glorious estate to come: for
as we see the most sweet and fragrant flower quickly to fade: A resemblance
of the estate of man's life
as to grow in the morning gay, and in the evening cut down and withered, and
all other things to come speedily to their end: even such is our estate if we
consider the uncertainty of our days, which would soon have an end, did not
the mercies of the Lord, and his comfortable hand conduct us, and hold us up.

For let us consider how the want of our daily sleep does annoy us: The
benefit of daily sleep.
who can forbear sleep one week? nay, for less while? What thing is more
tedious and irksome unto the body, The want of daily rest grievous to the
body, and the use thereof the contrary.
than the want of daily rest? and what comfort it more than the daily use
and enjoying thereof? and what are we, being possessed with heaviness and
drousines of the body? and when we are cast into a dead sleep, are we not as
dead men? Sleep makes us being alive, to resemble men dead.
whose memory, hearing, seeing, and all other senses are clean gone? wherein
we are separated (as it were) from God and the world, we can neither think on
God, or good things, we cannot do any thing whereby to defend our selves from
the least danger.

Let us therefore this morning recount the light and great favor of our good
God toward us, We should in the morning recount Gods blessings in the night
past.
wherein even this night he has preserved us from many casualties, whereof
there are many kinds, by thieves and robbers, by fire, by sudden sickness.
Yea, death seems to have a hand fixed on us, which might easily have
dispatched us this night, had not God prevented us, whose continual help is so
ready, that every morning does witness his love. Let us therefore reverently
fall down, What our duty is toward God in the morning.
and give him condign thanks, for all his loving kindness toward us: yea,
early now this morning, let us show forth the loving kindness of the Lord.
Psalm. 92. 2.

The Thanksgiving in the morning.
O Lord, I will praise thy name, early now this morning will I glorify thee,
who by thy loving protection have so guarded me, that no evil has taken hold
of me this night.

Oh most high, mighty, and favorable God, the day is thine, and the night is
thine: thou have framed the day for us to travail in, and the night thou have
appointed for us to rest in. I give thee most humble and unfeigned thanks, good
father, for thine unspeakable mercies, who have not only given me my
comfortable rest this night past, but also have kept me, as it were, under the
shadow of thy wings, even as the apple of thine own eye. And had I not been
defended by thee, innumerable dangers had overtaken me. If then had not
raised me up this morning, I should not have been able to rise, but have
perished in my bed. O great is thy mercy toward me, far surpassing my deserts:
for it is thy hand (good Father) that has this night preserved me from
perishing. Therefore lift I up mine eyes even to the heavens, from whence I have
obtained this safety. Yea, betimes in the morning I will call upon thee, that
thy mercies may evermore preserve me, and ouershaddow me, that no evil either
of soul or body hurt me: and grant that thy most sacred protection may
always prevent all the secret and open evils which hang over my head.

Give me thy spirit of wisdom and revelation, this morning, that I may know
thee, and serve thee. Lighten the eyes of mine understanding, that I may know
thy will, and according unto the same, frame all mine actions this day: and
grant also, that I may find how excellent thou art in thy power, how sweet
thou art in thy mercies, and in performing thy promises, wherein thou
continually workest, to the comfort, defense, and relief, of all such as come
unto thee.

O Lord increase our faith.
A motion to an Evening Prayer.
THe day being now past, and the light of ye sun being ouershaddowed with
darkness, A godly consideration in the entrance of the evening.
let us consider, that even so there will come the day wherein the light of
our bodily eyes shall be shut up, not for a night as in the bed through a
slumber, The night is ordained for the rest of man.
but until the appearance of Christ in his glory, coming to judgment.

And forasmuch as al things for the most part, A consideration of our estate in
the night, with a godly resolution when we shut up our eyes to rest*
at this time betake them to their rest, and man is limited this time to cease
from his labors. It is our duties especially to betake us into the gracious
protection of our good God, submitting us, our bodies and souls, to his
tuitio^, that if it be his pleasure to touch us this night with the finger of
death, we may be so readily prepared, that we be not taken at unawares, but
that we may have the light of the lamp of a faithful expectation of that
blessed hour, burning continually in our hearts, which may awaken us out of
the deadly slumber of security, whereby otherwise, we shall be so darkened,
that we shall perish, not only in our beds for a time, but in our souls and
bodies for ever. And surely in this danger shall we sleep, unless we betake us
into the hands of God when we go to bed. It is a matter of great moment, little
regarded of worldly men. How the children of God (...) them to (...) rest in
the night.
But the children of God far otherwise betake themselves to their corporal
rest, for they make their sleep an image of their death, and their bed they
enter into, as into their grave, and in the morning when the sun and light
appears, they take a new occasion, when they rise to contemplate of the
celestial and eternal light, glorifying the name of God, for his most
gracious protection.

And therefore arise now all ye servants of the Lord, cry out in the night,
pour out your hearts like water, before the face of our living God.

The Prayer for the Evening.
I Thank thee (good God, and most merciful father) whose providence reaches
unto the least of thy creatures, and thy favor and love always wait upon thy
children to preserve them: thou have executed thy sacred comforts toward me
this day, thou have given me all things necessary: and have suffered none evil
to annoy me. And by thy mighty working, I have passed this day, and am now
come to the end thereof, entering into the dark and lothsom night wherein many
dangers lurk, and lie secretly hidden, to vex thy children, if thou prevent
them not in thy wisdom and love. Have regard therefore (good Father) unto
me, who am frail, and soon fall into many things offensive unto thy
Majesty: and the right is often polluted with my sins, insomuch as I cannot
but accuse my self before thee, that my sleep cannot be justified to be pure,
but even therein, by dreams, fantasies of the flesh, and many vain
temptations. I am often moved to consent unto that which thou lothest, and can
in no wise then perform what thou love.

Since therefore (my good father) that I through my sins deserve no favor but
punishment, I appeal unto thy mercy in Christ, beseeching thee for his sake,
to anoint the eyes of my heart with the oil of thy grace, that though the
natural man slumber, and in slumbering fall away by weakness, yet my soul may
be refreshed this night, with diligent watchfulnes, least that the adversary
sowing therein the tares of temptation, I give consent to sin, and so endanger
both body and soul by my negligence, Good Father, pardon my sins for thy
names sake, be merciful unto me, receive me this night into thy custody and
safe protection, let thy grace comfort me, and let thy continual favor defend
me from all perils. And in thy love vouchsafe me such comfortable rest, as thou
shall see expedient for the refreshment and preservation of the health of my
body, which else cannot but wax feeble, and be made subject to such
infirmities, as I shall not be able to execute my duty unto thee.

In thy name therefore, good Father, I yield my self unto my rest, wherein let
thy holy spirit keep the door of my heart, and thy holy Angels attend about my
bed for my safety, for Christ Jesus thy dear sons merits. Amen.

O Lord increase our faith.
Before we go to bed.
The Lord will grant his loving kindness in the day, and in the night will
we sing of him, even a prayer unto the God of life. Psalm. 42. 8
OH Father, full of might and love,
our castle and our stay:
Who rulest with thy power above,
The darksome night and day.
The day is thine, and night also,
thou rulest with thy hand:
Both which were made for man we know,
and so was sea and land.
The sea and land and all the things
therein, which thou have plast:
Thou gave us, and madst us kings,
to use them till the last.
Which blessings (Lord) this day we have
most richly had from thee,
Bless ^^ke this night, good Lord, we crave,
keep us from danger free.
Preserve us when our drousie sleep
our bodies shall possess:
And let not Satan creep into,
nor our poor souls oppress.
But let thy grace prevent his ire,
let nothing us annoy:
Let faith prevail, let him retire,
and we good rest enjoy.
Tremble and sin not, examine your own hearts upon your bed, and be still.
Psalm. 4. 4.

O Lord increase our faith.
Having thus far proceeded in our progress, we must be forced to take up
our standing-house, and for a time abide in the earthly mansions of our bodies,
before we can attain unto the end of our journey, and be fully possessed of
that absolute heavenly hearts ease. In which standing house, we must consider
how we ought to carry our selves toward our Queen, the head and governor of
this household. (^)
IT is a common matter and necessary for Princes and great estates, How Princes
and great men use to deck their houses, where they purpose to abide.
upon their repair unto any house. wherein they purpose to make any small
abode, to take order that the same be cleansed, swept, garnished, perfumed, and
set in decent and pleasing order, as well for healths sake as for somelines,
pleasure, and delight. But much more it behooves us, that have taken by our
lodgings, and abiding places in these our mortal bodies, to take order with
our affections, What order we must take in our bodily houses.
wills, and dispositions, that our conuersations be in such decent, comely,
sweet, and comfortable order disposed, that our souls be not annoyd with the
filth and stincke of our corruptions, while we abide in the same, but rather
that our souls may be delighted with the sweet odours, and sacred perfumes of
sanctity and spiritual graces.

We must therefore like unto good Surueyers and overseers of our own
buildings, carefully endeavor, that all the noisome places within our building
be cleansed and the contagious sincks and unseemly filth and rubble, which
disgrace or annoy the same, be cast out and swept. We must cleanse the heart
above all other places.
And above all, we must look into the heart, for there lies infinite
filthiness, and unless it be carefully seen unto, it will hardly be thoroughly
cleansed, Iere. 17. 9.
for the heart is the place that is most deceitful and wicked, yea above all
the other parts of the body: and therefore it is demanded; who can know it? In
so much as the Prophet argues, The heart is a subtle corner.
that the heart is so subtle and deceitful, that unless we most narrowly search
it, there will lie hidden filthiness and corruption, when we think it is well
swept and garnished. It is a dangerous thing for us to flatter our selves in
our hearts, saying, our hearts are clean, Deuteronomy. 29. 19
and we shall have peace. and yet the filthiness of sin rest in us, Acts. 8. 23.
and ye root that brings forth gall and wormwood, grows in our wills
and behavior. But we must circumcise our hearts, Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
we must cut off all perverse and corrupt affections, and purge us of all
iniquity, wherein we must crave the assistance of ye spirit of God, which will
purify our hearts. And he that will not thus endeavor to cleanse this most
filthy part of his house, but rests stiff-necked, and as it were, Acts. 7.
51.
of an uncircumcised heart and ear, not forsaking his old wicked conversation,
neither will hear when God speaks unto him: he does as it were, resist the
holy Ghost. And his filthiness will so infect his poor soul, even with the
leprosy of iniquity, that he shall never be suffered to enter into the
sweet habitation of eternal hearts ease. All the filthy desires and lusts of
the flesh lie hidden in the heart, adultery, witchcraft, hatred, debate,
emulation, wrath, contention, sedition, heresies, envy, murders, drunkenness,
gluttony, and such other filthy annoyances, which unless they be swept out and
cast off, they will infect the whole house of our bodies, with such unsavory
and noysom pollutions, yt our mouths will be defiled with cursing, lying, and
bitterness, our eyes with lust, our hands with touching unclean things, our
feet shall not be able to walk the way of righteousness, but take the way
of sin, and all the whole house of our earthly tabernacle shall be so
environed with filthiness, that all our progress will be turned to our
disprofite: We must cast away the dregs of old Adam, and embrace Christ.
and our hearts ease to heart sore. Wherefore let us cast away all the dregs of
ye old Adam, which is unrighteousness, wherein we sometime walked, and let us
deeke us with the works of the new man which is renewed in knowledge, after the
image of Christ, who is the way in whom we must walk, the truth which we must
embrace, and the life wherein we must live for evermore, which way, as it is
pure, clean, sweet, and without turning, so must we be pure, clean, and
without sin, not turning back unto iniquity. And as that truth is
unchangeable, plain, and without deceit, so must we be simple, constant, and
faithful: and as that life is without all blemish, everlasting, and never
ending: so must we be quickened, living without all blemish, and spot of sin, in
righteousness and holiness for ever. Therefore let us consider, what are the
principal and chief ornaments to bewtifie this our mansion house, being thus
swept and cleansed from the former filthiness, that when we shall remove from
this our earthly tabernacle, we may take that way, depart hence in that truth,
and so for ever live in that life, Christ Jesus, who will bring us unto his
heavenly habitation, the absolute end of our progress, and the full
accomplishment of our heavenly hearts ease.

Let us then consider, Wherewithal we must adorn the houses of our souls in
this life.
that as the filthiness which we have cast out, was most ugly, filthy, and
noisome unto us, because they were the works of the flesh, which bring forth
death. So we must adorn us with sanctity and holiness, the works of the
spirit, which will be a most comely bewtifying of these our houses of claie,
and lead us unto life. We must now therefore sweeten and perfume our hearts,
The fruits of the spirit, must bewtifie our earthly tabernacles.
with love, with joy, with inward peace, with long suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekenes, temperance, and all godly conversation, casting away
all desire of vain glory, not provoking one another, nor envying one another,
that being dead to sin, and living to God, we may declare the same in this our
standing house, by an innocent and sanctified life.

Having thus cleansed our houses from filthiness and corruptions of the flesh,
and decked the same with the ornaments of the spirit: It is necessary that
we should proceed to the execution of our callings, according to the rule of
the divine word: We live not to our selves, nor for our selves.
knowing this, that we live not unto our selves, but unto god: not for our
selves, but for our brethren: for whose sakes we are bound to travel in our
callings, and to execute our offices and functions as becomes us, that our
calling in Christ may be made sure, even in this life.

There are in every body many members, Every body has many members.
and every member has his several place, office, and function. Every kingdom
is a body, wherein there is a governor, and people, as subjects to be
governed: wherein also are many Magistrates, as the principal members of that
body: and also there are inferior members, preserved and defended by the more
glorious. Every family is a body, where is a father, and where commonly are
children, where are masters, there are servants. All these having several
offices and places in this standing house of our Common weal, must every one
proceed to the performance of his calling, in such sort as there be not any
disorder, or any complaining in our streets.

We are humbly to thank our God, We are to thank God for our head Queen
Elizabeth
that he has established our head in such comely sort, and endued her with
all virtues aunswerable unto her high function, yea, we may sing unto our Queen
Elizabeth, the Queen of Sabaes song, which she made of the happy government
of Solomon. Happy are thy men may we say, 1 King. 10* 8. 9.
happy are these thy servants, The Queen of Saba to Solomon.
which stand here before thee, and hear thy wisdom. Blessed be the Lord
thy God, which loved thee, to set thee in the Throne of England, because the
Lord loved England for ever, and made thee Queen to do equity and
righteousness. Pro. 24, ^*
It is verified in her. That the king by judgment maintains the country How
have we (the poor members of this body, whereof she is the head) been
maintained preserved, conducted and blessed in her government? No nation has
tasted the like benefits, by peace, No nation has tasted like blessings as
England.
by plenty, by health, and especially (which is most sweet) by the continual
use of the word of God: whereby has been discried most filthy, dross and
dregs, and the rubble of errors which in former time stuffed up the house of
our land, so, that we could not walk in the truth without peril. And now in
great measure swept and cleansed, and garnished, adorned and beautified with
spiritual ornaments, of judgment, of equity, of mercy, and truth: in so
much as we may sing, that mercy and truth are met together, England
spiritually (...).
and righteousness and peace have kissed each other. The God of peace preserve
her, that she may be (if it please him) our head while we stay in this mansion
of the flesh.

O that there were such a resemblance of performance of duty in every of the
members, as is apparent in the head, that the subjects could answer in like
sort for their obedience, as her Majesty for government: then should we have
a most comfortable abiding in this our standing house of the flesh: then should
all the noisome corruptions of envy, malice, revenge, gall and bitterness of
the heart, be turned into love, meekness, mercy and peace: then should we
have no leading into captivity, no imprisonments, no murders, no strife, no
debate, no cause of complaining amongst us. But we must look into our duties,
How subjects must fashion themselves in obedience.
and fashion our selves, not according to the former deeds of disobedience,
but as becomes the servants of God, knowing that we are commanded to obey
such as are appointed to rule over us: 1. Pet. 2. ^.
we must submit our selves unto all manner ordinance of man for the Lords sake,
whether it be unto her Majesty, as unto our superior, or unto governors, as
unto them that are sent from her, for the punishment of evil doers, but for
the praise of them that do well. Exo. 22. 28.
We are commanded reverently to use the Judges, and not to speak evil of the
ruler of the people. Every soul must subject it self to the higher powers, for
there is no power but of God, Romans 13. 1. 2
and the powers that are, are ordained of God: whosoever therefore resists
the power, resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist, they that will
not obey and submit themselves unto such as are in authority, shall receive
unto them selves judgment: they shall be punished, The disobedient shall be
punished
not only by the censure of the judge in this world, but by the judgment of
God.

This then is not the least thing that we should have care of, while we are in
this house, to cast out of our hearts all disobedience, and so beautify the
same with unfeigned love unto her Majesty: who so wisely orders and governs
this our standing house, Q. Elizabeth aideth her distressed people.
and lovingly entertaineth every member of this body, that she suffers not
the least, the weakest, the poorest, nor the basest to be distressed, wronged,
or abused, but she extends present relief, comfort, and assistance.

What an unnatural member is it then, that will raise it self up, to offend
this so sacred a head: nay what member is it, unless he be overmuch infected
with the poison of envy, that will not strive by all possible strength to
perform the duty of a true subject in whatsoever office, calling or authority
he be placed: although very dangerous members have been found in this body:
Withered members of the body of the common wealth.
but they were withered and dried up with the scorching sun of vain glory,
so that they in their callings could bring forth no fruit, but very
rottenness of heart, wherein lurked nothing but the eating worms of envy,
the viperous affection of hatred unto the truth, and consequently devilish
desires to disturb, nay, to subvert and confound the whole body. But their
rottennes, and filthiness have been happily found out and they justly cut
off.

Let us therefore that now litte in a time wherein every man may walk in his
duty aright, while it is to day, yea, while we are in this earthly
tabernacle, We must all well agree in our callings
and therein have the comfortable use of the word to teach and direct us: let
us all endeavor to keep a direct course in every of our particular callings,
yt we all may be found lively and profitable members of this our common weal.

And no doubt (which I heartely wish in the Lord) but all our governors know
what belongs unto their christian duties, wherein they ought to consecrate
themselves wholly, Governors must endeavor to preserve the common wealth.
to the benefit, profit, honor and quiet of this our public stare, wherein
they are appointed to govern, not sparing any labor, care, expenses, toil of
mind or body, no not their lives, to preserve and keep this our Common weal,
in all happy felicity. And as in these our sacred governors and magistrates,
there appears a continual working and watchfulnes for the maintenance and
upholding of this public weal: So in us that are to be governed, there is a
necessity of resolute obedience and duty unto their authority, Necessity of
obedience laid upon subjects.
laid upon us. And forasmuch as we see by experience, that the wisdom, love,
and zeal of our gracious superior governor, does in some measure seem to
surmount her authority, in commanding us, let our humility, love and free
obedience toward her, and the governors under her, be greater then our
civil subjection: And let our hearts in all fulness be fraught with such
dutiful desire, to frame our whole affections to the will of the Magistrates,
that there may be no occasion given them to lift up the sword of justice
against any of us, for they bear not the sword for naught: he that offends
shall be punished, and every evil member of this body shall be cut off by the
same. Every good member is praised and receives reward.
But such as are profitable and helping members, shall not only not taste of
punishment, but be praised: and every good endeavor shall receive his reward:
yea, and whosoever is grieved amongst us, if it be the foot, then ye head it
self, and the most especial members of the body, will have regard unto the
same, and incline help thereunto, as unto themselves.

Who therefore would not endeavor with all force, to answer in duty what is
offered and administered unto us, Obedience the prop of our quiet.
from these higher powers? for take away obedience, and we cannot but fall into
many miserable calamities, while we are in this house of our mortal bodies. A
private house we see is well ordered, when servants yield obedience to their
masters, and children humility to their parents: But turn it contrary, and
there follows present confusion: how much more will the calamity be great,
and the mischief intolerable, if there should not be true loyalty in the
subjects toward their governors, as there is godly carefulnes in the
governors for the preservation of the subject?

We run the most of us, and especially which are the inferior sort, into a
most rash breach of the laws carefully made by our superiors, and it argues
in us inconstancy, and bewrays in us that our hearts are not fully cleansed
from gross enormities. And therefore if it will rest in this house of our
earthly bodies, in hope when we depart hence, to attain unto that spiritual
home, that sacred City which we seek, that place of perpetuity and
everlasting joy. We must enter again into our hearts and thrust out the old
gross desires, and corrupt affections there lurking, which break forth
oftentimes to the breach of the laws of our common weal, God sees our
walkings.
which should be kept by us inviolable. But especially we therein violate the
laws of our God, who looks on us, who considers our ways, and beholds
our proceedinges, howsoever we think he sees us not.

It might be thought a superfluous thing to set down perticularly wherein we
offend grosely, but for that it is a thing necessary that they should be
considered and reformed, I will briefly call to mind some such as I wish
especially were redressed: Among which, as the most ougly before God and good
men, Pride, a most ugly sin before God,
is Pride, a peevish evil, and a flattering conceit of our selves, that we are
that which indeed we are not, and indeed we make our selves monsters, and are
not, for God having created us seemly, and the most glorious of all other
creatures, we of our selves deform our selves, and mar by our mischief what
God has made in his mercy. But the beginning hereof, even of our pride, is, to
fall away from God, and to turn our hearts from our maker. Being fallen from
God we are cast down unto Satan. and turning our hearts from our maker, we
become one in consent with our miscarier: and yet how go ^^ehand in hand with
this wicked one, by whom we were deceived, even in the humor of pride, in the
beginning? and can not yet take heed of his wiles, whereof the greatest is this
filthy fashion pride: And the pride of England, The pride of England.
is, as it were set up upon the highest mountain of the world, seen and
scorned even of very infidels of the earth ^ such as know not God, make
marvel of our monstrous attire which exceeds not only in cos^ and color,
but in weight and fashion: oh pull it down, it is no^ fit for such as are
taking the wa^ to the kingdom of heaven, it agrees not with the guest which
lodges in us, Pride polluteth all the corners of our house.
the spirit of God: it is no fit ornament to deck the house of our silly
souls, for it stinketh and polluteth all corners of the house: oh remove it,
and send every Country his fashion again: be not beholden to any nation for
such trumpery, neither to the garmentmaker, whose study therein though it
please the vainglorious for a time, it will bring repentance, too late to the
work and the workman. It is from the Court come into the Country, a
dangerous evil, and has infected the poor plowman, that an years wages
suffices not one suite of attire. If I should tell all, the carter would
step in with his courtly gards, The cart^^ and plowman exceeds in pride.
and will defy him that is not of the fashion: men and women, the rich and the
poor, the old and the young, are too far gone in this sickness, the Lord
give a timely medicine, least we perish therein. We might (were we mindful of
our dangers) call to mind what diversities of diseases, and strange maladies,
have been amongst us of late, as though the Lord would say, as ye change your
affections upon vain things, and as ye are never satisfied with variety of
fashions, falling daily from me, so will I make you know by the variety of my
punishments, yt I have yet in store more strange calamities then yet ye have
felt. And shall we not yet cast off these enormities? Surely it is so dislike
that wedding garment, wherewith we must enter into our heavenly hearts ease, and
it is so strange unto the Lord, that he will not know us to be his: oh that it
were reformed, for every man and woman wade in excess in this sin, without
reproof, let it be reformed, lest God reprove us.

Should we let pass some little recompting of another gross evil, whose
reproof is deservedly set down by the sacred censure of God, and therefore I
will show what the Lord himself speaks against it, yt I may be
irreproueable, 1. Tim. 6 10 Covetousness the
The desire of money is ye root of all evil. Oh what a short and sharp
sentence is this? If it be the root of all evil, then has it no doubt many
branches of evil, therefore is it very unfit to rest in this house of our
souls, for they that have thus lusted extraordinarily for this worldly mucke,
have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows.
See what a most dangerous evil this covetousness is, it disquieteth both the
body and mind here. The whole house is out of order where this filthynes
lies, and therefore above all other evils it is to be reformed for that it
distempereth us here, and stops the ways that should lead us to our
heavenly hearts ease. Woe be unto ye rich, says Christ, for ye have your
consolation here. It is a sin so displeasing unto the Lord, that he
pronounced destruction unto ye people of Israel, Ierem. (...)
for that from ye least unto the greatest of them, every one was given unto
covetousness. Let us therefore have a care to reform this enormitie, and let us
cast it out of our hearts, for it breeds many evils: yet this evil above all
other, seems unpunishable, nay rather commendable. Covetousness unpunishable.
because it seems good husbandry. But all that are in the right way unto that
heavenly hearts ease, will cast it out of this their standing house, as dirt,
dung, and unprofitable rubble.

This evil of covetousness, draws unto it another dangerous evil, Flatterers.
flattery, which is an evil that draws light conceited me^ into vainglory.
But all flattery is as ye kiss of an enemy, as was Judas, and therefore are
all flatterers to be rejected, and to be cast out of this common society of
the members of this body, and to be cut off as unprofitable and perilous, yet
these prosper in the world: and fare far better then such as speak the truth
from their hearts. Cast them off.

Certain idle persons, whose infections do annoy a great part of this body,
are to be cured or cut off, for they are dangerous members, for whose
reformation have been made many notable provisions, by sundry sage and grave
acts, and howses of correction for vagarants, erected in every shire. But it
falls out, that the number of such dangerous weeds rather increase then
diminish, to the great detriment of our quiet abiding in this standing house of
our common weal: wherein I suppose the negligence of inferior officers, is a
great occasion of their increase.

I have trauelledm any shires, and it appears that there is little or no
execution of these good laws, greatly to be lamented, not only in regard of
the common quiet which by them is like to be disturbed, but also in regard of
the persons themselves, who endaunger their own estates, by their ungodly
loosenes and lewdnes of life. The common wealth also loosing their labor and
travel, which might in some measure steed their brethren, if with a sound and
godly disposition, they would frame their lims to labor, yet eat they that
which is gotten by the sweat of other men. The number of these persons is
great, the persons themselves for the most part, able of body, hardy, stout
hearted, and fit to be imploid in strong affairs, a number of them yet
counterfeyting impotency, and deforming themselves with rotten rags, pass
through the country halting in the day time, and oftentimes annoy the good
members of this public weal in the night. These pass and repasse by such as
have authority to examine, to commit, to punish, and to reform their disorder,
and yet few or none set hand to redress it. If the City of London be viewed,
the streets within it, and the suburbs and fields near it, will yield of
young and old, men and women, able of body to serve masters, and to labor for
their living, a great number of vagabondes. And which is most lamentable, the
young and tender girls and lads of all ages, lie under stalles in the streets
by great companies under hedges in the fields, and no man takes them up, to
bring them to some faculty to get their livings, as is commanded, but suffer
them to wallow still in idleness, until they be past to be reclaimed, falling
into breach of the laws, and so are eaten up with untimely death: who if they
had been carefully provided for, they might have proved good members of the
weal public. It is no new thing, and would God it might be now at the
eldest estate, that these euilles might be cut off, or in some measure
reformed. The root being cut in sunder, the branches would wither, for there
are diverse occasions given and tolerated, whereby they thus grow into these
idle and vagrant courses. It seems lawful, for it is tolerated, that every
man at his pleasure may leave his travel, and go to the play house, bowling
Allies. Bear gardens, Ale houses, Tauernes, and gaming, where they lose their
time, consume their thrift, and offend the laws of God, and her Majesty. And
the Sabbath day which should be sanctified with prayer, and hearing of the
word, is profaned with these accustomed evils, which if they were cast out as
unprofitable, in this our earthly abiding place, we should the more sweetly
pass on the way to our heavenly hearts ease. For out of these evils of
idleness and loytering, spring many noisome things, that blemish our body
here, as filthiness of the flesh, drunkenness, gluttony, swearing, and blasphemy,
forgetfulness of God, and contempt of Magistrates, wherewith our abode here
being grossly defiled, such will be our unsavory dwelling, that our spiritual
guest the holy Ghost, will refuse to abide with us.

I herefore, 2. Tim. 6. 11. to 16.
O ye men of God, whom the spirit of God directs, fly these things, and
follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, patience, and meekness, fight
the good fight of faith, lay hold of eternal life, whereunto ye are called, and
have professed a good profession before many witnesses. Keep on the course ye
have begun, without spot, and unrebukable, until the appearing of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who only has immortality, and dwells in the light that none
can attain unto, whom never man saw, neither can see. Unto whom be honor,
and power everlasting, Amen.

A short prayer against errors and scismes.
WE humbly pray thee most merciful father in mercy to look down upon the
dangerous estate of thy Church which is much pestered and infected with the suds
of error, insomuch as it seems to be swallowed up of the perilous
inundations of sects and scismes coined by the subtilties of that wicked one
Satan, whose practice is ever from ye fall of Adam, to stop the pure
proceedinge of the Gospel, by the perverse works of darkness. Sanctify
therefore thy children, with thine especial grace, and manifest thy truth unto
them, that by the light thereof they may know how to shape the way to the true
service of thee. And let them be able to discern between truth and error, yt
they may be always free from heresies, and not be entangled with false
doctrine, nor defiled we the loathsome pitch of man's inventions, but being
endued with the purity of heavenly knowledge, we may all join together in one
truth, wherein we may live and dye: and so in Christ thy Sons merits, live
with thee in heaven eternally, Amen.

Oh Lord increase my faith.
A short Prayer in crosses, troubles and afflictions.
OH Father, full of mercy, and love in Jesus Christ, have compassion upon me,
whom thou have touched with thy hand of correction. Thou have found me out in
my sins, and beaten me, thy hand lies heavy upon me, I am not able to
sustain the burden of my miseries. I can not but faint in my distresses, and
run too and fro for help, but lo, oh Lord, my crosses increase, and thy anger
I can not bear: wherefore good Father in Christ, have compassion upon me,
recomfort me again, be pleased with me, and take thy heavy displeasure from
me: and though my sins have deserved more then I can bear, the merits of
thy Son are greater then my sins. And therefore for his sake come again in
love, and by thy mercy and power, repair my decays, relieve my wants, and
cure my diseases, speak the word, and it shall be done, all things obey thy
voice, wherefore bless thy creatures all to my use, that I may have them all
in this life blessed unto me, and I blessed by thee in Christ, Amen.

O Lord increase our faith.
A short Prayer, that all men may live uprightly in their calling.
LOrd God Almighty, merciful and pure, be pleased in favor to consider the
weakness of man, and so sanctify us with thy grace, that we may all confess
our sins, and cry to thee for pardon, all acknowledge our weakness, and cry
to thee for strength, all see our ignorance, and come to thee for knowledge how
to behave us in this mortal life in our several callings, that thereby both
thou may be glorified, our brethren comforted, and our selves relieved: that
when we shall be called by thee to render account of our stewardships, we may
be able to stand before thee acquitted from all that either sin, the devil,
or our corrupt flesh may charge us with, not through our own deseruings, which
in our best endeavors are evil evermore, but in the merits of thy Son
Christ, Amen.

O Lord increase our faith.
The conclusion, wherein is exhorted unto watchfulnes, for the appearance of
our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom, and by whom we shall enter, after this
progress ended, into our everlasting hearts ease. ^ ^
Having attained thorough the divine assistance of my good God. unto the end
of this my poor travail, I can not but conclude with an earnest entreaty of
all such as covet this eternal hearts ease, that they will in this
standinghouse of the body, call continually to mind, the absolute end of this
Progress of pietic, which principally tends unto the finishing of the
journey and pilgrimage of this life, in all godliness, faith, zeal, and ardent
love of that heavenly mansion, which so far excels this earthly
tabernacle, as the purest gold exceeds the filthiest and most loathsome dirt
and dung of the earth: and the hearts ease thereof, is much far sweeter, then
the hearts ease of this world, as the sweetest honey passes in sweetness the
most bitter gall: and happy is that man, that soonest atteineth to the enjoying
thereof but in part, that is, either in this life, through the quietness of
conscience in our Christ, or being departed hence, has the fruition thereof in
spirit, expecting the coming of that great Judge, when soul and body shall
enjoy the same at full. Oh let us all therefore, in all godly watchfulness, in
this our pilgrimage which shortly shall have end, have due regard unto our
walking, that we walk not awry. Let us daily examine our selves, and consider
with judgment, that we shall all appear before that high Judge, from whom,
no step of our progress shall be hidden, and whom soever he shall find
halting, or walking awry, he will bereave of that most sweet hearts ease in
heaven, and will give most sour and unsavory hearts sore in hell. If I should
discourse of the comforts which shall be showed unto such as walk this
progress, and end the same as they ought, and as they are commanded, alas, I
am as unable, nay, there is no tongue of man or angel can nearer declare ye
deapth of the sweetness thereof, then I am able to number ye stars in the
firmament: the excellency thereof, is such and so unspeakable, as no heart is
able to comprehend or conceive the same: but let this satisfy all curious
conceits, that, that our heavenly mansion, our everlasting tabernacle, that our
spiritual inheritance, is such and so full fraught with such variety of joy,
with such unspeakable comforts, with such endless felicity, and surpassing
glory: yea, such is the fullness of all spiritual contentation there, that we
shall not covet to see more, the ear desire to hear more, the body have will
to feel more, nor ye heart thirst to conceive more, then we shall there for
evermore enjoy, howsoever they are now, whilst we are in ye flesh, far removed
from our gross conceits, and every report of them seems dark unto our
senses, until our all sufficient God, our Christ, and our Savior, shall
himself appear again in the clouds: then shall our understandings be
opened, then shall our senses be lightened, and then shall we most plainly
see, evidently perceive, and to our absolute comfort taste of the fullness
thereof, yea, then shall we see our God face to face, when there shall be an
end of all our travails, of all our toil, of all our carke, care, fear,
trouble, and irksome passage: then shall we hunger no more, thirst no more,
then shall we need no friend, nor fear any foe, then shall we that are here
now in prison, be set at liberty, and we that are pressed down with misery
shall be raised up to comfort: yea, then shall be an end of all things that now
discomfort us. Oh let us therefore be ever thankful unto our God, that has not
only provided this heavenly hearts ease, and endless joys for us, but has
also laid out the way thereunto, and given us his own hand to lead us, yea,
himself to conduct us unto the same. Let us without ceasing therefore pray unto
him, and let us be always in good comfort in him: yea, let us groan in our
hearts, with most longing expectation, for the appearing of him that shall
deliver us, and free us from dangers, and settle us in these joys. And let us
cut off all lets and impediments, how near or dear soever they be unto us,
whether it be the eye, the hand, or the foot, let us cast away all excuses,
wife, children, lands, goods, gold, and silver, honors, dignities, yea, let
not life it self be dear unto us, if it seem to hinder us from a speedy
passage unto our God: knowing, that so long as we are here in this earthly
house, our estate is miserable, our passage dangerous, our pleasures perilous,
and we wander as wretches through many miseries.

We are here but as in a strange country, far off from our own home,
whereunto we must endeavor to attain in all simplicity, carrying only with
us, as our staff to stay us up, the merits of our Christ, and for our defense
here, the sword of the spirit, whereby we shall be able to walk through all
the perils and dangers, yea the fire and water, through which we are to pass.
Let us expect, yea and wish with joy that most happy day, wherein that sweet
trompet of our saving Christ shall sound out to call us: let us hearken for it
continually, and let us think it will sound to morrow. Then to morrow shall be
our merry day, for then to morrow shall we meet our God, that will carry us
home with him, that in body and soul we may dwell with him for evermore. Oh
come Lord Jesu, come quickly, and let all the people of God say, Amen.

We are not yet come to the rest and the inheritance which the Lord our God
gives us. Deuteronomy. 12. 9. The Author to the Book.
STep forth and stagger not my silly Book: Dread not to draw near unto the
Palace of thy Princely Patroness, whose sacred Scepter shall be thy
sufficient safety, and whose worthy wisdom, will way the willingness of thine
unworthy woorkemaster, who though he below, yet he is loyal, howsoever
homely he has compiled thee: he in all duty and humility presents thee,
though a work unworthy to be patronized with so puissant a Princess. But
herein comfort thee, that her Majesty's royal countenance graceth the present
that carries show of true love and loyalty, and accepts the gift, as is the
mind of the giver.

Vade, Vale, and profice, non vised veritate.
FINIS.
A devout Prayer, for the preservation of her Majesty's forces now at Sea.
MOst omnipotent maker, and guider of all worlds, thou only searchest and
fadomest the botome of all hearts, consciences, and conceits, and in them see
the true original of all actions intended. Thou that by thy foresight do
truly discern of al actions intended. Thou that by thy foresight do truly
discer^^e, how no malice of revenge, nor quittance of injury, nor desire of
bloudshead, nor greedines of luker, has bred the resolution of our now set out
army, but a heedfull care, and a wary watch, that no neglect of foes, nor our
security of harm, might breed either danger to us, or glory to them. These
being the grounds, thou that did inspire the minds, we humbly beseech thee
with bended knees, to prosper the work, (...) with the best forewinde guide
the journey, speed the victory, make the return the advancement of thy glory,
the triumph of thy fame, and suertie of this Realm, with the least losses of
english blood. To this devout petition Lord give thy blessed grant.

Amen.

