A POOR MAN'S REST: Founded upon Motives, Meditations, Prayers.
and Expressing to the inward MAN, true Consolation. In all Kinds and Times of
Affliction.

By IO. NORDEN.

Now the eight time augmented, and much reformed by the AVTHOR.

PSALM. 10.14. The Poor commits himself unto thee, for thou art the helper
of the Fatherless.

London: Printed for John Budge, and are to be sold at the signed of the
Greene-Dragon in Paul's Churchyard. 1620.

1. January
called of the Latins, Ianuarius. Graecians, Gamelion. Hebrews, Tebeth, and is
their 10. month. has 31 days.

1 A Calends. 2 b The first day of this Month Christ was circumcised, Luke 1.
21. The tops of the mountains appeared unto Noah, Gen 8. 5. The Israelites put
away their wives, Ezra 10. 16. 3 c Nones of Jan. 4 3

4 d 5 e 6 f Day before the N. 7 g Nones of Ianuar 8 A 9 b The 5. of this
month, word was brought unto Ezechiel the Prophet, that the City Jerusalem
was smitten, Ezechiel 33. 21. 10 c Idus of January. 8 7 6 5 4 3

11 d 12 e 13 f 14 g Day before the Id. The sixth of this month Christ was
worshipped of the wise men, Mat. 2. 1. etc. baptized, Mat. 3. 15. turned water
into wine, Ioh. 2. 1. etc. as testifies Epiphanius 15 A Idus of January 16 b
17 c 18 d 19 e 20 f The 10. of this Month Nabuchadnezzar, King of Babel, moved
thereunto by the rebellion of Zedechiah, besieged Jerusalem most fiercely, as
may appear, 2 Kings 15. etc, Jer. 52. 4. Also Ezechiel was willed to utter his
parable, Ezech. 2. etc. 21 g 22 A Calends of February. 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10
9 8 7 6 5 4 3

23 b 24 c 25 d 26 e 27 f 28 g 29 A Paul called, and converted the 25. of this
month, Acts 9. 3. 30 b 31 c Day before the Calends of Feb.

Festiual days in this month be Circumcision the first day. Epiphanie the
sixth day.


2. February,
called of the Latins, Februarius, Graecians, Elaphebolio^ Hebrews, Shebat, and
is their 11. month. has 28. days unless it be year Bissextil and then 29.

1 d Calends. The first of this month, Moses repeated the Law unto the
children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 1. 3. 2 e Nones of February. 4 3

3 f 4 g Day before the N. 5 A Nones of Febru. The second of this month our
Savior was presented to the Lord, and Mary purified, Luk (...). 22. 6 b 7 c 8
d Idus of February. 8 7 6 5 4 3

9 e The ninth of this month, Noah, 40. days after he had seen the tops of
the mountains, sent out of the Arc a Raven, and afterward a Dove, which
returned, Ge. 8. 6. etc. 10 f 11 g 12 A Day before the Id 13 b Idus of
February. 14 c 15 d The 15. of this month, the Jews spend merrily together,
for that the Spring of the year does enter then, as they think. 16 e 17 f 18
g 19 A 20 b The 16. of this month, Noah the second time sent out a Dove, which
returned with an Olive branch in her bill, Genesis 8. 10. 21 c Calends of March.
17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3

22 d 23 e 24 f 25 g The 24. of this month, Zachariah was commanded to
prophecy, Zach. 1. 7. Matthias was elected into the number of the Apostles,
Acts 1. 26. 26 A 27 b 28 c 29 d Day before the Calends of March.

Festival days in this month be the 2. called the Purification of S. Mary.
The 24. which is Saint Matthias day.

3. March,
called of the Latins, Martius. Graecians, Mo^uichyon. Hebrews, Adar: and is
their 12. month. has 31. days.

1 d Calends. The Temple of Jerusalem was finished the third day of this month,
Esra. 6. 15. In the 1 of Esdr. 7. 5. it is said to be the 23. of this month. 2
e 3 f Nones of March. 6 5 4 3

4 g 5 A 6 b Day before the N. The tenth of this month, Christ was advertised
that Lazarus was sick, Ioh. 11. 3. 7 c Nones of March 8 d 9 e A feast was
celebrated among the Jews, for the overthrow of Nicanor, the 13. of this
month, 2 Mac. 15. 37 Also upon the same day all the Jews under Ashuerosh were
commanded to be put to death, Esth 3. 13. upon the same day the Jews had a
privilege given them to stay all their enemies, Est. 8. 12. This day also the
Jews solemnized for their joyful deliverance, Est. 8. 17. 10 f Idus of March.
8 7 6 5 4 3

11 g 12 A 13 b 14 c Day before the Id. 15 d Idus of March. 16 e 17 f 18 g 19 A
20 b 21 c 22 d Calends of April. 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3

23 e The 14. day of this month was called of the Jews, Mardocheus day, 2 Macc.
15. 37. also Purim, as may appear, Esth. 9. verse. 21. 26. 24 f 25 g 26 A 27 b
28 c The 15. also is another day of Purim, Est 9. 21. 29 d 30 e The 16. of this
Month Lazarus was raised from the dead. John 11. 43. 31 f Day before the
Calends of April.

This Month has one festival day called the Annunciation of Saint Marie,
celebrated the 25. of this month.

4 April
called of the Latins, Aprilis. Graecians, Thargelion. Hebrews, A^ib, or Nisan
and is their first month. has 30 days.

1 (...) Calenas. The first of this Month Noah uncovered the Arc, and saw
earth, Genesis 8. 13. Moses reared the Tabernacle, Exo. 40. 2. 17. the Temple
began to be sanctified, 2 Chr. 29. 17. 2 A Nones of April. 4 3

3 b 4 c Day before the (...). 5 d Nones of April. 6 e 7 f The 10. of this
month the children of Israel passed through the river Iorda^ on dry foot, Iosis
4. 19. the Paschal Lamb was chosen, Exo. 12. 3. 8 g Idus of April. 8 7 6 5 4 3

9 A 10 b 11 c 12 d Day before the Id. The 13. of this month the edict of King
Ahashuerosh came out for the murdering of the Jews, Esth. 3. 12. 13 e Idus of
April. 14 f 15 g 16 A The 14. of this month the Passover was kept, Exo. 12. 6.
Leuit. 23. 5. Jos. 5. 10. 17 b 18 c 19 d The 15 of this month the Israelites
departed out of Egypt, Numb. 33. 3. 20 e 21 f Calends of May. 18 17 16 15 14 13
12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3

22 g The 16. of this month Hezekiah made an end of sanctifying and purging
the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 29 17. 23 A 24 b 25 c 26 d The 18. of this month the
children of Israel walked on dry land through the midst of the red sea, Exodus
14. 19. 27 e 28 f 29 g 30 A Day before the Calends of May. The 24 Daniel saw
his vision, Dan. 10. 4.

The 25. of this month the feast of S. Mark is observed.

5. May,
called of the Latins, Maius. Graecians, Sc^irophorion Hebrews, Liar, which is
their 2. month. has 31 days.

1 b Calends. The first of this month Moses was commanded to number the
children of Israel, Numb. 1. 1. etc. 2 c 3 d Nones of May. 6 5 4 3

4 e 5 f The 5. of this Month, Christ is thought to have ascended up into
heaven, Mar. 16. 9. Luke 24. 51. Act. 19 They which could not keep the
Passover at the day appointed by the Lord, were willed to celebrate the same
the 14. of this Month, Nu. 39 v. 10. 11. So did the Israelites at the
commandment of King Hezekiah, 2 Chapter 30. 15. 6 g Day before the N. 7 A Nones of
May. 8 b 9 c 10 d Idus of May. 8 7 6 5 4 3

11 e 12 f 13 g 14 A Day before the Id. 15 b Idus of May. 16 c 17 d The 16 day,
Manna rained from heaven, Exodus 16. 14. 18 e 19 f The 17. day, Noah entered the
Arc, and the flood began, Genesis 7 11. 13. 20 g 21 A 2^ b Cal^nds of Iu^e. 17 16
15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3

The 22. fire from Heaven consumed such as murmured against the Lord, Nu. 11 1
23 c 24 d 25 e The 23 the Israelites with great joy triumphingly entered into
the Castle of Jerusalem, 1 Mac. 13 51. 26 f 27 g 28 A ^9 b The 27. Noah, the
water being dried up, came forth of the Arc, Genesis 8. 14. 30 c 31 d Day before
the Calends of Jane

The first of this Month is usually celebrated for the feast of Philip and
Jacob.

6 June,
called of the Latins, Iunius, Graecians, Ekatombaion. Hebrews, Siuan, which
is their third month. has 30 days.

1 e Calends. The first coming of the children of Israel unto men^i Sinai was
the first of this month, where they abode 11. months, and 20. days, in which
time all those things were done, recorded in Exodus, cap. 19. 1. etc. 2 f Nones
of June. 4 3

3 g 4 A Day before the N. 5 b Nones of June. 6 c 7 d 8 e Idus of June. 8 7 6 5
4 3

9 f The sixth of this month, Alexander that mighty Monarch of the world was
borne, of whom Dan. c. 11. 3. does prophecy. Also on this day that famous
temple of Diana in Ephesus, numbered among the seven wonders of the world, was
set on fire by Herostratus. The Jews likewise kept then feast of Pentecost on
this day. 10 g 11 A 12 b Day before the Id. 13 c Idus of June. 14 d 15 e 16 f
17 g 18 A 19 b 20 c Ca^^nds of July. 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3

21 d 22 e The 23 of this month, the first edict came out for the safety of
Gods people, the Jews, against Haman, and the rest of their enemies, Esth. 8.
9. 23 f 24 g 25 A 26 b 27 c 28 d The 29. of this month, the Arc of Noah,
through the increase of waters, was lifted up from the earth, Genesis 7. 12. 29 e
30 f Day before the Calends ^f July.

Festival days in this month, are the 2^. which is the feast of S. John
Baptist. 29. which is S. Peter's.

7. July,
called of the Latins, Julius, Graecians, Metageitnion, Hebrews, Thamus, being
their 4. month.

1 g Calends. 2 A The 5. of this month Ezechiel saw his visions, Ezech. 1. 1.
3 b Nones of July. 6 5 4 3

4 c 5 d 6 e Day before the N. The 6. of this month, the Capital of Rome,
counted one of the 7. wonders of the world, was burned: and the mirror of
Christian Princes King Edward the sixth, dyed the sixth of this month, Anno
1553. 7 f Nones of July. 8 g 9 A 10 b Idus of July. 8 7 6 5 4 3

11 c 12 d 13 e 14 f Day before the Id. 15 g Idus of July. 16 A The 9. of this
Month, Jerusalem, after it had a long while been besieged by Nebuchadnezzar,
was taken, Ier. 39. 2. 17 b 18 c 19 d 20 e 21 f 22 g 23 A Calends of August. 17
16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3

The 12. of this month, Julius Caesar, the first Roman Emperor was borne. Of
him is this month called July. 24 b 25 c 26 d 27 e 28 f The 18. of this their
year, month, the 29 g Egyptians begin 30 A Plin. lib. 8. cap. 47. 31 b Day
before the Calends of Aug.

The 25. of this month is the feast of S. James the Apostle: and upon this day
K. James was crowned King of England, 1603.

8. August.
called of the Latins, Augustus. Graecians, Boedromion. Hebrews, Ab, which is
their 5. month.

1 c Calends. 2 d Nones of August. 4 3

The first of this month, Aaron, 40. years after the children of Israel were
come out of Egypt, died on mount Hor, Number. 33. 38. Also on this day Ezra, with
his company came out of Babel unto Jerusalem, Ezra 7. 9. 3 e 4 f Day before the
N. 5 g Nones of August. 6 A 7 b 8 c Idus of August. 8 7 6 5 4 3

9 d 10 e 11 f 12 g Day before the Id. The 7. of this month Nabuchadnezzar
burnt the house of the Lord, and al Jerusalem, 2 Kings 25. 8. 9. 13 A Idus of
August. 14 b 15 c 16 d 17 e 18 f The 10. of this month, some think Jerusalem
to have been burnt by the Babylonians, Ierem. 52. 12. Josephus (lib. 5. cap.
26.) said it was burned afterward by the Romans the same day. Therefore do
the Jews on this day observe a most straight fast, and go barefooted, and
sitting on the ground, read twice over the Lamentations of Jeremy. 19 g 20 A
21 b Calends of September. 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3

22 c 23 d 24 e 25 f 26 g 27 A 28 b 29 c 30 d Day before the Calends of Sep. 31
e

The 24. of this month is usually called S. Bartholmewes day.

9. September
called of the Latins, September. Graecians, Maimacterion. Hebrews, Elul,
which is their 6. month.

1 f Calends. 2 g Nones of September. 4 3

The first of this Month Haggai the Prophet began to prophecy, Hag. 1. 1. 3 A
4 b Day before the N. 5 c Nones of September. 6 d 7 e The sixth of this month
Ezechiel saw another vision Ezec. 8. 1. 8 f Idus of September. 8 7 6 5 4 3

9 g 10 A 11 b 12 c Day before the Id. 13 d Idus of September. The 7 of this
month our late most noble Queen Elizabeth was borne at Greenwich, Anno. 1533.
14 e 15 f 16 g 17 A 18 b 19 c 20 d The 8. of this Month, Anno 73. Jerusalem was
utterly with fire and sword destroyed by Titus the Emperor, Joseph lib. 7.
cap. 16. 21 e Calends of October. 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3

22 f 23 g 24 A 25 b 26 c 27 d 28 e The 25. of this month, Nehemiah finished
the walls of Jerusalem, Nehem. 6. 15. 29 f 30 g Day before the Calends of
October.

Festiual days in this month be the 21. S. Matthew. 29. S. Michael.


10 October,
called of the Latins, October. Graecians, Pianepsion. Hebrews, Thisri, and is
their 7. month. has 31. days.

1 A Calends. The 1. of this month, the Jews celebrated the feast of
Trumpets, Leuit. 23. 24. the latter Jews call this day the beginning of the
new year. 2 b 3 c Nones of October. 6 5 4 3

4 d 5 e 6 f Day before the No. Jerusalem, after it had bin possessed of
Christian Princes 88. years, through mortal dissension, came into the hands
of the Sa^azens, Anno 1187. 7 g Nones of October 8 A 9 b 10 c Idus of October.
8 7 6 5 4 3

11 d 12 e The 3. of this month, some think the Jews fasted for the death of
Gedaliah: whereby occasion was offered to bring them again into the miserable
servitude of the Egyptians, 2 King. 25. 25 ^erem. 4^. 1. 2. etc. 13 f 14 g Day
before the Id. 15 A Idus of October. 16 b 17 c 18 d 19 e 20 f The 10. of this
month, the feast of reconciliation was kept, Leuit. 23. 27. So did the year of
Iubile every fifty year begin as on the same day, Leuit. 25. 9. 21 g 22 A
Calends of Nouemb. 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3

23 b 24 c 25 d 26 c The 15 of this month the Jews observed the feast of
Tabernacles 7. days together, in memory of the Lords protecting them in the
desert, Leuit. 23. 34. 27 f 28 g 29 A 30 b 31 c Day before the Calends of
Nouemb.

Festival days in this month are, 18. day, S Luke. 28. Simon and Jude.

11. November
called of the Latins, November. Graecians, Anthesterion. Hebrews, Marbesuam.
which is their 8. month.

1 d Calends. The third of this month, Constantius the Emperor, Son to
Constantinus the great, departed out of this world, An. 364 Hist. tripart. in
the end of the fifth book. 2 e Nones of Nouemb. 4 3

3 f 4 g Day before the N. 5 A Nones of Nouemb. 6 b 7 c The tenth of this
month, An. ^483. D. Martin Luther, was borne in Islebia. 8 d Idus of November.
8 7 6 5 4 3

9 e 10 f The 15. of this month, was made a new holiday by Jeroboam without
the commandment of God, whereupon he committed most wicked Idolatry in Dan
and Bethel: but he remained not long unpunished, nor his people vnplagued for
the same, as may appear, 1 Kin 12. verse 32. 33. 1 King. 13. 1. 2. etc. 11 g 12
A Day before the Id. 13 b Idus of Nouemb. 14 c 15 d 16 e 17 f 18 g 19 A 20 b 21
c Calends of December. 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3

22 d Queen Elizabeth began happily to reign for the advancement of the
Gospel of our Savior Christ, the 17. of this month 1558. 23 e 24 f 25 g 26 A
27 b The 18. of this month Titus the Emperor most cruelly executed to death a
great number of the Jews, Joseph. lib. 7. cap. 10. 28 c 29 d 30 e Day before
the Calends of December.

Festival days in this month, are the first day. The feast of All Saints.
The 30. and last day, Saint Andrew the Apostle.

12. December
called of the Latins, December. Graecians, Posetdo^, Hebrews, Sisleu, and is
their 9. month. has 31 days.

1 f Calends. The 15. of this month Antiochus placed an abominable Idol upon
the altar of the Lord, 1 Macc. 1. 57. 2 g Nones of December. 4 3

3 A 4 b Day before the No. 5 c Nones of December. The 20. of this month Es^dra
exhorted the Israelites to put away their strange wives, 1 Esd. 9. 5. 6. 6 d 7
e 8 f Idus of December. 8 7 6 5 4 3

9 g The foundation of the second Temple was laid the 24. of this month. Hagg.
2, verse. 11. 19. 10 A 11 b 12 c Day before the Id. 13 d Idus of December. The 25.
of this month our Savior Christ was borne of the Virgin, the year after the
worlds creation, 4018. On which day also Antiochus Epiphanes entered into
Jerusalem with a mighty army and spoiled the same, Ios. li. 21. c. 16. On this
day he profaned the altar of the Lord, 1 Macc. 1. 62. which day also the Jews
kept holy, because thereon the Temple was purged from idolatry, 1 Mac. 4. 50.
14 e 15 f 16 g 17 A 18 b 19 c 20 d 21 e 22 f Calends of January. 19 18 17 16 15
14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3

23 g 24 A 25 b 26 b 27 (...) 28 e The 28. of this month Herod caused the poor
Innocents to be murdered, thinking thereby to have slain Christ, Mat 2. 16.
etc. 29 f 30 g 31 A Day before the Calends of Ianuar.

Festiual days in this month are the 21. Thomas Apost. 25. The Nativity of
Christ. 26. S Steven. 27. John the Euang, 28. Innocents, called commonly
Childe^ day.

A rule to know how many days be contained in every month in the year.
Thirty days has November,
April, June, and September.
The rest has thirty and one,
Except it be February alone,
Which always has twenty eight mere,
When it is no Bisextile or Leape-yeere.
A note of the Months, weeks, days, and hours, throughout the whole veere.
The year contains Months 12. Hours. 69478 Weeks 5^. Days 365.

Day Natural, has 24 hours. Artificiali, 12

An Alminacke for ten years.
The vere of our Lord. The prime. Sundaies letter. Leap year. Ashwednesday
the first day of Lent. Easter day. Whit sunday. 1620 1 B A Mar. 1. Apr. 16.
June 4. 1621 2 G Feb. 14 Apr. 1. May 20. 1622 3 F Mar. 6. Apr. 21. June 9. 1623
4 E Feb. 16. Apr. 13. June 1. 1624 5 D C Feb. 11. Mar. 28. May 16. 1625 6 B
Mar. 3. Apr. 17 June 5. 1626 7 A Feb. 12. Apr. 9. May 28. 1627 8 G Feb. 7. Mar.
25 May 13. 1628 9 F E Feb. 27. Apr. 13. June 1. 1629 10 D Feb. 18. Apr. 5. May
24.

TO THE RIGHT Virtuous and godly Lady, the Lady, MARGERY KILLEGREVVE, wife unto
the right Worshipful, SIR WILLIAM KILLEGREVVE, KNIGHT.
IT pleased you (RIGHT worthy LADY) heretofore, to afford this little Treatise
kind allowance, to enter under your Roof, and to accept it, as a friendlesse
Pilgrim, committed to your shelter and protection: and such has been the
opinion of your self, the Patrones, touching the same, that many others in
imitation of your kind acceptance of it, have likewise favorably censured it,
and friendly received it, not for his sake that sent it, to seek friends, but
for yours, I assure me, that showed it and me friendship. And now the Book
(simple as it is) being dispersed into the hands of many, with the poor Title
of A poor Mansrest, becomes to be more and more richly regarded: And
therefore, I could do no less, after this seventh Impression, but reuiew it,
and augment it, and recommed it again unto your favorable tuition, nothing
doubting, but the longer it passes abroad in the worlds view, the more it
shall increase in your high commendation, that will vouchsafe to countenance so
poor a Guest.

Your Ladyships, ever at commandment, Io. NORDEN.

To all that are in any distress; rest, and consolation, in Christ JESUS.
I Am out of doubt, by mine own experience, that this little Book, entitled,
The poor Man's rest, shall bring no less unto thee, then the title imports:
if thou faithfully use it, it offers thee the mean by perseverance and
practice, to attain unto the rest of the soul: not as the rich man, vainly
promising rest unto his Soul, through the superfluous fulness of worldly
blessings, and was sent suddenly to hell: but that rest which Christ himself
promises, Mat. 11. 29. Where he says: Take my yoke on you, and learn of me,
that I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest for your souls. True
rest comes not by the pleasures of this life, but by the yoke of Christ,
namely, by his corrections, which consists in troubles, in crosses, in
afflictions, in miseries, in want, in hunger, in nakedness, in imprisonment,
in banishment, in things displeasing to flesh and blood: Why then should we
seem to kick against Gods loving chastisements and mild corrections, which
as an easy yoke he puts on our necks, and as a light burden he lays on
our shoulders? He tries us but a little while, and will never ouer-charge us
if we seek rest, and relief, and power, and strength to bear it at his
hands, and not at the hands of mortal men: whom yet the Lord in mercy uses to
comfort his afflicted Children. Why then covet we not to bevisited with the
rod, rather then to be left to the liberty of this wicked worlds vanities, that
are only the baits of confusion? And therefore says Eliphas, Job 5. 17.
Blessed is the man whom GOD corrects. Paul, 2 These. 1. 5. affirms, that it
is a token of GODS righteous judgment, to punish his Children here, that they
may be accounted worthy of the Kingdom of God, and that they be not condemned
with the world: and it is a righteous thing with him, to recompense tribulation
to them that trouble you, but to you that are troubled, rest; not the outward
rest of the body, while it abides on the earth, though woldly men hold liberty
and lust, and health, and honor, and possessions, and authority, and wealth,
and wa^^onnesse, and vanity, and fullness; yea, and filthiness, a sweet and more
certain rest, then the rest and peace of a good conscience, which in all the
assaults of sin and Satan, in all trials, troubles and crosses, in poverty,
sickness, taunts and ignominy, and in most bitter misery, if thou can say
truly with Paul, Gal. 6. 14. God forbid, that I should rejoice, but in the
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified unto me, and I
unto the world: thou shall have rest for thy soul. And therefore, what if ye
be cast down as into the gulf of disdain among men, and seem outcasts in
the world, and cast-awaies of the world for your troubles and trials sake, and
because of the want of the worlds glory? think it not strange, nor grudge, hut
rejoice; for it ministers unto you occasion to fly worldly confidence, and to
take hold of the heavenly promises: it works discord between you and Belial,
and concord between you and Christ, raising your thoughts from earth to heave,
because as the body is earthly, and being furnished with the worlds pleasing
vanities, is loath to depart and leave them; so the soul being fettered by
natural and carnal affections, is held also captive, and cannot lift it self
up by the wings of desire of heavenly things, until the body be deprived of
her delights here; then has the Soul and inner man scope (sanctified by the
spirit of God) to mount by the wings of Faith unto her rest namely, to a
resolute contentation, to abide the Lords leisure and purpose in all things;
yea, when we seem to be merely forsaken of the world, we should neither fear
nor be faint-hearted, knowing that our Redeemer lives. But as the Lord of life
says, Seek ye my face, Psalm. 27. 8. Let us answer with David. Thy face, O
Lord, will we seek. For this is the rest that poor men must seek; this is
the rest that will fill us better then the Gluttons feast, and is more precious
then the health of the body, then the wealth of the world, then the pleasures
of the flesh. The gold of all the Indies cannot purchase it, the Kings of the
earth (by force) cannot obtain it, nor the wisest of the world comprehend it.
But thou poor man, who so thou be, in what case soever thou art, poor and
needy sick and weak, hated and despised, threatened and abused, apprehended
and imprisoned, or in what miserable case else soever, even thou shall attain
unto this rest, if thou seek it instantly, praying faithfully; if thou be
patient, and grudge not when thou art visited of the Lord, thou shall be merry
when others mourn, and thou shall sing when others lament. And therefore learn
of Paul in what estate soever thou be, to be content. Infinite are the comfor^^
in the Bible, search and ye shall add more and more rest unto your souls.
For this little trifle, which I here offer thee, peruse it, and use it: It may
move thee to meditate, and procure thee to pray, which prevails much if it be
fervent. The eyes of the Lord are over the Righteous, and his ears are open
unto their cries. 1 Pet. 3. 12. And therefore cast your care upon him, for he
cares for you, he will not fail you, nor forsake you, that has conquered,
and has provided for you a Crown: therefore fight the good fight, and fear
not what man can do to you.

Yours in Christian good will, Io. NORDEN.

A familiar Admonition to the CHRISTIAN READER, touching the most comfortable
exercise of Divine Prayer.
ESAIAS 55. 6. Seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is
near.
THere are three things, especially to be considered in the true seeking and
calling upon God: The first is Preparation, before we call upon God in Prayer.
The second is, Attention in Prayer: The third and last is, Thanksgiving after
Prayer.

A PREPARATION to PRAYER.
AS touching the first namely, Preparation, we may observe and use a kind of
imitation of men, occasioned to communicate with mortal Princes, who are
observed to preponder with themselves; first, how to shape their behavior, and
external gesture: Secondly, how to frame their speech to gain Attention of
him to whom they speak: and how to avoid the censure of indiscretion, in the
delivery of what they affirm, or defend. If such curiosity and carfulness be
necessarily observed, in our communication with men whose breath is in their
nostrils: how much more obseruant and careful ought we to be, when we address
our selves to speak unto the Majesty of the immortal God? To intrude abruptly
into the presence of this great God, and unadvisedly to speak unto him,
becomes not a Petitioner, but bewrays an unsanctified and an unprepared
heart; rather tempting and dishonouring, then glorifying of the name of God.
And therefore, before we presume to present our petitions to God, in hope to be
heard; we must prepare our selves, not in our outward gesture, only in
eloquence of words, and Pharisaicall outward holiness: But in rightly ordering
and disposing the affections of the inner man; which, if they be set on carnal,
or earthly vanities, if our hearts delight in the fruits of the flesh, and the
unprofitable works of darkness: (though our words be never so good of
themselves) we may fear the reward of Ananias and Saphira his wife, who
brought a part of their substance (hypocritically Concealing therest) and laid
that part at the Apostles feet. So, if we come unto God giving him good words,
keeping back our hearts, to serve our own carnal and profane appetites: Shall we
think that God will be content with the leaves of our good words, when we give
the fruits of our hearts to the world? will God take such hypocrites by the
hand? we must know, that unless we can truly and unfeignedly cast off our
carnal thoughts, corrupt desires, and sinful affections, it cannot be that
God, who loves holiness and truth, in the inward affections, can look upon
us, as upon his children, who speak unto him, as to a father, with counterfeit
words, proceeding from unsanctified hearts. When we come therefore unto God in
prayer, we must depart from all iniquity, knowing that he hears not sinners,
such as the promises of God cannot win to obedience; nor his threats enforce to
forsake their sins; who yet will adventure to rush rashly into the presence
of God, in a formal kind of praying with the lips, without any premeditation,
preparation, or reformation of the heart, at all. These offer words for deeds:
leaves for fruits: Wolves for Lambs; and all manner, halt, lame, blind, and
blemished sacrifices, and yet would seem holy: And so in stead of a blessing,
procure a curse unto themselves for their hypocrisy. We must consider that God
is a jealous God, and holds none guiltless, that takes his name in vain as
they manifestly do, that come near him with their lips, when their hearts are
far from him. It is a kind of spiritual adultery, outwardly to seem wholly to
be Gods, and yet inwardly to be mere worldlings. Before we open our mouths
therefore to God, we must cast out of the Temple of God (which is our heart)
all buyers and sellers, as Christ did out of the Temple of Jerusalem: for as
long as our hearts do harbor the desires of worldly profits, and carnal
pleasures, above the sincere service of God, our heart, the Temple of the
living God, becomes a den of thieves, that steals away all our godly
affections, to settle them on Belial. Let us look unto the man Christ Jesus
crucified, by whose blood we are redeemed, by whose mediation we are sure to
have our prayers heard of God, and granted; especially, if for our further and
more perfect preparation, we can truly observe the rule of Christ, to forgive
our Enemies, knowing that if we forgive not our brother that offends us, God
will not forgiuevs, that far more grievously offend him. And therefore Christ
counsels us, that if we bring our sacrifice to the Altar, namely, if we
intend to pray; and there remember that a brother has ought against us, we
ought to leave our offering before the Altar, that is, forbear for the time to
pray, yet to continue our holy intention to pray; and to go first, and be
reconciled to our brother, and then to come to offer our gift; namely, our
prayers freely unto God in Christ: for before we be unburdened of all Rancor,
Malice, Envy, Hatred, and all other profane desires; it is not only not
available, but lamentable, that so many will (as do) presume to come before
God, with hearts so fearfully fraught with these unholy affections; and
stagger no more to press into Gods presence, nay, not so much; as some that
come unto God with most prepared, peaceful, and most sanctified consciences.
Let such cast out the bondwoman with her sonne^ namely; the old man, the works
and lusts of the flesh: and give entertainment unto the freewoman, and her
son, the new man; which, after God is created unto righteousness, and true
holiness; And so recommend our prayers unto God, the object of our prayers, in
Christ the Mediator of our prayers, by the holy Ghost, the Author of all holy
prayers.

ATTENTION IN PRAYER.
BEing thus prepared, let us endeavor to yield due and true Attention in our
Prayers, that is, to give heed to what we pray, to whom we pray, for what we
pray, and with what zeal we pray: which are the truest tokens, and greatest
arguments, that our prayers are lively, powerful, effectual, and of faith;
which properties can never be in lip-labor: for there cannot be a more
apparent discovery of a rank Hypocrite, then to make outward shows of
Devotion, with the gesture and lips, and yet the heart to be busied in the
cogitation of idle, earthly, and profane things. And nothing more discovers
an idle heart outwardly, then the wandering of the eye in the time of divine
prayer: for it is probable, and often found by experience, that the eye
withdraws the heart: and if the eye be inconstant, the prayer has not, nor
can have the due Attention of the heart: yet it does not follow, that although
the eye be fixed on any certain object, or be shut, that therefore the heart
is rightly set on God, for oftentimes the eye follows the heart, the
cogitation of the heart making the eye to forget it object: as when the heart
is wandering in the fields of Corn, viewing the herds of Cattle, and flocks
of Sheep, when it is in the Warehouse, in the Shop, in the Chest, minding
bands and payments, overcome with pride, plotting revenge, oppressed with
fear, besotted with pleasure, entangled with cares, or otherwise perverted by
any profane and ungodly cogitations. Prayers made with such an extrauagant
heart, be they in words never so holy they are imputed unto us as sin: for
shall we think, that God will hear our prayers, to our profit or comfort,
when the thoughts of our hearts in the mean time dishonor him? Many pray in
their own familiar language, and yet consider no more what they speak (for
want of Attention) then if they spoke in an unknown tongue: and yet such men
will hold themselves very devout, and to have power in themselves to pray when
they list: as if true prayer were of that facility and ease, to utter, as in an
idle tale, and as it seems by Beggars, that tumble out the Lords Prayer, with
one breath at a door, and yet mind nothing but their Alms. Such men are to be
pitied, and to be wished better to advise themselves, before they attempt this
service of God most holy; for Prayer is not an easy work, it is of a deeper
strain then a tale, that is but from the tongue to the teeth, from the teeth
to the lips, and so into the air. True Prayer is cordial, and of that force
and efficacy, as it constrains the heart to sighs, groans, and tears, with
such inward feruency of holy zeal, as tenters the heart with such internal
gripes, as may betruly said, the renting of the heart. And the more we feel
our hearts thus inwardly sharply touched: so much the more comfort it yields
to the soul of the faithful Petitioner, yea such, and so great consolation,
as he that feels it cannot express it with his tongue, be he never so
eloquent; neither can any conceive or apprehend the sweetness of it, that is
not exercised and experienced in the same; for nature apprehends it not. No
man can say that Jesus is Christ, but by the holy Ghost: and none can desire
the Spirit of God, but by the Spirit of God, Flesh and blood cannot as much as
desire spiritual things, spiritually; for spiritual things are to be compared
with spiritual things, and spiritual gifts are obtained by spiritual means:
And therefore are words without the Spirit, as naked and bare Incense without
fire: but, being inkindled in the heart, and sanctified by the holy Spirit of
God, who is promised to assist our spirits, they are as a lively and acceptable
sacrifice to God, working so powerfully with him, through Christ's mediation, as
they never return empty of whatsoever blessing we desire. Prayer can never be
effectual, unless there be some certain spiritual object of the mind, to
move the attention of the heart, which object is God: and we must consider,
that when we pray unto him, or yield him any other worship, that we are not to
conceive him, in the form of any earthly or heavenly, bodily or spiritual
creature whatsoever: for in that manner, not to conceive him, is a degree of
conceiving him aright, according to Master Perkins. God must be conceived of us
in our prayers, as subsisting in the whole three persons, the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost. The Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, is to be
worshipped, retayning in mind the distinction and order of all the three
persons, without seuering or sundring them: for, as they are conjoined in
nature; so are they to be conjoined in worship. And therefore, he that prays
unto God the Father, for the forgiveness of his sins, must ask it of him,
for the merits of the Son, and by the assurance of the holy Ghost: and he
that prays for the remission of sins to God the Son, must pray that he
would procure the Father, to grant him pardon, and to assure it by his Spirit.
He also that prays for the same to God the holy Ghost, must pray that he
would assure unto him the remission of his sins, from the Father, for, and by
the merits of his Son. Thus must we apprehend the Trinity in our prayers: so
shall we avoid that Idolatrous conceiving of him, embraced of some, who cannot
pray, unless they have the figure of a humane Creature, to represent unto
their bodily eyes, the shape of God the Father, in likeness of an old Man and
a Crucifix figuring Christ, suffering on the Cross, and the holy Ghost, by a
Dove, whose worship cannot be reputed spiritual, but carnal; and their
prayers, not heavenly, but profane. Prayer is a spiritual action, proper
only to the children of God, who are Saints by calling, sanctified in Christ:
And they, and none other truly call upon the name of the Lord JESUS: profane
persons pray not, though they seem to pray. But most happy is that man, that
comes unto God, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, truly prepared, and duly
attentive; he may boldly ask, and confidently assure himself, to receive
grace for grace, and all blessings spiritual, without limitation, and all
benefits corporal needful. If our prayers be made in us, by him, who has
promised, and has power to give what we ask, shall we think he will fail to
perform? The hope of Hypocrites, indeed, shall perish, and their prayers
vanish as the smoke: because they wait upon lying vanities, and desire carnal
pleasures, and worldly profits. But the Lord will surely fulfill the desires of
them that fear him, because their prayers t^^d to the setting forth of Gods
gloly, to the good of the Church, to the remission of their own sins, and
other men's, to the obtaining of Gods graces, to the increase of the
understanding of heavenly things, that they may walk before God, and be
upright, that they may do the works, and bring forth the fruits of the Spirit.
These are the prayrs that are the POOR MAMS REST. These are the prayers that
wound the Serpent, and that please God bringing peace to the conscience
afflicted. But (which is to be lamented) all men are dull by nature: And the
very Elect, sometimes weakly disposed to pray. And therefore is every godly man
to use all holy means, to inkindle their hearts, to the right performance of
this heavenly duty: And nothing more prevails the in, then Meditation:
whereunto we are also very unapt by nature, and know not how, nor upon what
ground to lay the foundation thereof: yet, if we can truly frame our hearts to
a holy Meditation, we shall find, that it is the very key that opens our
dull hearts, looked up under grief, under fear, under trouble, under
persecution and misery: and sends forth by little and little, the fire of
true zeal, which at length becomes a great flame of prevailing prayers,
which thing they easily find, that are conversant in this sacred exercise of
Meditation and Prayer: who yet, many times find themselves most dull, and most
unapt to pray, having yet an inward desire thereunto which desire they cannot
contain: but laboring a while in silence, speaking inwardly to God in sighs
and groans, at length they speak effectually with their tongues. Seeing
therefore, that all men need motives to stir them up to payer: let eueryman
address himself to the word of God, or peruse some godly work of religious
men. And although vocally he cannot read, by reason of his natural dulnes;
yet, if his heart can be but conversant, and duly attend the sense, as the eye
observes the letter, his mind by little and little shall mount it self from
earth to heaven, fixed on the Trinity, whence shall arise such spiritual
fruits of faith, and feruency of Spirit, as shall fill the soul with more
sweet consolation by inkindled prayer, then the tongue can utter. And to this
end (gentle Reader) according to the small measure of mine understanding, I
have prefixed before every prayer, a Motive or Meditation, touching the
substance and matter of the Prayer following.

THANKSGIVING after PRAYER.
THe third and last duty in this holy exercise is Thanksgiving, which cannot
but follow sanctified prayers, and that with such joy in the holy Ghost, as it
cannot but break forth into most unspeakable inward thankfulness to God, who
has been so graciously pleased, not only to forgive our sins, but to help
our infirmities by his holy Spirit, by whom we have had access unto the Throne
of grace, and found such favor with God in Christ, as we have obtained by the
holy Ghost, both the will and the power to pray. Also we ought in all things to
give thanks to God, for every blessing and benefit we receive at his hands,
according to the counsel and precept of the Apostle, who commands us to give
thanks always for all things unto God, even the Father, in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 5. 20. Thus much touching the admonition.

A PRIVATE PRAYER for the Morning.
The MOTIVE.
I Laid me down^ and slept, and rose again, for the Lord sustained me, Psalm.
3. 5. This Confession did holy David make (to the glory of God) in the morning,
and has left it to us, to move us likewise to glorify God, by whom we live
and labor, and by whose love and providence we lay us down to rest after our
weariness, and daily travel, and do enjoy the comfortable benefit of sweet
sleep, which he has afforded to refresh all Creatures. And man the most
excellent of all other Creatures, receiving this sweet blessing, and rising
from his bed, without thanksgiving to him that can give it, or deprive him of
it; cannot assure himself, whether his sleep shall turn to his good or
evil: for the greatest good thing that we receive at the hands of God, turns
to our hurt, if we be unthankful. But unto the godly, to such as fear him,
and give him praise, he turns even evil things to good. Therefore as David
says, I will give thanks unto the Lord, his praise shall be in my mouth
continually, Morning and Night, and at all times, and for all things, Psalm 34.
1. Whereby it comes to pass, that no danger can annoy us; for why? The Angel
of the Lord pitcheth round about us, to preserve us sleeping and waking, if we
fear him, and call upon his Name, P^al. 34. 7. The poor man therefore cries
unto the Lord: Lord, here my voice in the morning for in the morning will I
direct my prayer unto thee, and will wait till thou hear me and help me,
Psalm. 5. 3.

O Lord increase my Faith.
A Prayer for the Morning, to be said in private.
OH Father full of power, mercy and love, how dare I look up unto heaven where
thou sit in Majesty and glory? How can I think or hope to receive any good
thing here in the earth, where thou art in thy power and knowledge? for thou,
Lord see my ways, and my vanities, and my corruptions and my sins: yea, my
thoughts, idle and evil, are before thee: yea, my pollutions and imperfections
are such and so great, as I am afraid of thy judgments, if thou should note
all that I have done amiss: yet like a loving Father, thou have mercifully
preserved me this night, and vouch safed me sweet rest and sleep, and have
raised me by thy hand, for it is thou only that preseruest me, and defendest
me whether I wake or sleep, walk or work, eat or drink: yea, thou blessest
all these things unto me, or else they would easily destroy me. For I a weak
Creature, am subject to the infinite dangers that lurk in the paths of this
evil and corrupt life. In the night and darkness I sleep, and have no watch,
and therefore easily may I be ouer-taken with the dangers of the wicked that
hate the light, and practice evil in the dark, but that thou the watchman of
Israel, thou sleep not, but have a fatherly care, and vigilant eye, and
loving regard to thy weakest ones: when they slumber beset with dangers, thou
appointest thine Ange^s, and they pitch about them, and they are late. O good
Father, I thank thee for thy infinite blessings; bear with my weakness, and
wash me from my sins, and forgive mine offenses, and direct me in the ^ight way
of obedience, of thankfulness, of repentance, and reformation of my life,
which is still subject to vanity, still ready to slide into one sin or other.
I am never free (Oh Father) from temptations, never at true peace, but beset
with continual enemies within me; my own corruptions fight against faith and
obedience, wresting my will and mine affections, from sincerity to sin, from a
desire of good things to evil, from obedience to rebellion, from trust in thee
to despair, or to depend on the vain things of this deceiving world, which
being full of subtle baits, and every where beset with snares to catch my
sou^e, and to seduce me with dangerous vanit^es, I fly only to the sanctuary
of thy love, to the castle of thy providence, and to the harbor of thy saving
promises. Keep me therefore. keep me, dear Father, as the apple of thine
Eye, shrowde me under the shadow of thy saving wings this day, and teach me
truth, give me knowledge and wisdom, and humbleness, and obedience, and
mortification, and zeal, and faith, and hope, and all graces that may change
me from sin to sanctity, from darkness to light, and from coldness to a
more perfect zeal, to serve thee in all things. Teach me, O Lord, teach me to
execute my vocation truly and perfectly, and give such issue, and blessed
success to all my endeauours, labors, purposes, and proceedings, as I may
discharge my duty in obedience to thy divine Majesty, to my brethren in love
and equity, and to my self and mine in godly care and true piety. And let thy
holy Spirit so guide and govern me this day and for ever, that I may more and
more fructify and increase in all godliness, until thou shall cut off this
corruptible life: After which (good Father) in the merits of thy Son, let me
inhabit, and evermore inherit that heavenly City, new Jerusalem, where thou
sit and raignest one God; with whom shall live all thine elect, in joys
unspeakable for ever.

Amen.
O Lord increase our Faith.
A Morning Prayer, where the FAMILY assembles.
O Almighty God, full of love and pity, the chiefest comfort that any sinful
soul can have: when we miserable sinners here met together, do consider of
thy great mercy and goodness, which we have ever since our births, and before,
found, and daily do find at the hands of thy divine Majesty, together with
our great unthankfulness every way to thee again for the same, we must needs
confess, and even from the bottom of our hearts do acknowledge, that most
unspeakable is thy mercy in sparing us to live until this morning, before
which time thou might justly have consumed us. But (O dear God) of thy free
mercies, before the foundation of the World was laid, thou have chosen and
elected us for thy Children; and have, to our endless comfort, certified and
made known the same unto our spirits, by thy spirit, by whom, and not of our
selves, we now cry unto thee Abba, father: and for our Redemption, have sent
thine own Son to shed his most precious blood upon the Cross, no other
means being whereby we could be saved?

Thou have by thy holy Spirit wrought Faith in our hearts, to believe by him,
and in him to be justified before thee, and in some measure begun the death
of sin in us, and wrought our sanctification; and of thy free favor we enjoy
the benefit of thy Word, the freedom of conscience, great peace and plenty in
outward things, with many and infinite other benefits, waking and sleeping, at
home and abroad, in our selves and our friends: for all which, instead of
thankfulness, we become the more disobedient, not doing that we ought to
do, but with pleasure and profit, with vanity and self-love we are carried
away, spending our days in iniquity, carelessness, and unfeeling of our sin,
and there is no goodness in us: yet is there mercy with thee. O Lord, and
pardon upon repentance. Wherefore, we here this Morning met together before thy
Majesty, humbly confess our wants, and most entirely beseech thee, for Jesus
Christ's sake to have mercy upon us: Have mercy upon us most merciful Father,
and forgive us all that is past: strengthen us hereafter, that daily both in
bodies and souls we may glorify thee more then we have done, yielding thanks
for daily benefits, and striving in holiness and righteousness to please thee
all the days of our life. But because we cannot but offend, and fall diverse
ways, and every day; good Lord, for thy mercy sake, pierce our hearts with a
feeling of the same, and never suffer us to go on with dull and dead souls,
not seeing nor sighing for our offenses.

As a special means to keep us in obedience before thee (O dear Father)
work in us a continual remembrance, and an effectual consideration that we
shall not always live here in this wretched world, that does much please us
now, but that a day will come when the trumpe shall sound, the Dead shall arise,
and all we shall appear before the Tribunal seat of Judgment, there to
receive according to our deeds, without respect of Persons: oh, good Lord,
give us a remembrance, and a feeling of that unspeakable comfort, and eternal
weight of glory, which in that day shall be given unto us, if in this day we
serve and please thee: and contrariwise, even terrifle our cousciences, and let
us, as it were, see before our faces the dreadful Judgments, and the
fearful Torments, that both in Body and Soul, they shall be sure to have for
evermore, which in this life do not serve and please thee; but follow their
own fancies and wicked delights: give us an hatred of sin, and a true love
of righteousness: bless thy Word evermore with fruit unto our souls, when we
hear it: give us a desire to hear it often, and to practice it faithfully and
obediently, and keep our hearts ever free from disu^mulation and counterfeit
holiness: prepare our hearts diligently to watch for the coming of thy Son;
make us ready, fit, and willing to meet him in the clouds, if thou will that
we live to his coming, if it please thee in the mean time to call us, let us
with joy yield our bodies to the earth, and receive our souls unto thy self,
until the day when both our bodies and souls shall be remitted, and be
totally glorified with thee in Heaven. And let this day be a day of our true
reformation and repentance, that we becoming new creatures, may serve thee in
holiness all the days of our lives, yielding thee most humble and hearty
thanks for thy goodness to us this night: let thy merciful eye look upon us
this day, and so keep us bodies and souls, that being occupied in our several
callings, we may be safe by thee from all our Enemies, and live to thee in
fear, that we may die in thy favor, and live hereafter with thee in glory:
which grant, and all things in the mean time necessary for souls and bodies,
for Christ his sake, in whose name we ask them, saying as he has taught us:

Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread. And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us, and
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Let thy mighty hand and outstretched arm (O Lord) be still our defense: thy
mercy and loving kindness in Jesus Christ, our salvation; thy true and holy
word our instruction; thy grace and holy Spirit our comfort and consolation
unto the end and in the end. Amen.

The Lord bless us, and save us: and make his face to shine upon us, and be
merciful unto us: the Lord turn his favorable countenance toward us this
day and evermore.

Amen.
A private Prayer for the EVENING.
The Motive.
I Will lay me down^, and also sleep in peace, for thou, Lord, only make me
dwellin safety. Psalm. 4. 8. David by this declares his own bodily infirmity,
whereunto all men are likewise subject, namely, to such debility, as without
rest and sleep they cannot long continue; yet this rest (as he acknowledges)
may be a troublesome rest, unless God bless it: for as David did, so all men
lie down and take their rest, but all not in peace; for such as lie down
forgetting God, God leaves them to themselves, and so their sleep (in stead
of peace) turns into troublesome dreams, idle and sinful imaginations,
horrible visions, and fearful fantasies, whereby not only the body is
distempered, but the soul also grievously vexed. And therefore, though we
couch us on a bed of Down, with Curtains of gold, and Couerings of silk,
these administer not the peace that David speaks of, but God is he that
gives it only. It is not then the sweet sound of Music, or the cradle of
pleasures, that can give us that peaceable sleep and safe rest that David
speaks of, but Prayer unto God, in faith and true atonement with him in
Christ, thoughts free from sin, and the conscience cleared, may safely assure
a man, that when he lies down, God is with him; and when he rises up, God
will not give him over, but be his God, loving and merciful for ever.

A Prayer for the Evening.
MY God and Father, loving and all-sufficient, I yield thee praise and thanks
for thy mercies, in that thou have this day past strongly guarded me with thy
hand, lovingly refreshed me with thy favors, and now safely brought me to
the end of this day, night and darkness being at hand, wherein all thy
creatures draw to their rest. And I wretched creature, finding mine own
infirmity and imbecility, run now unto thy heavenly favor, who have made me
of that brittle and gross matter, as cannot continue without rest after
labor, without sleep after waking, and without comfort after sorrow and
grief: I do therefore beseech thee, as thou art the Fountain of all rest,
and succor, and health, and help, so thou will consider me in my weakness,
and give me strength, see and behold my miseries, and be merciful unto me.
And since the time now is come, wherein I covet rest and sleep, receive me into
thy protection, and yield me thy helping hand, that when this my corrupt lump
of flesh shall (through the heaviness and dullness of sleep) be deprived of
moving and sense, and ableness to help it self, I may be kept safe, and
securely preserved by thee, for it is thy self (Lord) only that make me
dwell and abide in safety. Thou art my Watchman when I slumber: thou art my
Defender when I am in danger: thou art my Castle, my Rock, my Sword, my
Buckler and my Refuge: thou art to me and for me all in all: without thee what
am I, but a beast that know nothing? but a block that feel nothing? but a
wretch that can do nothing rightly? And therefore, dear Father, stretch out
thy loving favor over the house wherein I rest: let thy Angels compass the
bed whereon I rest, and thy holy Spirit keep my soul and spirit in peace when
I rest, that I may rest in peace: that I may rise in peace, and live in peace:
that the troubles of the world dismay me not, that the sleights of sin
deceive me not, and that the devices of the wicked overtake me not; but as I
am weak of my self, I may be made strong by thy strength; as I am poor of my
self, I may be made able by thy riches; and as I am ignorant of my self, I may
be made wise in thee: so shall my lying down be acceptable, my sleep
comfortable, and my rising up profitable. In hope of this thy free bounty,
loving favor, and high providence, I will lay me down and take my rest: let
it be in peace, and (Lord) let it be unto me and all thine (when they rest)
sweet and comfortable in thee, who make all thine to rest, and rise up in
safety.

Amen.
O Lord increase our Faith.
An Evening Prayer where the Family assembles.
O Most high and mighty God, Father and Protector of all things in heaven and
earth, before whom all creatures fear and tremble, were it not in that thou
have commanded us, never durst we appear before thee, so corrupt is our
nature, and so many are our sins. But, good Father, thou do bid, and
therefore we obey, thou do call, and therefore we come, give us spirits to
pray aright. We yield thee most humble and hearty thanks, for all the
mercies that ever thou have bestowed upon us in body or mind, in our selves or
in ours, private or common, temporal or eternal. Many and marvelous have
they been, and still are upon us: yea, eueu (good Lord) past finding out. This
day what thou have done for us, which of us knows, or is able to express?
Father of heaven, forgive us that we cannot acknowledge them, or praise thee
for them as we ought, and quicken us in this duty more and more. Pardon and
forgive us whatsoever we have offended thee withal this day, or at any time,
either in thought, word, or deed, even our secret sins, such as we have
committed and know not of: remit them unto us, for Christ's sake: change us (O
Lord) and we shall be changed: create in us clean hearts, and renew a right
spirit within us. Break the strength of sin, that would subdue us more and
more: And (O merciful Father) so frame these hearts of ours, within us, that
we may more delight to live according to thy will, then to enjoy all the world,
and all the pleasures therein. Lay it often (good Lord) before our eyes, by thy
remembering Spirit, that thou have not breathed the breath of life into us, that
we should live as we list, but that in holiness and righteousness, we should
walk before thee all our days. Lay it before us (O Lord) that the time will
come, when the Trumpet shall sound, the dead shall rise, and we, even we here
met together at this time, all and every one of us, shall most assuredly stand
before thy Judgement-seate with naked hearts, with open and vn^olded
consciences, there to give an account how and what we have done. Then shall all
such as have believed in Christ, and truly served thee in this life, to their
endless joy, hear that most comfortable voice of thine: Come ye blessed of my
Father, possess the Kingdom prepared for you. But woe, woe to all careless
livers in that day, they shall drink the wiue of the wrath of God, be
tormented in fire and bri^stone before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb.
They shall have no rest day nor night, and the smoke of their torment shall
ascend for evermore. Father of heaven, have mercy upon us, knit these hearts of
ours fast unto thee, and now while we have time, give us grace not only
rightly to think of these things, but so to walk before thee in this present
life, as becomes thy Saints. O continue thy word of truth amongst us, ever to
our comfort. Let the seed thereof now sown in our hearts, take such deep
root, that neither the burning heat of persecntion cause it to wither, nor
the thorny cares of this world, riches, or voluptuous living choke it, but as
seed sown in good ground, it may bring forth fruit according to thy pleasure.
O Father, give us grace, that when we hear or ^^nde by thy word, any sin
that is in us, we may strive and study without delay, willingly to reform it.
Keep us, good God, that we never swerve for the fear of man, from our own
true knowledge, becoming seruers of time, and deuiers of thee. Keep us from
all hardness of heart, contempt of thy word, and from all dissembling of
sincerity. Increase true love amongst us more and more. Bless thy whole
Church (O God) with graces necessary, this parcel of it, our native Land and
Country: dear Father, bless it still with continuance of thy truth: Iessen in
it daily the number of blind and ignorant Papists, profane Atheists, and
increase the number of thy true children. Preserve unto us long alive, good
Lord, if it please thee, our gracious King and Governor: multiply thy Spirit
upon him and all his, that still more and more, he and they may seek and set
forth thy glory in maintaining Christian religion in all purity, suppressing
all vice, superstition, and Idolatry, with all severity. Give unto him an
honorable Counsel: give them graces necessary for such a calling. Bless all
other Nobles, Magistrates, and the whole body of this Realm, with true hearts
to thee and to this Country. Increase in this our Israel the number of true
Watchmen, whose hearts may seek thee and thy people, and not their own glory
and commodity. Bring to thy fold by them such wandering remnants as are thine,
And (O Lord) be gracious to our kindred and friends in the flesh, lighten their
hearts with the Sun of understanding, that they and we acknowledgeing one
truth, may glorify thee in the true and constant profession of the same, all
the days of our life. Comfort (O Christ) thy afflicted members, wheresoever,
or howsoever troubled, and grant us peace in our days, if it be thy pleasure.

Finally, because the night is now upon us, and we ready to take our rest, let
the bed (O Lord) strike into our hearts a consideration, that the grave is
almost ready for us. Which of us can tell whether these eyes of ours once
closed up, shall ever open any more again or no? Lord, therefore receive us:
into thy hands we all here now commend our selves, bodies and souls, unto thy
holy protection and providence: keep us this night and evermore ready for thee
when thou shall call us. Hear us, O Lord, O God, and Father merciful, in
these our petitions, for thy Son Jesus Christ his sake, our Savior: in whose
name we altogether beg these mercies, saying as Christ our Savior has
taught us:

Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in earth as it is in Heaven Give us this day our daily Bread. And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us, and
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Let thy mighty hand and outstretched arm (O Lord) be still our defense: thy
mercy and loving kindness in Jesus Christ, our salvation; thy true and holy
word our instruction; thy grace and holy Spirit our comfort and consolation
unto the end and in the end. Amen.

The Lord bless us, and save us: and make his face to shine upon us, and be
merciful unto us: the Lord turn his favorable countenance toward us this
night and evermore.

Amen.
A Prayer to be used in private Families, Morning and Evening.
Leuit. 26. 6. If ye truly serve God, ye shall sleep, and none shall make
you afraid.

Lord prepare our hearts, open our lips, sanctify our prayers, and increase
our Faith.


O Most mighty Lord God, and our most merciful and loving Father in Jesus
Christ, we thy poor creatures, and unworthy children, humbly present our
selves in his name before thy glorious majesty, acknowledging that we be most
unworthy to appear in thy presence, by reason not only of our original, but
also of our continual actual sins, and deep disobedienee, being originally
borne the children of wrath, and the least of our actual transgressions is
sufficient to cast us into hell and utter perdition, if thou should deal
with us according to the measure of our manifold iniquities. We therefore do
humbly beseech thee (O merciful Father) in the merits of Jesus Christ, freely
to pardon and forgive our manifold offenses, both in that we have committed
and done those things thou have forbidden, and left undone the things thou have
commanded. Lord forgive us, and remember our sins no more: let them never
(good and gracious Father) rise up in Judgment to our condemnation, Give us a
full assurance of thy mercies, and free forgiveness in Jesus Christ, and let
thy holy Spirit from henceforth evermore so sanctify our hearts, minds, and
bodies, that we never hereafter give consent to the corrupt motions of our
fleshly affections, and unclean desires: and let the lively light of thy
continual presence so illuminate our dark understandings, that we may still
search for thy will in thy word revealed, and give us will and power to
practice and perform all godly service, duties and obedience to thee: give us
feeling hearts, that we may find out our own weakness, and confess unto
thee our infirmities, and that we may boldly in the Name of thy Son Christ
Jesus fall down before thee, calling faithfully and sincerely upon thy holy
name, for pardon for our former evils, and for grace to reform so the rest of
our wicked lives, that thou may be pleased to accept us anew into thy favor
and fatherly protection.

Grant that we may continually feel in our hearts and consciences, more and
more the virtue and power of the death and resurrection of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, and that we may continually strive against, and mortify our
gross sins and foul corruptions, and grow more strong against all evil
motions and temptations in thought, word and deed, and be more and more
renewed in the spirit of our mind, and feel a continual increase of joy and
comfort in the reading, hearing and meditating of thy holy and heavenly word,
and a feruency of true zeal to seekethy glory, by increasing more and more in
knowledge, and in the hatred of sin in our selves, and rebuking it in others,
especially, in those of whom we have charge, and in a happy and faithful going
forward in all godly obedience unto thy will all the days of our lives. Direct
and strengthen us, that we may with all faithfulness labor to discharge that
duty whereunto we are bound by our several callings, which in thy providence
either are already, or shall be allotted unto us. Hold us, we beseech thee, by
thy right hand, that we fall not into any danger of body or mind.

Guide us by thy holy Spirit in the paths of righteousness: set continual
watch before our lips, that we offend not with our tongues. Keep our eyes
from looking any more upon, and our hearts from seeking after or consenting
unto vanities: shut up our ears, that they delight not in hearing the things
offensive to thy sacred Majesty. Rule and govern our hearts, that we may be
always studious of good things, and that we may be always truly inclined to
deal faithfully with all men, and enable us to perform all duties required at
our hand by them, and keep both our hands and feet, that we go not about,
or take any thing in hand dishonorable to thee, dangerous to our selves, or
hurtful to any, and that all that we think, speak or do, may be to the
glory of thy name. Let us not spend the time, O Lord, of this our pilgrimage,
any more in wantonness, idleness, or vanity, but in all godly and virtuous
exercises, always in simplicity and singleness of heart, and in a good
conscience, as becomes thy dearest Children. Bless, we humbly beseech thee,
and prosper all the labors and works of our hands, and bless all the Creatures
which thou have appointed for our use, that we may receive comfort and relief
in them, and by them in due season, by thy blessing, and by the daily
comfortable use of them, be the more moved and stirred up to a thankful
acknowledging thy fatherly goodness, in vouchsafing them unto us, which
without thy blessing, would rather turn to our prejudice then profit, rather
to a curse unto us, then to our true comfort: therefore good Father, bless us
to a godly using of al thy good creatures, and thy creatures to a comfortable
use for us.

And forasmuch, good Father, as our duty in this sacred exercise of prayer,
binds us also to entreat thy Majesty for all our Brethren and Sisters,
members of that body, whereof thy Son Jesus Christ is the head, frame in us a
true, perfect, and hearty zeal to pray, and hear us, also for them:
beseeching thee to raise up the Ministry of thy Gospel in all places of the
earth, that by the means thereof, such as do appertain to thy Kingdom, may
be daily called home to thy fold: and that the Kingdom of Satan, Antichrist,
Sin and darkness may be weakened, and more and more beaten down in all the
world: hold up and maintain the scepter of thy word, where thou have already
planted and advanced the same, and increase all the means by which it may be
increased and confirmed, and weaken all the powers that resist or strive
against it. Bless those, O Lord, that endeavor to promote and further it:
increase their zeal, wisdom, knowledge and power; him especially, good
Father, whom in great mercy toward us, thou have made Sovereign over us,
James thy servant, our King, and all his Royal Issue, the Counselors,
Magistrates, Nobility, and the Preachers of thy holy word; all godly and
Christian Families, all true Professors of thy Gospel. Beseeching thee to
power on every of them in their several Callings, such graces, benefits and
blessings, as are most meet for them, whereby they may all show themselves thy
true and faithful miuisters, in furthering all sincerity in Religion, and all
pureness and godliness of life, not only in themselves, but in others, so
far as appertains to their charge, public or private. Beseeching thee also
to be mindful to comfort all our afflicted Brethren and Sisters, howsoever, or
for whatsoever they suffer; especially such as suffer for the testimony of a
good conscience. Comfort all them that are pressed down with the burden of
their sins: help, relieve, succor and assist all that be in want, in misery
and affiction, that fly unto thee for succor. And as, good Father, we do
thus boldly beg at thy hands these many and several favors, for our selves
and others: so (Lord) accept at our hands our humble thankfulness which we here
yield unto thee, for thy manifold blessings and benefits daily, so lovingly and
freely bestowed upon us, both inward and outward, spiritual and corporal, in
number infinite, for greatness unspeakable, and for goodness far better
then we could either ask or think: beseeching thee to continue thy gracious
favor toward us always, and in all things, that we may still give thee the
glory for our continual safety and relief.

In the Morning. Add this.
ANd finally, we thank thee, good Father, that thou have so graciously kept
and preserved us this night past, and have given unto our bodies rest, and have
brought us to the beginning of this day in peace, good Father, pardon
whatsoever corruption has taken hold of us this night: pardon our present
dullness of Spirit, coldness of Zeal, weakness of Faith, and all whatsoever
offends thee in us: and bless the labors of our hands, and our godly
endeavors this day, and make us rather able to be helpful to others that
need, then to be forced to ask, or to be chargeable to any, by reason of our
corporal wants. Grant these things, good Father, and al other graces necessary
for us, and for every member of thy Church, for Jesus Christ thy Sons sake:
in whose name we further pray, Our Father which art, etc.

In the Evening, Add this.
WE thank thee also, most gracious Father, for that thou have so mercifully
kept and relieved us this day past: beseeching thee to receive us also this
night into thy Fatherly protection, and keep our souls, bodies and goods free
from dangers: let thine Angels encampe about us, guard us, and defend us: give
unto our bodies that competent rest and sleep, that may be only sufficient,
and let our thoughts be ever on thee, in love, fear, and due obedience and
reverence, that we may be fearful to commit the least evil, yea, in the
dark, which with thee is as the noone day. Watch over us, good Father, that
Satan prevail not against us: and give us grace to be always watchful for
the time, when our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ shall make his glorious
appearance in the clouds, to finish these days of sin. And at this time,
pardon, O Lord, our weakness in prayer, our coldness in zeal, and whatsoever
does hinder us from the true publishing of our own wants and imperfections at
full, and thy praise and glory as thou deseruest: increase our Faith, and grant
us, and all thy Children, all other graces necessary for souls and bodies, for
Jesus Christ's sake: in whose name we further pray, Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for the King.
It is God that gives deliverance unto Kings, it is he that rescued David his
servant, from the hurtful sword. Psalm. 144. 10. Take away the wicked from the
King, and his throne shall be established in righteousness, Pro. 25. 5.
WE render and yield unto thee all possible thanks, O Lord of mercy, King of
all Kings and Kingdoms of the Earth, for (as a great blessing unto us) thou
have placed over us in this Realm, so ^ure a guide of true Religion, JAMES (by
thy heavenly providence) our gracious King, under whom enjoying free liberty of
the true service of thee, we rest in a quiet estate both of body and mind:
we humbly beseech thee, to behold with thy eyes of mercy, the same thy Servant
our Sovereign Lord and Governor, and to replenish his heart with the grace of
thy holy Spirit, that he by the working thereof, being inclined to the setting
forth of thy Word, may walk according to the truth of the same sincerely: that
we thy Servants, and under thee his Subjects, seeing his godly examples, may
be ashamed to fall from that true form of honoring thy Name, which for thy
glory, through thy grace, by the rule of thy holy Word, is prescribed unto us:
and vouchsafe to stir up in him zeal of thy glory, and a desire to establish
whatsoever wants in this Church of England, for the increase of true and
sincere Discipline: Let no ignorance abide in his Royal heart, but enrich him
with divine and heavenly Knowledge: give him an obedient mind, abounding with
all humility toward thy divine Majesty: save and defend him from the tyranny
of foreign Powrr, and Authority, and from all such as profess not inwardly
unfeigned zeal of thy Gospel: give him godly Counselors, and such zealous
and true hearted Ministers of thy Will, that he and we may sincerely serve
thee in this life, and in the end for evermore reign with thee in thy heavenly
Kingdom, for Jesus Christ his sake, our only Advocate.

Amen.
A Prayer for obedience unto God.
Has the Lord as great pleasure in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as when his
voy^e is obayed? Behold, to obey is better then sacrifice, and to harken is
better then the fat of Rams, 1 Samuel 15. 22. Paul commends the obedience of
the Romans, Romans 16. 19. Obey my voice, says God, and I will be your God, and
ye shall be my people, Ier. 7. 23.
O God, the Governor of Heaven and Earth, thou that rulest in the highest,
that only can do all things, and raignest for ever: at whose beck the
Pillars of Heaven shake, and all Creatures tremble: I miserable creature,
framed of the earth, do with great fear and trembling, prostrate my self
before the ^hrone of thy Majesty, acknowledging and confessing my wickedness,
and ways, abominable in thy sight. Without thee I think not a good thought:
without thee I do no good work: without thee I am worse then a worm of the
earth, yea a beast in thy sight.

I render unto thee thanks, O God, that thou have vouchsafed me that
knowledge, that I may see and know that I am nothing, and unable to do any
thing without thee. Thou art the Potter, I the Clay: such as thou please to
have me be, such can thou form and fashion me: if thou make me blessed,
thou show thy mercy and grace; if thou cast me into hell, thou show thy
justice, and executest thy judgment; neither is it my duty to contradict thee,
why, or for what reason thou do it, for thou have mercy upon him whom thou
love. These things I consider with my self (O Lord) and I fear thy
judgments, and depend only on thy mercy.

Forasmuch therefore, as all my safety and salvation relieth wholly on thee,
and consists in thy hand and power, and thou have showed thy self a
merciful and long-suffering God to the whole world, and have testified the
same indeed, in that thou would thy only Son Christ Jesus (the innocent)
should die for our offenses, and should wipe away our sins with his blood on
the Cross; and since thou have taught us in all our perturbations and
afflictions to call upon thee, and crave thy grace and mercy, for that thou will give us althings, which we shall ask in the name of thy Son: I come
unto thee, being dross and clay, O merciful and celestial Father, humbly
beseeching thee, that thou will in thy mercy, make of this unworthy carcass of
mine, an habitation for thy holy spirit, that though I line in the earth, I may
have my conversation holy as in the Heavens.

O merciful and most loving Father grant me forgiveness of all my sins,
through the death of thy beloved S^n Jesus Christ: make me to please thee,
increase in me all heavenly virtues, and grant that I may persevere in the
same to the end: increase in me that faith and love toward thee, which thou
have begun in me; kindle my affections toward thee more and more in lively
obedience, that by thy help, and presence of thy grace, I may obtain
everlasting life, (which thou have promised us of thy mere goodness) to the
end I may praise thee, and give thee thanks in thy celestial Kingdom for ever
and ever.

Amen.
O Lord increase my Faith.
A Prayer to be confirmed in the way of Righteousness.
God is the fountain of righteousness; and he that gives himself to
righteousness, is known to be borne of him, 1 John 2. 29.
O Gracious Lord God, loving in Jesus Christ, Redeemer of mankind, who is the
Way, the Truth, and the Life, I humbly beg at thy hands, that I may never
wander nor go astray from thee, who art the way, neither at any time to
distrust thy promises, who art the truth, and performest whatsoever thou do
promise: thou art eternal Life, more to be destred then any thing in heaven or
in earth, by thee we have learned the true and direct way to eternal
salvation, thou did instruct and teach us readily how to believe, what to
do, what to hope, and in whom we ought to trust: by thee we have learned how
unhappy we were borne through our first Father Adam: by thee we are taught
that there is no hope of salvation, except by faith in thee, we take hold of
our free redemption and adoption in Christ.

Thou art the only light, that sh^nest to all Creatures in the Desert of this
World, conduding them through the ignorance of their minds, from the Egyptian
darkness, to that blessed Land, which thou promisest unto the meek, and such as
follow thee in humility. For in us was nothing but utter darkness, who neither
could discern our calamity, neither knew from whence to seek the remedy of
our misery. Thou did enter into the World in the shape of a Servant, and
did take upon thee our nature, that thy brightness might disperse the cloud
of our ignorance, that by thy precepts thou might directour feet in the way
of peace: by the examples of thy life in thy humility, thou did limit out a
path for us to immortality, making it easy for us to tread in by thy heavenly
way: so becamest thou unto us a way that leads to Life, in which, lest we
should be wearied, thou have assured us by thy promises, that in following thy
footsteps, there is an inheritance of eternity prepared for us: therefore,
whilst we are in this journey, be thou a staff to us, whereby we may be
sustained in all our ways: And by the comfort of thy holy Spirit, repair our
strengths, to the end we may more willingly come unto thee: and as thou art
made a way unto us, seclude all error, become our ^^uth, take away all
distrust, and confirm our Faith in thee.

And as thou art made life unto us, revive us that were dead in sin, by a
lively knowledge of thee: For it is eternal life to know thee, Father, Son and
holy Ghost, to be one true God. Wherefore I humbly beseech thee, O most
merciful Father, to increase Faith in me, who am thy unworthy servant, lest
at any time I waver in thy Celestial doctrine: increase obedience in me, lest
I swerue from thy precepts: increase constancy, that walking in thy ways, I
never be allured by the inticements of Satan, nor seduced by his terrors, but
that I may persevere in thee who art the true way to life eternal: increase my
Faith, that being partaker of thy Promises, I may never wa^e slow or dull in
the study and practice of god^inesse, and that I may always strive and
endeavor for more and more perfection.

Increase thy Grace in me, that being mortified unto my self, I may live, and
have my conversation with thee in Heaven, and be encouraged by thy holy Spirit,
fearing nothing but thee, then whom there is nothing more to be loved or
feared, glorified or more to be rejoiced in, who art the true glory of all
Saints: in whom there is nothing, but full and perfect Felicity.

A Prayer for the assistance of the holy Ghost.
No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12. 3. 4.
If ye that be evil can give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall
your heavenly father give the holy Ghost to them that desire him? Luke 11. 13.
O Gracious Lord God, who did send upon thy Apostles, and others, thy holy
Spirit, filling their hearts with grace and wisdom; I humbly beseech thee, by
thy unspeakable mercy, that thou will vouchsafe to fill my soul with thy
grace, and water my heart with the unspeakable sweetness of thy Love, in the
love of Jesus Christ thy most dearly beloved.

Send down, Lord, thy holy Spirit, to guide me, being ignorant, banish by his
light the blacknes of sin through Christ Jesus, by him refresh my sad and
sorrowful soul: there is neither wisdom nor strength without thee: aid me
therefore by that holy Spirit, and I shall be able to shun the deceits of
Satan, and to withstand his power.

Thou art not ignorant, that I can do nothing of my self, extend thy
favorable hand over me therefore, and grant that I may forsake and utterly
relinquish my self, and fly unto thee. Mortify in me whatsoever is
displeasant unto thy Majesty, that in all things thou may conform me unto
thy will, by thy holy Spirit, that my life may be ever hereafter perfect in thy
sight.

O Lord my God, look upon me, thy miserable Creature, whose soul sigheth
after thee day and night, when shall I come and appear before thy presence?
when shall I enter into that admirable place of thy Tabernacle, the house of my
God? O comfort me with thy presence, that I may taste here in this my mortal
pilgrimage, the sweetness of thy glory, which shall continue for ever. O my
God, I long to be delivered from all temptations? O eternal fountain of
light, bring me back again to that eternal goodness, by whom I am created,
that I may know thine omnipotency, even as I am known of thee, and may so
love thee, as I am loved by thee, that I may see and enjoy thee in the society
of all the Elect, who live and raignest together with the Father, and the
Son, a Trinity in Unity, for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for Sunday-Morning.
Thus says the Lord: take heed to your souls, and bear no burdens on the
Sabbath day, nor bring it into the gates of Jerusalem: Neither carry forth
burdens out of your houses on the Sabbath day, ney do ye any work; but
sanctify the Sabbath, as I commanded your Fathers, Ier. 17. 21. 22. He that
gathered sticks on the Sabbath day, was stoned to death, Numb. 15. 32 35. 36.
O Eternal God and heavenly Father, I extol thine infinite goodness and mercy,
together with thine eternal wisdom and truth, who have protected me this
night, and made me to rest quietly and securely by thy most holy and divine
providence, I humbly beseech thee of thine infinite goodness, to protect and
govern me this day, by thy mighty hand, from all dangers both of Body and
Soul: Give thy holy Angels charge over me, to direct me in all my ways:
drive away the deadly enemy, remove all offenses of this World, mortify and
kill in me all carnal lusts and evil affections, that they may have no
dominion over me; give me a sorrowful heart to bewail my wicked life, and
comfort my soul by a lively assurance, that thou have freely forgiven my
sins.

Sanctify me, O Father, this day, I humbly beseech thee, with thine especial
grace, that I may have decent carriage in my behavior, true devotion in
prayer, and reverent attention to hear thy heavenly and holy Word, and that
thou will please to give me understanding, joined with true devotion, to
observe, learn and embrace such things as are necessary to me, for the
confirming of my faith in Christ Jesus: raise me (O Lord) by the power of thy
resurrection, from sin, and give me spiritual rest in the Communion et Saints,
that afterward I may keep the everlasting Sabbath with thee in the Kingdom of
Heaven: behold (O Lord) I knock at the door of thy mercy, with all my power and
strength; beseeching thee to continue unto me the right use of all my senses
and limbs, and send thy holy Spirit to bear witness to my spirit, that I am
thy child, and shall be heir of thy glorious kingdom, through the mirits of
Christ Jesus our Lord: for whose sake I humbly pray thee to grant all those
things that I have prayed for, and have need of.

Amen.
O Lord increase my Faith.
A Prayer before the hearing of Gods Word.
O Eternal, most high and mighty God, vouchsafe, I humbly beseech thee, to
inlighten my dark and dull understanding, that thy word may enter into my soul,
and be so received of me, as that Ignorance, the mother of disobedience, being
put away, heavenly knowledge may enter in, and have perfect rest and abiding in
me: Give power, O Lord, to the seed of Truth, that being sown in my heart, it
may take deep root, and bringforth, to the comfort of my soul, sixty, an
hundred, yea, a thousand-fold: and let thy Spirit so guide the lips of this thy
Minister and Preacher, as that he deliver nothing but the Word oflife, with
such sincerity and bolduesse, as neither fear nor affection may hinder the
same, that we thy flock may fructify and increase our knowledge in Faith
thereby, and more and more desire to feed at that, the Table of thy Word, and
be filled: open my heart, as thou did Lidyacs, that I may attend with
diligence to the preaching of thy Word. Send forth store of Laborers (O good
Lord) into thy Harvest, which by their careful pains and faithful endeavors,
may gather the dispersed sheaues of thy Church into thy celestial Barn, and
banish from this wholesome work all such as are not sent from thee, and come
not truly to edify, but rather to reap their own gain, making as it were
man chandise of thy holy Word, teaching in stead of truth, the tradition of
men: Lord, vouchsafe grace into the lips of those that are now prepared to
declare thy will, and grace into our hearts that are present to hear it, that
they by teaching truly, and we by following effectually, may through Christ
obtain of thee remission of our sins past, light instead of darkness,
peace for trouble, and heavenly happiness in stead of worldly felicity, that
tasting the sweetness of celestial comfort, we may despise terrestrial, and
after this life ended, enjoy the perfect joys of eternal felicity, through
Jesus Christ our Savior and Redeemer.

O Lord increase our Faith.
A Prayer after the Preaching of the holy Word.
Blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it, Luke 11. 28. The
hearers of the Law are not righteous, but the doers of the Law shall be
justified, Romans 2. 13. Be ye doers of the word, not hearers only, deceiving
your selves, Romans 1. 22.
O Heavenly Father, and most merciful God, seeing that we have now received
the benefit of the hearing of thy heavenly and holy word, by the mouth of thy
Minister, the fruits whereof doetend to the perfection of a godly life, and a
godly life is the way to eternal life in Christ our Lord, vouchsafe, O good
Father, we humbly beseech thee, to imprint in our hearts the gladsome and most
comfortable tidings, which we have heard and received this day of thee, by the
mouth of thy Minister; and grant that in faith unfeigned, ^t may lay up the same
in our understanding and remembrance, lest that forgetting the same, and
neglecting the exercise of a godly life, we be taken away as trees that bear
no truit, and so be cast into the fire: therefore we most humbly pray and
beseech thee, that thou would send us thy holy Spirit the Comforter, which
may retain the good tidings of the Gospel in our hearts, whereby we may
appear as trees bearing good fruits, and so be preserved until the coming of
our Lord Jesus, who will then receive us, and give us the inheritance which he
has purchased for as many as believe in his most holy Word.

Amen.
O Lord increase our Faith.
A Prayer for the Sabbath day at night.
O everlasting and merciful God, I give thee thanks from the bottom of my
heart, that of thy mercy thou have nourished and preserved me by thy divine
power, and governed me by thy Word and holy Spirit this day, and all this
week, yea, and at all other times of my life protected me by thy power and
providence: and I most humbly beseech thee for the merits of Christ Jesus, to
cover and bury all my misdeedes, which heretofore I have committed in thought,
word and deed against thy divine Majesty, in the death of thy Son.

Forgive (O Lord) the evil that I have committed; supply the good which I have
omitted, restore what I have lost, heal my sores, cleanse my filthiness,
lighten my darkness, and alter the whole state of my mind, that nothing may
be wanting to good purposes in me, nor any thing lurk in me which may offend
thee.

Water (O Lord) the seed of thy holy Word, which I have received this day,
with the dew of thy grace, that with sound judgment, and godly devotion, I may
practice such things as are pleasing to thy divine Majesty, and that my heart
being always obedient to thy Commandments, I may pass my time in peace,
through thy protection. O Lord, stretch out thy hand over me, and of thy
accustomed goodness defend me this night: Keep me from searefull and wicked
dreams, unprofitable cares, idle cogitations, and outward violence. Compass
me about on every side with thy grace, that when I shall either take care for
things of this life, or carefully seek for those things which appertain unto
the Kingdom of heaven, I may hear the voice of thy holy Spirit sounding in my
heart from the mouth of the Apostie, The Lord shall relieve thee in all thy
necessities, and yield thee a Crown of eternal glory with Christ, his
beloved, in the heavens. Grant (O Lord) this, and all other graces meet for
me, even for Jesus Christ's sake, my only Lord and Savior.

Amen.
O Lord increase my Faith.
A Prayer to be said before a man begins his Labor, or enter into the
execution of any profession.
OMnipotent God, and most merciful Father, since thou have commanded, that all
humane creatures shall labor, and eat their bread in the sweat of their
brows, while they abide in this life, and yet seeing no man can prosper
without thy blessing, or receive any good success in his affairs, we humbly
beseech thee, that thou would bless our labors in such sort, as thereby we
may have just occasion to confess thy goodness, assistance, and fatherly
care, which thou take of us.

Let thy holy Spirit (O Lord) be our guide, to the end we may faithfully
exercise the works of our estate and vocation, without any fraud or deceit:
and give us grace rather to regard the following of thine ordinance, then to
satisfy the appetite of our own sinful flesh, which couets to enrich it
self by any means whatsoever.

Nevertheless, if it be thy pleasure to bless and prosper our endeavors,
grant us also cheerful dispositions, to help and relieve such as are in
distress, according to thy talents best owed upon us. And let us keep within
the bounds of humility, not puffing our selves up above the poor and needy, by
that which we enjoy by thy bounty and goodness. But if thy good pleasure be so
to deal with us, as to abase and impouerish us far beyond that which our
weak nature can bear, yet vouchsafe to enrich us,. with cleaving faithfully
to thy promises, whereby we shall no way fall into distrust, but rather be more
certainly assured, that thou will never forsake us in the extremity of our
wants and calamities; enable us to perform truly the duties of our callings:
give us the use of all our limbs and senses, with an holy endeavor to perform
our callings, and patience to attend thy leisure, to replenish us both with
temperall and spiritual comforts, receiving thereby daily new occasion to give
thee praise and thanks, and to expect all things from thee. Hear us, O Father
of mercy, for thy dear Son Christ Jesus sake, our Lord and Savior.

Amen.
O Lord, increase our Faith, and bless our labors.
A Thanksgiving, or Prayer, to be used after a man's labor is finished.
O My gracious Lord God, I yield unto thee hearty thanks, because thou have
preserved me from imminent and infinite dangers, which might otherwise have
happened to oppress, and utterly overthrown me, if thou Lord had not
carefully regarded, and kept me from many inconveniences. Therefore now, O most
loving Father, I humbly entreat and beseech thee for Jesus Christ's sake, to
pardon all the faults wherein I have offended thee, in the time of my labor or
otherwise: correct me not in thine anger, nor punish me in thy heavy
displeasure: work in me so by the power of thy holy Spirit, that hence forth I
may walk in greater integrity, and carefully perform those duties which are
required in my vocation and calling, to the end, that though I labor with my
body, yet in spirit I may be led by thy spirit, to love, serve and glorify thy
name in all my doings, words and thoughts.

Direct and guide me by thy holy Word, in all truth and honest conversation
among men, never swaruing from thy commandments, that in the end I may attain
everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior.

Amen.
Lord evermore increase and confirm my Faith in thee.
A general Confession of sins, and of the vanities of carnal delights.
If we acknowledge our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If we say we have not
sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us, 1 John 1. 9. 10.
O God Almighty, and al-knowing Father, the fountain of all comfort and
consolation, I confess against my self, as evermore I have done, that I have
grievously offended thee, by my manifold transgressions, and have thereby
drawn down a most heavy weight of thine importable judgments upon me; under
the burden whereof I cannot but faint and fall, unless thou set to thy
helping hand of mercy in Jesus Christ to support me: for (good Father) I am
weak, and cannot bear thy displeasure; I am ignorant, and know not which way
to turn me, unless thou point out the way unto me by thy holy Spirit,
directing me within, as thy Word teaches me without. For it is not every one
that hears, that understands; not every one that understands, that can
practice and perform what thou command: for who so is not guided by a
better line, then that of flesh and blood, mistaketh the right path, and
treads the way of vanity, whose end is death: yet, for the time it is most
sweet and pleasing to the outward man, the man unsanctified and unregenerate,
because he loves to be sed with the dainties of this life, as with honor,
preferment, riches, health, friends, and worldly delights, esteeming these the
earnest-penny here of Heaven to come, and that wants, and poverty, and
sickness, and enemies, and imprisonments, and crosses, are even here the
entrance into Hell it self. So foolish are they (O Lord) and ignorant, whom
thou guidest not in thy way. And this has been my foolishness, and my
misconceit of the several estates of men in this life, even unto this day. But
having now found by due trial and experience, the foolishness of such, as put
their delight in these transttory, fickle, and uncertain vanities, do
disclaim all confidence in them, and do heartily and most unfeignedly abhor
and detest the deceiving baits of temporal and carnal delights, and do
wholly betake me unto the sweet saving sanctuary of thy wisdom and
providence, wherein, howsoever the worldly minded do contrarily judge, is
truest safety, happiness and security: for therein, bear Father, is the true
feeling and founded hope of future eternal felicity: thy wisdom, O Father,
is the wisdom of the Spirit, the Spirit the sanctifier of the Soul, the
mind and affections, which being sanctified, begets true fear of thee, and
that fear is the beginning of that sacred wisdom, which guides and
governs the whole man in the blessed way, the way to life, even unto Christ
himself, who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life.

O Lord increase our Faith.
A Prayer for humiliation and sorrow after sin committed.
O Lord my God, and most loving Father in Jesus Christ, I confess and
acknowledge, that mine offenses, are increased, and my sins are grown up
unto the heavens, that I am ashamed to lift up mine eyes to thee, admiring at
thy influite mercy, in forbearing to punish me, knowing that I am worthy to be
swallowed up, or swept away with some extraordinary and sudden judgment. And
now (O Lord) especially having so grosely sinned against thee, and done so
great evil in thy sight: how have I (vile wretch that I am) wounded mine own
conscience? how have I laid my self open to the malice and envy of the Devil?
what a disgrace and slander have I brought upon my Profession? what an offense
and scandal have I given unto others? what a toy will this be to the wicked,
that they have now by me^ gotten something to speak evil of? But (above al, O
Lord) how have I dishonored thee, whose favors have been so many, and so
innumerable toward me? I know not how to express my detestable sins, and
the heinous and hideous natures of them, when I think upon thy patience, upon
the means of grace which thou have afforded me: upon the light of knowledge
which thou have given me, upon the good motions which thou have from time to
time stirred up in me, upon the profession which I make upon the sundry vows
and promises of better obedience, with which I have linked my self unto thy
Majesty, upon the diverse admonitions (which by thy providence I know) have
been used to me by thy Servants, purposely to prevent and stop this evil in
me, me thinks I may call it rebellion (which is as the sin of witchcraft)
or presumption in the highest degree. O Lord, I see my sins, and know them to
be exceeding great: nevertheless, I cannot so lament them, so grieve for
them, so detest and abhor them as I should. Strive (O gracious God) strike, I
beseech thee, my flinty heart, make it even to melt within me, at the sight of
mine own transgression. Settle in it that godly sorrow, which causes
Repentance unto salvation. Humble my soul under thy mighty hand, and suffer me
not to freeze in the dregs of mine own corruptions: make my head full of
water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, which may run down like a River
day and night. O let me take no rest, nor suffer the apple of mine eye to
cease: cause me to power out my heart like water before thy face, that I may,
by all means, testify the unfeigned grief of my Soul, that I have so
displeased thee. And grant (O Lord) that I may not sorrow so much because of
hell and condemnation, which J have made to be due to me, but that my chief
vexation may be to think how I have abused thy mercy, and requited thy
exceeding love, with so foul a trespesse. Withal (most merciful God) seeing
there is mercy with thee, and that thou desire not the death of a sinner, but
rather that he should turn from his wickedness, and live, give me leave to
become a suter unto thy grace, not in mine own name, but in the name of thy
dearest Son, the only Mediator and Intercessor of his chosen, I most humbly
beseech thee, for his sake, to have mercy on me, O Lord, one drop of his most
precious blood, shall be a sovereign Medicine, to cure my running ^ore: his
stripes and wounds are of an healing nature, O then, I pray thee, purgeme
clean from mine intquitie, and according to the multitude of thy mercy, wipe
away all my uncleanness: let the apprehension of my sin be tempered with a
comfortable application of thy mercy, that I may hold an even course, betwixt
fearlesse security, and faithless despair, beholding at once, both my
vileness to humble me, and the riches of thy grace to revive me. And (Lord)
permit me not. I humbly pray thee, to think it sufficient, that I have once
made some show of humiliation and sorrow for my fal^, but grant I may endeavor
my self in the performance of these duties and may every day renew and
increase my repentance, with a deep detestation of my sins, and with a
fervent desire more and more earnestly strive to be renewed in the spirit of my
mind, that being so cleansed from all filthiness, both of flesh and spirit, I
may attain unto perfect holiness in thy fear, through our Lord Jesus: in
whose name I commend unto thee my Petitions, and for whose sake thou have
promised to deny nothing to thy Servant. So be it.

Amen.
Lord increase my Faith.
A preparation to the Receiving of the holy Communion of the Body and Blood of
JESUS CHRIST.
ADAM, the first man, was forbidden to eat of one fruit, which was fore-shewed
to be mortal, and he did hasten to eat thereof. We, the Children of the
second Adam, are commanded to eat of the lively and saving fruit, the Body and
Blood of Christ to our salvation; yet, how slack are we to prepare us
thereunto, and to partake thereof?

The first step therefore of true preparation thereunto, is to search the
Scriptures, who teach the Mystery of this holy Communion, and the institution
of the same, as also the signification of the outward signs, which are Bread
and Wine; the things signified, the Body and Blood of Christ shed for all
believers: the end of the receiving whereof, is to retain the remembrance of
the Death and Passion of Christ, which he suffered for our sins.

By the true receiving of this Sacrament, we are united unto the love of God,
in, and by the death of Christ, the second Adam, being separated from him by
the fall of the first. We are made heirs by adoption of eternal salvation,
in, by, and with Christ, which we lost in, and by Adam.

The true receiving of this blessed Sacrament, must be in sincerity, with a
repentant heart, and faith unfeigned.

And because it is not provided for sinners (who coming thereunto unworthily,
receive their own damnation) we must, before we repair thereunto, cleanse
our souls from all sin: which cannot be done without diuing into our own
souls, with an impartial search, to find out our own corruption, and truly
to repent our sins. Therefore, says the Apostle, Let a man try and examine
himself, before he presume to come to this holy Table, etc.

It is not fit that we should come to this holy Banquet abruptly, ^s men do
to their ordinary feasts, where they Pharisaically and ceremoniously will wash
their hands before they eat; but to this most holy Supper we are not to come
without inward washing of the soul from sin? for if unwashed hands profane
the meat for the belly, how much more an unwashed heart, this sacred Sacrament,
the food of the Soul? Inward examination, impartial accusation, and an
absolute condemnation of our selves for sin, is the best preparation to this
holy Table. For he that looks into, and examineth the hidden profaneness
lurking in the heart, cannot, but (upon due view of the same) accuse himself
of deep disobedience to God, which deserves death. Finding this, he cannot
but judge himself worthy to be rejected from this communion of Saints, and so
condemn himself that he be not condemned of the Lord: for he that confesses
his sins to God, covers them: and he that coueteth to hide them, increases
them. Therefore the Apostle wills all men to try and examine themselves,
which imports repentance, and so to eat.

This caveat is no inhibition, but a terrifying of the soul, not to presume to
come to this holy Table, without purification and sanctification.

Herein does the Lord Jesus discover his wonderful love toward us, who before
he inuit us to come to this Table to eat, does instruct us how we should
come, and how we should feed. He lays not this Table to snare us, as Absalom
did Amnon: and yet forewarnes us, that there is danger in receiving it, namely,
with polluted hands, with hands full of bribery and extortion, to take it with
lips defiled with blasphemy, cursing, and lying; to put it into a stomach
gorged with drunkenness and gluttony, and with a heart making no difference of
the Lords body.

We must therefore lay aside all our old sins, and put on the new man, a
Righteous, a Holy, and Christian conversation and disposition. We must be holy
and heavenly minded toward God, we must be loving to our Neighbors, slow in
taking advantages, or revenging wrongs, we must be lowly and little in our
own eyes, meek and sober in all our actions.

And because things of so wonderful value are herein exhibited and offered to
the worthy Receivers, we must consider who we are, how we are cleansed of
our spiritual Leprosy, before we presume into the company of the Saints to
communicate. We must consider well, whether upon trial made, as before is
said, we can assure our selves that we are of the number of those, to whom
these holy things do appertain For who so is profane in his person, and an
unsanctified Creature, let him forbear to come to this holy Table, and let him
first use the means of better assurance: namely, repentance for his sins,
amendment of his corrupt and sinful life: let him use often zealous prayer to
God, for remission of his omissions and transgressions: let him crave the
assistance of his holy Spirit, to assist him in the beating down, and
mortifying sin in him, and that his Heart and Conscience may be sanctified.
And when he is cleansed, let him show himself to the Priest, his Pastor, and
let him take knowledge by his outward Confession, of his inward Contrition, not
by particularising of his sins, but by manifesting his repentance; and then
in all reverence, let him come to this holy Table, let him eat the Bread, and
drink the Blood of that Lamb that takes away his sins, and will present
him pure unto the Lord.

The Lords eye is pure, and can abide no wickedness. The Sacrament is holy;
touch it not rashly. If thou have not on the wedding Garment of sincerity, come
not: the Lord will find thee out, and thrust thee forth of his presence, among
the unbelievers, whose portion shall be with the Devil and his Angels.

Let us therefore search and examine our ways: let us lift up our hands with
our hearts unto God in the Heavens, and feed on this holy mystery, the life
of our souls, in remembrance of Christ's death, until his second coming.

O Lord increase my Faith.

A Prayer to be said at the receiving of the holy Communion.
OH, most gracious Lord God, merciful and loving Father in Jesus Christ my
Redeemer, in whom thou art also my Father by Adoption, in, and by thy Son; my
soul, O Lord, which was lost in Adam, bought and redeemed by the Death and
Passion of Jesus Christ, does earnestly long, and entirely desire to be more
and more assured, that I am fully and really united unto thee again in him,
and therefore I do hunger and thirst to partake of those means, whereby that
sweet and precious union may be confirmed in me: Increase my knowledge more
and more of thy saving truth, revealed unto us in thy word, and increase my
faith to believe what thou have taught for our salvation: let me take perfect
and assured hold of my regeneration wrought in me by Baptism, the seal of thy
promise set upon me, when I knew not thy Law; wherein as I promised to forsake
sin, and cleave unto righteousness; so Lord, let the operation of thy holy
Spirit then promised, work in my soul, a true detestation of the works of
darkness, and love unfeigned to thy celestial and divine light. And for that
thou in Christ have left unto us a second seal of thy love, and our adoption,
the Sacrament of the body and blood of that immaculate Lamb, who for a
remembrance of his death, and our free adoption by him, instituted the same at
his last supper with his Disciples, and commanded thy Saints dispersed through
the world, through all generations, to this day and for ever, to the end of the
world, to communicate of this holy Sacrament, in commemoration of that high and
most prevailing sacrifice, the offering of thy Son upon the Cross for our
redemption and atonement with thee. And therefore, most loving Father, I come
in the name of him thy Son, not of my self presuming, but in all humblenes,
through his merits, unto this holy Table, to partake with the rest of thy
Saints by adoption, here at this time gathered together, of this holy and
heavenly banquet; humbly begging at thy hands for his sake, that it may please
thee to prepare my heart, which of it self is not only dull, but profane:
teach me, being of my self not only ignorant of this sacred mystery, but too
much knowing sin: Sanctify me by thy holy Spirit, who of my self am not
only corrupt, but wholly prone to evil evermore, and consequently unworthy to
eat at this holy Table, to partake of thy love so unspeakable: Oh forgive me,
Father, and in thy Christ here represented unto us, ingraft in me a lively
assurance, that my sins are done away by his blood: give me faith to believe
in him, who by faith is made ours, and we in him, thine by adoption: elected
even of thy free mercy, and made heirs with Christ Jesus of eternal glory:
whereof this holy mystery is the most assured pledge: Oh make me a worthy
partaker of so precious a benefit.

And for that sinners, Lord, are not admitted to this sacred banquet of saving
food; where shall I appear, whose sins drew down from heaven, him, whom
thou most dearly louedst, and betrayed him to the Cross: how then shall I
presume to appear in this holy assembly, appointed for thy Saints only: a
Table of sanctity, whereof none partake, but such as are free from sin? Who
then (Lord) dare presume to eat of this bread, or to drink of this Cup? only
those whom thou have called, who though sinners by nature, yet are they thy
children by grace, and so their sins are not imputed unto them, for whom
Christ by his death has satisfied, (apprehended by faith, showed forth in
newness of life) and wrought in us by his righteousness, in whose name accept
me (good Father,) and let the garment of his innocence cover my sins, and so
let me come to this holy Table. And as a new man, shaped in holiness and
righteousness, let me evermore henceforth walk before thee, and more delight
in thy Commandments, then in any, or in all worldly things: let me by thy
power be powerful over Satan: let his instigations never prevail in me, and
let all corrupt affections die in me, and let me wholly die to sin, and live
to righteousness and true holiness.

And for that I live among men of diverse dispositions, give me grace to love
all, but to covet to converse only with such as are thine, as near as I may:
to revenge me of none, but to forgive all wrongs and injuries, and so far to
forget them, as I may study and endeavor to do good unto all, especially to
such as are of the communion of Saints. And enlighten mine understanding more
and more, that I may see and consider always mine own weakness, wants, and
imperfections, that I may so much the more bear, with others, by how much I
cannot but confesie, I come far short of my duty to thee: who so offends
me most, I offend thee much more. And therefore, good Father, frame in my
heart love unfeigned, true patience, and lively obedience, Leave me not either
to the dullness, perverseness, or pride of mine own nature, or to mine own
corrupt will, make me little and lowly in mine own eyes, and give me
humbleness of spirit, and indue me with all heavenly virtues, that I may
rrsemble my first estate of innocence, and let my present estate of grace come
near to resemble thy dearest children, yea, thy self, who as thou forgauest
us in him, that was Lord of all, and for us became as a servant, and by his
blood washed away our sins, offering his most innocent body, a sacrifice for
our sins; whose rent body, and spilt blood being here represented unto us by
bread and wine: I do most humbly pray thee, that we may be accepted worthy
receivers of his true body and blood signified thereby; and that we may feel
even instantly, a renewing of our minds, our hearts to be changed from all
corrupt affections, and our souls swallowed up with the due contemplation of
this most sacred mystery, wherein thou give us not only thy visible
creatures of bread and wine, to refresh our weak bodies, but thine own Son,
to save our souls and bodies. Oh, who is worthy to open the book of this so
high, and so heavenly a mystery? not the worldly wise, not the great learned,
nor the most glorious in the world; only the poor in spirit, the humble and
meek, such as truly hunger and thirst for their salvation in and by Christ.
They only ask, seek and knock, they receive knowledge and find mercy: and
they are accepted into this heavenly society, seeing yet but in part, knowing
yet but in part, feeling yet but in part, receiving but in part, glorying but
in part, and where they yet praise thee but in part. But thou have promised,
that we partaking of thee in this life, after this life we shall fully enjoy
thee, in, and by Christ in the heavens, to our everlasting comfort, to our
inestimable glory, and endless praising thee in him, whom here we see by the
eyes of our souls in faith, on whom we depend in faith, and of whom we here
partake in faith; which faith (O Lord) increase more and more for ever in us
all.

Amen.
A thanksgiving after the receiving of the holy Communion.
Jesus Christ our true Sovereign and eternal sacrifice, thou art seated at the
right hand of God, upon the Throne of Majesty in heaven, having the
administration of all goodness to come, and of the true Tabernacle which is
not made by hands.

Thou entredst once (by thy precious blood) into the holy places, and have
obtained for us eternal Redemption, by sacrificing thy self unto thy Father,
to cleanse our consciences from al dead works, to the end we might serve the
living God.

We give thee thanks with all our hearts, because by willing obedience to thy
Father, thou did suffer a most ignominious death on the Cross, for us poor,
miserable, and wretched sinners, and have instituted this blessed Sacrament,
for an eternal memory of thy faithfulness, and favor, on out behalf,
leaving it like wise as an earnest penny, seal, or testimony, for the
remission of our sins.

Thou have called and brought us to the Communion of this wonderful feeding,
to the end that we might refresh our hungry souls, languishing and thirsting
after life everlasting.

O Lord my God, great is thy love, thy mercy vnexprsseable, and thy grace
incomprehensible. Thou despisest no persons, coming to this Banquet, except
they exclude themselves, or intrude thither unworthily.

If any one do hunger or thirst, here he is fully satisfied: such as are in
necessity, may here find the riches and treasures of Life: the desolate here
meet with comfort: the st^ke, here find physic, and health for their
souls: such as are ouer-laden with their sins, are here disburdoned in their
consciences, and they which are assailed by Death, do here meet with life
that cannot be molested. Help us then, O good God, that this blessed
Sacrament, which we have received, may avail us to our salvation: and that
hereafter we may retain the fullness of our hope, without any wavering,
because thou art faithful in all thy promises, and let us care one for
another: give us grace to love all, but covet only the society of such as
either may stirrevs up more and more to godliness, or that we may win them to
more knowledge of, and obedience to thee, and that we may in a holy and
heavenly union often assemble our selves at this holy and sacred banquet,
comforting one another in thee, hopefully looking for thy blessed appearance in
the clouds for our full and final redemption.

Amen.
Lord increase our faith, and renew a right spirit within us.
A Motive to the Prayer following, against Temptation.
FOrasmuch as no man is free from Temptation, it is a necessary exercise for
the Children of God to pray daily to be strengthened against the same, for if
the Devil spared not to tempt Christ, Mat 4. 1. 3. Mark 1. 12. 13. he cannot
but tempt us. And as he began with Christ, knowing him to have long fasted,
and deemed him so desirous to eat, as he would have done any thing to have
had bread, as Esau longed for his brothers pottage. And as he himself in the
beginning fell by ambition and vainglory, he thought it had been the humor of
Christ likewise to de^e terrene glory: according therefore to these two
occasions he tempted Christ to accept of both, or either of them. But he had
no advantage against Christ, but fifteth and finds man of another
inclination, wholly and altogether corrupt, and so prone naturally to sin, as
there rests in all men some peculiar humor, and a kind of private and
commanding sin, which so far commonly ouer-ruleth the affections, as
whenever it offers it self, it easily draws consent even of the whole
man, as Nabals couerousnes, whom the rich do imitate, who although they might
be free from all other sins (as they cannot be) it were sufficient to
condemn them: some are wholly overcome, and make drunkenness their whole
delight, some bribery and extorsion, some whoredom, some wantonness. And
these and such like sins, are, as it were, the Bailiffes and Stewards of the
houses of men's hearts, which who so embraces, and holds them so dear, as he
will not endeavor to be freed of them, is not the child of God. And therefore
this prayer following may be used of all men to that end, although he would be
ashamed to confess it before men. God already knowing it, his confession to
him shall more and more make a way for repentance, and obtain strength to
resist the Devil in his temptation, who observing our inclinations, bends
his temptations accordingly: and having won but the outerward of our hearts
at the first, a bare consent, he then will visit oftener, until he have made
custom so strong, as it becomes an habit, or as it were another nature: So
that a man may as well endure the plucking out of his eyes, as the shaking off
of that accustomed sin. And therefore it behooves all men to be watchful
against Satan, and to resist him by prayer.

A Prayer against Temptations, especially fit for a man that finds in
himself a continual strong inclination to any particular sin.
O Gracious God, and most loving Father, who in the beginning did create man
to thine own image and likeness, in all sincerity, and did place him (in
the holy estate of his innocence) in the sweet garden of all heavenly and
earthly delights, and in thy superabundant mercies did ordain all thy
creatures in Heaven and Earth to do him service: O what was man, that thou
had such respect unto him? And yet how suddenly (Lord God) did he fall from
that estate of original grace? how grossly did he disobey, and rebel
against thy will revealed unto him? By whose fall all corruption entered, where
before was nothing but sanctity: by whose corruption the earth became corrupt,
and all things in the earth began to disobey him for whom they were created, as
he disobeyed thee by whom he was created. And by his transgression, all that
have proceeded of him by a lineall original pollution; have all defiled their
ways, and all men by nature are likewise so far tainted with that first
offense, as infinite offenses are bred in every man by that offense: as I, for
my part (good Father, against whom that first sin was done) do acknowledge,
that I feel the force of that original corruption, working so strongly in me,
that I cannot but accuse my self to be the most vile, and unworthiest of all
Adams issue: for I cannot otherwise judge of my self, when I look into, and
see, and consider what I am, and how I am inclined to sin. I cannot but
confess, what I cannot hide from thee, who see the most secret and most
covered thought of the heart, much more then the deeds of darkness, which I
commit, to whose all-seeing eyes the darkness and light are all one, and
therefore find out all my sins, whether they be in thought, intent, or
action. And although every sin brings death, yet there is a promise upon
repentance, that they shall be forgiven. But (Lord) among many sins,
remaining in me, thou see one principal, and as it were, a reigning and
commanding sin in me, whereunto I am drawn by the continual violence of
that neuer-ceasing adversary Satan, who works my more corruption, and by my
corruptions polluteth mine affections, and mine affections breed so strong an
inclination to that odious sin, that I am weak to perform what thou
command, and strong to effect what thou forbiddest. Therefore (good Father)
kill all, and especially this sin, that hangs so fast on me, that it
reign no longer in me: for I feel it an heavy and loathsome burden unto my
soul, which I cannot shake off, as of mine own power, but by the special
working and strength of thy holy Spirit, who works true repentance. O work
true repentance in me, and make sin more and more loathsome unto me: for
thou see (Lord) that I commit all sin, as it were against my will. Give me
therefore power to bridle all my corrupt affections; the consideration whereof
grieueth me, and a heap of fear possesses my soul, despair presenting it
self before me, which would utterly devour all hope of reconciliation with
thee, did not thy word and promise firmly assure me, not only of free pardon
for all that is past, but of power also to withstand Satan's future assaults, in
the blood and merits of Christ Jesus thy Son my Savior; yet not without my
true and serious repentance, which also is thy gift. O work in me true
repentance, give me grace to withstand all temptations. And although I shall
never so mortify my corruptions, but some dregs will remain, and break
forth, yet kill the strength of this and all other sins in me, that I may be
able truly to assure my conscience, that what I would do, that I do not; and
what I would not, that I do: that thy free favor and love in Jesus Christ,
working in me, for me, and by me, faith, obedience, and a renewed heart, may
work and prevail in me, to the withstanding of the tempter and his
temptations: suppress my corruptions, and their fruits, and make me to become
more and more holy, by the imputed holiness which in thy son, by promise, is
mine: to whom with thee and the holy Ghost be ascribed all honor and praise
for ever.

Amen.
Lord increase my Faith, and give me true repentance for my sins, and power
evermore to resist them.
A Prayer for a prosperous Journey.
O Lord, in whose hands all things, and all men are, the Guide and Protector of
all that believe and come unto thee, I come (Lord) unto thy divine Majesty,
begging at thy hands pardon for my sins, which I do confess to be very great,
and worthily may pull down a great and weighty burden of thy Judgments upon
me, and nothing can truly prosper with me, until I be reconciled unto thee
in Christ, in whom thou art so well pleased, as who so in him comes unto
thee, never departs empty of some blessing or other: and therefore I now,
good Father, under thy favor, by thy permission and fatherly furtherance,
intending to take my journey, do beseech thee, to pardon my sins: and grant
that before I betake me to my travel, I may seele in my conscience a lively
assurance that thou have forgiven me, and that I am reconciled unto thee, and
at peace with thee, that so I may be assured, that as thine holy Angel went
with the servant of Abraham, and prospered his journey; as an Have of Angels
were present with Elisha, to defend him from the King of Aram, and as thine
Angels comforted and conducted Jacob in his journey: so thou will send thine
Angels with me, that they may take charge of me, conduct me, guide me, and
prosperously speed my journey, and give good success unto the occasion of my
travels: for I do confess and acknowledge, that it is not in the wisdom,
the art, power, ^r providence of man, either to prevent the dangers, which in
diverse manners do lie hid and concealed from the wisest, till they fall;
neither to perform his journey, or to accomplish the occasion of the same
prosperously: and therefore, unless thou may be pleased to assist me with
thy grace, to support me with thy hand, to defend me in thy mercy, to bless
me in thy love, and in thy providence to comfort me: I cannot but confess,
that my journey cannot be prosperous, my self in body or soul safe, nor the
business where about I go, come to good effect. ^ith therefore, good Father,
thou have made unto all men that come unto thee, an assured promise, that thou will never fail, nor forsake them, but wilt command thine Angels to take
charge of them, that nothing shall hurt them; and that thou will be with them
in the way they ride or ^o, in the house wherein they rest, or refresh them; and
wilt enable them to perform that which they intend, better then they have
either skill or ableness: bless me, I beseech thee, with such wisdom, will,
power, and discretion, as I may so perform my journey, and the occasion
thereof, as may be to the discharge of my duty to thee in true obedience, to
man in a good conscience, and to my self in a due regard of the relief of
me, and such as thou have given me: and withal, most gracious Father, since
that thou have ordained thy Creatures to serve to my use in this my journey,
bless them (I beseech thee) with strength and power to perform the service
for me, which the necessity of my journey requires, that my journey being
ended, and my business duly effected, I may return the praise and glory to thy
most holy name in Christ: to whom with thee and the holy Ghost be ascribed all
honor, power, glory, and dominion for ever more.

Amen.
Lord increase my Faith, and prosper my Journey.
A Motive to the Prayer following, against Enemies.
IT is the nature of carnal men to hate their Enemies, and seek all means
possible to be revenged of them: wherein they offend the Majesty of God, and
make him their enemy: for he has said, Vengeance is mine, Romans 12. 19. And
therefore we must take heed, we take not the office of God upon us, in taking
revenge of our Enemies, either by our own sword, or by any sinister means,
but to appeal unto the Christian Magistrate, who bears the Sword to right
the wrongs done unto his children. We must leave the revenge to whom it
belongs, and seek to be, and to continue at peace with God, without which no
Creature can be at true peace with us. And being reconciled to him in Christ,
we shall not need to fear our enemies, for he will make our Enemies to fear
us, as he made Esau to fear Jacob, Genes 35. 5. 6. If we walk in his
commandments, and observe his Laws, among many other blessings, We shall
chase our Enemies, and they shall fall before us, Leuit. 26. 7. 8. Deuteronomy. 11.
23. 25. and 28. 1. 7. And he will deliver our Enemies into our hands, if it be
expedient, or our cause being heard before the Magistrate, he will give
censure with us, and make us to rejoice over them, that would triumph over us.
And therefore in these crosses of Enemies, we must fly unto God by prayer, as
David in many of his Psalms shows himself to have done, and especially in
the 35. Psalm. If therefore thy cause be just, and thou be unjustly pursued,
fear not, for God will not fail thee, nor forsake thee.

A Prayer against the power and practices of Enemies, who slander and pursue a
man, either without a cause, or in a matter which he cannot reconcile.
INcline thine ear, Lord, unto my prayer, and harken mercifully unto my
complaints, for thou see how man intends mischief against me; many lay
snares for me to catch me, that they may take me, and so devour me, but
thou art my trust, I will not fear what man can do unto me: yet, good
Father, judge and revenge my cause, let them not triumph over me that hate me
without a cause: say I, without a cause? yea, Lord, without cause committed
against them, unless thou calling to mind my sins committed against thee,
do stir them up to be instruments of thy wrath against me: So am I indeed
in excusable, for I do confess, that I have transgressed thy Laws, I have
done evil in thy ^ight, but to these men, Lord what have I done? my conscience
is clear of all desire to offend them: and therefore, Lord, let their malice
come to an end, if not, Lord, give me Faith in thee, and patience to endure
them for thee, whom indeed I have offended. They travel in mischief, thou
art merciful; they conceive wickedness, and bring forth lies, but thou art
righteous, the God of truth: my defense is in thee, and therefore, though they
dig pits for me, they shall fall in themselves, and be taken in the same,
that they themselves have laid. Their mischief shall return upon their own
head, and their cruelties upon their own pates, although in their pride and
malice they boast themselves, as if they had already destroyed me. Up, Lord,
therefore, and defend me, let them not prevail against me, rather let them
relent or perish. They think in their hearts, as it seems by their
insolence, they shall never be removed, and thou see it; thou beholdest
their wrong done unto thee: take my cause therefore into thine own hand, for
thou iudgest right, and helpest such as suffer violence. Oh, break the arm of
the wicked and malicious, who bend, their bow, and make ready their arrows
upon the string, that they may secretly shoot at them which are upright in
heart: they shoot out their sharp and malicious accusations, bitter words and
slenders against me: yet, Lord, of thy mercy it is, that though they hit me,
yet they wound me not deadly, their hatred and malice tends but to the hurt
of my body, not being able to touch my soul: and therefore if they should
prevail, their conquest were small, but my ransom is their own ruin: curb
them, good Father, and bridle their wicked devices: set me at liberty, whom
these wicked men would hold for ever snared. I rest upon thy providence to be
defended: I seek not revenge against them, vengeance is thine, thou will
reward: but were I inclinable to revenge, they are more mighty then I, more
carnally politic then I, more befriended of the world then I, and yet as
Elisha said unto his Servant, there are more with me then with them: for thou
pitchest an Host of Angels about such as are thine. Therefore, I will never
fear what these men can do unto me, either by fraud or force, openly or
secretly: for thou who iudgest rightly, wilt turn all their malicious devices
to work for my good, and their own confusion, as thou did end the malice of
hateful Haman, against harmless Mordecai. Wherein thy providence brought it
to pass, that he was snared that laid the grin, and fell into the pit he made
for another. Therefore, good Father, I will rest me upon thy providence, and
rely upon thy mercies in Christ, in whom all things shall work together for my
good, as did the selling of Joseph by his Brethren, his Mistresses false
accusation, and his wrongful imprisonment, all which together wrought to his
high advancement. Even so, Lord, let all things work to my conformation, and
consolation in Christ: hear me, oh, hear me, lest they rejoice over me, for
when my feet slip, they rejoice and extol themselves against me.

O Lord increase my Faith, and weaken mine Enemies.
A Prayer of the Flock, for their diligent, painful and faithful Pastor.
O Most bountiful and great God, how gracious have thou been unto us, in
lending us a good and godly Past or according to thine own heart, who is able
and willing to instruct us with knowledge and understanding, and to deliver
unto us faithfully thy holy Word, one, who is sufficient to resolve us in our
doubts, and to comfort us in our calamities, to recall our wanderings, to
instruct our ignorances, and to go before us, as a guide, in the way that
leads to salvation: O Lord, thou have not so dealt with all people, neither
is there any desert at all in us, for which thou should bestow on us such a
favor. If thou had still left us in our natural darkness, and had
suffered us to be perpetually plunged into that region of the shadow of death,
in which we sat of our selves, it had been but justice in thee even utterly
to have forsaken ^s. O Lord, make us thankful, and quicken us up, that we may
even fill our mouths with the praises of thy name, who have caused the light
of thy Gospel thus to shine amongst us, to our exceeding great comfort. O make
us careful and diligent to walk while we have light, that we may be the
children of light, and to beware how we receive thy word in vain, or neglect
so great salvation: let us ever remember, that to whom much is given, of them
there will be much required, and that our sins will be the greater, and our
judgment the more heavy, if we make not right use of this thy mercy. And
concerning the Watchman, whom thou have appointed over our souls, we beseech
thee to enlarge his heart, to increase his gifts, and to replenish him yet with
a fuller measure of thy Graces. Give him (O Lord) the true zeal and spirit of
Paul, that he may with all boldness of speech give unto us thy Gospel, and
publish even the secrets thereof, for the edifying and comfort of our souls.
Make him powerful in the holy Scriptures, like Apolloes, that by the power
thereof he may both convict our consciences, and stop the mouths of all
gaine-sayers. Power into him thy holy Spirit, the word of wisdom and
knowledge, that he may rightly judge of our estates, and understand what things
are most expedient and necessary for us, and so may speak to our consciences,
finding us out in our special sins, and directing us in those holy courses,
from which we have chiefly strayed. Let his words prick our hearts forward,
that we may not be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. Make him
firm and constant in the best courses, that he may not be as a Reed shaken
with the wind, but as a sure foundation, that by his perseverance in good
works, our hearts may be the better established. And we beseech thee (O
Christ) who command the Stars, and hold them in thy right hand, to
defend him from unreasonable and evil men, and from the wrongs and injuries of
the wicked enemies of thy truth: for doubtless, men of corrupt minds will
resist the Truth with all their power. Therefore (good Lord) bless his labor,
to the calling and converting of those, which are elected unto salvation.

Make our hearts flexible to yield true obedience to thy Word delivered from
his mouth, that we may receive it, not as the word of a man, but (as it is
indeed) thy Word, and make it also effectual in us, that we may not only be
professors and hearers of thy holy will, but also practisers and continual
performers of the same. And teach us to reverence him, we beseech thee, and to
love him for his profession and works sake, not sparing our goods to relieve
him, knowing it is a small thing for him to ^eape our earthly things, who
sows amongst us spiritual food for our souls. In all our Supplications make
us mindful of him without ceasing, that his studies may be directed, his
endeauours guided, and his labors in thy work blessed, to the glory of thy
holy name, and the salvation both of him, and of us which hear him: All which
we humbly and earnestly beg at thy fatherly hands, for thy dear Sons sake,
who has ordained Pastors and Teachers for the gathering together of his
Saints, and who is the supreme and sovereign Bishop of all our souls: to whom
be all praise, honor and glory, now and for evermore.

Amen.
O Lord increase our Faith.
A Prayer for the true observation of the Commandments of the Lord.
O Omnipotent, and everlasting God, maker of heaven and earth, who have from
the very beginning promised to be our Lord and our God, our fortress, our
buckler and defense, our castle and refuge, who have brought us with a mighty
and strong hand, with an outstretched arm, out of the land wherein we were
strangers, and lived in bondage (under the yoke and tyranny of Antichrist and
Satan) into the land that flows with milk and honey, and of true Religion,
wherewith thou feedest the Souls of the faithful ones, to their unspeakable
comfort, grant that as through thy mercy and love, thou vouchsafest to bring us
into this world, and to frame us to thine own image and likeness, so we may
account thee as our only God, worshipping none other besides thee, making our
selves none image of any likeness, either of things above, or things beneath,
nor to seek help at the hands of any, as a God, beside thee, who as by thy
mighty power, thou broughtest the children of Israel out of Egypt, by the hands
of Moses and Aaron, where they were in bondage, and were continually oppressed
with sundry kinds of vexations, both of body and mind, so thou have vouchsafed
to bring us and deliver us from a greater bondage and slavery, euenfrom the
power of Satan, under whose tyranny we rested, and now escaped not by any
other policy, strength, or power, but by the bloud-shedding of thine only
Son, Jesus Christ, who took upon him the death of the Cross for our sakes,
to bring us from darkness, wherein we walked according to the will of the
flesh, unto the true knowledge of thee again, and to redeem us out of the
bondage of sin, into the land of righteousness; from blind ignorance to the
bright shining day star of thy heavenly will, who art not only a most loving
and most gentle Father, but also a most sharp punisher and revenger, who art
not only desirous that we should come unto thee, but art also most jealous
over us, lest we should seek or follow any other gods besides thee: yea, in
all our afflictions and troubles thou will that we seek only thee; and being
relieved, to attribute the only mean thereof unto thy self, whereby thou
have promised to be merciful unto thousands that ^oue thee, fear thee, seek
thee, and truly take hold of thee, as their only God: and again, threatnest
vengeance on the third and fourth generation of them that hate thee, and follow
strange gods, neglecting thy Commandments: O God, vouchsafe that we never put
our feet toward any strange gods, appear their help never so likely and
plentiful, but that it may both now and ever continue in our hearts to confess
both in word and conversation, that there is none other God besides thee, who
art a most gracious and loving Father. Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy
upon us, and so vouchsafe to direct us in all our doings, cogitations and
words, as we may always, and in all things, fulfill thy will, without taking
thy most holy and most glorious Name in vain, by blasphemous speeches,
dishonouring the same: keep us, most loving Father, not only from the most
detestable sin of perjury, whereby thy holy Name is often defaced, and as it
were, trodden underfoot, as in making it the author of abominable falsehoods
and lies; but from all frivolous and vain eathes, which to the great grief of
thy Children, and dishonor of thy Name, are most uncomely in the mouths of
such; as irreverently and rashly use it even in common speeches, without any
urgent cause, whereby they fall into the most heinous sin of taking thy most
glorious Name in vain: O Lord forgive us, and grant that we may use such a
reverent manner, and godly order in trial of matters in controversy, as we
may be always true hallowers, and not abusers of thy Name therein. And
forasmuch as thou within six days did finish all things in the beginning,
and in the seventh day did rest from the same labor, commanding us to
observe the sanctification of the same for ever, and to rest from all labors,
travels, and wordly businesses, and not only our selves, but our Servants,
Oxen, Asses, and such like: Grant that we may not only lay a side all worldly
cares and businesses on the Sabbath day, but may in all things sanctify and
keep it holy with godly exercises, divine prayers, and heavenly meditations,
with diligent regard to the avoiding of all pastimes, foolish and uncomely
exercises, and unlawful practices, whereby oftentimes the affection being
moved to impatience, powers forth choler, to the dishonouring of thee. Let
our conversation be altogether modest, mortifying our own desires, wholly
applying our selves, not only on the Sabbath day, but all the week; yea, all
our whole life, to the service of thee, to the honoring and glorifying of thy
Name, to the benefit of our souls, profit of our neighbors, and due reverence
to our Parents, whom thou have commanded us to honor, love: and obey, as the
instruments of our beginning, thou being the workman. Grant, Lord, that we
truly and unfeignedly reverence them, as thou willest we should, that we may
long continue upon the earth, not in the number of careless and disobedient
children, in whom rests no thankfulness for so great benefits had and
received at the hand of their parents, from whom thou have said, thou will
withold thy blessings, and altogether deprive them of their liberty of
living. But grant that we may so order our selves by thy grace, both to them
and other our Superiors, that we may receive at thy hands, many good gifts
and length of days here, according to thy promise in Christ.

Let it likewise please thee (O Lord) to continue thy blessings in and upon us,
that it may go well with us all the days of our lives: take from us (Lord)
all destres of revenge, all rancour, hatred, and malice, lest the Devil (who
rea^ily stands to prick us forward to a desperate mind) procure us to slay
the innocent. We beseech thee (good Lord) let not at any time such evil
imaginations enter into our hearts, lest we (giving our selves thereunto)
loose the reins of our natural disposition, which is (...) inclined to wrath,
that unless the strength thereof be subdued, or the venomous s^ing thereof
plucked out by virtue of thy holy Spirit, it provoke us to wait opportunity to
wreake our malice with violence upon such as by small occasions have offended
us, yea, and by little and little break out into that height of hatred, as to
provoke us to seek the means to destroy the innocent.

O Lord forbid it, and keep us from the most pernicious sin of adultery,
which being so odious in thy sight, as thou causedst to fall in one day for the
same twenty and three thousand, but indue us with thine holy Spirit, that we
may keep our bodies clean and undefiled members of thee, endued with perfect
sanctity, may abandon all occasions that may procure us to offend thee,
retaining a godly behavior, which thou dearly love, and expelling evil
concupiscence which thou deadly hate.

O merciful God, vouchsafe to keep us from taking any thing by indirect
means from any man, whom we ought to love as our selves; the desire whereof
(good Lord) proceeds often by scarcity and want, by poverty and need, which
indeed thou art able and willing to relieve without any such unlawful means.
And therefore I beseech thee to grant us a sufficient and necessary portion, or
else constancy and unfeigned hope in thee, to be relieved in thy good time, and
utterly to detest the horrible sin of stealing, for thou have promised,
neither to fail us, nor forsake us, cal^ing faithfully upon thee in time of
our necessity. And as we ought to beware of taking any thing of others by
steaith, so likewise vouchsafe when any occasion serves, to grant us heedfull
minds to depose and testify that which is truth, according to our knowledge,
without any respect, either of greatness, friendship, or favor of the one, or
the e^uy, malice, or poverty of the other. And grant that we raise no false
accusation or slander upon any man, but that we may keep our mouths from
speakeing any thing hurtful unto others, but to show our selves helpefull both
in word and deed to all: and like good men, muse and meditate aforehand, what
we ought to speak, not letting the bridle of our lips loose, to babble out
that which first comes into our minds, and that we may content ourselves
with our estates, whatsoever thou sendest, without an ungodly desire of any
thing that belongs unto our Neighbors. And grant us by thine especial
grace, evermore to observe, and faithfully to fulfill all thy most godly
Commandments, in the name, and for the sake of Jesus Christ: in whose Name: as
well for grace to keep thy Laws, as also for all necessaries for body and
soul, I heartily beseech thee, in that form of prayer which he has set
down unto us in these words:

Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us And
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, the power and glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Prayer and Meditation concerning the continuance of Gods corrections,
notwithstanding our continual humiliation, and daily Prayers unto him, for
comfort and relief.
O Father, most merciful and loving in Jesus Christ, what shall I bring unto
thee, whereby to appease thy wrath, conceived against my sin? If I should
bring the sacrifice of Bulls or Goats, thou art not delighted with them.

Teach me therefore, O Lord, teach me what to do, to be reconciled unto thee
again.

I have long called upon thee, and that in the name of thy most beloved Son,
and find not that I have long sought: I receive not that I have many days
desired of thee: I have long and earnestly knocked at the door of thy mercy,
and find no entrance for my Soul.

I see, I am shut out of thy presence: I wait, and am weary; I sigh, and see no
remorse; and lingering thus in distress, I languish under the burden of thy
displeasure, which seems to be so hetly kindled against me, as I am ready to
give over my suite.

For behold, Lord, my miseries are beyond measure, and my grief grows daily
more and more, being of my self ignorant what to say more unto thee, then I
have said: I know not what course to take, nor to whom to make my moan, direct
me and hear my prayers.

Thou being angry with me, all thy Creatures seem to be also offended at me,
and nothing seems to yield me comfort.

Dear Father, what shall I do? whither shall I fly to find rest? there is
no rest for me, but in thee: and therefore, unless thou may be pacified
with me, I cry in vain, I seek, and find nothing, and knock, and feel no
comfort.

I have nothing to give thee, to redeem thy favor toward me, for if I had
Mountains of gold, if I had Rivers of Oil, or ten thousand Sacrifices to
bestow upon thee, it booted me nothing, they are all thine own.

Accept therefore the Calves of mine vn^ained lips, and the simple zeal of my
sorrowful soul, and be at peace with me in the mediation of thy
all-sufficient Peacemaker, thy beloved Son, in whom thou delightest: Oh,
hear me for him, and relieve me in him, without whom there can be no help
for my soul, no case for my heart nor relief of mine estate: neither can
inward comfort nor outward aid appear, until thou be appeased with me in him.

O unhappy wretch that I am, that ever I offended so loving a God, that works
all good for them that fear him: so wise a God, that can find man out in his
most secret ways: so watchful a God, that considers whatsoever man
thinks, hears whatsoever man speaks, and sees whatsoever he does: a God
most powerful, that for sin can hurl down the loftiest, and in love can
exalt the lowliest!

O Lord increase our Faith.

A fit and comfortable Meditation, when God seems most angry with us.
ALas, that ever I offended this great God, this God of all gods, this high
King of all Kings: that God that prevails against mightiest mortal men,

This God (alas) have I offended, this God have I stirred up against me, and he
in recompense of my sins makes all his Creatures, as it were displeased with
me also, and hardens the hearts of men against me. The blessings and good
things of the earth he withholds from me, and instead thereof, he sends me
a troop of evils to afflict me.

Alas, what shall I say unto thee dear Father? what course can I take to help
this? by this are my sorrows increased, and one evil follows another, as
waves in the Sea, I am weary to bear the burden of so many calamities, and
still I cry to mine offended God, in hope of help, but my hope quarleth, and I
despair: all my comforts are crossed with continual troubles, as if I were
only the man that had deserved to be punished above all other men.

I would yet gladly appeal unto my God, but I fear to be rejected again. But
shall I think it a fruitless work, to repair unto my God, that of his own
accord calls sinners to come unto him? Is it bootlesse to fall down before
his Throne of mercy in prayer? may not mine unfeigned cries at last prevail
with him, that is full of pity?

I will frame my heart to meditate, and my tongue to utter what may please him:
though I be a Sinner, I will go unto him, in the Name of him that he dearly
loves, that he may be appeased, and look upon me again in love.

He is a God all-sufficient, and can as well behold and consider my inward
faithful desires, as he sees and observes what I have done by ignorance or
negligence, what I have done contrary to his will.

All that I think, speak, or do amiss, he notes and writes it up in his
remembrance, as with a Pen of Iron: Oh, why should he not also mercifully
consider, what I intend justly to do, though I cannot do it, who has
promised to accept the Will for the Deed?

He knows that I am but flesh: and what is flesh, but frailty it self? and
what is man but a lump of natural corruption and frailty?

And will this high Jehovah, this God so strong and powerful, set hisforce so
fiercely against a weak Worm? What conquest can there be in God against a
silly man?

But why reason I thus with my Maker? Why, rather do I not lay my self do ^ne
unto his will? if he will afflict me more, let it be so: if he will punish
me further, let it be so: if he will kill me, let it be so; for I am his, and
he will do with me what he lists: there is no reasoning against him, there
is no pacification of his displeasure by Art or Flattery. It is not words that
will work my welfare with him: friends cannot defend me from his fury, nor
take me out of the hands of so powerful a God: no shield nor backler can
prevent the stroke of his Rod.

I will yield me ^erefore to his will, I will say unto him, Lord, do with me
what thou will, turn me whither thou will, I will wait thy leisure, till the
time shall come, wherein I may see the issue of thy determinate purpose with me.

And in the mean time I will consult with thy Word. I will therein exercise my
self, and take comfort through hope; I will refresh my dulled spirits, with
the dew of thy sweet promises, and laying aside all vain expectation of
fleshly aid, I will only rest my self upon thy protection, and in an assured
resolution, I will seek thee, being the Way, wherein who so walks, shall at
length attain unto perfect happiness: the Truth, which who so imbraceth,
shall never err: and the Life, wherein who so lives, shall never die
eternally.

O Lord increase our Faith.
A Prayer against Despair.
O God of mercy, for as much as many ways I h^ transgressed thy holy Precepts,
contemned thee our Lord and maker, and offended thy divine Majesty, greatly am
I grieved in mind, and stand wonderfully in fear of thine everlasting
displeasure. And although thine holy Word does tender unto me pardon and
remission of my sins freely, through thy mere grace and mercy, yet have I
not grace as yet to apprehend the same, for busy is our most cruel and crafty
adversary, and does labor to bring us from all hope and comfort of salvation.
The only remedy which we have against this our deadly adversary, is, that we
never doubt of thy grace, and readiness to forgive our sins. Comfort us at
all times, especially at the hour of death, and give us grace to fasten all
our confidence and trust on thee, and never to think my offense greater, then
thou can and wilt pardon.

O loving and everliving God, the lively Fountain of all grace, ouer-flowing
the whole World with the Rivers of thy mercy: inlighten mine understanding,
increase my Faith, that I may truly know, and assuredly believe the Death and
Merits of Christ thy Son, the least drop of whose most precious blood, shed for
me, is of more efficacy and power to save me, then all my enormities and
heinous sins to condemn me. Look upon me (O my Savior) with those Eyes of
pity and fatherly compassion, wherewith thou did behold Peter, after he
denied thee, le^t otherwise I despair, and so commit the sin against the holy
Ghost.

Give me (Lord) the holy help of thy sacred Spirit, that when Satan does
accuse me, and my Conscience bear witness against me, when the cogitations
of Hell and Death do dismay me, when the snares of Death and horrible
tentations would entrap me, when the whole World forsakes me, and all things
set themselves against me, then strengthen me, I beseech thee, that I forsake
not thee my Savior, and fall from hope of thy free mercy.

O, comfort my heart with an inward assurance and seal of mine Adoption in thy
Son, in whom the forgiveness of sins is promised unto all Believers. Call
to memory thy holy Covenant entered into with us, at our Baptism, and the
promise thereunto annexed, (He which believes, and is baptized, shall be
saved,) and grant that we may evermore consider the same, to our perpetual
comfort.

Amen.
A comfortable Prayer against backsliding in Religion, and for increase of
Faith: most worthy often to be said of every Christian.
O Almighty and Eternal God, which have in thy Word commanded, that we should
beware of falling from thy grace, and have also witnessed that the end of those
which go back from thy Word, after they have once known the way of
righteousness, will be exceeding fearful: Have mercy therefore on me (O
Lord) I most humbly pray thee, for I find in my self great weakness, no
power have I of my self to persevere in goodness: I begin to waver in my
judgment, and to grow doubtful, even of those things, which I heretofore have
embraced with fullness of persuasion: The exercises of godliness are not so
pleasant unto me, as they have been, a strange kind of dullness steals upon
me, and I have no such life and spirit in matters of Religion, as in times past
I have had: and to what a woeful pass these things may come, though I have
much hope when I think upon thy mercy, yet well may I fear, when I look into
my self. I confess that thy goodness is great, in that thou make my heart
within me to smart for these things, and do not suffer me to run on without
stay, into that hellish and infernal Pit, in which I should be soon plunged,
if thou should once leave me to my own weakness. Therefore (O Lord) I
beseech thee, to quicken my dull heart, kindle those sparks which are even
upon quenching, and like utterly to go out, unless it shall please thee to
revive them: make strong my thoughts and conscience: make me able more and
more to see the Truth in cases of Religion, and to discern things that differ
from the same. Give me understanding to know both good and evil, give me
also increase of zeal, that I may spring up in grace, and thrive in godliness,
until I come to that measure to which thou have appointed me to come in Christ
Jesus: let ^ee not in these key-colde and decaying times, be carried away with
every blast of doctrine, through the subtlety and wil^nesse of those which lie
in wait to beguile me: suffer neither the cares of this vain world, to
wither and dry up thy graces in me, nor transitory pleasures to entrap me,
nor evil examples to misguide me, nor mine own sloathfull and heavy nature to
make me grow weary of well-doing: but make me so to burn in love with
heavenly things, that I may not satisfle myself with any measure, either of
knowledge or practice, but may rather still be ashamed of my self, that I make
no better proceedings, and so may ever desire and strive to more perfection.

To this end, enkindle in me affection more and more, by the hearing and
reading of thy heavenly and holy Word, earnest praying, intentive and fervent
meditation, careful watching over mine own soul, following the example of
godly men, and imitating their gracious and holy conversation.

As thy promises (O Lord and most merciful Father) have encouraged me thus to
pray, so (I he seech thee) let it be thy gracious will to accept of these my
humble petitions, which proceed from a contrite and a sorrowful heart, so
shall my soul magnify thee, and my tongue set forth thy praises with joyful
lips, and that in Jesus Christ thy Son and my Savior.

Amen.
A most Christian and comfortable Consultation, and sweet resolution, what
course in time of deepest distress men ought to take: worthy of all men to be
considered, to their unspeakable comfort.
Read and Regard.
IT is a general complaint among the distressed children of men, that great and
dangerous is the trial, to be long visited with the punishing hand of our high
and powerful God, especially notwithstanding the many instant cries, and humble
petitions of the afflicted soul, who finding no ease, nor feeling any comfort,
but contrariwise troubles and miseries, crosses and griefs to increase daily,
thinking himself utterly forgotten of God, or merely to be hated of him: the
silly afflicted soul thus bewrapped with fear, and feeling of his miseries,
many times faints, and so falls from faith in God, to seek succor at the
hands of mortal men, and finding that to be a course of cold comfort, with
whom neither prayers take place, nor endeauours prevail, he then (pressed
down, as under the burden of utter despair of any succor) is moved
oftentimes to frame his affections to contriue unlawful means, by his
natural and corrupt conceit, that his own will and wit may shape some course
to a haven of more secure rest: and so hoysing the sails of his own perverse
imaginations, betaketh himself to the main sea of his ungodly devices, t^l at
the length, instead of a happy hoped harbor, he suddenly sinketh, and is
swallowed up of the ougly devouring gulf of irrecuperable confusion. For the
world, as a sea, tossing the weak ones that sail therein, tries the
inclinations of all, and approves and condemns, but not according to the
right rule of Christian reason, and godly wisdom, but after a sensual manner
of false judgment, affirms, such as sail with a full fore-winde of
prosperity here, to be only blessed, happy, and beloved of God, and such as
are becalmed with distress and miseries, with crosses and calamities, and
keep not the glorious way with the worldly-minded, to be hated and accursed of
him. And this wretched and false censure of carnal men, drives many weak
souls upon the rocks of bitter ruin, even when they dream of a course of
sweetest happiness. For as David found, Psalm 49. 18. much more this age
affoordeth the experience, that men do praise them that make much of
themselves, namely, such as wallow in the delights and pleasures of the flesh.
But them they esteem mad men and fools, and cast-awayes, and accursed, that
live in a base, and low, and poor, and ignominious estate, though never so
contented: the foolishness of worldly men is wisdom, and the true wisdom of
the poor is foolishness, with the worlds flatterers. And this is that
dangerous rock, upon which oftentimes even the godly make shipwreck, when
they consult with flesh and blood, which argues it the safest course, to
become licentious, to embrace vanity, and to study the profitable and praised
arts of flattery and dissimulation, to walk the broad way to preferment, to
scale the walls of wealth and estimation by fraud and force, to leap over love
and lowliness (as dangerous blocks) and to sit in the seat of scorning the
poor, with the proud and ambitious. And if the godly (such as have professed
knowledge and zeal) be driven from their right course, by the wind of this
vain worlds Paralites, what becomes of such as have no coasting card of
Christian knowledge, nor needle of faith to conduct them? And if such as have
the world under their feet, and can crush the poor in their fist, be easily
carried away from^ justice and judgment, to rapine and bribery, extortion and
wrong; what a dangerous trial is it unto the poor and distressed man, who
even for relieuing necessaries, is forced to bend his course to the haven of
any small comfort? Yet this worlds wisdom censureth, that it is holden hardly
lawful for the poor to tread the steps of the rich to relieve himself.
Such an unequal match there is between these two, that for strength the one
subdueth the other without great encounter; for wisdom, he stops his mouth
with fair words, Eccles. 9. 16. Because the world holds him wisest that is
wealthiest, and him best that is brauest. The wisdom of the poor is
despised, and his words are not heard. He is accounted most honorable, that
can subdue the lowest with loftiest looks: great men often speak what their
hearts think not; and the poor pine in penury, while the rich preach
dissimulate plenty: the worst in their lives seem most glorious in their
livings: the wicked increase in worldly wealth, while the poor do perish. But
since it thus fares with the dearest children of God, that they must be as
cast-outs in the world and cast-awayes among worldlings; since they have no hope
here, nor help, nor succor, nor pleasure, nor delight here, it is necessary
that a careful consultation be had in such a dangerous warfare, how we may be
best def^^ded, and most eased, and surest guarded. And for that the poor s^^me
to have no share amongst the rich, the weak no part with the strong, nor the
simple any portion with the deceitful, (and yet a necessity laid upon the
poorest to provide ^oode, though in mean measure to sustain life, and rags
in simplest manner to cover the skin) a course must be taken after the rule
of right reason, wherein we must leave the sleights of the mere flesh, and
lean to the advice of the spirit; lest that, through a careless negligence,
and negligent sluggishnesse, we be found authors and workers of our own
miseries.

And to this end that all should be without excuse, and none should plead Gods
injustice or partiality, in punishing or correcting: God, the Father of all,
has sent proclamation and warrant to all to come to him. Such as are burdened,
he will ease: such as are hungry, he will feed: such as are sad, he will
comfort: and such as are in misery, he will relieve. He then that complains,
must complain to him, he that prays, must cry to him: and he that n^^deth,
must come to him. But a caveat is given, as a prou^so in this general warrant,
that he that will come to God, must depart from s^^ne: wherein are
comprehended two inseparable conditions: the one, that we believe the premise
of Gods protection: the other, that we perform our duties in our calling: for
without the latter, the first has no ground: for we cannot believe without
the promise, and to the promise is tied obedience, and to this obedience,
exercise of good things, the endeauours of virtue and godly life.

And this cannot be without the blessing, which brings with it the timely
supply of bodily necessaries here, and the true assurance of the joys to come
in heaven, which also begin even here, through the testimony of that lively
spiritual Comforter, which gives inward contentation, in outward crosses, and
outward relief in inward sorrow: it yields illumination to the dark
understanding, and quickneth the dull desires to do good: it heaueth us from
the earth and vnhelping earthly things seen, to heaven and heavenly society
concealed: it turns our carnal desires of workeing our own wills, to the
contemplation of divine things, and makes us to seek first that Kingdom
which is above, as the principal end of our hope and happiness, and then to
seek the things of this life, as things of necessity; and not to covet them,
to be the more glorious here, but the more godly; not to be wealthy here, but
rightly wise; not to be ambitious here, but humble, and content with a mean
estate; not to fill our bellies with the gluttonous, but to seed, as fasting
from all desire of superfluities.

Being thus mortified in our affections, and furnished and adorned with the
most sauory fruits of contentation in our estates, high or low, rich or poor,
famous or base, we cannot but walk patiently in our callings, and not to
grudge at our miseries, be they never so great; we cannot but be resolute
Christians, and abide the encounter of the worlds furies, be they never so
fierce and cruel: and therefore let us be all of good courage, let us fight
the good fight, and stand as men. Fly not to idle and evil means to relieve
our distresses, nor repine at the wealthy and wicked, that have the wind of
every man's plausible Al hail, to drive them on from one proud conceit of
themselves to another: for if it be duly weighed, what weight of vanities it
heapeth on them (which as stabble in the end shall consume themselves with the
fire of their guilty consciences) it will cause us to leave off to love their
lives, or long for the like: for their time is short and sweet (as a feast in a
dream) here; but in the end bitter, and for ever.

And contrariwise, our miseries are but for a moment, and our joys perpetual,
and the smallest things (if we fear God) are better to us then the greatest
riches to the wicked. And though we fall, we shall not be cast off, for God
supporteth us with his hand.

But the wicked shall be cast down, and never be able to rise: though they
flatter themselves in their own eyes, while their wickedness is found out,
worthy to be hated and abhorred of all godly and virtuous men.

Let us therefore trust in the Lord, and not be idle in well-doing; and in our
deepest miseries, let us wait patiently for the Lord, and not be weary: let us
hold fast by his promises, for though he see me to hide himself from us, he
will be found at length, and will grant and give us what is necessary for us as
children, and not what may make us more wanton, as his Enemies, Worldlings and
Reprobates: he may suffer us to lie among Lions, for a season with Daniel, but
he will shut and close up their devouring laws, that they shall not prevail,
till the Wicked come within their power, whom they shall tear in pieces
without mercy.

He may suffer us a while to live in the Wilderness, as he did his dear
David; but he will bring us home again, to take comfort of our friends, and
to comfort our families: he may suffer us to be imprisoned long, as he did
Joseph, but at the length he will enfranchise us, and turn it to our
advantage.

And what if the wicked rail and revile us, as Shemei did David? It may be,
and surely the Lord will do us good for their evil, if we can temper and
mortifle our choler, and with patience brook their slanders: we may be sick
and diseased, yea twelve, or thirty years, with the woman and the man in the
Gospel; but he can cure us, or comfort us, that it shall be easily borne. We
may loose our goods, as Job did, and become merely undone, as we think, and
yet he will restore it, if we be patient and faithful.

God has a time to correct, and a time to comfort, a time of trial, and a
time of reward: he never fails them that faint not, nor forsakes them that
forsake him not: he may make us mourn now, but he will make us merry again:
though he make us weep now, he will take a time to wipe away our tears, and
put them in a bottle, reserving the remembrance of them till the end, when we
shall have our portion with him in joys endless and unspeakable.

And therefore we that go forth with little seed, and sow it in sorrow, let
us wait, without wavering: for a plentiful increase will come, and a joyful
harvest. We see our beginning, and feel it hard and dangerous: but if we dwell
in the land and grudge not, our end shall be joyful and glorious. We have but
one day to labor, and then comes our hire: he that calls us is sure, he
that promises is faithful; what he speaks, is Yea and Amen, as certain as
if it were presently done.

Our natural Fathers indeed may forget us, and our familiar friends may
forsake us, and our enemies may threaten us; but he will take us up, stand by
us, and guard us: he will foster us and defend us.

As a Father favors his Son, and as a Mother tendereth her infant; so does
our heavenly Father, and far more dearly regard his children: yea, when he
seems to frown, it is not in disfavor; when he corrects us, he hates us
not; when we think he leaves us to the raging waves of this worlds troubles,
and when we seem to sink, he has us in his hand to hold us up: we are
always in his sight, and he beholds all our ways, and records all our
works: our going forth, and our coming in, are in and by him, and he has
charged his Angels to watch over us, and to guard us from evils that lie in
secret to devour us: when we rise up, and when we lie down, sleeping, or
waking, he cares for us: he is the Watchman of Israel, that slumbreth not:
he is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, at whose voice the Wicked tremble, and by
whose strength the Righteous stand.

In our youth, and in our age, in our wealth, and in our want, in our life, and
in our death, he is always ours, and neither the height above nor depth
beneath, nor distance of place, can separate us from him, nor hinder his
presence with his Children; neither poverty, nor sickness, nor ignominy, nor
misery, can estrange him from such as trust in him.

Such a Father is he unto the fatherless: such a Friend to the Friendlesse:
such a staff to the Weak, and such a Benefactor to the needy, as no man
truly trusting in him shall perish: he hears his Children, as in his
bosom, and loves them whom the World hates: he favors them on whom the
World frowneth: he embraces them that the World retecteth: he clears them
that the World accuses, and saves them that the World condemns; his
glorious, are in the World most base; his dearest, are in the World disdayned.
Not the most Rich, but the most Righteous, not the most Glorious, but the most
godly; not the most Lofty, but the most Lowly in the world are dearest to him:
he preferred the poor Beggar in h^s rags, and with his scabs, before the
glorious Glutton with his riches and perfumed Robes. Who then will rep^ne at a
poor estate? Who will be sad at ignominy? Who will grudge at misery? ^h we
have riches unseen, glory concealed, and infinite joys, and comforts
unspeakable within, through the Comforter, which no man, but the Soul of the
godly man can comprehend? Thus is the faithful Soul fed, thus is the Godly
man relieved, and thus is the Child of GOD preserved. And therefore, let us
that are poor and miserable, and despised in the World, be silent in the
World, that hates us, and cry unto God who hears us, because we are his,
and in his beloved he loves us, he can and will help us, when most need
is, and in greatest perils show his powerful presence: he came to Daniel,
when the Lions would have devoured him: to the three Children, when they should
have been consumed with fire: to Susanna, when she should have been unjustly
condemned; to the Widow of Sarepta, in her need, and when all her oil and
meal was spent, he then renewed her store: he heard the groans of Israel in
Egypt; he considered the desire of Anna in her silence; he saw Agar solit^ry,
and grieved in the Wilderness: he was with David banished, with Eliah an
hungered, with Sampson when he thirsted. And none, no not one, was ever
disappointed of his hope, that continued constant unto the end: though we silly
Souls cannot comprehend his providence, nor limit his power, both which are
always working wonderful things, and are never idle, ever perfect, and never
defective in any thing, his will shall come to pass: he is only wise, and all
flesh fools: he is only strong, and all men weak: Princes are at his
disposition: Kings are at his command, the raging Sea he calmeth, the dryest
land he waters, the hardest heart he bends, and the most Tyrannous he
talmeth, as a Lamb, by his Word.

May not this suffice to bring our raging affections under, and work such
contentation in our miseries, as that we should think us beholding to this
powerful Protector, and lay down our necks to his will, and heartily and
willingly wait his good time of renewing our estates? but if it be his will to
keep us always low, and never to raise us; always poor, and never to
relieve us; always distressed, and never to comfort us with the comfort of
this life, can we think that we through our small and short sufferings could
deserve the high favor of so prevailing a God, especially the joys that he
has laid up in heaven for ever, for such as with Patience, and Faith, and
Love, and Obedience, and Well-doing, endure unto the end.

And therefore for our present resolution and comfort, let us consider that we
are not as the World deemeth us, nor the Worldlings as the World esteems
them. For we are in their eyes cast-awaies, but in our own consciences, the
children of God through Christ: and they, in their own conceits, blessed in
their wealth, and wanton, and delicate, and loose lives; but by the Word of
God, without repentance, Reprobates*

And therefore faith Christ unto them; Woe be unto you that are rich, for you
receive your consolation in this life. And again, Weep and howl, ye wealthy
and worldly men, for the miseries that shall come upon you. But unto his little
ones, such as are least esteemed in the World, he says: Fear not, my little
Children, I have prepared for you a City. And again, I will neither fail you,
nor forsake you: What shall we then say? The Lord is our portion, and our sure
defense, why then should we fear, what man can do unto us? Esaias 9. 7. The
zeal of the Lord of Hoasts will perform this

Let us therefore rouse up our souls that are dulled with our miseries, and
let us rest upon him that is the God of mercies. Let us be faithful, patient,
and humble? let us only grieve that we have sinned, and be fearful to offend
again. Let us fall down before his footstool, for he is holy: let us cry to
him, for he is pitiful: let us ask of him, for he is liberal: let us
refer us to his will, for he is loving.

O Lord increase our Faith.
Here follow sundry most effectual Prayers for distressed men, howsoever their
trials continue or increase.
When thou saydest, Seek my face, my heart answered, Thy face, O Lord, will I
seek, Psalm. 27. 8.
IT appears by this resolution of godly David, that he was moved by the
Spirit of God in his troubles, to seek aid from above, and not in the Earth;
of God, and not of Man. And to the end that David's true affection which he bare
toward the good of all Posterities, and especially the love of God toward his
Children, might be recorded to their perpetual encouragement, it is continued
even unto us, that we that are even now afflicted, should see, and as in a
glass behold the good will of God, wherein he wills us to seek his face:
which imports a most sweet encouragement, that all men troubled should seek
aid at God, who to the end that this World, and the comforts thereof, should
not allure his Children, lest they should be also miscarried thereby, and so be
condemned with the World, he sets a veil (as it were) before their eyes,
namely, poverty, ignominy, crosses, miseries, and sundry calamities, that they
delight not in the face and shape of this World, but that rather, it appearing
ugly, and nothing pleasant unto them, they might seek another way to comfort
themselves, namely; the most amiable face of heavenly Jehovah, who wills us,
as he did will David, to seek him only in our distress; that is, to call on
him faithfully, to crave his favor instantly, and to lead our lives
uprightly. So shall his most loving countenance shine upon us, his hand be
extended toward us, and his power and might be with us.

And therefore as he says freely, Seek ye (...), let us instantly and
faithfully seek him with our whole hearts: so shall we be sure to see his
salvation, after we have patiently undergone the sweet burden of the yoke of
his fatherly chastisements.

A Motive to the Prayer following, for Patience in Affliction.
PErforce makes a man patient against his will; but that cannot be called
Patience, but a coffeehouse. But thatis Patience, when a man bears all
injuries, wrongs, crosses, afflictions, and miseries, with a willing mind,
without grudging or murmuring, without seeking or using any evil or sinister
practice or attempt, to ease himself of that which God lays upon him,
wherein he would seem to be wiser then God, who knows better then the wisest
man, what is best for him. And therefore David gives counsel, To wait
patiently upon the Lord, and to hope in him, in what estate soever we be,
although we be poor and see others rich and prosper. Fret not thyselfe for him
which prospers in his ways, Psalm. 37. 7. Natural reason is deceived; when
it conceiueth men happiest, that prosper most in the world: for then were the
Word of God not true; which says, Many are the troubles of the righteous^: and
then were the wicked in better case then the godly; for they prosper best in
the world. But read the 37. Psalm, their estate is there described, their end
presaged, and the godly comforted, and confirmed in patience.

A Prayer for patience in affliction, very comfortable.
Heavenly Father, merciful and loving, full of power, absolute in wisdom,
unsearchable in thy providence, and giver of all divine and spiritual graces,
whereby thy children are guided in the way of Obedience, supported in their
dangers, and relieved in their wants: whereby they learn to love thee for thy
mercies, to reverence thee for thy greatness, and to obey thee for thy
goodness; and in all the changes and alterations of their estates to embrace
Patience, whereby such as thou blessest, become thankful, such as thou
afflictest, become meekely contented, and bear the burden of their crosses
without any outward show of coffeehouse, or inward grudging or murmuring at
thy corrections, but depending upon thy fatherly providence, they are either
timely delivered, or inwardly comforted, their hearts eased, and their
consciences quieted, never presuming to limit the time when, or the manner, or
means how, thou should ease or relieve them: but rest assured by thy Spirit
working in their hearts, that they are thine, and therefore all things are
promised by thee in thy Word, to work together for their good; sickness of the
body, grief of the mind, want of necessaries, enemies, and all crosses, all
conioyne to work good unto those that are thine: and being hereof assured,
they rest themselves in patience, and wait thy timely release for their
miseries, in hearty obedience to thy will. And for that (most gracious Father)
it is not the nature, nor in the power of man, to accomplish these heavenly
duties; no, not in thine own Elect: give me this heavenly virtue, Patience,
to undergo whatsoever thou shall lay upon me with a willing and contented
mind, acknowledging that I know nothing less then thy secret purpose, in
working with man in this life, why thou aduancest one, and pullest down
another: Why one prospers, and another is miserable: knowing yet by thine own
Word and Promise, that to such as are thine, all things turn to their good.
And therefore I come unto thee, who have willed me to come: I beg of thee,
who have willed me to ask: and I knock at thee, who have willed me to enter
into thy presence, and all for Patience. Good Father, give patience unto my
perplexed Soul, that howsoever I feel either inward grief or outward
troubles, I may rest me only in thee and by thee, in peace within, howsoever
the outward man seem to perish. And let neither my fainting heart be cast
down, nor my spirit disquieted within me, nor my conscience be difmayed at
any of thy corrections. Lie my heart within me rejoice: let my soul triumph,
and my conscience retain true peace and godly alacrity, in the midst of the
causes of my deepest discontentments. And assist me, Lord, so with thy grace,
that I may not only seem, but be indeed truly patient; and by the same thy
grace, let Patience have her true and lively working in me, bringing forth all
other spiritual effects of Obedience, all the fruits of thy sanctifying
Spirit. Faith to believe, zeal to pray, and constant perseverance in that
hope, which makes not ashamed. So shall all my trials and temptations, crosses
and afflictions work for my good, to thy glory; and al my troubles be approved
trials of thy love, and fatherly favors toward me, howsoever the desires of
flesh and blood oppose themselves to weaken the sweet assurance settled in me
by a lively feeling of thy promises, made in thy word, infinite in number,
comfortable, and never failing. Plant therefore in me, O good Father, plant in
me these saving fruits, and water them continually with the distilling dew of
thy sanctifying Spirit, that they may grow up in me, from the small and weak
buds, that scarcely appear in me, to such lively fructifying, and neuer-dying
branches, as may bear in me true testimonies unto my self of mine assured
Salvation, and future Glorification; and to thine Elect, encouragements of
divine imitation; and to the contrary minded, examples either to their
reformation, or condemnation.

A Prayer against the temptations of the Devil.
MOst merciful God, and leuing Father, thy blessed World teaches us, that the
old Dragon and subtle Serpent, our adversary the Devil, ^uns about us like a
roaring Lion, seeking daily to devour us.

He uses all his wicked sleights against our Souls, with an in finite number
of devilish Stratagems to make us fall into sin or despair.

He practices to entrap us by riches, by poverty, by voluptuous and wanton
pleasures, by greedy desire after honor, and worldly dignities, by coveting
earthly goods and possessions, by care for the belly, and provision therefore,
with all other unrighteous and sinful affections and desires.

He cunningly does cast abroad his daits and snares to entangle us, night and
day, in our words and works, so that wake we or sleep we, he is before or
behind us to devour us.

O glorious God, who can escape? for he is continually watching, and never at
rest, and we are weak and unable of our selves to resist.

Open thou our eyes (O Lord) that we may comprehend how mighty and crafty our
enemy is. Confirm our Faith, for we are not to fight against flesh and blood,
but against Satan, the utter enemy of the Soul, therefore (O faithful
Father) have compassion on us.

Make us strong in the power of thine own streugth, put upon us thy defensive
armor to resist manfully the temptations, and subtle devices of the Devil.

Give us thy weapons: gird our reins with the Girdle of truth, put on our
breasts the Breast Plate of righteousness, let our feet be shod with Euangelical
peace, and above all things let our hearts be defended with the shield of
Faith, so shall we be sure to quench all the fiery darts of the devil, so
that our hearts be covered with the Helmet of Salvation, and our hands hold
fast the Sword of the Spirit, which is, thy most sacred, an^ never failing Word.

Then shall we be able to do any good thing, and valiantly (through thy ^ide
and succor) over come our adversary the Devil, for in thy very name we shall
strongly with stand him.

Be thou but our helper, and no fear can assault us, stand thou but by us, and
though the world should be ouer-whelmed, and the Mountains tumbled into the
bottom of the Sea, yet shall we be safe: for thou art our assistance, that
live and raignest world without end.

Amen.
The Motive to the first Prayer in distress: Being a Confession of sins, and
a Petition to be released of the punishments due for the same.
DAngers and afflictions move poor men to repair unto God, not only in their
silent sighs, as Anna and Moses did, but also in their vnfamed zeal, using
the means, the tongue and lips, in crying unto the Lord, who wills us to
ask, and enioyneth us to wait, until his good time be to give what we desire.

And for that God hears not sinners, here is inserted a Confession and Prayer
for forgiveness, that our unworthiness may be put away, and our unaptness
turned into true submission, and our coldness into zeal, that the Spirit of God
being renewed within us, through our humiliation and prayer, we may not faint,
but live in hope, and undergo the correction of our loving God, in what
manner, and for what time heseeth it fit for us, without indenting with him
what to do for us, or when to come to us, because he is wise, and we our
selves fools: he is merciful, and never fails, nor forsakes the miserable.

God is love, and imbraceth them that deserve to be hated. And therefore he^
bears with our imperfections, and accepts us righteous, being unrighteous;
worthy, being unworthy of our selves. And in this hope and assurance, is this
prayer following, to be faithfully used, and it shall comfort the soul of the
most sorrowful.

The way truly to seek our God, is to do justly, to love mercy, to humble
our selves, and to walk with him.

Rejoice in hope, be patient in tribulation, continuing in Prayer, Romans 12. 12.
The first Prayer in distress.
O Father, full of knowledge, thou searchest the hidden thoughts of all hearts,
thou beholdest the desires, even of such as keep silence: But yet thou
requirest that thy children should know and confess thee to be their Father,
and so to judge of thy works, as that thou have framed in man an heart
wherewith to believe, and a tongue and lips, whereby to confess thee to be his
loving Father, and do challenge at his hands, the Sacrifices of Prayer and
Praise continually.

Thy children must not be dumb in their Souls, nor mute in their lips, that
want thine aid: no, thou command them to ask, seek, and knock, ant she
west thy self ready to hear, ready to be found, and ready to receive thy
distressed ones, who are faithful and patient, and persevere unto the end.

And therefore, dear Father, I (beset with many miseries) come unto thee, as
unto the chief fountain of all rest and relief, inward and outward: but I am
st^full, and that I confess, and thou wi^^ not hear such as are defiled with
iniquity: the wicked cannot find thee, and the unjust cannot come before thy
presence.

Alas, what shall I then do, being so unfit to ask, so unapt to seek, and so
unworthy to receive what I desire, by reason of my sins?

But cleanse me, O Father most pure, and sanctify me, O thou most holy:
teach me what to speak unto thee, for I cannot keep silence, my griefs are
great, and my miseries increase more and more: I must therefore speak: O shape
in me a new Spirit, give me a renewed heart, and a tongue that may speak
acceptable things unto thee: that thine ears may be opened at my cries, and
thy mercies (O Lord) ready to receive my humble complaints.

Thine eyes (O Lord) are open unto the cries of all that fear thee, and
relicuest all that trust truly in thee, thou deliuerest their souls from death,
and comfortest their hearts in the time of sorrow.

And therefore does every man that is godly, make his prayer unto thee, and
holds not his tongue, he may ^use and meditate for a time at his miseries,
but at the length the fire of zeal will enkindle, and he cannot but speak
with his tongue, and cry unto thee, to show his hope, that he has an helper
in heaven: he cries, and thou considerest: he desires, and thou relieuest: he
believes, and at the last, thy mercy and goodness appears, and thou imbracest
him with joyful and timely deliverance.

And how comes it to pass (O merciful Lord) that I so long have sought
thee, and thou seem to hide thee from me? How long have I prayed unto thee,
and thou seem to give no ^are unto me? which makes me weary, and almost
ready to faint, and to give over my suite, which I have so long sought, and
made unto thee, O God, my Strength, and my Redeemer.

But lo, O Lord God, thy promises and loving kindness do only ^eede and
nourish me with a continual and never dying hope, that the time expected will
come at the last, when thou forgetting my sins, wilt both hear me, and fully
deliver me.

Thou art God, and therefore good: thou art the Father of all, and therefore
only, thou know the wants of all thy children, and the things most fit to
give unto them, and the time when to bestow it on them.

And therefore, Father all-sufficient, and full of love, I presume not to say
unto thee, Come now, or Do this, but for the time when, and the thing what
thou will work for me, I refer to thee, yet be not ouerelong away: for thou
know my seeblenesse, and my miseries, and how near I am brought to an
unrecoverable fall: what shall I do, Lord, but hope only in thee?

Thy Prophet witnesses unto us wretched men, that when the righteous cry, thou
hear them, and deliuerest them out of all their troubles.

But who is righteous, O Lord? who is clean? he also witnesses that none is
righteous, none is clean, but all are sinners: yea, our most holy fathers were
impute in thy sight, and yet they received the Promise, and obtained grace and
mercy, and relief, and strength, and salvation at thy hands.

But, Lord, they were thus comforted and thus blessed, and thus relieved only
of thy free ^auour (wherein thou acceptedst them righteous, and imputedst not
sin unto them) and not of their deseruings.

Thou art love, and in love thou imbracest them, that deserve to be hated for
their sins; and therefore since thou art so full of compassion, and so
infinite in thy mercies, bear with mine imperfections, and cover my sins;
accept me righteous, and I am righteous: accept me worthy, and I am worthy to
receive the good things of thy love, which is without all limitation.

Hold me righteous in the righteousness of thy beloved, that I also may be
heard when I cry, as my righteous Fathers were, and let me be delivered out of
my distresses, as the righteous have been delivered out of all their troubles.

For, what can it profit thee (O Father) to forsake me utterly, and to suffer
me to be forsaken of all, as if thou had no respect unto mine offering? I
cry daily, and yet my trouble continues: I seek thee, and am deprived of all
earthly blessings.

O wretch that I am, what shall be the end of my complaint? I will cry yet, if
thou will hear: I will seek thee still, till thou may be found: be it as
thou will, into thy hands I commend me, and to thy providence I commit mine
estate most grievous, and best known unto thy self.

O Lord increase my Faith.
The Motive to the second Prayer, to be said of distressed men.
WHerein the poor man desires God to consider in mercy his temptations, which
are so much the more heavy and grievous, because the worldly minded do taunt
at him for his afflictions; affirming that God has forsaken him, for that he
punishes him so deeply. And the poor man having no other refuge, but to fly
unto God, i^ encouraged through Gods promises, and persuaded through faith,
that these men speak so hardly of him, for that they savor not of the true
knowledge of Gods loving corrections, whereby he visits his dearest Children
here for a time, that they perish not eternally: and resolves himself to
hold fast by God, and therefore prays for strength; and withal, he desires
the assistance of Gods directions in the government of his life and actions,
lest that such as see his poverty and afflictions, should see him fall from God
by gross sins, and so take the stronger occasion to censure him justly
punished for his wickedness. Yet withal he confesses unto God, that he is
indeed a sinner, and for his sins justly touched with crosses, by the mere
providence of God in love, and takes comfort by examining his ways, and his
will, which although they be not so right as they ought, yet in respect he
erreth through frailty, not by a full consent, rather as a sufferer by Satan's
oppressions, then a wilful doer against the will of his Maker: he desires God
to look upon him in the merit of Christ, and in him prepare his dull heart to
repentance, and his whole man to a more sincere course of life: that his ways
being reformed by the word of Truth, his hard afflictions may be in the end,
and by little and little, mitigated, and that God will break the fetters of
grief and sorrow, and according to his divine Promises, by his delivery, give
him occasion to sing a new song, a song of joyful deliverance, both from the
tyranny of Satan, and also from the heavy burden of his afflictions.

The second Prayer for Constancy in affliction, and to endure malicious
slanders patiently.
LOrd, how are my troubles increased? how many and how grievous miseries have
seized and taken hold upon me? insomuch as the world argues me forsaken of
thee: aff^rming that there is no help for me in thee.

But, Lord, are they not such as have a carnal eye, and do not spiritually
discern thy secret purposes, in chastifing them whom thou love?

They look only upon the outward means that the world works, and
comprehend not thy mercy and providence, wherein thou workest, by means without
means, and against means, even as thou will.

Therefore, let not their malice move me, nor their taunts dismay me: I will
hold me by thy promises, and endeavor to keep thy Statutes, and perform what
thou have commanded.

O Father, lead me in thy righteousness, that I sin not in their sight that
covet to catch me in the snare, and to (...) ap me in the net of deserved
reproof. Bear me upon the wings of thy blessed protection, and let me not
come within the reach of their malicious inventions.

Let not such as lay wait for me, have just cause to desire, or opportunity to
work any evil against me: rather let me so trend the paths of that love,
and perform that duty to all men, that thou have willed in thy word, that my
conscience bearing me witness of mine innocence, I may freely say, The Lord is
my helper, no evil shall happen unto me.

I confess, that I cannot so carry my self in this life, but offense w^ll be
taken against me, and I shall deserve (as I do) the just reproves of men,
yea, against my will: and consequently, the carnally affected cannot but break
out into bitterness against me for the same, and the more, by reason they see
me afflicted, as it were by thy hand, which they take as a strong argument,
that I am a sinner most notorious, and that thou have utterly cast me off
forever.

I cannot indeed (loving Father) but confess my sins, and that I am worthy
of sharper corrections, the^ I have yet tasted, or am able to bear: yet
consider that I have not maliciously done what thou dislikest, but in
weakness, and of natural imbecility only, and much against my will, rather
as suffering Satan's oppressions, then willingly or wilfully committing sin.

And therefore trust I in thy mercies, O forgive me: I depend on thy power, O
save me and deliver me, lest my miseries ouer-whelming me, such as pretend
evil against me, take occasion to pursue me, and so d^uoure me.

Consider my troubles, O Lord, behold my dangers, and be unto me a perpetual
rest and refuge.

Why stand thou aloose, O Lord, and seem not to regard my t^oubles? why
turnest thou away thy face, and considerest not my wants? thy hidest thou thy
self, when my troubles so much abound?

Arise, and let not the wicked take occasion through mine afflictions, to say,
there is no help for me in thee, or that thou regardest not the causes of thy
distressed children.

Deliver me rather, and relieve me, that the righteous perceiving thy
readiness to save me, may the more fear thee, and trust in thee, and not
^aint when they are likewise afflicted.

Thou willest the poor to commit himself unto thee, and promisest to relieve
such as have no helper. Thou preparest the dull hearts to call upon thee, and
thou again hear their cries, and comfortest them.

How long then, O Lord, how long will thou forget me? how long shall I cry and
not be heard? how long shall I seek counsel of thee, and yet be ignorant what
course to take? I am wearied with my daily sighs and groans, which my heart
(fraught with grief and heaviness) does power forth before thee continually. O
be unto me that lively light, that may lighten my sad and pensive Soul. Send
that Comforter unto me, whom thou have promised to send, that he may teach me
what to do in this my misery.

Thou have threatened to increase the sorrows of such as seek unto other gods,
why then should they continue still miserable, and heavy, and grieved, that
seek thee only, and only believe in thee? how shall they be still ignorant
that ask counsel and wisdom of thee, who have created all in the beginning,
and do preserve all, and maintain all for ever, being God only powerful,
provident, and loving?

To thee I only come, on thee I only call, thee I only seek: with thee is
mercy, and with thee is right Redemption, and thou deliuerest all that trust in
thee, as a most sure Savior, and mighty Protector.

And thy Word expresses the lively force of thy love and power, wherein thou
keep them that are thine, as the apple of thine est, and couerest them with
the wings of thy savor, from the merciless and cruel men.

O be therefore my Rock, whereon I may safely rest: be thou my strong Castle,
wherein I may be freed from the dangers prepared against me: for thou have
promised, that all such as hope in thee, shall be as Mount Sion, that shall
never be moved.

Break thou my fetters (Lord) wherewith I am tied, and remove my sorrows,
wherewith I am brought even to the door of death, that I walking in the
liberty of a free spirit, may grieve no more at my crosses, but glorify thee
with a song of joyful deliverance.

Let not sin prevail against me any more, which as a Lion, teareth in
pieces the assurance of my soul.

Bear me upon thy saving wings, through the miseries of this life, and let not
the Mire and Clay, wherein I stick fast, detain me ever: let not the
Water-flouds which roar fearfully, and fiercely swell against me, utterly
swallow mevp. But rather divide and put back the merciless Waves, that so
dangerously rage on all sides against me, that I may pass on, and finish this
my mortal course, as one that lives, and has his being of thy mere love, and
not as one that languisheth in thy displeasure.

O Lord increase my Faith.
The Motive to the third Prayer.
Wherein the poor Man disclaymeth his own worthiness, and appealeth to the
mercies of God; yet grieved under the burden of his miseries, he instantly
prays unto God, that he will not correct him ouer-sharpely, lest he faint.
For by reason of his grievous crosses, (not withstanding his continual
prayers) he fears (as it were) lest he pray in vain, and be driven to
think that either God hears him not, or regards not his Petitions: and
therefore beseeching God to come now at the length, either with delivery, or to
give him such inward spiritual strength, as he may constantly endure unto the
end. For he having tried the help of mortal men, finds it to tend only to
words, and not to relieuing works; assuring himself, that God is not as Man,
that promises and performs not, but is absolute, to work by means, against
means, and without means, even what he will for his; setting before the eye
of his hope, Gods former favors and fatherly assistance, showed unto our
faithful Fathers of old; by whose example he seems to challenge at the
hands of God the like loving kindness, and that God will not suffer him
utterly to perish, putting his trust in him, although the World gaze on him and
deride him, as if he were a Monster, and no man: expostulating, as it were with
God, that forasmuch as he was cast upon him, as soon as he was borne, and he
only depending on his mercies, he cannot leave him in the deep, but rather,
for his own glories sake, lift him out of his calamities, lest the Righteous
faint also to see him still visited, notwithstanding his continual Prayers:
and that the wicked should thereby gather, that there is not a God that
regards the causes of poor Men.

The third Prayer: wherein he flies, and wholly relyeth upon God, and trusts
not in the help, nor fears the hurt of men.
O Lord, I cannot excuse mine evils, they are infinite in mine own eyes, and
many as gross which I have forgotten, and slightly past over, as if they were
no sins before thee: and therefore I appeal unto thy mercy for all: for by
mine own deserving or satisfaction, I can clear my self of none at all.

Who can rehearse or call to memory, all that he has done amiss before thee,
who keep account of the least sins? And therefore what avails it me to
justify my self, if I knew nothing by my self? It is thou that see and
iudgest: it is thou that have found matter enough to condemn me, and cause
enough to punish me: and therefore I have no means to be freed from thine anger,
and consequently from my miseries, but thy mercy only, in thy beloved Christ
Jesus.

Correct me not therefore, dear Father, as I deserve, but in him have
compassion upon me: and as for my reformation, thou beatest me with thy rod,
so for my preservation, hold me up by thy staff, that I be not confounded
utterly, or perish altogether.

Thou seem as if thou had utterly forsaken me: Oh, why art thou so far
from me in the woeful time of my troubles? Why stoppe^t thou thine ears at my
cry? Why do thou turn away thy face, when I offer the sacrifice of prayer
unto thee, and seem not to regard me, though I put my trust wholly in thee?

O come, Lord, come now at the last, perform thy promises of aid and comfort,
when most need is: for vain are the helps of flesh, weak is man's arm, and
his heart is not right in equity and judgment: therefore I trusting in thee
only, let me not be disappointed of my hope: let me not go mourning, by
reason of my miseries, and never find relief at thy hands.

Our Fathers trusted in thee, they called upon thee in their troubles and
dangers, and were delivered and freed from that which oppressed them: they
prayed unto thee, and were heard: they fought thee, and thou shewedst thy self
a helping Father unto them, even when they were ready to be swallowed up of
merciless waters.

Great was thy favor toward all our believing fathers: but alas, Lord, what
am I? I am a Worm and no Man, yet I believe, Lord, help mine unbelief: I am
covered with shame, be thou my glory, that I may glorify thee among the people
that now contemn me, because thou seem to hide thy face from me.

I am gazed on, and derided, scorned, and despised, because of my miseries: my
neighbors that should assist me, disdain me: my familiars that should
comfort me, do not only forsake me, but say of me, that all my hope is in
vain: my kinsfolks who should aid me in my necessities, add grief unto my
miseries, and tauntingly say, I am deservedly fallen, and cannot rise again.

Oh behold this, thou that sit on high, consider this, and instead of these
miseries (increased by such as should friendly visit me) stand thou by me,
and afford me the cup of thy salvation, that I tasting of it, may answer these
men, and say, as I am assured that my Redeemer lives, even thou my God,
merciful and all-sufficient, who art one and the same for ever.

I was cast upon thee as soon as I was borne, and thou receiuedst me: But the
faults of my youth, and the sins of my riper years, have caused a divorce
between thy love and my lewd life. I am sorry, dear Father, J am sorry for my
fault, take me again into the bosom of thy favor: and from hence forth be
present with me again, and let me only joy in obeying thee, and let my soul
take comfort of thee, and my whole man be relieved by thee; for besides thee I
have no helper.

Oh help thou me, and restore me to comfort again: banish all mine
afflictions as a mist, and refresh my soul with the timely dew of thy reliete,
power down the sweet drops of thy quickening Spirit, and let a comfortable
calm follow the fearful storms of this dangerous tempest.

And I will yield thee the praise, who art worthy of all praise, I will
magnify thy name that workest wonderful things, and bring to pass that
which the worldly ones cannot comprehend; I will declare thy name for ever
among the children of men. The righteous shall hear it, and be glad, and the
wicked shall quail to see me restored, whom they so long have scorned, and
deemed a castaway, because of my miseries.

For thine own names sake therefore, O Lord my God, hear my prayers, consider
my meditations, help me in time convenient, before I shall utterly, lest the
righteous be discouraged by my decay, and the ungodly take heart to persevere
the more in their obstinate and malicious ways, whilst they imagine there is
not a God, that respects the miseries of his distressed Children.

O Lord increase our Faith.
The Motive to the fourth Prayer.
Wherein the poor man shows his accustomed constancy and faith. And feeling
the weight of his crosses yet heavy, prays that he may not be utterly
consumed, nor that his enemies prevail against him, but rather God will
furnish him with such ability, as he may pacify them in paying all men their
due: and the rather, for that many do look upon his dangers, both the wicked
and the godly, the one in derision, the other in grief. These yet expect what
will be the issue of the poor man's crosses. But the godly wishing it to be
comfortable, he prays that they may see it come to a wished end, for
conformation of their hope in the like dangers: and because the poor man
finds his own infirmities, he prays for strength, and seeing his own
ignorance, prays for knowledge, and looking into his dullness, and cold
inclination to good things, prays for feruency and zeal: knowing assuredly,
that there is no way to attain unto delivery from thraldom, but to walk
rightly before the Lord, who is ready to set the just upon a sure rock,
against which the wicked cannot prevail. And although Father, Mother, Kinsmen
and Friends forsake him, he is assured the Lord supplieth them all, and by the
experience he has of the Lords readiness to help, having vpholden him in
former dangers, he will not fail him, nor forsake him, when he is ready to be
swallowed up of most merciless troubles.

The fourth Prayer: wherein he prays for faith, for zeal and strength, to
undergo Gods corrections, and to be delivered from the dangers prepared
against him.
LOrd, I lift up mine heart unto thoe, my soul trusts in thee, let me not be
confounded: let not men have their desires against me: let thy blessings be
powered down upon me, let thy cup of comfort and salvation be filled unto me,
and let thy right hand be ready and outstretched to hold me up, and in thy
providence furnish me with the hid treasures of thy love.

So shall I sit safely upon a sure rock, and be furnished with such things as
may pacify such as now are importunate with me for that which I cannot
perform: and resting in danger of their cruelties, have no other refuge, but
to depend on thy mercy and providence, wherein (as in a safe sanctuary) I shall
rest evermore preserved, until these dangers be ouerpast.

Many do look upon me, to see and consider what will become of my miseries,
and I continually plead thy free mercy in Christ, wherein thou promisest to
cover the multitude of my sins, for which I am thus afflicted: the righteous
thereby take hold of hope, and in my behalf wish a prosperous and happy end of
my destres, encouraging me to persevere; for that thy word, ever sure,
warranteth a timely delivery of all such as are penitent, patient, and
faithful unto the end.

But alas, good Father in Christ Jesus, I a most sinful man, do challenge no
comfort, ease, or relief in mine own right, but in the merits of him, in whom
thou art well pleased, and in whom thou show mercy unto sinners, among whom
I am the greatest.

Yea, Lord, I am ignorant of good things, and wander as a beast, by nature, in
the vast wilderness of this worlds vanities, having little or no taste of thy
saving truth, or feeling of future dangers; but of thee only I have knowledge,
of my self I am weak, but from thee I have all strength; of my self is
misery, from thee is mercy, of my self. I am altogether imperfect, but from
thee is all perfection, both inward, tending to the consolation of my said
soul, and outward, to the relief of my distressed body.

Therefore teach me, O Lord, teach me thy truth, show me thy ways, and lead
me in thy paths continually: withhold my heart from every evil thought, and
my hands that they commit no evil, keep mine eyes sincere, and my tongue that
it speak no unseemly thing, and my feet from falling.

Regard more not as I am in mine own self, nor deal with me as I deserve by
mine own ways, but according to thy tender mercies and loving kindness
banish my sins as a mist, drive away my imperfections as a cloud, and supply
my wants with timely relief.

Thou art righteous and gracious, and reformest sinners, and forgiuest their
sins. Be merciful therefore unto mine iniquities, for they are very great.
Keep my soul and deliver me, let me not be confounded, nor perish utterly,
for I trust in thee.

Thou art the light of my salvation, the strength of my life, and my refuge,
and sure defense in trouble.

In the time of my greatest dangers, thou shall hide me in thy tabernacle,
namely, in the secret places of thy providence, which no man can find out:
thou shall keep me, and hide me from them that covet my destruction: thou
shall set me upon a rock, against which man shall not prevail.

Harken therefore, O Lord, harken unto my voice, when I cry unto thee, have
mercy upon me, and comfort me.

Thou say, Seek ye my Face: And what is it, O Lord, but to seek thy help
in distress and danger? to crave thy favor and succor in the time of need.

O Father, my soul (by the privilege of thy free Spirit, which teaches truth
in the inner parts) is ready; my heart also is prepared to seek thee: my
tongue speaks unto thee, as unto the lively helper of all that are oppressed.

Hide not therefore thy face in displeasure, which in love thou willest me to
seek: be unto me as heretofore thou have been, my succor and shield, and
leave me not unto the end.

My natural father indeed that begat me, and my mother that bare me, may
forget me, my friends that pretend to favor me, may forsake me, when thou
rebukest me, but thou can not forget me, nor forsake me; for thou in thy
Word have promised the contrary; and therefore I will not fear to fly unto
thee, who give what earthly fathers cannot give, and supplyest my wants, that
neither my most familiar and my dearest friends can supply.

I should utterly faint, did I not verily trust in thee, and assuredly know
that thou have no respect of persons, and that thou acceptest not of men, as
the world does, by the outward habit and external glory, but the inward
parts, decked with faith, fear, and obedience thou likest, and embracest the
poorest for piety, and in the proud whom the world does reverence, thou have
no delight.

Frame thou therefore mine inward zeal, and let not my outward baseness
overmuch deprive me of some comfort among the children of men; and when I cry
unto thee, be not as men, who regard not the poor; but with speed hear and
consider, and refuse not to answer me with timely relief.

And let not the unsavory miseries of this life, accompanied with the natural
we akenesse of my flesh, draw me into the way of the wicked, but let me rather
hold fast by thy promised protection, as by the Altar of a lively ^^fuge.

^ow down thine ear, I ^ay. O Lord, and let me not for ever cry unto thee in
vain.

Draw me out of the net that is laid for me, deliver me from the dangers
prepared against me.

Thou have seen my troubles, and have known my soul in the bitterness of
distress, and yet thou have not utterly forsaken me, but in mercy have
mightily preserved me from infinite perils.

And now, Lord, even now, seeing my life wastes in heaviness, and my years
consume in forrow: since I am a reproach even among my neighbors, and all my
friends fail me: and since I am even at the point to perish, be pleased to
think of my miseries, and send me speedy relief.

As thy goodness, O Lord, is great, which thou have laid up as in a treasury,
for all that fear thee: so let thy mercy appear, and thy providence and power
toward me, be seen, among such as think indeed thou have forsaken me utterly.

O Lord increase my Faith.
The Motive to the fifth Prayer.
Wherein the poor man appealeth unto God, being stricken with a kind of
despair, because there be that say of him. There is no help for him in God:
he therefore not only cries unto God, that he will consider it, but he
himself also enters into the cause, why they so say, and finds it to be,
for that they see his store consumed, and his basket emptied, and his foes
furious against him: but he herewith not dismayed, reasons against these
men's infidelity; who, in these their allegations seem to deny, that either
there is a God, or that he cares for, or will, or can help the poor. And yet
he presumes not upon his own integrity, but confesses God to be just, and
rightly may punish sinners, among whom he is the greatest: and he finding this
temptation to be very grievous, he prays God to second his feeble nature, by
his free grace, and that he will stay him with his staff, while he corrects
him with his rod, because he is but a weak man, and may easily be burdened
above his own strength. But being assisted by God, he assures himself, that
no arm of flesh can prevail further against him, then shall be profitable for
him: nay, he is assured that it shall come so to pass, that even they that
most vpbraid him, shall acknowledge the mighty hand of God in delivering him,
and therefore determines to wait the good pleasure of God, when and how it
shall come to pass, and will not be discouraged though men say, There is no
help for him in God.

The fifth Prayer, wherein the poor man prays God to keep him from
despair, howsoever men go about to make him afraid.
IN thee, O Lord, I put my trust, and yet there are that say, There is no help
for me in thee: but thou art my God, how say they then, Thou can not help
me? since thou art most loving and absolutely all-sufficient.

I am indeed brought low and much weakened, I have no helper among the sons of
men. This they consider, that say, There is no help for me in thee.

They perceive that my baiket is empty, they see that my store is consumed, and
therefore they say, There is no help for me, nor recovery of me by thee.

I ponder these their words, O Lord, in my heart, and keep silence: I consider
their thoughts, yet faint I not: I mark what they speak of me, and yet I
despair not, for thou art my God, that can defend me, my Father that can
restore me and sustain me, thou art to me all in all: how say they then,
There is no help for me in thee?

Do not these men say in their hearts, Thou art not God, that thus diminish thy
power? and that thou art either unable, or unwilling to help the needy, and to
uphold thy distressed children? But as thou know them liers, so make them
know their vain conceits, by some sure token, that thou never faiisst them for
ever, that persevere constantly, and trust truly in thee unto the end.

Thou art indeed a jealous God, and punishest such as go^ astray; yet thou art
a loving God, and call thy chosen children from their evil ways, by a
gentle correction.

And therefore foolish and vnadussed are they, that measure thy favor toward
men, by the fullness of good things, tending to the saciety of fleshly desires,
and thy displeasure by want and affliction, that think that thou love them,
that thou feedest fat with the plenty of worldly riches and pleasures of this
life, and hate them that are low by crosses and corrections.

And great is this temptation (good father) unless thou second our feeble
natures by thy grace, being touched with thy correcting hand, stay me therefore,
O stay me, with thy staff, whilst thou smitest me with thy punishing rod.

Lay not upon me wretched man, a more heavy burden then I shall be able to
bear. And though thou see it most convenient for me to suffer want,
afflictions, crosses, and reproaches in this life, to the end that I be not
miscarried with the pleasing vanities of this World, yet withal consider, that
I am but a man, weak and unapt to bear the yoke of ouer-sharpe trials,
without such supply of thy blessed comfort, inward and outward, as may
maintain faith and bodily necessaries in me, and for me.

So shall I rejoice in my low estate, and no calamity shall bring me into
despair of thy provident protection: I shall be assured that thou art indeed
my God, and that whatsoever men say of me to the contrary, thou art and wilt be
my helper, in the time of my greatest need.

And then shall it come to pass, that even these men shall see how great thy
goodness is, which thou have in store for them that fear thee, and thy mercy,
which thou show them that trust in thee, even in the sight of the sons of
men.

They shall see and behold, how thou do seem to expose thy children, as it
were, to the fury and rage of the worlds miseries, and yet do hide them as
in a sacred Sanctuary, a place, whereunto the proud, and such as embrace
vanity, shall never come.

And such as now pursue me, either with hate or reproach, shall see in the end,
that there is help only in thee, and that no arm of flesh can prevail
against thee, O God, nor against them that trust in thee.

They shall say, when they see the issue of my hope to be good, and that my
prosperity is renewed, Lo, we thought this man mad, we deemed him a cast
away: but lo, the Lord, in whom he trusted, has made him to stand, and his
hand has brought to pass what he desired.

And I my self shall then consider that I erred, when rashly I said, I was
utterly cast down; for though when I cried, thou seemedst not to hear; when I
sought thee, thou seemedst to hide thee from me: and when I complained unto
thee, thou did not regard it: I shell then confess, that thy wisdom in
humbling me, thy mercy in sustaining me, and thy providence in relieuing me,
does pass the capacity of the wisest men.

Therefore (dear Father) I will yet wait that acceptable time, I will yet
attend thy good pleasure and will, and will not indent with thee when, nor
direct thee the manner how thou should help me: but submitting my self
unto thee, I will hold my peace, though men say yet of me, There is no help
for me in thee.

O Lord increase my Faith.
The Motive to the sixth Prayer.
THe poor Man finding the troubles of this life grievous unto him still,
begins his Prayer with a Meditation, wherein he desires to leave the Earth,
and earthly things, and to be with God, where all good things are; flying to
God with serious lamentations, for that God absenteth himself, and keeps
back his comforts, notwithstanding his long crying unto him. And therefore
heartily prays, that God will hear him, and help him now in the deepest of
his troubles: being become ignominious to the World, by reason of his miseries,
in so much as he is ashamed to be seen of men, and withal seems to be rapt
up with the contemplation of heaven and heavenly things. And standing thus
balanced between grief of his crosses, and joy of his comfort to come, he
resolves himself to endure for the time, and refers the end and managing
of his course to God alone, to whom he prays, that he will so much favor
him, as that he may receive such inward consolation, and outward comfort, as
he may have cause to begin his praise of God here, for his delivery promising
as it were in himself, that he will glory in nothing in this life (howsoever
he be advanced) but in God only. But fearing lest he should be deprived of
the occasion of praising God, for his help extended, he instantly beseeches
God, that as he is beaten down by his corrections, so he may be raised again
by his mercy and providence.

The sixth Prayer, to learn how to leave the world and worldly things, and to
desire heaven and heavenly things.
MY soul longs and thirsts for the living God, I desire to appear before
his glorious presence, that I may see the good things that he has laid up in
heaven for them that are his.

For I am weary of my groaning, I faint under the most cruel burden of the
miseries, which he, for my sins, has laid justly upon me here in this
mortal life.

O God, the Rock of my strength, Lord of mercy, why suffer thou (...) thus
to languish, and find no relief? why mourn I daily, and have no comfort? why
cry I unto thee, and thou hear not? why do my sorrows increase, ^^th I
seek thee unfeignedly?

Defend me, O defend me, in this time of my greatest danger, relieve me in
the time of my most need, preserve me from the merciless and cruel men,
feed me with the hid treasures of thy love, and multiply thy blessings upon
me; for I am poor, miserable, and past help, unless thou help me, and
sustain me, O Lord.

Be not far away from me, and put me not altogether to confusion: let me not
utterly perish, while there is none to help: I am ignominious in the sight of
all men, by reason of my miseries, and miserable, by reason of my sins: I am a
reproach unto my neighbors, and many jest and laugh at my fall.

Insomuch as I am ashamed to be seen of men, and wish I were able to fly out
of the earth, and that I might once be, where I might with joy behold thee in
thy triumphant Throne, where is neither hunger, nor thirst, nor nakedness, nor
want, nor ignominy, nor sin, nor death; but all fullness, and glory, and
truth, and joy, and life eternal.

O sweet being with thee! most happy dwelling and abiding with thee.

But lo, Lord, this place so glorious, these joys so sweet, and these
comforts so sure, are not attained unto, but with vnfauoury affliction in this
life. This future happy, and immortal life, cannot be without the death and
suffering of this mortal body.

And therefore, Father eternal, be it unto me in this frail life, even as
thou will, that I may possess thee, and the joys with thee, of eternal life.

Afford me thy favor: let me enjoy thy blessings, even here in this life,
that I may here begin to joy in thee, and here begin to praise thee among
the children of men, that they may see and consider, that though great are the
troubles, and miseries, and afflictions, which the Righteous suffer here, thou
yet deliuerest them out of all. So shall J also give thanks unto thee, thy
praise shall be in my mouth continually, my soul and m^ne inward parts shall
glory in thee, and glorify thee.

I will say unto thee, O mine hope and my fortress, thou art my God, in thee
will I trust: when thou shall make me glad again, I will be glad in thee; and
when I rejoice, I will rejoice in thee; for it is thy self only that
comfortest the abject, and deliuerest the poor from them that persecute them.

Awake therefore in time (O Lord) awake, preserve me, that I perish not in
these miseries, and lest I being as one forgotten and forsaken of thee, be
censured a castaway among such as see me: and so being deprived of the
occasion of praising thee for my delivery, I be driven from one sorrow to
another, and all my hope turned into distrust of any recovery. Hide not thou
therefore thy face, forget not my miseries, and be not careless of mine
afflictions for ever.

My soul is beaten down even to the dust; my heart faints, my hands become
weak, my knees wax feeble, mine eyes are dim, and all the parts of my body
are vexed, and I go continually mourning in my miseries.

O see and regard my miserable plight, look upon my griefs, and ease the
intolerable burdens of my calamities: for though thou have made a great wou^d
by thy corrections, yet, O Lord, thou can cure it again with spiritual
comfort, and not withold the outward good things, ordained for the comfort of
thy Children in this life.

Turn thy face unto me, which I instantly seek; send down thine aid, which
I heartily crave, and have mercy upon me, for I am most desolate and poor.

Rise up, O Lord, rise up, thou that art loving and bountiful: let me rise up
again by thee, that am thrown down by thee; and though my sins (as a
sword) have cut me from thy favor, let the righteousness of thy beloved unite
me unto thee again, in such sort, as nothing may separate me from thee for
ever.

O Lord increase my Faith.
A Motive to the seventh Prayer.
In which the poor distressed man shows his desire, to hold fast the
Promises of God, and to show himself thankful.
THE poor Man being lately in an extreme agony, near unto despair, by
reason of his sins and miseries, he here begins to rowze himself up again,
suddenly crying out, that the Lord is yet his hope, and therefore promises to
hold fast by him, and not to give over for ever: no, whatsoever troubles do
befall him, and miseries assail him: yea, howsoever the world and worldly
things be moved against him, he armeth himself with faith in God, to stand
with patience in all. Nay, such is his assurance of a more blessed being, after
this little time of trial, that he affirms these crosses that happen here,
to be but trifles, and of no weight to be borne, in respect of the future
happiness: yet because he will not seem senseless of Gods corrections, and
be idle in well doing, he still solliciteth the Lord for some tokens of his
love here; namely, that he will bind up his sores, and heal his wounds with
his holy help, and that he will renew him with spiritual understanding, and
cleanse his affections, that he may think, speak, and do all to the glory of
his name, and that his tongue may be an instrument to praise him before the
children of men, for his delivery, promising to continue constant till the time
appointed.

The seventh Prayer in distress.
O Lord, thou art yet my hope and strength, thou art a helper in trouble, and
do not hi^e thee for ever from thy distressed Children.

Therefore I will yet hold fast by thee, and will yet trust in thee, while I
live and have breath: I will not utterly faint, nor fear, though greater
storms yet arise th^n hither to I have endured: though the Earth tremble under
me, and all thy creatures rage round about me, I will say still, and confess
and acknowledge, that thou art my God, and therefore thou will not suffer me to
be utterly lost, or perish altogether.

No, Lord, though the earth be moved, and though the mountains be tumbled into
the midst of the Sea, though the waters roar and swell, and the lofty hills
tremble at the fury thereof: yet will I not be discouraged, because I have
thee my Salvation.

Should I then faint at the small afflictions, which as little darts, thou
shootest at me in love, not to kill me, but to put me in mind of my vanity
and forgetfulness of thee, to call me from mine errors of the truth, from
sin to salvation, and from death to eternal life? I must confess against my
self, that I have deserved the darts of eternal death, and to be shut out of
the land of the living: but mitigate thine anger, and turn thy heavy
displeasure into love and lively relief, and let me once taste, and be
refreshed with that comforting river, that makes glad thy distressed Children.

O God of hoasts, come and behold my desolation, and cause those thy deadly
darts, which so fast stick on me, by little and little to fall away, and cure
the wounds which thou have made.

Bind up the sores of my sorrowful soul, cleanse the corrupted affections of
my defiled heart, lighten the dim eyes of my dark understanding, wash me
thoroughly from mine iniquities, and purify me from sin.

Make me to hear joy and gladness again after my long mourning, give me
relief again after my long want, set me upon a sure rock, and plant me on a
fruitful ground, among the flourishing trees, that prosper by the sweet waters
of thy lively favor.

Oh cast me not away, dear Father, cast me not away from thy presence, restore
me rather to the glory of thy salvation, and establish me with thy free Spirit.

Lord, open my mouth, that my tongue may be an instrument to praise thee for
thy liberal relief, and ready help in my need and necessity.

So when thou shall renew my decayed store, and replenish my empty basket, when
thou shall yield comfort to my sad soul, and refresh my sorrowful heart, I
will surely utter forth thy praise with unfeigned lips, I will give glory unto
thy name, and publish thy mercy to all the world.

Oh ^e therefore unto me a speedy helper, delay not too long to come, my
salvation: for behold, I am in a miserable case, as thou well know, poor,
as thou see.

Reject not yet my petition, who cry instantly to thee for help, O help
before I perish utterly, hold me fast by thy hand, and lift me up again
before I fall altogether.

Thou have not promised, I know, that which thou will not perform, and
therefore I will wait faithfully, for the time is at hand that thou have
ordained for my delivery. And therefore by the privilege of a lively hope,
which will never make them ashamed that fix it on thee, I will persevere:
confirm my hope, and make it perfect, until I may enjoy the lively fruits of
thine assured salvation.

O Lord increase my Faith.
The Motive to the eight Prayer.
In which the poor distressed man craves pardon for his sins, the cause of
his miseries.
THe poor man, as it were ouer-charged with the burden of his miseries,
wishes himself wings to fly away from all occasions of calamities, but
forthwith checketh his rashness and folly, in seeming desirous to hide him
from God, that is every where, and can every where punish the transgressors of
his will. And therefore prays, that God will bridle his affections, and give
him patience, appealing unto the Almighty, who knows his desires to do well,
though the perverseness of his nature do draw him into things offensive: and
therefore disclaiming his own worthiness, craves pardon and mercy,
acknowledging the general weakness of all mankind, and his own to be the
greatest of all; and therefore prays for strength, for wisdom and
instruction, affirming him to be most happy indeed, whom he favors, by
reason of the infinite blessings that he even here enjoys in this mortal
life: although he withal cries out against the miseries that do still
oppress him, keeping fast hold through hope, that yet God will not suffer him
to perish, nor fall utterly, because he is a rock whereon the righteous, such
as do take hold of the death and passion of Christ, do rest most safe from al
dangers: and therefore concludes his Prayer with an instant Petition, that God
will give him a blessed end of his hope, that he may talk of his glory, and
sing of his praise, that all men may see by his example, that God respects
the cause of the needy.

The eight Prayer in distress.
OH that I had winge like a Dove then would I fly away from these troubles,
and make mine abode in the wilderness among the thick bushes and branches of the
Cedars, rather then to endure these intolerable miseries among the sons of
men.

But alas, Lord, what do I consult thus with the vain wisdom of flesh and
blood? thou art God, and were I in the Wilderness, thou art there; were I in
the uttermost parts of the earth, thou art there: were I on the highest
mountains, or in the bowels of the Earth, or in the Sea, or in the clouds,
thou art there, and can there also find me out, and there visit mine
iniquities with stripes, and my sins with scourges.

It booteth me not to covet to hide me from thee: better is it for me to
subject me unto thy will. And therefore bridle mine affections, tame the
unruliness and fierceness of my heart, reform the words of my mouth, teach
me right wisdom, and learn me true understanding: vouchsafe me perfect
patience, and then shall I be nearest unto that liberty which I long for, and
best freed from the dangers which I fear, and soonest enjoy the comforts that
I desire.

O make no long tarrying, O Lord, but hasten my deliverance: preserve me from
the furious storms and raging tempests that are yet ready to give my wearied
Soul a new encounter.

Wherefore have thou left unto us (by thy Word) a commandment to cast our
cares upon thee, and tolay our burdens upon thee, promising to comfort us and
to ease us? It is not to deceive, but to deliver us.

Thou see my desires, and know the secrets of my heart, and all (...)
ways are manifest before thee. If therefore I should justify my self, thou will condemn me: if I hide my sins, thou find out my corruptions, and
that all my righteousness is worse then vanity it self.

And therefore disclayming mine integrity, I crave pardon; and ask mercy,
wherein thou art rich, and whereof thou art most bountiful, even to such as
acknowledge their own weakness, wants and wickedness.

To thy mercy I appeal, I fly unto thee, I depend on thee, I lay my burden
upon thee, fearing thee, and reuerencing thee, loving thee, and trusting in
thee.

What imperfections, O Lord, see thou in me, for which thou should thus
afflict me? O wretch that I am, amost wicked one, a corrupted one, defiled
within and without, how can I plead any good duties done unto thee?

But, good Father, thou art not ignorant of the general vanity of man, who is
evil in his best ways, and the most pure of us is imperfect. Pardon then my
weakness, and give me that strength, and that zeal, and that obedience, and
that perfect love, that thou requirest.

Be unto me a Father to instruct me in true wisdom; be unto me a guide, to
lead me in that way that leads unto life, that after my long estraying from
thee, I may be at last brought home to thy blessed favor again, wherein is
life, and liberty, and comfort, and fullness, and joy, and rest, and peace for
ever.

Oh happy is he, that is in thy protection, most happy is he whom thou
fauourest: for he is wise, he is strong, he is godly, he is fed, he is clad,
he is safe, and he is rich in every good thing.

When he calls, thou hear, when he asks, thou give; when he seeks,
he finds; when he is sick, thou curest him; when he is poor, thou
prouidest for him, when he is sad, thou comfortest him; when he is weary, thou
easest him: when he hungreth, thou feedest him: when he is in trouble, thou
defendest him: when he is in danger, thou preseruest him: when he is hated,
thou love him: and when he is dead, he then enters into that life which is
eternal, and then partaketh of the joys which are unspeakable.

Oh, accept me into this favor, wherein are so many blessings certain:
furnish me with these blessings, wherein are so sweet contentations, and
bestow on me those graces that make the most despised in the world most
honorable with thee. So shall my sorrows be turned into joy, my want into
sufficiency, my tears into gladness, and all my miseries into godly mirth.

Deliver my soul from death, keep my feet from sliding, let me walk
righteously before thee, and call instantly upon thee, who performest thy
promises, and suffer none to depart empty away, that seek thee with their
whole hearts.

Oh send therefore, and save me from them that would devour me, and from
that which afflicts me; for my soul is among Lions; I wade as through a
raging sea: I dwell among men set on fire against me, whose teeth are spears,
and whose tongues are as a two edged sword: let thy mercy therefore and truth be
my shield and buckler.

Thou have ever been mine hope, help me therefore, and let not my troubles
increase, renew my joys, and set me upon the rock of neuer-failing relief,
and let my rest and refuge be for ever under the shadow of thy protection.

Bring to pass what is fit for me, and which thou know expedient; let the
righteous see the blessed end of my hope, that they may likewise talk of thy
glory, and speak of thy praise.

And all men shall say, Verily, there is fruit for the righteous: doubtless,
there is a God that works good for them that are of a perfect heart.

O Lord increase my Faith.
The Motive to the ninth Prayer, for assurance of Gods Providence.
THe poor man, notwithstanding his present heavy burden of affliction, has
and feels in himself an inward instinct of comfort, and in mere zeal of
Gods glory, breaks out into an admiration, as it were, of his infinite
Majesty, power and excellency, and consequently, recounteth the innumerable
blessings, and infinite mercies of the Lord: who, so regards the frailty of
man, as he seems to wink at his many evils, confessing it the mere
kindness, and free favor of God, that all mankind is not confounded for
disobedience; laying upon himself the guilt of his own sins, for which,
beyond all other, the Lord may justly punish him; acknowledging that he more
offends God by his sins, then he can appease him with his Prayers, and does
more move him to anger by his transgressions, then he can please him by his
best zeal: And yet he longs still to be at one with God, in whom he knows
there is mercy and love, and liberty, and relief: In hope whereof, and that
God will remember his loving kindness again toward him, he will yet trust
and pray, and be patient. And yet seeing his corruptions still strong to beat
down his faith in God, prays God to bridle his ungodly affections, lest he
fear overmuch, and so faint and give over his suite; and desires by the
examples of Ioh, Joseph and David, and other godly Fathers, that endured their
troubles patiently, he may likewise be patient unto the end. And thus rowzing
up his dead thoughts, and sorrowful soul, with the sweet consideration of
infinite comforts (which his loving God has ever, and does daily bestow upon
his poor oppressed children) he resolves not to faint.

The ninth Prayer, in which the poor distressed Man acknowledges, that though
God do deservedly punish him, yet he assures himself that God will relieve
him.
O Lord my God, thy name is most excellent in all the World, thy glory is
spread abroad through the Heavens, and thy praise is uttered by all thy
Creatures, as in an universal harmony, through Heaven and Earth.

For thy mercies are infinite, and thy blessings without number, that thou have
best owed upon them all, especially upon the Children of men, who yet among all
other Creatures, are most forgetful, and aptest to break out into strongest
disobedience against thy Majesty: and of thy free favor and mercy it is, that
all Adams issue is not utterly rooted out of the Land of the living.

And I for my part (Father most loving) cannot hold my self guiltless of
infinite evils, whereby I have yielded greatest cause among many, that thou
should punish even the whole World for disobedience: but my self especially
I confess worthy of my miseries, and not to deserve the use of the Air to
breathe in, nor of any of thy creatures to be comforted by them.

Worthily therefore have thou afflicted me, and worthily may thou still visit
me: for I see I do rather more incense thee by my sins, then appea^e thee by
my prayers; I more offend th^e by transgressions, then I can please thee by my
best zeal.

I faint at mine own unworthiness, yet feign would I be at one with thee, in
whom is only safety and succor, and assured salvation, to them that truly
reform their lives, and rightly frame their repentance, and sincerely follow
thy will, which is thine own gift.

All this I desire to perform, and distrust thee not: for thou have promised
pardon to the penitent, and relief to the lowly, and to be with them that
seek thee, and to hold them up that hold by thee, and to instruct them that
seek wisdom of thee.

Forasmuch therefore, as I have so long cried unto thee, and so long sought
thee, I will yet hope, though I shut up my sad soul in si^ence, only unto
thee, who well co^siderest the inward gro^es, and rightly ponderest the
sorrows, and sighs, and wants, and desires of thy distressed Children, though
they seem mute in their lips, and to speak nothing with their tongues.

If thou might at all have been pleased to hear by earnest cries, thou
might have heard me: if it might have pleased thee to succor me by earnest
desires, I might have been relieved. But lo^, the time is not yet come, that
thou have appointed for my delivery, and therefore I will still wait, and not
be weary; for my help, and my comfort, and my life, and my salvation depends
on thee.

O brible therefore all ungodly affections in me: let me neither murmr, nor
grudge, nor fear, nor faint, but with patience (in well doing) tarry till thou
have decreed to have mercy upon me.

For, is there not an appointed time for all things* Job was brought low by
thee: yet at thine appointed time lifted up again. Joseph was long afflicted
in prison; yet when thou saw the time, he was advanced again. Thy dear
David was long and fiercely persecuted, yet at length established in his
desired dignity.

When the poor ^iddow was even at the end of her hope of further relief, her
cruze of Oil being emptied, and her vessel of Meal spent, even then did
thou send her a relieuing guest, by whom thou gave her increase of necessary
succor.

Therefore yet a little while, and my appointed time will come, wherein I shall
be also delivered out of all my miseries.

Yea, thou art my strength, and my portion, and my defense, and my salvation:
thou ^eest my miseries what they are, and how many they be, and how heavy they
lie upon me: for thou that sendest them, art not ignorant of them; and thou
that made me, well know what is fittest to preserve me.

I am brought to the very Pit of confusion, as the natural man deemeth; but
thou have decreed the time of my delivery, to me unknown, that when it
comes, I may rejoice in thee, and not attribute my recovery to the fleshly
aid of mortal men, which I have sought in vain; yea, while I ca^^ed
instantly upon there, that I might acknowledge all help to proceed from thee,
and all that the world affords, to be but the effects of thy love, of thy
power, and of thy providence.

O, blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to come unto thee by
afflictions: for although he seems to be a companion of Death, yet he lives
by the secret sweetness of the pleasures of thy inward consolation, and safely
dwells in the Courts of thy protection, f^^ding on the lively assurance of
thy Providence and Love, and sainteth not at any frown of the might^est on
earth.

So am I assured, O Lord, that thou art my portion, and thou tendrest me as a
son, though thou visit me with thy Rod, as a sinner: and that thou will not
suffer me to fall utterly, though thou seem to correct me sharply.

Although I seem to be deprived of all hope of recovery of my wonted comfort,
because I see no ready mean before my eyes, nor present likelihood:
notwithstanding my long and instant cries, I will not shrink, knowing this,
that thy love is infinite, thy power wonderful, and thy providence past
finding out.

For if the stony Rock, and the withered Jow-bone; could yield water to
refresh the thirsty: if thou could send Manna from heaven, and meat by a
^a^en, and feed so many thousand people with little show of bread: if thou
could send Quails so plentifully in the Desert, with infinite other things,
miraculously for thy distressed Children: confirm my Faith evermore, that I
may constantly believe, that thou both can, and will in thy good time relieve
me.

All power belongs unto thee: who then will say, or who can imagine that thou
can not help when most need is? who will say thou have not love, since thou
so freely have done these many and mighty things for thy distressed Children,
that could not relieve themselves?

But lo (Lord) all things are thine, the Heavens are thine, and the Earth is
thine, the Cattle in the fields, the Fowls on the Mountains, the Gold and
Silver, and all that is above us or beneath us, is thine: who then can say,
thou can not give and bestow on whom thou will, what thou wist, when thou will?

Thou make the Corn to grow, and waterest the Earth with thy sweet showers
from above, so that even the Beasts also of the field are fed, as by the dew of
Heaven.

Since then that thou art Lord of all, and since thou command and forbiddest,
since thou make poor and enrichest, since thou throwest down and aduancest,
since thou triest and rewardest, and since thou do what thou will, in what
manner thou will, to whom thou will, and when thou will, and no man can command
thee or forbid thee; I yield me wholly to thy will, and crave only to will as
thou willest, and do as thou directest in all things. Be it thus, dear
Father, for his merits that thou most dearly love, that died, and rose
again for all, and who sits with thee, a Mediator for all: for his sake, O
Father, hear and help me in time convenient.

Amen.
O Lord increase my Faith.
A Motive to thankfulness to GOD, for Comfort and Relief received of him,
after long praying unto him in the time of necessity and affliction.
PSALM. 28. 7. The Lord is my strength and my shield, my heart trusts in him,
and I was helped therefore my heart shall rejoice, and with my tongue will I
praise him.
AS no man knows how profitable a thing physic is, but he that has been
sick, and has been eased by it, nor of what value faithful friends are, but
he that has been brought to extreme need, and tasted of their help: so none
can sufficiently comprehend, how great the goodness of God is, but such as have
been tried by some affliction, and felt grievous calamity, and have been
delivered by God, out of their dangers, and miseries, or in some measure been
eased. And if he that in sickness has received health by physic: if he that
in his great necessity and want has bin relieved by friends, do not
acknowledge the benefit received by either of them, will not all men of civil
carriage condemn them of ingratitude? So, and far more, worthy is he to be
condemned, that being afflicted by whatsoever means, and is delivered by the
providence and favor of God, if he stand silent and mute, not endeavoring to
give God the praise and glory of his delivery. This I confess is my case, and
no doubt there is no man exempted out of the number of them, whom God has
delivered out of one danger, and affliction, or another: But some being blind
of that side, see no other means of their delivery, but their selfe-wit,
policy, strength, or carnal means, never turning eye to the true help, the
power and providence of God: and that is the cause why (as there were of ten
Lepers, but one returned to give thanks to Christ) so few, scarcely one of ten
that receive blessings and comforts at the hands of God, return thanks truly
to God for the same, and yet there is not one of what estate, degree, or
profession he be of, but must (if he be not an Atheist) acknowledge himself a
debtor unto God in this behalf, who requires but only thankfulness for all
his benefits. Some may say, they were never afflicted, never oppressed, never
distressed, never in danger, for they have had continual prosperity, and
therefore could never observe, wherein God has showed them any such needful
deliverance: some are borne noble, some left rich, many preferred to Offices,
and that immediately of their Parents, Friends, or themselves, never conceiving
that the hand of God had a share in these. And therefore (it to any) they give
the glory to the wrong means, forgetting their Creator, by whom they were
made, preserved, and by whom they were (indeed) preferred to place of dignity
or profit, by whom they were taught and instructed in the mysteries, whereby
they become glorious in the ^orld, and so become graceless usurpers of Gods
gracious and free blessings: in recompense whereof it is often observed, that
God (as it were) winking at their vanities for a time, permits them to run
their own race, until they fall into some apparent dangers: as some into
want, some into disgrace, some into sickness, some into the hands of Enemies,
some into gross fatuity and foolishnes. In all which they run unto their
former vain considerations, seeking redress by wrong means, and finding
none, they then consult with some better guide, who set them in the way to
seek God, who being merciful, refuses not to be their refuge that come unto
him, at length, by faith in prayer, who yet will seem not to hear them by and
by, when they speak unto him, nor to give what, and when they ask, to make
them the more earnest and seruent in asking, and finding at the length Gods
favor, and receiving in some measure what they want, then the upright in heart
(as David says,) become thankful, having gotten comfort from the Lord, they
willingly give him the glory: the true Children of God cannot rest contented,
when God has refreshed them with his mercies, till they have truly given the
Lord again his due praises: a mark to distinguish the Children of God from
the wicked, who swallow up all Gods blessings, namely the profitable and
pleasing things of this life, ascribing the glory, and doing their Sacrifices
(as it were) unto their own arms for the same: what blessings soever God does
bestow upon them, they are never the fuller of thankfulness, nor made thereby
the more obedient to God, like the Lake Asphaltis or the dead Sea, whereinto
Jordan runs, the water of it self being salt, becomes nothing the fresher
by the sweetness of the quality, nor the bigger by the quantity of the
water of Jordan; they take from the Lord without giving again, like barren and
unprofitable ground, that receives the seed, but returns none, and
therefore is near unto burning (as the Prophet Hosea says) whose end is to be
burned. Let us therefore learn to be thankful to God for every benefit
received of God, which if it increases not thankfulness, it increases
judgment. It is a dangerous thing to forget God, in thanksgiving, neglecting
heaven, and heavenly things, and to mind the world only and worldly things,
they that preach unto themselves peace, without peace with God, in what outward
state of contentment soever they stand in their own conceits, and in the view
and admiration of men, they be but in slippery state, though they seem to have
no occasion to fly unto God for succor; they are in deeper danger then he,
whose estate without seems most dangerous, who yet within has an assurance
of the help of Jehovah. Such as to whom Christ spoke, Ioh. 16. Verily, verily,
I say unto you, ye shall weep and lament, but the world (such as have all
things in the world at their desires) shall rejoice, and ye shall sorrow, but
your sorrow shall be turned into joy.

You shall be delivered from all your dangers wherein you shall rejoice, and
glorify God for your deliverance, whereas this sentence being turned contrary,
may be applied unto such as forgetting their duties and thankfulness to God,
because they are full, and think they have no need of Gods assistance;
Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye shall rejoice and triumph, but the godly
shall lament and mourn, ye shall laugh, but your laughter shall be turned into
weeping.

But I will leave the ungrateful Worldlings, whom not I, but God will judge,
and will only seeks to stir up my self and others that are afflicted to fly
unto God, as I have done, assuring them in the good time they shall be
comforted. And let patience have it true work in you that are in any
aifliction, and let true thankfulness appear in you, that have been any way
comforted by the Lord. Patience and Thankfulness are qualities, or rather
virtues, observed only in the Children of God, yet are they not in these
accounted fools or mad men? for if a man that fears God fall into penury,
poverty, want, or into any kind of misery, or is ouer-taken with any strong
temptation, or tried by Gods visitation, he is censured according to the
natural and caruall opinions of the worldly minded; who as they are blind in
heavenly things, as in the secret disposition of the things of God, so judge
they amiss of the man afflicted, holding him as a man accursed of God, because
he is chastened of God: and themselves, whose matters prosper well in the world,
to be only blessed as by desert: and this breeds such coniempt of the rich
toward the poor fearing God, and this usurps such reverence of the poor
toward the rich, both which especially proceed of an ouer-good opinion that
the rich have of themselves, and of a base conceit they have of such as are of
law estate, though they be the dearest children of God: which in the rich is
arrogance, and in the poor fearing God, humility: yet it often comes to
pass, that the rich are made poor, the high are ^ade low, and the most
glorious become despised: and again, the poor are made rich, the lowly
exalted, and such as were before despised, become honorable even among men,
according to the saying of the blessed Wirgin: The Lord shows strength with
his a^me, he scatt^reth the proud in the imaginations of their hearts, he
puts down the mighty from their seats, and exalts the humble and meek, he
fills the hungry with good things, and sends the rich empty away. These are
the works of Gods justice and providence: his justice then shows it self,
when he plucketh down the ungrateful arrogant, and his providence in
providing for, and exalting the faithfully thankful poor man.

The first cannot pretend injustice or wrong in God, for taking away from him
that which he falsely suggested to be his, in such sort, as he was not beholden
to God for it: neither can the other (nor will he) assume unto himself merit
to have that bestowed upon him by desert, which he cannot but acknowledge, and
thankfully accept to be the free gift of God: as God is ^ust, so is he
merciful, and even in this case of his justice he shows mercy, to the end
men may seek and find mercy: and in this case of his providence he
confirms his mercy, and performs his promise: the one to move to
thankfulness, the other to increase and continue it: he interrupteth the
haughty and high-minded in the way of their pride, fatherly to reclaim them
from the way of death, the end of Gods corrections. The godliest men are many
times, and by many means likewise plunged in dangers, but they feel in their
sharpest afflictions sweetest comforts: for though they feel the rod of Gods
correcting hand, yet they hold fast by the staff of his mercy, praying unto
God for delivery, not as they will, but as the Lord will: not for their own
private benefit only, but also, and especially, that his glory and power, by
their deliverance, might be the more celebrated of all that fear him: for
there is not a more forcible inducement of imitation then success: when men
see the issue of another man's course, they will in discretion follow or
forsake, as is the profit or danger, especially men of one profession, observe
time, and mean, and matter, and place, and person, of precedent good or evil:
and by the same endeavor to frame and shape unto themselves a course answerable
for their own private commodities, this is the manner of worldlings: and shall
not the children of God make use of other men's most blessed success, of
faithful prayer for delivery out of their miseries* who being in danger,
seeing before his eyes the manner how another in like peril was delivered, and
will not seek the same way to be relieved? It is the nature of true godliness
to publish every benefit received at the hands of God, as David in many places
by his own example, and many other holy men have done: and left their examples
for us to follow, to the end that all, were it possible, might be partakers of
the knowledge of Gods providence and love toward all that seek him with a
true zeal, contrary to the course of worldly men, who covet to conceal the
means whereby they atchieue commodities, not willing that any should partake
of their gain. The man of God having that celestial Jewel in what measure
soever, willingly and freely makes all others that are desirous, partakers of
it, that all may grow likewise rich in the same faith, knowledge, and virtue
with him; the godly much rejoice in him that most excels in divine virtues,
notdisdaining any for his poverty or baseness of his worldly estate, but
embracing the poverty of the body, and the estate of outward wants, in regard
of the inward riches of the mind: for as he that seems rich in outward
things, may be indeed a banckerupt; so he that is poor in carnal things,
may be rich in heavenly: else were the miserable poor man more wretched then
any creature, that walks or creeps upon the earth, flies in the air, or
that floateth in the waters: of whom all have a contented being; but the poor
oppressed man has no comfort at all, if he be not inwardly comforted of God:
in whom if he be truly comforted, his comfort is beyond all that the world can
afford.

The worldly farmer, the rich Merchant, the gallant Gentleman, the honorable
person, and the greatest Monarch without the same, has no true comfort, but
earthly and vanishing shaddows of things without true comfort or continuance:
yet is not this so taken, nor so accounted; for the glorious having only
terrene reverence, receive their glory from the basest: but the poor despised,
having confidence in God, have their glory from above: whereunto no earthly
honor can compare. This then may work in them patience to bear the burden of
misery, here for a while, and for every small benefit or blessing which God
shall bestow upon them to be truly thankful, and yet not to deiect themselves,
and be so careless of their estates, as to neglect all lawful means of
worldly prosperity, because poverty, affliction, and persecution in the godly,
seem to be a glorious title, bearing as it were, the Cross of Christ thereby.
But so far to endeavor to atchieue necessary ability and outward peace, as
that ambition may be far from the thought in desiring; and avarice in using,
or repineth against what God sends. And to be careful, diligent, and
faithful in the execution of their callings, praying for a blessing at the
hands of God: and if endeavors prosper, always to return for all things
praises unto God, that makes all things prosper unto us: and if the industry
of our bodies, and the continual care of our hearts cannot attain to that
which we think fit, we must rest contented with the portion allotted by him
unto us, who knows better what is fit for us, then we our selves, and yet
never to give over praying unto the great giver, who will never fail to add
more and more comfort, as he sees most just occasion, best known to
himself, and can turn all our crosses and deepest afflictions to our greatest
consolation, when the best and most pleasing earthly delights tend to the evil
of such as have them, and either abuse them, or be not thankful for them.
Such as are ignorant of the discipline which God uses to instruct and educate
his children, can conceive of no comfort in crosses, berause as they are
strangers from the School of God, so learn they not the things belonging to
such as are Gods di^ciples: but condemn what is to be approved, and approve
what is to be condemned; holding no man happy, but he that prospers in his
ways, and he to whom all things succeed according to his hearts desire, when
indeed nothing is more dangerous, then fullness of all things, which breeds
security, and security kills all other virtues, and reuiueth all vices:
carnal security plucketh up faith (as it were) by the roots, Faith being the
tree of all virtues, it dying, Neglect of God, and all goodness, begins to
branch, and bears Forgetfulness of duty to God and men. Where then is
thankfulness? Where is giving Glory to God? Where is prayer and seeking to
God for blessings, when he finds no cause to ask, for what he supposes he
inioyeth? blessing himself in his own wretched estate, which he foolishly
deemeth a most warthy and incomparable portion. But he that is godly,
abandoneth all carnal security, acknowledging himself ever in so great
danger, as when he carnally thinks himself most safe, and therefore takes
continual occasion to fly unto God for daily supply of daily wants, having no
assurance of the continuance of any earthly thing, but from day to day: and
therefore daily and hourly acknowledges the goodness of God, in giving him
what he daily enjoys. He forgets not that all things that he has, he
has from God, his creation, his life, the use of all his limbs, his senses,
his food, his raiment, his health, his ableness to perform the least duty in
his calling, and whatsoever else, inward or outward, he holds them at the
will of the Almighty, to whom he prays for all graces and divine virtues,
that he may be furnished with that riches that none can possess, but such as
have them from that great God, who gives to them that ask, and vpbraideth no
man, neither denies he any man's request, if it be according to his will
revealed in his word: and for all that he gives, requires only true
thankfulness for requital: not that thankfulness, which some carnally minded
rich men would seem to afford him, a cap veiled with both the hands, with
words only, I thank God: This may be counterfeit and lip-thankefulnesse,
which God respects as the offering of hypocrites. The organs of the tongue and
lips are necessary instruments to declare the meaning of the heart, if they
move by the power of a feeling spirit: but if the mouth speak in these divine
offices what the heart inforceth not, it shall not only not profit, but witness
against the heart and conscience that deep dissimulation before men, and
hypocrisy before God, that shall work their own just condemnation. But we
must fall down upon the knees, not only of the outward body, but of a lively
feeling heart, and acknowledge that all we have received, to be his blessing
and especial gift: which if we can rightly perform, it will follow, that of
the same faith will proceed with words of thankfulness, works of obedience,
which God accepts above all sacrifices whatsoever. But who so still asks
and receives blessings, and only says, They are the gifts of God, and
disposes of them contrary to the rule which God has prescribed in his Word,
that thankfulness will return into his bosom as sin, and he be imputed a
plain usurper of his blessings. For, as when a man by fair and flattering
means obtains any thing of his friends, and having obtained it, rejects
the kindness of the giver, and becomes ungrateful and unkind, what is it
but mere extorting of the thing obtained? Although the all-seeing eye of God
fore-seeth the heart, and knows how and to what end we ask, whether for our
own gain, or his glory: and he often bestows great benefits upon men,
never desiring them in open speech. The very groans of the heart ascend unto
God, and God is moved even with the mere desires, and that oftentimes when
they proceed not of faith; yea, he grants the very things that the wicked
long for, but not for their comfort, only to fulfill their carnal appetites,
to make them so much the more beholden to him, for their worldly and corporal
prosperity, and makes their condemnation so much the more just, by how much
they are inexcusable, for not serving God in true obedience, which is the sum
of most acceptable thankfulness for all blessings. It is the nature of al
men, to covet earthly things, which we see God gives to the evil as well,
and in greater measure then to the godly: yet are the godly far more
thankful for their smallest, then the wicked for their greatest portions;
which last do hunger and thirst continually to add more and more corporal
means unto what they have: and no abundance can make a stay to their coveting,
neither can there be satisfaction to the covetous. And howsoever it increase,
all their thankfulness is swallowed up in their Chests, or cast upon their
fields, given to their wits, to their Art, or drowned in their vanities, the
back and belly have their condign gratifications of the most, and they are
most beholding to some, who rest as much indebted unto these two, in answering
their necessities, as unto God, in a sort, to whom they owe many, and will
never pay any thanks. And yet the prophanest of these will say, that all the
things they enjoy, are the gifts of God. But as for the cordial and true
thankfulness, it is a language unknown unto them. The blessings of God to
many, may be compared to sweet showers, and our hearts to dry ground, receiving
them to refresh it when it is weary, but returning no drops back again: no
more do unthankful men return condign thanks for Gods greatest benefits,
but as the Sun by his force and exhalations, draws up the moistures of the
ungrateful earth by force, so when men can keep their usurped and extorted
earthly blessings no longer, then they bestow them, and yet oftentimes not at
all consulting with the true owner, God the lender, but bestow them to some
such ends as are displeasing unto him, as was their former abusing them. They
dispose of them by their wills, as it were against their wills: their Testaments
are as testimonies of their unwillingness to leave what they so dearly loved,
which proves their gross ingratitude, even in their last conflict with death,
who commonly is not so cruel an Enemy, but he tells a man by one token or
another, that he must prepare himself to endure his encounter, sometimes many
days, many months, and often many years before he show his uttermost force:
in all which time, the most forgetful and most unthankful man might call
himself to mind, and consult and consider wherefore, and by whom the things
he enjoys were bestowed upon him: if by his own deserts, or by his own
mere industry, let him then kiss his own hand, as the author of his
happiness: but if it came of the free gift and mere benevolence of God, let
him rather cut off his hands, then rest unthankful to God, who can turn (as
we see) wealth into wretchedness, mirth into mourning, health into sickness,
strength into weakness, and all whatsoever a man in this world delights in,
into bitterness and wormwood: all which may be assured to turn to their good,
whosoever rest patient and thankful. Who then will not afford so small a
recompense for so great blessings?

And all thankfulness is comprehended under this one word Obedience.
Sacrifices were acceptable duties done in their time unto God, but obedience is
more acceptable then all other kinds of sacrifices. This obedience consisieth
not in the outward ceremonies of performing only the outward duties required
at our hands, as to live in this World without doing hurt to others, in paying
that we owe, in doing good to such as do us service, and to love them that
love us: but in doing good to them that do us hurt, in giving them that take
from us, in forgiving them that offend us, in loving them that hate us, in
feeding them that we see hunger-starued, in clothing them that we see want
their corporal covering, in comforting the sad and ^rowfull, in visiting such,
both with counsel and aid, that have not their wished liberty of Body or
Mind, and in performing such other offices of Christian commiseration and
piety, as are commanded us in the Word of God, to be done toward our Brethren
and Neighbors. These are outward works, which being performed by a feeling
heart, touched with the Spirit of God, are sweet sacrifices to God, and are
accepted of God, as that true thankfulness, which God requires in recompense
of our abundance, which God so freely and lovingly bestows upon us above
others in this life: and for his spiritual gifts and blessings, as the
blessing of the inward peace of conscience, the blessing of the knowledge of
his Word and Testimonies, the benefit of Faith, of Repentance, and of other
divine graces, he only requires the true use of them, as to love him above
all things, to live in sobriety, temperance, in his fear, in the exercise of
true religion, in prayer, in hearing his Word preached, in reading the same
with reverence, in continual going forward from faith to faith, from one
heavenly virtue to another, and in behauing our hearts inwardly, in such a
lively and willing remembrance, and execution of his divine Will, as nothing
may miscarry us from what he has commanded, or draw us into what he has
forbidden.

Thus if he find us prepared, he will then, as he has promised, bless us
more and more, and give and bestow upon us, more and more of his spiritual
benefits, and add unto our stock and store such abundance of all necessary
outward things of this life, as we shall not only be able to feed, cloathe,
maintain, and relieve our selves with wished contentment, but will give such
continual increase, as we shall be able to perform these former duties to his
needy members, and there by not only testify to the World our Faith by our
works, who will glorify God for us: but God shall see our faith in him, and
approve our outward works amongst men, to be good by our faith. These being
the fruits of true obedience, and obedience the most acceptable sacrifice of
thankfulness, a work not only not painful or tedious, but most sweet unto
the soul, let us unbrace it as the true wisdom, which, for the sweetness,
passes the honey and the hony-combe, and for preciousnesse and worth, of more
value then the finest gold, or dearest earthly Jewels. Who will not then apply
his heart unto this most acceptable thankfulness, to which is promised a new
and daily renewing of blessings, one blessing shall follow another, as the sweet
drops of the morning dew: happy is the man that is in such a case. But most
unhappy the man forgetting God, and Gods benefits, nay, who offers the
sacrifice of praise in a false, or a cold, or counterfeit manner, as Cain did,
who would be seen to give unto God part of his earthly abundance, but because
it was done with no true affection, it was not accepted: no more are these
unworthy praises, which many worldlings seem to flatter God withal, offering
the Sacrifices not of idle, but of hateful fools, though in common speech
they can make semblance of great piety: As when they speak of Gods blessings,
the increase of their Corn, Oil, and Wine, the prosperity of their Cattle,
the long continuance of the health of their bodies, good success in their
affairs, they can use an outward kind of humiliation, bowing their
counterfeit knee, and ^ailing their dissembling ^onnet; as if the true praise
of God consisted in these ceremonies, when indeed their hearts are full of
^^arice, their hands of Bribes, and their lips of dissimulation Has God
respect to these kinds of offerings* No, he accepts the obedience to his
will: and his will is, that thankfulness to him (being in heaven not seen)
should begin in earth, in doing good to our brethren whom we daily see: else
though God vouchsafe to se^ (as he did upon Cain) a mark upon such
ungrateful dissemblers, that they come not into misfortune in this life, like
other men, yet it shall be a mark of their reprobation, which they shall carry
with them to their eternal graves. Had not the men of the old world great
blessings at the hands of God? But where was their thankfulness? The earth
was full of cruelty: a base recompense for so many blessings: yet did think
themselves very secure: yea, when God in his secret Justice prepared their
general confusion. Was God so strict in observing, and so severe in punishing
the whole world for unthankfulness, having but the Law of nature their guide?
and will he be less to a stiff-necked people, or to one disobedient person,
having the use of his word* Is not man's unthankfulness toward man, censured in
most evil part by man? how much more man's unthankfulness to God? Laban found
great benefit, and many blessings to grow unto him in his earthly estate, by
Jacobs faithful and true service, yet how unkindly did he reward him? Genesis 31.
2. Yet see the mercies of the Lord, who seeing thankful Jacobs afflicted
heart, under his ungrateful and severe Master, wrought his delivery, and sent
him from cruel Laban, rich. But did Jacob attribute his success, and increase
of his wealth, to proceed from his care and industry* or did he attribute it
to his ^rt of speckled Rods* No, he confessed by whose means he was so
blessed, namely, by God, to whom, as to the Author of all the good that befell
him, he gave the glory, saying, (at his return) Over this Brook I came with
my staff and scrippe only; but lo^, Lord, I now return with mighty Droues.
Here was the true and lively image of the Sacrifice of praise in godly jacob*
and the very picture of ingratitude in unthankful Laban, giving thanks
neither to God nor Men, for his prosperity.

Many Labans now live, that receive the benefits of poor men's travels and
endeauours, and at the hand of God, rich blessings; and yet they will not
admit, either the help of man, nor the providence of God, to be the means of
their advancement, but their own wit, policy, desert, or humane friendship:
and to defend their gross and (...) ingratitude, ^^icke not to a^firme, that
the Servant that labors is worthy of his hire, I am (says this caruall
Logician) the Servant of God, and therefore worthy of the gifts I receive from
him. Such hellish Syllogisms worldly men, the Scholars of perdition, can frame
against themselves, not finding the subtilty of the Devil in these Arguments,
who strives to color by his Sophistry, this erroneous conceit of theirs, in
assuming desert to receive good, where they deserve to receive evil evermore.

The Servant of an earthly Master may perform in some measure his Masters
work, and may thereby deserve his promised hyre: but who so thus pretends
himself to be, or is indeed the servant of God, by whom a lawful calling may
be assigned him, howsoever he wade in the execution of his external vocation,
yet he comes to far short of his true duty commanded, as he not only
meriteth no earthly or temporal benefits, but to be corrected with many
stripes. As who so looks into, or compares his own performance with the
Commandments of God, shall find himself so far behind with God in
thankfulness for his least benefits, as he shall be driven to confess he is
unworthy of the Bread and Raiment, (be it never so mean) that he inioyeth:
which also, how mean soever it be, it is the gift of God, and in no other, nor
by any other means made ours, but in Christ alone, without whom the greatest
Riches, the most glorious Estate, and most wished earthly prosperity, becomes
a curse unto them, that make them not theirs by him that is blessed for ever.
Heathen men are thankful unto their false gods, for the supposed good turns
they do receive of them, and in recompense they do not only give verbal
thanks, but will offer unto them, even their dearest Children in Sacrifice, to
show their thankfulness. And yet such as receive every day new blessings of
the true God, yea although their plenty and health never so much increase and
continue, they will not offer unto him the least part of their superfiuous
store, in giving it to the Poor, in whom even Christ himself makes Petition
for a cup of cold water, (as it were) and yet can hardly obtain it at their
hands, that will not stick to affirm they are most thankful to God. But
know that God will not be served as Men are. Masters can no further judge of
their Servants and their service, then they see: the idleness and loytering of
their Servants they may in presence observe, but the hidden and concealed
falsehoods they cannot discern: and if it be discovered, it is but by doubtful
means, as by conjecture, or report: but our great and all-knowing Master has
never his eye from our work; nay, he sees and knows our wills, the secret
idleness or vanity of the heart, howsoever the hands or lips may seem to
labor in the praise of God before men, he can find out our counterfeit
holiness, and dissembling thanks. It is no boot to tell men, We be thankful
to God, though men cannot reprove us, nor distinguish between our
dissimulation and true thankfulness. Who would or could have condemned Ananias
and Saphira, that voluntarily gave the most part of their goods to the use of
Gods people? and yet the holy Ghost finding their hypocrisy, gave them the
reward of death, for that which they concealed from men.

Man could not have found out the bribery of Gehezi, nor the hypocrisy of
Judas. It is a dangerous thing to dally with holy things, much more to
dissemble with him that is most holy.

Ingratitude is a contemptible vice, yet not so odious as is hypocritical
unthankfulness, for by the one, man finds apparently, who are thought
unworthy of a second good turn, but by the other, man is drawn to do a
favor unto the undeserving, that by dissembling insinuation, and counterfeit
thanks for a former, obtaines a second kindness, when in truth he is
merely unthankful for both: but God is not thus ouer-taken, he cannot
deceine by dissembling gifts, nor be deluded by counterfeit thanks. And yet
God oftentimes gives new gifts, as health, wealth, honor, office, favor of
friends, a good wife, and dutiful children, and many such like earthly
blessings, to the most unthankful, by which the minds of carnal men are so
much the more besotted, in observing that all things succeed so well, they
think God is well pleased with them, flattering themselves, that they stand
much in Gods favor, because their occasions succeed better then other men's,
persuading themselves that to keep a formal and moral course of life among
men, and to make a superficial show of thankfulness unto God, and at their
death to allot some matter of forced benevolence to the World, as the building
of an Almes-house, Hospital, College, or such like, is so high a recompense
to God, for the loan of his benefits, as he rests rather in such a
benefactors debt for this good deed, then such a vainglorious giver indebted
to God for his long using and abusing of his blessings.

By which, I condemn not such works, tending to charitable uses, as are done
in due time, and by men, first, seeking to be themselves in the true favor of
God, before they so seek the glory and commendation of the world: for I
presume to say, that the bestowing of men's goods, while they are their own, by
their own hands, in secret to the needy members of Christ, is more acceptable
to God, then the former (though commendable) intendments after their deaths:
while we live, we know what is for the time in our disposition, but after
death we cannot take knowledge what course will be taken with that we intend
to best actions: neither does the giving after death, testify a man's assurance
of Gods providence, as does the liberal giving in time of life: for who so
keeps his treasure till he dye, he leaves it perforce, and against his
will, which no man can deny, and though he grieve to forgo, he cannot fear to
want them: but he that gives in his life time, gives in assurance, that he
that gave it him, and made the promise of rewarding the Giuers to the poor,
depends so surely thereupon, as he shall never want what may be sufficient,
which indeed is a worthy testimony of truest thankfulness to God, for the
things he enjoys in this life.

Preparatiues to thankfulness.
Salvation belongs unto the Lord, and his blessing is upon all that are his,
Psalm. 3. 8. The Lord has heard my petition, the Lord does receive my Prayer,
Psalm. 6. 10. I will praise the Lord with my whole heart, I will be glad and
rejoice in thee, Oh thou most High, Psalm. 9. 1. Lord, thou have heard the
desire of the poor, thou preparest their heart, thou bendest thine ear unto
them, Psalm. 10. 17. In my trouble did I call upon the Lord, and cried unto my
God, he heard my voice out of his Temple, my cry came before him, and he
helped me, Psalm. 18. 6. I sought the Lord, and he heard me; yea, he delivered
me out of all my fear, Psalm. 24. 7. Taste ye, and see how gracious the Lord
is: blessed is the man that trusts in him, Psalm. 34. 8. Let the Lordline, and
blessed be my strength, and the God of my salvation be exalted, Psalm. 18. 46.
Thou art my Lord, my well doing extends not to thee, but to the Saints that
are in the earth, Psalm 26. 2. 3.
THough men by their best gifts cannot enrich God, yet they must bestow Gods
gifts to the use of his children, and that is the best recompense they can make
unto him for all his earthly blessings, and to be obedient unto him according
to his will revealed in his Word, is the Sacrifice wherewith he is pleased for
all his benefits spiritual and corporal, which who so neglects, is merely
unthankful, what shows so ever he makes of outward Thanksgiving. Therefore
every faithful receiver of any his blessings, will fall down before his
Majesty in this or the like manner of hearty thankfulness, to manifest with his
words, the inward willingness of the heart.

A general thanksgiving unto God, for all his benefits, spiritual and
corporal.
Eternal God, and everliving, and most loving Father, I the poorest and most
unworthy of all thy creatures, do bow and prostrate the knees of a truly
thankful heart unto thy majesty, yielding unto thee all humble, unfeigned, and
possible thanks for all thy fatherly favors, both divine and corpora^l; above
all (Oh Father) I thank thee, for that thou did elect and choose me to
salvation before all worlds: for that thou createdst me being nothing, and
being borne a sinful reprobate by nature, did redeem me from Satan and
hell, and adoptedst me one of thine own children, by thine own Sons blood,
in whom, and for whose sake, thou acceptest me an heir, with thy Saints, of
the glory of Heaven. And for ^ine assurance here in this life, have given me
not only thy promise in thy Word, but have sanctified me with thy holy
Spirit, whereby I believe: and can in some measure resist the motions which
arise in me, by means of that original corruption which I brought into the
world, and bear about me, which could not but condemn me, were it not that
the death and resurrection of. Jesus Christ the righteous did justify me by a
lively apprehension, and a faithful feeling of his most free merits, working
for me, and in my behalf.

These most sweet spiritual favors so far surmount the apprehension of the
most wise in the world, and any feeling to the comfort of carnal men, that
they cannot assure themselves of their own salvation, a more miserable estate
then which cannot light upon man. How much then, Lord, am I wretched creature,
bound unto thy free mercy, in choosing me to be one of thine own by Adoption,
and to give me the earnest-penny of thy Spirit, to assure me thereof, and
that so far from presuming upon any desert of mine own, as I wholly condemn
my self, and acknowledge all my hope and assurance to be wrought in me by
thine own free love, I unworthy, deserving nothing less, deserving rather
thine heavy and high indignation, and consequently thy just Judgments,
whereby, in stead of my free election, I should be rejected, in stead of my
redemption, I should be condemned, and to be retained in the fearful power and
bondage of Satan and hell: in stead of my sanctification and justification, I
have merited reprobation, and yet, dear Father, in the abundance of thy
favors, I have, and do enjoy the blessings of all spiritual comfort and
contentment, and withal have inioyed so many corporal comforts, and earthly
graces at thy hands, as are more in number then my sins, which are more then
the dust of the earth: my life I had of thee, the continuance thereof of thee:
the health of my body thou preseruest, and when I have been sick, thou have
healed me. In my hunger thou feedest me, and refreshest me, when I am thirsty:
thou cloathest me, and which is more, thou bear me as the Eagle does her
young, even upon the wings of thy providence: so that I have bin defended from
infinite imminent dangers, both from the peril of the sword, and the plague,
and from the violence of many misfortunes which might have befallen me, whereby
had I not been protected by thee, I had perished long ago, and many times
being poor, thou have relieved me: being e^uied, thou have kept me from the
power, and open force, and secret devices of my many enemies. And moreover,
which is not the least, (Lord) thou have not only given me the use of my
limbs, and service of my senses, but have taught my heart to conceive, and my
hands to perform that, by which, in thy providence, I profit in my calling,
and live. How then, most gracious and loving Father, am I bound unto thy divine
Majesty, for such and so many heavenly and spiritual blessings, and corporal
and ^arthly benefits, the least of which as I have not deserved, so can I not
make recompense unto thee for the least? But as thou have freely bestowed them
all upon me in Christ: so in Christ I return to thee the glory, in whom thou
art well pleased, and in him reconciled unto me, or else would the benefits
which I receive, become rather a curse then a blessing unto me.

Oh that I were therefore of wisdom sufficient, of power able, in disposition
willing, and in zeal so seruent, as I might power forth thy deserved praises
with a joyful heart. But, good Father, accept the sacrifice of my wi^ling
mind, and impute not unto me either weakness or unwillingness,
unthankfulness or forgetfulness of this high duty, forasmuch as that
all-sufficient Lamb sacrificed for me, mediateth as well for me, and in my
behalf my inward thanksgiving, and presents them upon thine altar of mercy,
as he ever presents unto thee my prayers for pardon of my sins. Of my self,
Lord, I cannot bring thee Abel or Elias sacrifice, but an heart of true
thanksgiving, which it may please thee to accept, as thou did the sacrifice
of Bullockes and Goats. and let me, Lord, be truly able to offer unto thee
David's morning and evening sacrifice of praise: especially that most sweet and
prevailing sacrifice of ^iliall obedience which thou so much acceptest: and
although it can merit no favor at thy hands, as it is my work, it being
sanctified in Christ, it is the special mean, not only to discharge my duty
in part, but to obtain new and continuing blessings and benefits at thy hands
in Christ: to whom, with thee and the holy Ghost, be all honor, power, praise,
and thanksgiving, for evermore,

Amen.
O Lord increase my Faith, and make me evermore thankful.
Another thanksgiving, in, and for Gods gentle corrections.
O Eternal God, powerful, and true, which bring down to naught, and again
aduancest: thou in mercy often correctest thy dearest children, and hold
them in by afflictions, lest their overmuch liberty should give them overmuch
scope to run astray, and consequently to sin, and dishonor thy name, to
their own destruction. Therefore, O loving and most merciful, and dear
Father, I do yield thee thanks that thou have visited me with crosses, and
beaten me with gentle afflictions, and corrected me with fatherly
chastisements: for they are thy loving imbracements, welcome to the spiritually
minded, ^^kesome yet to flesh and blood, that favor not of any thing
contentedly, but of sin, delight and vanity, baits and snares of death. Good
therefore is it for me, dear Father, that thou have humbled me with thy
loving corrections: and great is thy favor, ye^, and thy providence and power,
past all the capacity of the wisest: for (...), Lord, I have found favor in
thy sight, I have received comfort at thy hands, even in the time of my deepest
afflictions; yea, when I was cast down, and in the conceit of mortal men,
confounded altogether, thou yet did take me up, and did not suffer me to
perish utterly: for when mine enemies laid wait for me, and snares to take
me, and intended my destruction, they were by thee preuenced of their purpose,
and when they hasted to take me, they stumbled and fell, and I escaped from
them, as a bird from the snare of a Fowler: therefore do I give thee the
glory, I praise thy name, and I will magnify thy goodness for ever.

O Father. who has looked upon me in my troubles, but thou? who has sustained
me, but thou? who has fed me, but thou? who has preserved me, but thou? who
took me out of the Lions mouths, but thou? who relieved me when I wanted
things necessary, but thou? who has delivered me in the time of danger, but
thou? who shall have the praise and glory, but thou, the God of my salvation,
and mine everlasting refuge?

But what recompense, dear Father, shall I make unto thee? what reward shall I
give thee? what sacrifice shall I offer thee? I am a worm and no man, I have
no good thing to present unto thee, but only I say, and confess, and
acknowledge even from my heart and soul, with my tongue and lips, that thou
only art God, only good, only able, and willing to help the poor, to
relieve the distressed, to comfort the abject, and to deliver them that are
ready to be swallowed up of merciless waters.

I am poor, yet thou prouidest for me: I want, and thou give me things
expedient: I have Enemies, but thou defendest me from their tyranny: I am
feeble, and weak, and fearful to fall, but thou do yet strengthen me and
uphold me: thou leauest me not in misery: thou forgettest me not in my
calamity, thou do not ever hide thee from me, nor turn thy face when I
seek thee, but thou rather hear me before I call, and preparest me salve
before I unfold my sore, and give before I ask, more then I can desire: Yea,
Father, when I think my self ouer-whelmed with the troubles, that like raging
waves do follow one another, thou take me up, and set me on a sure
Rock, and when I begin to slide, and my faith seems to fail me, thou even
then, with thy helping hand do hold me up: so that neither the waters of this
worlds troubles can altogether swallow me up, neither I altogether so fall, as
if there were none to help me up.

Therefore, O Father, full of love, full of power, full of compassion, and
patient, to thee only I yield praise, for my present relief and comfort: I
thank thee for thy loving and fatherly help, who art absolute in thy
providence, and therein raisest means to support thy Children, when they are
in danger. And as thou of thy free favor in Christ thy beloved, have at this
time, and for ever delivered me, yea, when I was past hope; so continue my
loving God, and helper, and Savior unto the end: and as thou see my Soul in
adversity continually: so be thou my continual helper, that I may still sing
unto thee the song of praise, for thou art worthy to be praised, oh, thou art
worthy to be praised: to thee be praise for ever.

Amen.
O Lord increase my Faith.
PSALM. 18. 2. The Lord is my rock and my fortress, and he that delivers me,
my God and my strength: In him will I trust, my shield, and the horn also of
my salvation, and my refuge.
A Thanksgiving to God, for that Enemies have not prevailed according to their
desires, with prayer to prevent them.
OH Lord of Hosts, Lord of heaven and earth, who defendedst David from the
malice of Saul, Hezekiah from the power of Senacherib, and all thy Children
from their Enemies, so far as was ever expedient for thy glory, and their
souls comfort: I thank thee, and blessed be thy holy Name for ever, for that
thou have not suffered mine Enemies to triumph over me, buc have most
graciously delivered me from their malicious devices, and hateful inventions.
Thine eye has seen their laying in wait for me, and their wicked practices,
and in thy providence they are fallen, and I stand; they are snared, and I am
delivered; they are punished, and I am preserved. But it was not mine own
policy, mine own power, wisdom, or sword, that has kept them back, it was
thine own will, thy work, and thine is the glory: neither have I escaped
their wicked practices, because I was just, nor because I was innocent: neither
of which deserves so much, but it was thine own free mercy in Jesus Christ,
by which they are snared, and I am delivered: and I do acknowledge it, and do
confess before all men, yea, I do publish thy praise for thy goodness, who
art my strength and my salvation: be thou evermore so, and I shall never be
moved: be thou my rock, whereupon I may ever more rest say. And grant that as
I have seen thy salvation, tasted of thy saving health, felt the power of thy
right hand, and been partaker of so many of thy benefits and blessings: make
me able to glorify thy Name, that as thou have now disappointed mine Enemies
of their hope, and weakened their power, as thou have scattered them, and
brought their devices and imaginations to naught: so, Lord, stand always by
me: and as they have made a mock of me, trusting in thee, so let shame befall
them for their cruelties; let their mouths, which spoke lies, be stopped,
their arms still weakened, and their hearts wa^e faint, whenever they shall
attempt their malicious devices against me again, when they shall compass me
about with the multitude of their wicked imaginations, then let the multitude
of thy mercies ouer-match them. They have sought my hurt without a cause, and
therefore fell without my force: thou tookest my cause into thine own hand,
and have brought me out of the snare that they had laid, and taken them, for
thou iudgest right: let them therefore know that it is thou has have done it,
and although they say in their hearts, The Lord will not see, nor consider: let
them find that thou see and considerest their practices, and let them
understand that thou regardest the cause of the oppressed, let them never have
power to rise again against me, let them never prevail: let me evermore
rejoice in thee, O Lord, my God, my strength, and my Redeemer.

O Lord increase my Faith.
A Thanksgiving to be used after the return of a Journey, or coming to some
Inn, or place of rest.
O God of all goodness, mercy, and love, I give thee most humble and hearty
thanks, for thy divine providence, in leading and conducting me in this my
Journey, and for preserving me from dangers in the same, wherein I do
acknowledge thy goodness toward me, who as thou did even by thy hand,
conduct Lot out of Sodom, so have thou taken me, as it were in thine arms,
and delivered me from peril. And as thou did send Raphael thine Angel to
conduct Tobias. And as thou did lead the Servant of Abraham, and did
guide Jacob in their iournies, even by thy holy ministering Spirits: so do I
acknowledge, that thou have been this day with me in my journey, thou have
brought me in peace and safety unto this place, wherein I may take my bodily
rest and refection, having graciously protected me from many secret dangers,
not only of Enemies, Robbers, and Thieves, but also from danger and hurts of
my limbs, which are commonly incident, and dee befall even thine own
Children: blessed be therefore thy holy Name for ever. I give glory unto thy
sacred and most glorious Name, for that thou have not only preserved me, but
have also blessed my journey with such success, as in thy wisdom is most for
my comfort and profit: for in all things thou know better what is fit for
man, then man: and therefore as thou have been pleased to deal with me, or
shall think hereafter fit for me: grant that I consult not with flesh and
blood, to find the expediency of the success of my journey, knowing this,
that we are ignorant of the things most convenient for us: And therefore
whatsoever does or shall succeed by thy providence, give me wisdom,
patience, and thankfulness to embrace the same.

Let me never forget the words of thy mouth, thy promises made unto thy
Children, that all things shall work together for the best for them. And
therefore I do assure me, that thou have brought my journey to prosper, to
far as may be to thy glory, my comfort, and the discharge of my duty, in all
the circumstances of the occasion of the same. Make me able therefore to extol
thee, O my God, let my Soul praise thee, O everlasting Guide. Lord, most
loving, God all-sufficient, and euer-helping Father: to whom, with thy Son,
in whom thou preseruest, and to the holy Ghost, in whom thou sanctifiest all
that are thine, be evermore ascribed all Glory, Power, Dominion, and Majesty
for ever.

Amen.
O Lord increase my Faith.
A Prayer for the Fruits of the Earth.
O Almighty and most merciful God, the Lord of Heaven and Earth, which of
thine abundant and infinite goodness, do adorn and fill the Earth with all
kind of fruit and grain, whereby is sustained both the life of Man and Beast,
and which yet cannot prosper without thy blessing: we humbly beseech thee, of
thine infinite goodness and mercy, to bless our Fields and Ground, and make
them prosperous to yield their increase: for without thy favor and blessing,
the Earth can bring forth nothing, but unprofitable and hurtful weeds, nor we
by our endeauours make the same to prosper. Let not our grounds be desolate in
thine indignation: shut not up the Heavens in wrath for our sins, that it be
not as Iron, nor our Earth as Brass; but of thy goodness give us both the
early and latter rain, that we may have abundance of all Fruit. Thy River, O
Lord, is full of Water, prepare our Corn, and prosper our earth, crown the
year with thy goodness, and let the clouds drop fatness, let the P^aines be
replenished with Sheep, and the Uallies with Corn, that the Possessors of the
earth may be merry and rejoice. Preserve us (O Lord) in the time of dearth,
that we perish not for hunger, nor be confounded in the time of danger: we
confess our sins (O Lord) with groanings and grief of heart unto thee:
hear our prayers in thy holy Habitation, and be merciful unto thy people,
which have transgressed thy holy Commandments, and give every man according to
his wants, that in all things we may confess and acknowledge with all
reverence, thy omnipotent and divine power, and thy bountiful hand, with
giving thanks and continual praises unto thee, which have given us all things
here to enjoy.

Amen.
O Lord increase my Faith.
Meditations.
A most divine and comfortable Meditation, concerning the Majesty, and Power,
and Love of God, whereby men distressed, and in continual dangers, may be
stirred up the more assuredly, to depend on him, for their delivery and
relief, though it come not suddenly.
WHy should thou fear or faint, O my poor soul, though yet thou find no
more rest then the Dove, that could find no place to set her foot on? Be yet
comforted, for the Lord he is God, and he turns all things to good, to them
that are his.

Thou have long sighed and bewailed thy miseries, and yet thou art as Joseph,
still in prison: but look not upon the weak means of flesh and blood, to be
freed: look not upon the staff of Egypt, the bruised Reed of carnal aid to
be stayed by: they are but false allurings, to draw thee from the sweet
contemplation of the admirable works of the worker of all good, the Lord of
hosts, besides whom there is no God. He sits in glory in the Heavens, and
has clothed himself with Majesty. It is he that makes all knees to bow, and
forces Kings to stoop, and drives away the armies of his most mighty enemies.

He is the hope, and strength, and help, and refuge, and rescue, and relief
of them that trust in him: and he is not curious or coy, as man that works
for money: he does not good for good again, but all in love, all in mercy,
freely, and wanting no power to bring to pass what he will: either in mercy
to his children, or in judgment against his enemies.

For the heavens are his seat, the earth is his foot* stool, the Angels are
his ministers, and all creatures serve him, and that for man only. I will not
then dismay, though I cry yet, and be not yet heard: there is an appointed
time, and there is an appointed mean in his providence already decreed in my
behalf, I know well by his promises, which are Yea and Amen.

Therefore be yet patient, O my soul: trust yet, O my soul: stand fast, and
this God, yea, this high and glorious God, this great and terrible God, will be
thy keeper, thy Savior and protector evermore.

He is an immaculate God, a God pure, perfect, and holy: fear him therefore.
O my soul; for as he is clean, he will have thee cleansed from all impiety,
he will have thee beautified with sanctity and holiness, as he is holy: no
evil dwells in him, sin must not remain with thee, fly therefore all
impiety, and embrace the righteousness of Christ, who will put on thee his
robe of righteousness, and thou shall be perfect. And this God then shall be
with thee, this God, I say, shall be thy refuge for evermore.

Though he sit in the high heavens, not seen with the eye of flesh, nor can be
reached unto by the hand of natural reason, yet he commands all, and does
even what he will, both in heaven and in earth.

So powerful he is, so magnificent, and so absolute in power, that at his word
the earth trembles, the mountains move, and in his displeasure he kills
even Kings for his righteous childrens sakes.

The heavens above do show the glory of this God, and the artificial frame of
the firmament, the glistering Stars therein, the Sun and Moon, and their due
courses unchangeable throughout all ages, and the beautiful ornaments of the
earth beneath, do approve the admirable works of his hands.

His voice is a mighty voice: for he speaks, and it is heard from one end of
the world to another: his voice is a terrible voice, at which all powers,
Princes, and Potentates do tremble.

That mighty Nebuchadnezzar at his voice, was thrust forth into the field among
the wild Beasts, from his Throne: and David from the wilderness, called back
to sit in the seat of honor: by him was Haman hanged, and Mordecay delivered,
Susanna cleared, and the Judges stoned.

Every Kingdom is this great Gods, and he reigns over all Nations: he
controlleth, and is not controlled: he ^^iteth, and is not resisted: thee
aduanceth, and none can throw them down.

O my Soul, fear, and serve, and love, and reverence, and obey this great
God, this Lord high and terrible, that approves himself a King over all the
earth, being guarded with such invincible power and majesty, that he can
strike Saul to the ground with his terrible voice, and again raise Saul with a
loving and kind hand.

O Lord, how terrible art thou in thy works? Through the infinite greatness of
thy power, thou have made all things, and preseruest all men: insomuch as all
such as seem to deny thee, thy power and providence, the fools that say in
their hearts, there is no God, are made mute, and put to silence, and both their
will and their practices made all subject unto thy will and pleasure.

What then? shall I rest amazed at the frivolous inventions of fleshly men,
that seem by their own power to build themselves Babels on earth, working
terror to the poor by their pride, and practice impiety without any remorse
of conscience?

No, I will keep silence, and neither mine own wants, nor sorrows, nor
dangers, nor the worlds ignominious taunts at my base estate, shall wrest me
from this glorious God, from this powerful Jehovah, from this so loving and
kind a father: that fears not the strength and forces of millions of Kings,
but shieldeth and defends his by his mighty hand, and keeps them safe in
the flaming fire, in the raging seas, and in the strength of the Lions paws.

Let this God, I say, arise and chase his enemies, and cherish his little ones,
and pull down the proud, and set up the simple, and scatter the wicked, that
they dwell not beyond his time appointed to tyrannize over his chosen upon the
earth.

The Chariots of this God are twenty thousand Angels, the Lord himself being
among them the general worker of all good for all his, and of all judgment
against the unjust.

All the gods that are esteemed as Gods among men, are but Idols, but the Lord
he is God, that has covered himself with light, as with a garment, whereby
he discovers all darkness, infidelity, disobedience and sin: he finds
out the faithless, howsoever they dissemble zeal, and approves them not most
godly, that are most glorious, nor them reprobates that the world rejects:
but through the light of his most high wisdom and providence, he yields to
every one his own: to him that does well, life, and relief, and succor, and
patience, and rest, and peace: but unto the wicked, sorrow, and anguish, and
tribulations, and a worm ever devouring, in perpetual horror in hell fire.

O my soul, be therefore patient in these transitory troubles, in these
momentany afflictions: stand fast, faint not, fear not, fly not, but feed on
hope; for a strong help comes, and for this small suffering, thou shall
receive a perpetual and most admirable weight of glory.

O my soul, now consider: whom have thou in heaven but this God? or whom, or
what desire thou in earth in comparison of him? for he is the portion of
thine inheritance, he fills the cup of salvation unto thee for ever:
therefore I fear not, neither will I faint, for this God has promised,
neither to fail me, nor forsake me.

There is none like unto God, Oh righteous people, which rides upon the
heavens for thy help, and on the clouds in his glory.

The eternal God is thy refuge, and under his arm thou art for ever: he shall
cast out the enemy before thee, and will say, Destroy them, Deuteronomy 33. 26.
27.

O the deepnesse of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out! Romans 11. 33.

Of him, and through him, and for him, are all things: to him be glory for
ever, Amen. Verse. 36.

They inherited not the Land by their own sword, neither did their own arm
save them: but thy right hand and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance,
because thou did favor them, Psalm. 44. 3.

A sweet Meditation concerning the knowledge and providence of God, whereby the
souls of the distressed members of Christ, are so quickened through faith in
Christ, that they rest assured, that God having foreseen all things, cannot
but in mercy, bring all their sorrows to a joyful and wished end.
IT is in vain I see, for me a wretched creature, to strive with my powerful
Creator. If I should seem to bide me from him, and to seek to escape his rod
and corrections, he being always solitary, I do but deceive my self, for he
is in all places, and with all persons, and knows the ways of men, and
searches the hidden thoughts within, and soeth mine actions without: the
works of his children he sees and approves, the evil actions of the
reprobates he sees and condemns: yea, this righteous God tries the very
hearts and reins: he finds out the hidden dissimulation of hypocrites,
pretend they never so great denotion and sanctity. Should I therefore think to
color my sins with the painted show of dissimulate holiness, could I
perform it so far, as men might approve of all my sayings, and allow all my
doings, and that I were held just? No, no: for if my inner parts be not
perfect, he in his most absolute knowledge finds me a deceiuer, and so will
make mine evils at the last break out as the morning light.

O my soul therefore, as thou tenderest thy salvation to come, and my comfort
here in this life, leave off to sin in secret, and fly al shows of impiety,
and regard truth, and embrace justice, and follow good, even with thy most
inward affection: and let neither my hand, nor mine eye, nor mine ear, nor my
tongue be instruments of iniquity, but rather of sincere piety, and of a
sanctified life.

The cause of misery is sin, the way to obtain mercy is repentance, and a
reformed conversation.

How can thou look for love, that love not to live well? and how can
thou live, and not lack many, yea, all Gods blessings inward and outward,
unless thou love him, and reform thy self before him, that sees thy loose
behavior toward him?

Thou art in outward poverty, because thou art full of inward impiety: thou
have many enemies, because thou art enemy to God: and thy dangers increase
daily, because thou dwell not in God, nor Gods Spirit in thee.

Thou say thou art Gods, and yet ungodly: thou say, thou fear him: and
yet thou still offendest him: thou think thou should receive what good
thou destrest, and yet thou destrest amiss, and deseruest evil.

God knows who are his, and who are not his: and none know they are Gods, but
who know God, and serve him rightly. The righteous only he knows, and their
wants, and the unrighteous he despises because of their sins, wherein they
say, Tush, the Lord will not regard it.

O Lord, thou see and beholdest, thou find out and considerest all men's
ways: mischief and wrong, equity and justice are before thee, and thou take
the causes of men into thy hands, and thou give just judgment, because thou
only know the truth of every man's cause.

The poor commit themselves to this God that knows them, to this God that
sees them, and to this God that pittieth them, and provides for them.

The Lord looks down from heaven upon all men, such is the force of his
knowledge, that he knows in man, more then the heart of man it self: for he
fashioneth the heart, and understands all my thoughts long before they be
conceived within me.

And therefore, my soul, prepare thee to patience, address thee to praise
God, and continue in prayer, be not idle to meditate good things, that the
Lords goodness may be thy goodness, that his love may be thy life, and his
providence thy protection: for as he knows thy going, and marketh well thy
wandering, when thy feel follow value things, and fatherly corrects thee for
them: so does he behold thy tears, and hears thy groans, which thou make
for sin committed against him, and heals thee, and comfort thee. Yet all
things are so hidden in the treasure-house of his providence, that the natural
man sees not the means how to be cured when he is sick, how to be raised
again being brought low, how to be defended having many mighty enemies: But
the Spirit of God discerns, and as he is God, knowing all things done, so he
is a God, foreseeing al things to be done hereafter.

And he seeing me in my mothers womb before I was any thing, or dained for
me then, what I receive now, and therefore my hope must not fail, but take
hold of his ancient love, wherein he first created me to live in him, and by
him: and therefore, Oh, that I might be able truly to serve him, that he might
lovingly relieve me still, that I might faithfully obey him, that he might
fatherly help me still.

He is the good shepherd: Oh that I were a good sheep of his pasture: he
feeds, and guides, and holds up and comfort, and maintains all that
are his: he loses none that are his, he confounds none that are his,
neither does he forsake any of his unto the end.

Within his fold is his favor, and in his favor is life, and in that life is
liberty, and in that liberty is relief, and in that relief true peace, and in
that peace the assurance of salvation, and in that assurance, the joy and
comfort of the Spirit, whereby every outward unsavory thing is made inwardly
sweet: every cross has his comfort, and every trial, and temptation, and
sorrow, and grief, is turned to the unspeakable good of the sheep of his
pasture.

Therefore, O my soul, sigh no more, sorrow no more, be no more pensive at
outward poverty, fret no more at the worlds miseries, dismay no more for thy
many sins, but strive to stand in the favor of this God, and he will set
thee free, and banish thy fear, and fill thy Cup, and feed thee with the hid
treasures of his neuer-failing love.

O Lord increase my Faith.
God knows the hearts of all men, Acts 1. 24. and 15. 8. The foundation of
God remains sure, and has this seal: The Lord knows who are his: and let
every one that calls on the Name of the Lord, depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.
verse. 19. Thou have counted my wanderings, and put my tears into thy bottle;
Psalm. 56. 8.
A Godly Meditation of the Word of God, whereby men distressed, may be strongly
resolved to cast off all fear, and to cast all their care on God, that cares
for them, according to his promise in his Word.
OH, what am I, that I should conceive of any happiness, or glory, or joy, or
comfort to be given me, either in this earth below, or in the heavens above?
for I am a man of corrupt conversation, my heart is fraught within me with
corruption, my soul is defiled, and my whole man polluted. Is it not therefore
my just portion to have here misery, and calamity, and crosses, and enemies,
and evils innumerable, to follow me for my sin, and to vex me for mine
iniquities? so has the Lord threatened in his word.

Most true it is, that right it were, that I should receive these unsavory
things of this life, and to be deprived of the Land of them that live for ever,
if I should receive according to my deseruings: for death is due for sin, O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this danger of death, that
shall never have end!

Surely, when I look into this book of mine own ways, and works, and
wantonness, and wicked life, I see nothing but danger, and fear, and sorrow,
and death it self, written therein: how then, my poor soul, unhappy soul,
wretched soul, how can thou escape? oh, tremble and fear: for i^ thou find
not favor, thou are fallen for ever, and for ever forlorn.

Where then will thou seek for succor? to whom will thou fly for grace? to
the weak, and wicked, and woeful World, or wanton worldlings? No, my Soul,
fly from these feeble friends, and look into, and consider, and believe, and
embrace the Word of God: taste that Bread of life, drink of that Fountain
that flows from the lively Spirit of truth, and thou shall live. It is a pure
Word, and will purify thee: it is a lively Word, and will revive thee: the
Word of truth, and will teach thee: the Word of comfort, and will recomfort
thee.

O my soul, what thing is so precious as this Word, that brings the glad
tidings of thy salvation, thou deserving damnation? of Life, thou deserving
death? of Comfort, thou deserving confusion? and of mercy endless, thou
deserving miseries infinite?

It is a Word full of consolation, to such as are sorry for their sins, and
seek after righteousness: a Word of terror to the obstinate: it is a killing
sword unto the wicked, and saving shield unto Gods children: the savor of Life
unto life, to them that are his: and the savor of Death unto death, to the
wicked. It is more to be desired, then the purest gold, or sweetest honey: Come
unto me (says this Word) and I will refresh you. Seek (says this Word) and
you shall find rest for your souls.

O my Soul, here then to thy rest, here is thy safety, and here is thy
saciety, and here is thy life and liberty, and here shall thou dwell as upon
the Mountain of Peace, upon the Rock of Relief, and Hill of continual Help.

This is the Staff to stay thee by, this is the Weapon to defend thee with,
this is the Way to walk in, and this is the Food to relieve thee withal.

Oh, rejoice therefore in the Lord, O my soul, because of his Word, by which
he assures thee of health, if thou be sick: of comfort, when thou art sad: of
defense, when thou art in danger: and of his presence, when thou seem to be
left alone, forsaken of all.

By his Word, he says, Come: by thine obedience, say, Lord, I come: delay not
to cast away the superfluous ear of carnal things, and seek things
spiritual and heavenly.

By his Word, he says, Seek first the Kingdom of God: answer thou, by a
detestation of the World and worldly vanity, Lord, thy Kingdom I seek: seek
then this heavenly Inheritance, more to be wished then the Land, and Revenues,
and Riches, and glory of the greatest earthly subject, who has but the
casual, and vain, and slippery things of this World, that leave him, and we
leave them: but, lo, a Kingdom is provided in Heaven for the poorest Child
of God. Seek this Kingdom, O my Soul, even while thou art here in this vast
Wilderness of this Worlds miseries: for when thou have suffered, thou shall
receive glory: and when thou have fought that good fight, thou shall be
crowned: and when thou leauest these things so vile, and vain, and loathsome
below, thou shall enjoy things glorious and sweet, and full of joy and
consolation above: when thou have left the society and fellowship of men below,
thou shall accompany Angels above: and when thou have made an end of sighing,
and grieuing, and groaning, under the burden of tyrannous men here, thou shall
sing praise and glory to this glorious God above, who has sent thee his
Wordhere in thy mortality, to comfort thee with the sweet contemplation of
thine immortality.

Oh, then let this be thy daily meditation, let this be thy continual
exercise, that in want and weakness, in sorrow, and ignominy, and misery, and
crosses, and temptations, and in all trials whatsoever, thou may duly weigh,
how thou may be assured, that none of these shall hurt thee: for, lo, even
this glorious, and sweet, and most joyful word tells thee from thy loving
Redeemer; My grace is sufficient for thee.

O sweet word of truth, yea of truth: for he speaks and performs: his
grace is sufficient: what then shall I fear? If his favor be not further off
but always at hand, what shall I scare? if it be sufficient, what can resist
it? nothing but sin: nay, his grace is sufficient to kill sin: then nothing
can stand between me and this Kingdom of God, if I fly unto this Word, if I
keep this Word, and meditate this Word, and bring forth the fruits of this
Word: then this Word will further assure me, that this good God, this
powerful, provident, and loving God, will never fail me, nor forsake me.

O Lord increase my Faith.
The word of God is lively, and mighty in operation, and sharper then any
two-edged Sword, and enters through, even unto the dividing a sunder of the
Soul and the Spirit, and of the joints and the marrow, and is a discerner of
the thoughts, and the intents of the heart, Heb. 4. 12. The word of God is our
delight in affliction, And gives wisdom to the simple. Psalm. 119. 130. As newborn Babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby, 1
Pet. 2. 2. Let not the book of the Law depart out of thy mo^th, but meditate
therein day and night, that thou may observe, and do according to all that
is written therein: for then shall thou make thy ways prosperous, and have
good success, Joshua 1. 8.
A Meditation, concerning the ^enefit of Faith in God, and how it holds the
Children of God from falling from him, in their deepest miseries.
OWretch that I am, where is my hope? where is my help? where is my rest?
where is my assurance of salvation, or help in my troubles?

I have a forcible and strong Law in mine own carnal wisdom, that to trust
in Man, to put confidence in Wealth, and to fly unto the relief of mine own
devices, mine own ways and works avail me more then all other means, that
elsewhere I may seek.

O Fool that I am! O silly Sot, and wretch most feeble, what can I do, or
speak, or work, or devise to bring to pass, the least good thing to comfort
me withal?

Mine heart is corrupt, my conversation evil, my tongue unholy, and all parts
of my body vnp^: can I then hope of any help, or work any good, or devise any
course to comfort (...)?

No, I disdain all mine own ^aies, and works, and wisdom, and incl^me wholly
unto the counsel of the most high, and he will instruct me, I will trust in
him, and he will help me: I will fly to him, and he will receive me: I will
pray to him, and he will hear me: I will fall down yet again, yea, again,
and again, before him, and he will take me up.

Shrink not therefore, O my soul, nor be ouer-sad at these my miseries: be
not afraid at the Worlds injuries; saint not at the fury of the eu^il and
malicious men, for thou have an helper in heaven, in whom whosoever trusts,
shall rejoice: and whom whosoever fears, shall stand fast; and whom whosoever
truly seeks, shall preuatle in his desires, and shall triumph evermore*

O my soul, set the Lord always before thee, for he always is near thee
Let me not think that he sees not my ways and my walkings, as if he were a
God, that considered not the actions of men.

He is at my right hand, and on my left hand; he is before me and behind me;
he compasses me about on al sides, and finds me out in my secret intentions,
and his ways are only perfect and (...); his Word (...)* (...) capacity of
wisest men. In this God I trust: in this Word I believe: in this Wisdom I
repose my hope: and as he has promised, it shall come to pass; and as is
fittest I shall receive.

And therefore I will not dismay, I will not be discouraged at my miseries; no,
if I should pass through the ^alley of the shadow of Death, I will not fear;
for my God attends me, and is in all things, at all places, and at all times
with me; and though he correct me with his rod, he vpholdeth me, and
comfort me with his preuayling hand.

None, that trusts in God, shall be put to shame; not one that puts his
confidence in him, and embraces his Word, and obeys his Will, and walks in
his Ways, shall be confounded for ever.

He is my light, and he directs me, he is my help, and he sustaineth me, he
is my rest and mysaluation, whom then, or what need I to fear?

O my soul, I should have fainted in ^^se importable miseries, and contisee
the goodne^ did not believe to life; if I were not assured to taste of his
blessings, before I go hence, and b^ no more seen:

And I find his favor, and his mercy, and his power, and his providence, and
his infinite blessings, both within me and without me daily; yea, he is my
strength and my shield, he is my defense in trouble, and my portion, and my
salvation. O my soul, trust in him, and thou shall be fed, and shall have
cause to rejoice in him, and to sing praises unto his name: for trusting in
him, his mercy shall compass me about, and comfort me with joyful
deliverance, yea, none that trusts in him shall perish.

The eyes of the Lord are upon them that trust in him: trust in him, O my
soul; then shall thou say, I sought the Lord, and he heard me, and delivered
me, and relieved me, and defended me, and brought me out of all my dangers.

O how good and how gracious is this God, who sends his Angels to encampe
about such as truly trust (...). him, that no peril, or fear, or cross, or
temptation hurt them! Blessed are they that trust in him.

Fear the Lord, O my soul, trust in him, cry unto him, cease not to do good,
be not weary of well doing; for nothing wants to them that fear him. Delight
thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee thy hearts desire: commit thy
way unto the Lord, and trust in him, and he shall bring all things to good end
for thee.

Wait patiently upon the Lord, hope in him; fear not, though the earth be
moved, and though trouble inuiron thee round about, for the Lord out of heaven
shall send and save thee, and shall not suffer thee to perish altogether.

O God, remember thy promises, how thou have said, thou will not fail me. I
believe it, Lord; Lord, help mine unbelief.

Upon thee I have been stayed from my youth, and it is only of thy mercy,
that I had not been confounded long agone: for of my self I have fallen, but
thou (Lord) have raised me; of my self I perish, but through thee I have been
ever preserved.

Consider this, O my soul, and forget not the benefits of the Lord, how he
has made thee as Mount Sion, that can never be moved.

Let neither poverty, or sickness, or loss, or enemies, or any crosses, or
whatsoever troubles, drive thee from trust in this God: and assure thee, that
neither life, nor death, nor things present, nor things to come, shall dismay
thee: his mercies, and goodness, and blessings, and favor, and love shall
follow thee, and feed thee, and relieve thee, and protect thee, and save thee
from all dangers for eue^.

O Lord increase my Faith.
Faith is the ground of things which are hoped for, and the evidence of things
that are not seen, Heb. 11. 1. Above all, take the shield of faith, wherewith
ye may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked, Ephesians 6. ver. 16. I believed,
and therefore I spoke, Psalm. 116. 10. They that trust in the Lord, shall be as
Mount Sion, that cannot be moved, Psalm. 125. 1.
A necessary Meditation, concerning the uncertainty of man's happiness in this
life, and the certainty of the endless happiness of the children of God in
the life to come, notvvithstanding their present miseries here.
MJne eyes have seen, and mine heart has duly considered the fickle, and
frail, and feeble, and vncoustant happiness of man in this life; yea, I my
self have found by experience, that this world administreth unto man no
periect comfort, while he lives upon the earth.

Yet flesh and blood, the foolish outward man, besotted with the vain delights
of sins deceits, and snared with the baits of vain hope, the pleasures, and
comforts, and glory, and ease, and fulness of earthly vanities, thinks
himself safe, and in state of such sure and neuer-failing happiness, that he
walloweth in the mire of deceiving security, until at unawares the hand of the
living God be stretched out against him, and either turns his hope to
despair, his glory into shame, his ease into trouble, his fullness into want,
or all the vain things wherein he delights, into grief and sorrow.

O my soul, trust not therefore in the transitory trash, and pelf, and wealth
of this world, for it deceives and deuoureth men; and as the rust and can^er
eats and wastes iron, so does the love thereof devour thy trust in God, and
thy practice of better things.

Trust not in worldly friends, for their words are vain, their promises not
performed, nor their help worth thy hope. It is better to put confidence in
the Lord, then to trust in Princes; for they who have their breath in their
nostrels, are but men, whose power is of the earth, and whose hands are feeble,
and their devices vain. Some trust in chariots, and some in horsemen: but (O
my soul) trust thou in the living God: be doing good, and thou shall remain,
when the foolish man that believes in flesh, and depends on earthly means,
shall fall and perish.

Be not carried away, O my soul: therefore, with the hope of any man's help,
nor fear what man can do against thee: for suddenly is thy friend taken from
thee, and he that seeks thy destruction* brought to a fearful end. Thy
happiness is not to have heaps of gold and silver, many friends, and all
earthly abundance: for the abuse of these are dangerous, because they draw thee
from seeking God, and they are short, and bring thee to destruction, leaving
thy carkase naked in the grave, and thy self, O my soul, in the merciless
pit.

What auailed the rich man's worldly pleasures, when he went suddenly to hell?
What hindered the beggars poverty, when he went immediately to heaven?

How was Job impouerished, having mighty wealth? What miseries do follow the
might men, is daily seen, and how terrible the end is of such as have not
the Lord their strength, but put their trust in the multitude of their riches?

Who can say, The wealthy man is happy? When he sleeps, he sleeps in fear:
when he walks, he walks in danger; and when he is in his best age,
strongest body, and best state, he suddenly dies, and leaves his wealth he
knows not to whom.

And who can say, the poor, fearing God, is unhappy in his baseness, and
want, and i^nominy, since he sets his hope upon the neuer-failing God? he
seeks his help from heaven, and is fed as with the dew thereof? only hope
sustaineth him, and his want is timely supplied with wished necessaries, and
his heart comforted in his deepest miseries: he lies down in faith, and
patience, and thankfulness, and the Lord sustaineth him, and when he dies,
he lives, and reigns, and rejoices in God his Savior.

O that I might have no delight in the vain things of this world. O my soul,
be at peace within me, when I have wars without me, be contented, and grudge
not, when I want the outward fullness of worldly things: for I see and
consider, that carnal means cannot save me, but the mercies of the Lord,
wherein he affords unto his faithful ones all things to enjoy.

Though he make me a reproach among my friends, and though he suffer me to
stand a gazing stock before the eyes of the wicked, who triumph in their own
glory, gotten by their own hands and devices, and the Lord none of their
counsel, I will not yet be dismayed, neither will I be moved at their
prosperity: for I know, the day of their sorrows comes on, when they shall
howl, and cry out in horror, for the pains that ^nsue their pleasures, and
for the want that shall follow their wealth, and for the miseries that shall
follow their mirth, and for their death that shall follow their glorious and
wanton life.

Oh, how foolish are they that trust in their goods? how mad are they that make
wealth their warrant, and riches their arm, and friends their staff, when
none of these can save them from sickness, from sorrow, from dangers, nor from
death?

No man can redeem his brother from Gods displeasure, and from his appointed
torments in hell, by his much wealth: he cannot save himself by the multitude
of his riches: but God shall deliver thee, my soul, from the power of hell,
and shall save me.

Be not therefore afraid, O my soul, though many be made rich, and thou in
poverty: many advanced, and thou rejected; many graced, and thou disdained;
many comforted, and thou injured among the sons of mortal men: thy riches, and
thy glory, and thy favor, and thy comfort, and thy joys are hid in Christ
with God.

And what think thou, O my soul, of these short miseries, that shall be
exchanged for infinite comforts? whether is it not profitable for thee to have
these moment any corrections, to enjoy an eternal crown? thou have tried the
inconstant course of worldly things, and the day is coming wherein thou shall
possess the permanent consolation of heavenly things.

How long have thou looked about thee for help in the earth? Upon my right
hand I looked, and behold, none that would know me, or comfort me (as David
says) and upon my left hand, and no man I found that cared for my soul.

Then I cried unto the Lord, and said, Thou only art my hope and my portion,
in whom I live, and have an immovable being.

O Lord increase my Faith.
We brought nothing into this world, and it is certain, that we can carry
nothing out, 1 Timothy 6. 7. Therefore when we have food and raiment, let us
therewith be content, Verse. 8. The children of men are vain, the chief men
are liars, to lay them upon a balance, they are lighter then vanity it self,
Psalm. 62. 9.
A sweet Contemplation of Heaven, and heavenly things, whereby the sad
distressed soul is much comforted, and encouraged to endure unto the end, that
he may possess the joys prepared for such as patiently suffer, and without
grudging bear the burden of this worlds miseries.
O My soul lift up thy self above thy self, fly away in the contemplation
of Heaven, and heavenly things: make not thy further abode in this inferior
region, where is nothing but travels and trials, and sorrow, and woe, and
wretchedness, and sin, and trouble, and fear, and all deceiving and
destroying vanities.

Bend all thine affections upward unto the superior place, where thy Redeemer
lives and reigns, and where thy joys are laid up in the treasury of his
merits, which shall be made thy merits, his perfection thy perfection, and his
death thy life eternal, and his resurrection thy salvation. Esteem not the
trifling pleasures of this life, to be the way to this wealth, nor the
ignominious estate here, to be any bar to prevent thee from the full use, and
joyful fruition of the glory there prepared for thee.

I am assured, that though I want here, I shall have riches there, though I
hunger here, I shall have fullness there; though I faint here, I shall be
refreshed there, and though I be accounted here as a dead man, I shall there
live in perpetual glory.

That is the City promised to the Captives, whom Christ has made free: that
is the kingdom assured to them whom Christ shall crown; there are the joys
prepared for them that mourn: there is the light that never shall go out:
there is the health that shall never be impaired: there is the glory: that
shall never be defaced: there is the life that shall taste no death: and there
is the portion, that passes all the worlds preferment: there is the world that
never shall wax worse: there is every want supplied freely without money:
there is no danger, but happiness, and honor, and singing. and praise, and
thanksgiving unto the heavenly Jehovah: to him that sits on the throne, to
the Lamb that here was led to the slaughter that now reigns: with whom I
shall reign, after I have run this comfortless race, through this miserable
earthly val^.

The honor in this earth, is baseness, the riches of this world poverty, the
fullness of this life is want: the joys of this worlds kingdom are sorrow,
and woe, and misery, and sadness, and grief: and yet the fool says in his
heart, There is no other heaven, but this harmefull deceiving worlds
happiness, no other hell but this worlds bitterness, no better comfort then
this worlds cares, nor further help then this worlds wealth.

Thus is man's wisdom made foolishness, and man's glory turned into shame, and
man's power made of no force. And the faithful poor that are here despised,
there are advanced: the sorrowful are comforted, and the cast awaies in this
world are received to that blessed being, that cannot be expressed with the
tongue of man, nor conceived with the heart of man.

Oh that I had wings (says heauenly-hearted David) that I might fly away from
this worlds vanities, and possess heavens happiness. Oh, that I were
dissolved (says blessed Paul) that I might be with Christ. Oh, that I were in
this place of such wished happiness, where I might rest from these worldly
labors, and earthly miseries, and transitory vanities.

But be not heavy, O my soul, though thou must yet wade through the sea of
these earthly troubles: for these heavenly mysteries are not seen of
carnalleyes, nor can be obtained by carnal means, but through troubles and
afflictions, and dangers, and persecutions, they must be achieved: and none
that are Gods elected, shall be free from this Worlds hatred: for such
difference there is between earth and heaven, and between earthly and
heavenly things, that who so delights in the first, shall be deprived of the
latter: for we cannot have this worlds heaven, and the Heaven of heavens, the
heaven of Saints, and Angels, and Cherubins, and Seraphins, where are all
unspotted, and all glorious, and all in white Robes of sanctity, and where
Christ, the sacrificed Lamb, is unto them all in all.

Oh blessed are all they that are thus assured: blessed are the Poor that shall
have this heavens riches: blessed are the Base that shall be thus advanced:
blessed are the Low that shall be thus raised: and blessed are the Worlds
despised, that shall have this heavens happiness; yea, happy is this wretched
worlds unhappy man, for he shall be happy.

I will daily meditate of the greatness and Majesty of this high heavens
blessed estate, where I shall one day bless my God, with the company of his
Saints, and where I shall one day sit secure and free from the dangers, perils,
crosses, and afflictions that now do assatle me on the right hand, and on the
left, within me, and without me, and am never free from one calamity or other.

But it is good for me to be here humbled, that I may be there advanced, where
I wish speedily to come. It is good that I was in want here, that I might seek
heavenly necessaries. It is good that the World did discourage me, that I might
fly to God that comfort me. It is good that I am daily killed here, that I
might live continually there.

Now therefore, O my soul, stand up, fear not, faint not at this worlds
crosses: but give glory to this great God, praise this high and helping God,
seek him while it is to day, drive not off to pray to this God,
notwithstanding any hope thou have in mortal men; nor reject not his gracious
means, who in favor infinite, and mercy endless, moves the hearts of men in
this life, to do good unto such as he sees distressed; he can find out and
afford infinite means to succor them that are his, and will not leave them
forsaken in danger: for he even here gives me his blessings, as pledges of
his neuer-failing lout, that being visited in his mercy with timely comforts
here, I may assure me of greater blessings in Heaven, where they are prepared
beyond all that I can ask or think.

O Lord God of Hosts, who is like unto thee, who have established thy Kingdom
with truth and equity, with mercy and judgment? thou have a mighty arm,
strong is thine hand, and high is thy right hand, who so is under thy
protection, he is safe, and he that trusts in thee, mercy imbraceth him on
every side.

Oh, blessed art thou, O my soul, if thou can rejoice in the Lord: he is thy
Father, he is thy helper: walk therefore in the light of his countenance, and
be patient: wait in hope, till these storms be past, and then shall thou have
that quiet rest, that he has ^repared in heaven for thee.

O Lord increase my Faith.
Our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior, even
the Lord Jesus.

If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ
sits at the right hand of God,

Col. 3. 1. Set your affections on things which are above, and not on things
which are on the earth, Verse. 2.
A consideration of the dangerous estate of the impenitent wicked ones after
this life, notwithstanding their wealth, and power, and great glory, which they
have here, where they seem to triumph over poor ^istressed men.
Read and consider, ye Rich and Poor.
IT is a strange temptation unto a man, when he finds himself still
afflicted, notwithstanding he seeks help continually at the hands of God,
and the more, when he sees that such as neither serve God, or fear God, such
as are wanton and wicked, and hardened in sin, to prosper and to flourish in
this life, and to have all things that their hearts can desire.

David beholding this, began a little to stagger, and was ready to give over
his godly beginning, and to end with the wicked: and as long as he took no
better regard, but only as natural wisdom led him, he commended their
estates, because they were rich, and wanted nothing, they were healthful and
lusty, and their goods did increase, which Worldlings hold true happiness.

But when David considered their greatness, as it was discovered unto him by
the light of true knowledge, he then altered his conceit of these Men, and
renounced their ways, and hated their works, and avoided their company, and
betook himself to prayer, as the thing whereby he should prevail better,
then with all the wealth the world could yield him.

And surely, the present time affords unto us that now live, no less cause
of vigilent regard, that we be not carried away with the World, whose glory is
embraced, whose power is practiced, whose policy is preferred, and whose
happiness is had in greatest esteem: insomuch as who so is poor, or
helpless, or distressed, or endangered in the World, by worldlings is censured
a castaway, a reprobate, a man forsaken of God.

It is not virtue, nor godly life, nor inward zeal, nor any good quality of
the spirit, that has any favor in the World: but the rich, and glorious, and
men of countenance, and of power, and of office, and of gay attire, that be
accounted Gods favorites. As for such as are ragged, they are not regarded;
such as are base in show, are accounted base in deed. So that Gods children
have the least share of the worlds liberality: and the impudent, and
shameless, and wicked, and worst men, are they that possess and usurp the
earth, and earthly glory.

But alas, short and slippery is this glorious show of theirs: they are as
Ceda^s, that ouer-shaddow the low bushes for a while, but they shall be as
stubble in the Furnace, when the ^re is put to their roots. They are now as
devouring she Bears, and as raging Lions: but the time comes, wherein the
Lord will smite them upon their iaw-bones, and will pull out the teeth of these
merciless wretches.

They have set themselves in glory, but God shall turn it to shame: they have
fastened their footing, as they think, never to be moved; but the Lord will
make their standing unsure, and their ways slippery, and their days short,
and their end horrible.

And howsoever they now make boast of their own hearts wickedness, and though
they seem to contend with God, and subdue his members, and make no reckoning
of his Saints, or think there is no God: God will find them out, and he will
rebuke them with a perpetual rebuke, and put out their name for ever, not
only out of the Earth, which they hold their Heaven, but even out of Heaven,
and his Book of life.

Who yet are commended, and esteemed, and advanced, and reverenced, but these
men, of least merit? Only their riches, and their bribes, and their flattery,
win them dignity, and preferment, and honor, and favor, and what may fill
them full of all tokens of perdition.

But this is a heavy weight of temptation to the poor, that deserve to be made
rich for virtues: for the low, that ought to be raised for praiseworthy
qualities, when they see that the worst are preferred for reward, and the best
rejected for want.

Surely, this World may be compared to the Poole of Bethesda, into which what
diseased person stepped first, was healed, but the strongest and best limmed, and
he that had best helps, had always the benefit of the healing: so now in
this Puddle of worldly partiality, not the first that comes is preferred, nor
the most fit, but the most liberal giver.

But there is a Judge that sits and sees, how the Worlds wealthy ones make
others wealthy, not for worthiness, but for gain.

What striving, and struggling, and working, and inuenting, and swearing, and
paines-taking, is there about the Philosophers stone? Many a man has been
long hammering, and hazarding goods, and lands, and liberty, and life, and some
pawn soul and all, to have this strange mean to make himself a great man,
and a rich man, and a wise man, and a cunning man, and a man to be admired at
for his rare skill, and great wealth, and hidden wisdom: and while he sought
this stone of wisdom, he became a fool, and a beggar, and a laughing-stocke
to them that become the wiser, to see his ambition and folly.

But had thou this stone, that could transinute Maluerne Hills into pure gold,
and all the Earth into silver, and could make thy self young again, and
lusty and strong again, and had what thou could wish here in this life:
what were this unto thee? thou were yet but a worldly wise man, a worldly rich
man, a carnal man. But the Philosophers stone indeed thou have not found,
which is, to fear God, and to embrace his Word, and to be content with a
competent estate: and therefore as impossible for thee to go to heaven, as a
Cammell to go through a needles eye: But tush, thou will say, Abraham was rich,
Lot was rich; Job was rich, and Solomon was rich: and yet they were in Gods
favor, and Gods elected ones.

True it is, they were blessed of God in their riches, because they knew God,
and believed his promises, They held not their wealth, but as means to relieve
themselves and others: but thou hold thy wealth to get vaineglory by them.
They were bountiful and liberal where need required, and had not the desire
of money, as thou that have never enough, and wilt depart from none: that by
rapine, and wrong, and oppression, and bribery, and sin, inrichest thy self.
They used their wealth, as though they used it not, in respect of themselves,
but to do good to Gods children by it.

Who can but imagine, that if the Philosophers stone were to be contrived or
compounded of the powder of poor men's hearts, and of the blood of their own
souls, would not there be some of these stones composed by merciless men,
that hate to be reformed, and say by all their cruelties, daily practiced, that
either there is not a God to recompense their wickedness, or else that God
sees not, nor considers their oppression and wrong?

These men yet prosper in the world, and say that these things are theirs:
these things are Gods blessings: these things are to be disposed after their
own hearts lusts, in vanity and pride, in wantonness and sin: but to relieve
the necessity of the poor they have no will: the words of worldlings warrant
them, that they may do with their own what they list.

But the word of God cries, we to the rich, many more to the hardhearted and
fast-handed rich Man: because there is no love in him, or mercy, or compassion
in him, the poor (...)ous unto him, and the needy or (...)sed man's cry he
cannot hear.

But God shall hear these afflicters of poor men; he shall find out their
hidden mucke, and approve them liars that say unto the poor, I have not for
you; yea, God shall hear them, and afflict them: even he that reigns of old
shall cast them down, though they long flatter themselves in their prospority,
and say, We will prevail; who is Lord over us?

Let no child of God therefore repine against these evil men, that have the
world at will, who are so fat, and so well liking, as they hold themselves in
most happy case. Let them alone, their day is coming, and their confusion
comes: they shall be cut down like grass, and wither as the green herb,
and at last be cast into the unquenchable Furnace.

The Lord laugheth them to scorn, while they laugh the Poor to scorn, and
the Lord out of Heaven thundereth terror unto them, while they work trouble,
and misery, and vexation against the Just, that dwell in ^^se show upon the
Earth, whom yet t^ord holds under his protection* and guardeth so, as the
wicked prevail no further against them, then may make for the profit of their
souls. These oppressors, and these mighty men, that care not for God, nor
regard his Word, nor feate his threats, nor believe his promises, they shall
be surely confounded, and perish, when there shall be none to help: they shall
be consumed as the fat of Lambs: even with the Uiper of their own guilty
consciences they shall be stung, and consume away, and come unto a fearful
end.

I have seen the wicked strong, (says David) and spreading himself like a
green Bay Tree: but he withered ere he was plucked up, and being plucked up,
he is cast into the fire. So that let these men of power, that oppress and
pity not the poor, think what a goodly show they make in the Streets, in
the Church, and in the Markets, and seats of Judgment: how wonderful they
are in their own ^onceits, by reason of their wealth, and honor, and glorious
attite, and how the poor fall at their feet, and they cast by their
countenance from beholding such wretched poor men, and withold their hands
from giving, and their tongues from comforting, as if they themselves were (and
none else) the substance, and the poor but the shadows of men. But consider
(I say) consider thy state, and place, and pomp, and pride, and vanity well,
and it shall all appear but as a cloud that vanishes away suddenly, like a
glistering bubble in the Sun. So thou go to the grave in fear, and the
worms prey upon thee, as thou did on the poor: for as thou piece-meale
did rob the poor by extortion and bribery, so do the worms by little and
little devour that proud car^eis, that now, as to a^ Idol, men are forced to
crouch, and bow themselves.

Have thou any thing rightly to boast of, O thou foolish man, that esteemest
the more of thy self for thy wealth and great glory, being the very means to
make thee proud, and thy pride to make thee despise thy Brethren, and
consequently God, that made thee and them? Were it not better for thee to
become a Zacheus, to restore all thou have wrongfully and sinisterly gotten,
and of thy goods well gotten to give half to the poor, that thou may say,
and be said to be rich in good things, because thou do good? But to be rich
and hoord it up, to be rich and do no good, is a badge of a man that shall
never enjoy the Kingdom of God.

Were it not better to weep here, that we may rejoice hereafter, then to
rejoice here, and howl for ever? But weep, and howl, and lament, and be
wail your selves, ye rich men, that have no remorse: for the pains, and
horror, and anguish, and torments endless, shall be your reward if ye repent
not, and reform your evil ways.

Be no more stiff-necked, nor covetous, nor disdainful, but liberal, and
humble, and helpefull to the people of God, that God in his mercy may make you
rich in knowledge of good things, rich in practice, and rich in godly zeal.

And be not grieved, though by this alteration you become poor: for a mess of
portage, to one fearing God, is better then all the riches of the wicked.

He is not poor, who loves God: for God loves him, and in his love is life,
and liberty, and lively reliese.

But who so fears not God, have be never so great abundance, is a beggar, a
castaway, and a reprobate from the joys of heaven: the least of which cannot
be purchased with millions of kingdoms: the least of them more worth then all
your gold and silver, and lands, and possessions, and offices, and honor, and
what else the whole world, which deceives you, can afford.

The Book of God is full of terrible and sharp threats against merciless
rich men: and many woes the Lord (that loves the lowly) pronounces against
the proud. And what a judgment it is that their hearts are shut up, that they
cannot consider their end, to be as the Ox that is fattened for the slaughter,
who delights in the deep feedings, while the Butcher determines his death:
as the covetous, and wanton, and wicked ones, take pleasure in their vanities,
while their death and destruction comes without redemption?

But if these men will not hear, nor conceive, nor consider the peril of
their estate: if they will not, while the Lord may be found, seek to return,
that they may be saved, their judgment, and destruction, and reprobation will
be the more just.

O Lord increase my Faith.
Why boastest thou thy self in thy wickedness, O man of power? Psalm 52. 1.
The Lord shall destroy thee for ever; he shall take thee, and pluck thee out
of thy tabernacle, and root thee out of the land of the living, Verse 5.
An exhortatiue Conclusion: wherein the afflicted are stirred up to patience,
and not to be ashamed of their miseries and base estate, so long as they
endeavor to do their duties in their several callings, and stay themselves
upon Gods providence.
AS the man that is borne blind, cannot judge of colors, nor the dease man
distinguish of sounds: no more can a man that has been kept blind and
muffled with the mask of this worlds pleasures, and become dumb with his
secure estate here, discern the things of God: he cannot distinguish
between, Woe be unto you rich, because you have your consolation here; And,
Blessed are the poor, for they shall receive comfort. These things are not so
heard, nor so regarded of Worldlings, as might bring them to a true and lively
consideration, that there is a woe and a blessing pronounced: that there is
fire and water set before them, and life and death offered them. But as
Children that have no more discretion then Moses being an Infant, who refused a
Crown, and took burning coals, do reject the better things as dross, and
embrace the worst, as most d^are and precious: and therefore prefer their
Oxen, and their Farms, and their heaps of transitory vanities, before the
sweet banquet of a contented estate. And so far they are from the true
conceit of Gods purpose in punishing man, that they censure crosses that light
upon other men, as curses, and the glory, and riches, and mucke, and pelf of
their own, to be given them, because they, and none else are blessed: whereby
many times the dear Children of God are put to a deep agony, when they hear
and perceive the taunts, and reproves, that the world and worldlings cast at
them for their poverty, and base estates sake. They stand before the worlds
Gallant-ones, as David's men, that had the shirts of their garments cut to their
buttocks, as men derided and scoffed, and as cast-awayes, and men forlorn and
forsaken of all men: and cast down and confounded by God himself: in regard
whereof many times the poor, though indeed the very Children of God, are so
ashamed of their estate, as they be forced not only to avoid the familiarity
of the wealthy, but even to be seen of them a far off: nay rather, they hide
themselves as men cast off, or dross from the gold: where indeed the Word of
Truth finds them out, and approves them the refined gold, and the
worldly-minded straw and stubble: provided withal, that he that is cast
down, must not so justify himself, as to argue himself the child of God
because he is cast down, because he is made poor, or because he has
enemies, or sickness, or want, or persecution: (for all these things may
happen also unto the reprobate:) for as sin is the ground of all our
afflictions, and our offenses the cause of Gods displeasure, and Gods
displeasure powers forth crosses and curses too upon sinners: So must every
man carefully consider how he stands in his troubles, whether he have
fallen into the same by his own riot or lascivious and wanton life, by his
ungodly conversation, and neglect of the fear of God; for which things sake,
the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience, and he powers out
of the cup of his indignation upon them, either in judgment, because their
condemnation shall here begin, and so be perpetual, or else to reclaim them
from their wicked ways, that they may be saved.

And he that finds himself in his conceit, lest deserving afflictions,
because he either feels not, or finds, or will not acknowledge that he is
such a sinner that deserves so great punishment, as many times lights upon
other men: let him think that he in thus justifying of his own ways, is in a
dangerous state.

It is the pride of the heart, which God that searches it, well sees, and
considers, that such a one is in a perilous way, if he be not humbled. And
surely godly David himself was gone a little that way, and God saw that he
must pull down this chosen vesell of his, before he would tread his steps as
he should: for as he confesses himself, Before I was corrected, I went
avvry, So that our troubles and miseries. and all the adverse things that may
befall us, are Gods corrections to his children to reform them: but his
judgments are messengers of his utter renunciation to the obstinate, who by
his punishments wax worse and worse, and who murmr and grudge at the course
that he takes with them to amend them, as did the rebellious Israelites, whom
he often visited in mercy, before he entered into judgment against them: So
that none that stands may say, he cannot fall, none that are high may say,
they cannot be brought low: for all have sinned, and all have need of
correction, all are sick, and all have need of Physic; all have gone
astray, and therefore all have need to be reclaimed. Who then will be ashamed
of Gods visitation? who will be impatient when afflictions come? Surely, none
but the man that knows not God, none but he that loves this world more then
heaven, and the pleasures of this life, more then the joys of the life to come.

David was not ashamed of Gods corrections: for he praised it as a great
benefit, and took it as an high blessing, and said it was good for him. Was it
good for him, and ill for us? was it profitable to him, and hurtful to us? No,
and therefore Paul was not ashamed of his crosses: for crosses make us the
companions of the blessed Children of God; nay, they make us the more like to
our elder brother, Christ Jesus, who finished our Redemptions through the
Cross, and made the way to the joys of heaven through afflictions, and he
that is ashamed to follow him that way, he cannot come to him at all, he will
not know him, and therefore he shall never enter into that holy place, he
shall never attain unto that rest that shall be endless, and most joyful in
the heavens.

How unsavory therefore soever our troubles seem, we must be patient, and
never give over to cry unto our helping Father, nor to use our best endeauours
in our callings, which God will bless, staying our selves in hope upon his
promises. Let us never dismay, for God that makes this little wound without,
does it to cure a greater within: and while he seems to kill us, it is, that
we may live ever: and while he suffers us to be here ignominious, it is
that we may become all glorious with him in heaven.

The poor man cries, and the Lord hears him, and saves him out of all his
troubles, Psalm. 34. 6.

The Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about them that fear him, and
delivers them, Verse. 6.

Taste ye, and see how gracious the Lord is: blessed is the man that trusts
in him, Verse. 8.

A Prayer to be used of a sick man.
O Almighty and everlasting God, who although thou art still in thy judgment,
yet art thou a merciful God to the soul that seeks theeth, infinite in thy
mercy, and plenteous in redemption, for though thou send sickness, yet will thou show pity, according to the multitude of thy compassions, for thou do
not willingly chastise and afflict the children of men: therefore I poor
wretched sinner, which am but dust, earth and ashes, unworthy the least of thy
favors, do freely confess, to thy glory, and mine own shame, that I am
conceived and borne in sin, that original corruption, stayning and infecting
my whole nature, has deprived me of all holiness, and left in me an
inclination to all evil: and that I have by mine innumerable transgressions,
in thought, word, and deed, broken all thy holy Commandments, and therefore
(besides all other evils) I have justly drawn this sickness, and these
diseases upon me, yet not withstand, seeing that thou (such is thy exceeding
great mercy) have no pleasure in the miseries and destruction of thy Children,
but do only by affliction try, correct, humble, and reform them, for there
present and everlasting good: I do therefore, most dear and loving Father,
most humbly beseech thy heavenly Majesty, to pardon my sins, the only causes
of my misery and affliction: increase and perfect in me all graces that
concern salvation: assist me with the counsel and comfort of thy sacred
Spirit, and convert this my visitation to mine amendment, and salvation of my
soul in Christ.

If it be thy good pleasure and will (O Lord) restore me to my perfect and
former health, that I may not only perform my good purposes, and pay my
vows, which my lips have promised, and my mouth has spoken in my affliction,
but also henceforth grow up in grace, in obedience, in holiness, until I come
to the end of mine hope, which is the salvation of my Soul. But if it be thy
will and decree by this chastisement, to finish my days, I most humbly and
earnestly entreat thee (O my God) as the outward man decaieth, to renew in me
the inner man, and to grant that as the body dies, so thy grace may live and
revive in me. Shut not the eyes of my mind, but open them and make me
understand what the hope of my heavenly calling is, and what is the riches of
the glorions inheritance, that thou have prepared for me, that I may live in
thy faith and obedience, and end my life in thy favor, and when this life
ends, remain and reign with thee in glory for ever.

Uouchsafe to be a Father to my family, kinsfolk, and posterity: plant thy
fear in their hearts, confirm them in thy grace, and give them all things
competently necessary for the maintenance of this present life. Harken (O Lord
to these my prayers, and grant me all other things, which thy heavenly wisdom
sees necessary for my soul or body, for thy dearly beloved Sons sake. To
whom, with thy Majesty, and God the holy Ghost, be rendered and ascribed all
honor and glory, now and for ever.

Amen.
O Lord increase my Faith.
A Prayer for Patience in sickness, and truly to express sorrow for sin.
O My most loving and merciful Father, God omnipotent, who art nigh unto all
those that call upon thee in truth, thou art a present help in time of
trouble, all powerful, full of wisdom and compassion, wonderfully surpassing
all earthly Parents: I poor miserable wretch, long troubled with grievous
sickness, and so sore vexed with pain and torment, that neither my body can
take any sleep or rest, nor my Spirit feel any ease or comfort, do here in
the only merit and mediation of Jesus Christ, present and humble my self
before thee, humbly begging and entreating for favor and mercy at thy hands.
Work in my heart by thy holy Spirit, godly sorrow and repentance for all mine
offenses: impute none of them unto me, but let me feel and be assured in my
conscience, that the guilt and punishment of them are removed. Be thou my
Physician, to cure and heal me: auert and turn this present sickness into a
sovereign medicine, and this vehement and grievous pain into a fatherly and
gentle visitation: let thy strength appear in my weakness: let thy power be
perfected in mine infirmity: and so arm me in this my temptation, with the
gift of Patience and long-suffering, that I be not with-drawne from the
constant practice of holy duties, neither yield unto mine own passions, and
the suggestions of Satan.

To this end power down thy blessed and sacred Spirit into mine heart, ^each,
assist, and direct me, that he may open to the eyes of my mind, the
righteousness of thy Judgments, that I may in all willingness a^ knowledge
the equity of the same: that he may bring to my remembrance, the cruel and
most bitter pains and torments of my merciful Lord and Savior Jesus, who by
his death has swallowed the very dregs of thy wrath, and by the merit and
virtue of it, has so tempered and sweetened the Cup of affliction unto ^:
manifest unto me the glorious and heavenly happiness, and holiness, of thy
Saints and Servants in heaven, that the certain assurance, hope, and
expectation thereof, may abundantly exceed, and take away all my present
gri^ie and torment.

I beseech thee (O Lord) according to thy promise, ease my burden: give me
quiet and comfortable sleep, and refreshment to my restless body, and to
bless all those good means, which shall be prescribed unto me, that they may
tend to my cure and amendment (for without thy blessing they are of no force
and virtue) that I with thy blessed Servants, Job, Lazarus, David, and others,
having experience of thy might, truth, and mercy, in my relief and amendment,
may with all joy and love praise thee, truly serve thee, and more confidently
rely upon thee all the days of my life, yea, and (for the instruction and
encouragement of the afflicted) publish and declare the infinite and exceeding
Power of thy might and compassion.

Uouchsafe (O most gracious Father) to incline thine ears to this mine humble
Petition, and to grant me all other things needful and necessary for my soul
and body, for thy dear Son Christ jesus sake, my only Savior and Redeemer:
to whom, with thy Majesty, and thy blessed Spirit, three persons and one God,
al-powerfull and sufficient, be ascribed and given all honor, praise, and
glory, now and always.

Amen.
O Lord increase my Faith.
A Prayer to be said at the point of Death.
O Lord God Almighty, I assuring my self my time is come, my soul waxes
heavy even unto death: vouchsafe therefore (O Lord) to cast down thine eyes
upon me, bedew my heart with the Oil of thy grace, forgive me my sins,
confirm my faith, shorten my pangs of Death, expel Satan, for thine infinite
mercy help me in this my last conflict: look upon Jesus Christ thy Son my
Savior and Redeemer: into thy most blessed and gracious hands, I commit my
soul, refuse it not (O God) but accept me, for it is thy own workmanship,
and let me depart in thy fear, and rise again in thy merciful favor: that I
may attain and come to thy eternal and most wished joys of heaven, for and
through the merits of my blessed Savior, Christ Jesus, to whom with thee, and
the holy Ghost, be all glory, honor, and praise for evermore.

Amen.
O Lord increase my Faith, and receive my soul.
A Confession of sins, with a very necessary Prayer, to be said of poor
distressed men, Morning and Evening, and at all times else, as they shall be
thereunto moved.
O Father full of mercy, I yield unto thee all praise and thanks, for thy
continual most sweet favors, and especial graces, bestowed frankely on me thy
unworthy Creature: for Electing me to salvation, for Creating me, for Redeeming
me, for Relieuing me, and for Preserving me evermore. Great is thy love in
Christ my Savior, infinite thy Power, unspeakable thy Mercies. Relieve me
always, and direct nice in all things: let thy will be a Law unto my will,
that my corrupt affections draw me not to consent again to the unsavory lusts
of my carnal will, which to this day ha^h overmuch miscarryed me, into the
vain destres of this wicked Worlds pleasures, the baits of that mortal
adversary, deceiving Satan, the defiled fruits of my sinful flesh, and the
cords whereby I have been drawn from virtue to vice, from sanctity to sin,
from light to darkness, from Heaven to dreadful Hell. My sins, O Lord,
have been many and continual: my serving of thee, cold and seldom. O forgive
me, and let not my years consume any longer in vanity: let mine hands hate to
handle unholy things: let my heart harbor no more the hateful thoughts of
unrighteousness, and let my soul be so seasoned with the spiritual dew of
thy blessed Word, that my Soul and Body, being sanctified to every good work,
I may cast off the unprofitable works of darkness, and only cleave to the
true service of thee, who art full of grace and truth. Be unto me the sweet
savor of life unto life: be unto me the light of truth, that my life be not
unprofitable in good things, nor my soul deprived of thy sacred spirit;
without which, man is poor, possessing all worldly riches, base, in most high
worldly honor, and dead, live he never so strongly in the flesh.

Therefore, Father full of mercy, be merciful unto me: full of power, protect
me: provident, relieve me: most sacred, sanctify me. Let the eyes of thy
favor be always on me: let the relieuing hand of thy help be always toward
me: be unto me a strong Castle, a Restfull refuge, a Fountain of relief,
the Supply of my wants, my Protector, my Savior, my Guide, and my wisdom, my
will, and my zeal. Be unto me my Jesus, my Christ, my Father, my Physician, my
lot, and my portion: be unto me all in all, that nothing want in me which thou
likest; nor any thing dwell in me which thou misl^kest: that I being a
sanctified vessel of heaven, may be a fit Mansion for thy sacred Majesty, to
abide in by thy blessed Spirit.

Yield me (O Lord) yield me continual shelter under thy relieuing wings:
foster me with the hid treasures of thy love, and learn me so to live, that
I may ever live in thee, and thou in me: make that union between my will and
thy Word, that I will nothing but as thou have willed, and blot out all mine
unworthiness: and in stead thereof, imprint the merits of thy Son, in whom,
Lord Almighty, let me be also partaker of the good things of this life: let not
poverty utterly deprive me of a competent estate here: but bless thou the
works of my hands, prosper thou my endeavors, and raise up gracious means for
me, that I may live and not lack things necessary. Thou art all: sufficient,
and in thy gifts manifold, thy love is without limitation, and thy will without
contradiction: what thou decreest shall stand, and what thou willest shall come
to pass. Will thou therefore, will thou thy creatures, which thou have
ordained for the good and service of thy children, ^o serve my use, that I and
mine may be sustained by thy providence: for what am I (Lord) that I should
stand upon mine own power, wit, or policy, which are weakness and
foolishness before thee? Thy Word prevails: speak, and all things in heaven
and earth shall obey thee: yea, thine heavenly Angels shall be ministering
Spirits for my good, and all the fruits of the earth shall add comfort to my
wretched estate. Good Father, sanctify me within and without, and fructify
my calling: bless my endeavors, and teach me to use my function justly, and as
I ought, that I may so prosper in this present life, that I may truly pay all
men their due, and owe nothing to any man but good will: a thing to me
impossible, but to thee easy to bring to pass. To thee therefore, I refer
me wholly: bless me, that being blessed, I may prosper: that prospering, I
may praise thee: and in praising thee, please thee, and be here comforted of
thee, and live righteously in thee, through the merits of thy beloved Son
Christ Jesus, who having purchased all things for this life, and in the life to
come for me, be with thee, and the holy Ghost, praised for evermore.

Amen.
O Lord increase my Faith.
A very comfortable and most patheticall Prayer, to be said of such as are in
greatest distress and danger, having wife and children, and in debt, not able
to maintain and relieve the one, or to satisfy the other.
O Most mighty, merciful, and all-knowing Father, the fountain of all comfort
and consolation, who find out in thy deep and allsearching knowledge, all
the sins that are, or can be committed amongst the children of men, howsoever
hidden and secret: I do confess unto thee, against my self, that I have
grievously offended thee by my manifold transgressions, and thereby have drawn
upon me, a most intolerable weight of thy deserved wrath, and fearful
indignation, insomuch as if thou may not be pleased to mittigate thy ^ury
toward me, I shall faint, and fall, and shall not be able to lift up my head
any more, in hope of thy favor: for, dear Father in Jesus Christ, I am weak,
and am not able to bear thy heavy displeasure by mine own power or merit. And
therefore, good Father, lay not upon me the punishments which I have deserved:
take away thy heavy hand of correction, and as thou art patient and long in
suffering the sins of thy weak children, he yet patient with me, and send
thine holy Spirit to season me anew, that I may bring forth now the fruits of
amendment of life. So shall thy punishment cease, and comfort increase, though
I am heset with no small or few dangers, before me, behind me, on my right
hand, and on my left, I am beset with perils: so that which way soever I seem
to run, or howsoever I covet to escape, I fall into dangers. What shall I do,
Lord, in these miseries? I stand amazed at the consideration, what will become
of me languishing in fear, while there is none to help. I live where none but
mortal creatures are, and what can they do to my comfort, Lord, that have
their breath in their nostrils? They move, and breathe, and live, and speak:
but little avails their help, unless thou that guidest and gouernest the
hearts of all, vouchsafe to move them to commiseration and patience with me, I
have sinned (Lord) against thee, and am indebted unto men, and cannot be
released, and all comes of my sins. Father, pardon thou me: so shall thou in
thy renewed love send me new relief. Raise me means to satisfy men, or
qualify their extremities, that they may be patient until thy help come: And
in the mean time, teach me, O teach me the way that I should choose. Direct
me Lord, what course I shall take: for thou, Lord, art wise and provident, and
merciful, and all goodness comes of thee. Therefore, O Lord, instruct me by
the inward working of thy holy Spirit, to do this or that, and make me
obedient unto thy will: so shall all return to my good. Raise up some gracious
means (Lord) for my succor: for thou know, though I be but one man, whose
ruin can be but as the death of the least creature in the censure of such as
feel not, nor partake of my griefs: neither will my overthrow grieve such as
have no share of my, miseries. Some there be yet, dear Father, whom thou
know, that shall taste of the bitterness of my fall: and therefore, Lord,
consider in mercy: and although none of them (Lord) that shall feel the smart
of my calamities, but have also added sin unto my sin, and so aggrauated
thy displeasure against us, yet in thy Christ forgive us all, and reclaim us
all by thy gentle corrections, not by thy furious judgments. And as a sparrow
(Lord) lights not on the ground, nor one hair falls from our heads,
without thy prouidedre: so I know (Lord) that nothing shall befall me, but
what thou have decreed, even for my good, both in this life, and in the life to
come. Thou have never, Lord, dealt so sharply with any, but upon serious
repentance they have received comfort, they have tasted of thy love, and of
inward peace. So work, Lord, in these my trials, and by these my crosses and
dangers, that I be neither inwardly too much afflicted with fear and sorrow,
nor outwardly too much cast down with want, but as I taste of thy correcting
rod, so I may also flude thy supporting staff. Lord, thou art moved by a
better Mediator, then are my complaints. Oh hear me for him, and hear him for
me: me, Lord, for his sake; and him for thy promise sake, lest I remaining
here in this vale of continual miseries, where there is no true or lively
helper, I utterly perish in my troubles. It is no true help, Lord, that
comes not of true compassion: and there is no true compassion, without true
feeling of another miseries: but how far, Lord, that is from the hearts of
many, thou know, and I feel it. And therefore every heart truly moved to
true commiseration, is first moved by thee. Oh move them therefore, move thou
such as thou please to use as instruments of thy will for my good: so shall I
use it, and accept it as thy goodness, to thy glory. But, Lord, the course of
thy providence teaches us, that thou will not have thy dearest children to be
lifted up by the fullness of earthly things, above that which becomes the
humble, to keep them still in awe of thy corrections. Forere while, O Lord, I
thought of seife-peace, little fearing further perils, nor to be thus chased
anew, as I am, by such as seek to molest me, and to exact that from me by
rigor, which thou know I am not yet able to perform: though thou feast the
inward destres of my heart willing, by my best lawful endeavors to obtain the
means to satisfy al men their due, and it grieueth me that I cannot do as
they require.

And therefore (O loving Father) as thou well know what is wanting, supply
it in thy mercies, in thy good time, before I be confounded altogether, and
before I go hence, and be no more seen. As thou blessest me, O Lord, by the
labors of my hands, so thou know I yield to them, to whom it is due. And
therefore, Lord, since they will not have patience with me of their own
accord, work their hearts to be more pliable to my entreates: or else, which I
ask especially, if it please thee, raise up means for me, that I may be
enabled to pay them all: wherein thy will be done. I have seen thy salvation
and delivery already, in great dangers, and thy promise, and thy power, and thy
providence are still in force, and thy mercy is no whit diminished, therefore
(Lord) remember thy mercies, and look on me: and as thou said unto the
blind man in the Gospel, Receive thy ^ight, and he saw: so Lord, say to me,
Receive comfort and relief, and I shall receive it: thy word is thy will, and
thy will is thy work, therefore speak, and thy will shall be done, to restore
me to constancy: let not the floods of these dangerous waters ouer-flow me
quite, but when I am ready to sink, yield me thy helping hand and save me:
lift me out of the mire and clay of all my miseries, and set me on the
relieuing pastures of thy continual free favors: let the cheerful dew of
thy blessings, and blessed graces shower down upon me, so shall my little
store increase, and my empty basket become full. And forasmuch as I have no
free portion in this earth, not the breadth of a foot: neither have I of mine
own a house to hide my head in, put me therefore where thou will, and let
mine abode in earth be in what place, and how long, of short time thou will,
for of my self, whither to turn me, or what to do I know not: Be thou
therefore my guide, and direct all my desires of earthly things by thy Word,
and let my will always follow thy will, lest my will, led by the blind
affections of corrupt reason, bring me mine own prejudice and shame. Thou
evermore prouidest for them that ask of thee, and directest them that take
counsel of thee: therefore having thus weakly laid open my cause before thee,
consider it, and give me patience in all my trials, and let me not so much
mourn, and hang down my head, and be heavy for the want of outward
necessaries, as at the consideration and looking back into the ugly gulf of
my former continuing sins. Oh, free me, Lord, free me from my sins, and
sanctify me anew, that howsoever the outward man seem to be discouraged, yet
the inward man may be still more and more filled with all spiritual knowledge
and consolation, and true contentment. Thou hear my reproves, thou know
my sorrows, and my groans are not hid from thee: put my tears, few and
weak, into thy bottle. Remember thy promises, and I shall never forget thy
praises: Oh fail me not, forsake me not my God, and my Redeemer.

O Lord increase my Faith.
A Thanksgiving and Prayer to be used of a sick man when he is recovered;
oftentimes.
I Yield and give unto thee (O merciful and most dear Father) all humble
thanks, honor, glory, and praise for thine infinite and exceeding great
blessings, (having no way merited the least of them) and namely, for that it
has pleased thee of late to deliver me from the very point of death, and (as
it were) raised my feeble body from the grave, and redeemed my soul from
death, that I should walk before thee in the land of the living, that I might
further glorify thy name, do more good in my calling, and be made meet for
the inheritance of thy Kingdom. This work, O Lord, proceeded from thy mercy,
and no desert at all of mine, and for thy grace, and not of any goodness in
me: not unto me, not unto me, but unto thy blessed name be given all glory.
But seeing that I through my sinful corruption, am more ready to bury in the
grave of oblivion, then to keep in thankful remembrance thy great mercy, yea,
and rather to grow cold and backward in all holy exercises and duties, then to
holiness of life: I therefore beseech thee, with all earnestness, to renew my
nature, and to ingraue the remembrance of this thy goodness in my heart, by
the illumination of thy holy Spirit, and grant that for the residue of my
temporal life, I may in humility and truth be directed by thy most sacred
Word, and always submit my self to the government of thy blessed Spirit. Make
me (good Father) a light and example of virtue and godliness unto others, and
to grow in grace, as I increase in years, that so I may live in thy fear, and
dye in true peace of conscience, and assurance of eternal glory with all the
Saints and Angels in heaven: vouchsafe (O my heavenly Father) to grant me all
other things convenient for me in this life, for the only merits, obedience,
and mediation of Jesus Christ, our Mediator and Redeemer.

Amen.
In time of affliction pray thus: yea, often.
The Lord shall make the Pestilence cleave unto thee, until he has consumed
thee: the Lord shall smite thee with a consumption, and with the fever, and
with a burning ague, etc. until thou repent, Deuteronomy. 28. 21.
O Lord most just, and Father most merciful, thou it is that renewest thy
plagues against man when he offends thee: thy vengeance from heaven is both
sudden and fearful toward the rebellious and disobedient children: thou for
one sin in King David, destroyedst with the loathsome disease of the
Pestilence many thousands of his people: cast thine eyes of mercy upon us, O
thou preserver of men, which languish now in this land, and in this house, with
the like disease and sickness. Now, dear God, has not David only offended
thee, in trusting to his strength, and numbering of his people: but even each
congregation, and every household has one way or other provoked thee to plague
thy disobedient people: and now that we see thy plagues appearing, to the
piercing and piercing of our bodies and souls asunder: Lord, we stand amazed
in our minds, heartily sighing with groans at the sight of our sins. Now
we consider, we have sinned grievously, we have done amiss, we have dealt
wickedly, we have lived ungodly, we have iwerued from the way of truth, without
any godly fear or remorse of conscience: thy great benefit of peace, and rare
blessing of long prosperity, under so good and gracious a Governor, have
brought too too many of us, to such security and contempt of Religion, that
altogether forgetting to be thankful, we have abused thy benefits as fast as
they came, and that with a churlish kind of impiety: the thoughts of our
hearts, the words of our mouths, and the works of our hands are vain, carnal,
and devilish: yea, our service to thee oftentimes but mere abomination: so
far (alas) have we erred from the path of thy Commandments. As thou did
find with the Israelites wickedness in Gilgal, sin in Bethel, and iniquity
in B^rsheba: so in every Church, in every Court, nay, in every concourse or
assembly amongst us, thou beholdest how the flesh has ouer-growne the spirit,
and how reason is ouer-ruled with affections: so many labor in these days
under the displayed Ensign of Satan, that very few (dear Father) are found
settled in the dutiful form of upright and spiritual Obedience, which thou
requirest. We confess, thou might justly therefore forsake us, as we have
forsaken thee: and not only proceed to sting the head-Cities, and whole body
of this Land, with sundry plagues and grievous diseases; but for our manifold
sins and iniquities, which we daily commit, thou might justly and worthily
condemn us, man after man, to eternal death, all consciences being so guilty,
that they already condemn themselves. Yet who is he (O merciful Lord) that
can measure thy goodness, who by thy word do oftentimes bring sinners to
belief, repentance, and salvation? though it be not thy pleasure (good Lord)
to make the wicked innocent, but rather to visit their iniquities, yet have we
this comfort, that thy mercy to the humble ever rests unmeasurable and
immovable: though thou spakest to the Prophet against thine own people, being
disobedient to thee, saying, Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet have
I no heart to this people: Drive them away that they may go out of my sight,
some unto death, some to the sword, and some to captivity: yet we know (O our
good God) that when as Ephraim was heard ^amenting and praying heartily in his
distress, thou thoughtest then upon mercy, as a Father pitying his own
children. This thy clemency to others incourageth us to cry for thy mercies, in
this our misery, upon our repentance, both for us, ours, and the whole Land.
Uouchsafe O loving Savior) to repress the vehement heat of thy fire with
godly pity: stay thine hand from our destruction; thou art long suffering,
good, gracious, and unwilling sinners should perish. Be entreated therefore (O
Lord) most glorious) to bid th ne Angels cease from punishing: look forthwith
upon this Land: (good Father) pity the infected people thereof, that we
altogether may say, The Lord lives for ever, worthy of praise, because he
has been merciful unto sinners.

Amen.
O Lord increase my Faith.
If not Infected, pray thus.
IT pleased thee, O heavenly Father, who art Lord of life and death, once to
plague the Egyptians, and yet to spare the Israelites, in the borders of Gosen;
only because thou plaguest where thou please. So with the pestilence now
have thou infected, even from Dan to Beersheba; yet my self, and diverse others
in this place, rest safe from this so pestilent an Infection, protected and
kept as yet safe therefrom, only by thy hand, only by thy goodness: for, our
sins (we confess) stand up as rampired walls against us, and deserve no
less then theirs, whom already thou have bruised with a just measure of thy
Judgments. O gracious Lord God, stir us up, to show our hearts thoroughly
thankful unto thee, that in thanksgiving and praise, we may go before
others, which in pains and plagues do go before (...). And as in mercy thou
have drawn ^knesse from our bodies, so in love to our souls, make us loath
the vain delights of this life, that we may faithfully se^ue and seek thee,
in these our days of health, wherein we obtain thy mercy, enjoy thy favor,
and rest preserved from the pestilence, wherewith many of our Brethren lie
perplexed, beside sundry thousands, whom the grant has swallowed. Bless us
still, O Lord our God, bless us, O Father, without and within: be thou our
guard, thy Word our guide, thy Spirit our comfort, and thy Son our Savior.
Lord, stand by us for our good continually, that when the world repineth at thy
Judgments, when the wicked swell in their impatiency, when the unregenerate
grudge and murmr at thy plagues and punishments (wherewith thou chastisest
and correctest thy dear Children) that even then we may have and enjoy
quietness of heart, and peace of conscience, never to be dismayed, or to
distrust thy providence over us, but still to lea^e steadfastly unto thee, and
rest upon thee, and the rock of thy Truth. This confidence (Lord) grant us, and
thy protection from this courageous disease that reigns, that we may
chearefully ^ound forth thy divine praises amongst men, unto the praise of thy
grace in Christ Jesus: To whom our Savior and Redeemer, with thee the blessed
Father of us all, and the holy Spirit, the Sanctifi^r of our souls, three
persons, yet one divine essence, be given all la^d, glory, and thanks, in this
world, and in that to come, for ever.

Amen.
O Lord increase my Faith.
A Prayer in the time of Tempests and unseasonable Weather.
God brings up the clouds from the ends of the earth, and makes the
lightnings with the rain: he draws forth the wind^s out of his treasures,
Psalm. 135. 7. He commands and raises the stormy winds, and it lifts up
the waves of the se^, Psalm. 107. 25. But he arises and rebukes the winds and
the sea, and makes them calm, Mat. 8. 26. Mark 4. 39. By his word he
stilleth the wind, and by his counsel appealeth the deep, Ecclus. 43. 23.
O Most mighty and merciful Lord God, let all the powers of the earth bless
thee, and praise thee their everliving God, in thine holy and heavenly
habitation, for thou, O Lord, sit on high in the Throne of thy Majesty, and
make thy strength and might known to all Nations, thy voice is upon the
waters. From thee (O God) proceeds Thunder, thy voice makes the Wilderness
to tremble; yea, thou make the mighty hills to tremble and shake: the Earth
trembles and quaketh, the foundations also of the Mountains move and shake
when thou art displeased: there comes out of thy nostrils smoke, and out of
thy mouth a consuming fire: thou make darkness thy secret place, and at the
glory of thy presence the Clouds pass away: thou thunderest from the heavens,
and give out thy voice: thou drawest forth the Winds out of thy treasures,
and command them back again to their places: all things are in subjection
unto thee, thy works magnify thee (O Lord) yea, they tremble at thy presence:
the Mountains and Hills dread thee when thou art displeased; yea, the whole
world is afraid. The Waters, O God, know thee, and are afraid; yea, the depths
tremble: thy voice (O Lord) divides the fiery flames: O Lord, thy voice makes
the Wilderness to tremble. Thou remainest King forever, thou will give strength
unto thy People and bless them with peace. O most merciful God, shadow us
from thy displeasure, which is too vehement and intolerable: let thy
countenance shine upon us and have mercy on us: protect thou our houses and us,
that we be neither consumed by fire, nor drowned by waters: send not upon the
earth such intemperate or untimely Showers, or any other unseasonable weather,
whereby the Fruits thereof may be hurt, or our souls harmed. O God the Father,
which did send thy only Son to die the death of the Cross for my sake,
preserve me, and grant unto me a blessed end. O God the Son, which did
suffer for my sake the heavy death of the Cross, defend me: and, O God the
holy Ghost, comfort me, bless and keep me from all dangers, from this time
forth and for ever.

Amen.
O Lord increase my Faith.
A Prayer for Peace in true RELIGION.
Behold, says the Lord, I will extend peace upon my Church, like a flood: as
one whom his mother comfort, so will I comfort you, and ye shall be
comforted in Jerusalem, Esaias 66. 12. 13. These things have I spoken to you,
says Christ, that ye in me might have peace: in the world, ye shall have
affliction; but be of good comfort, I have overcome the world, John 16. 33.
O Most high and glorious God, who art the Author of Peace, from whom do
proceed holy counsels, and righteous destres, give unto us thy Servants, that
Peace which the world cannot give, that both our hearts and works may answer
thy Commandments, and that our days through thy protection, may be always
quiet from trouble.

Speak thou peace unto all people, especially to thy Saints. Let thy salvation
be nigh them that fear thee, that glory may dwell within our Land.

Let mercy and Truth meet together; yea, let Justice and Peace embrace each
other.

Let Truth arise out of the Earth, and Righteousness look down from Heaven.

Let the Mountains and the Hills bring Peace to the people, and Sheep of thy
Pasture.

Bless, Lord, all Countries, Cities, Towns, and places, where thy Word does
abide, and is purely preached, and increase the number of them in the
universal World.

O Lord, send them much peace that delight in thy Law, let them be without
stones to stumble at, and bless them with prosperity within their places.

O eternal God, which have called us in peace grant we may have peace with
all men, and let us highly account of holiness without which none can see the
Lord, nor have peace in the Lord.

Repress the Devil, the breaker of godly Concord and Christian Peace* which
(...) aging throughout al Nations, sows every where the seed of strife and
discord, as the Seeds-man of falsehood and l^es.

O God of Peace, which make an end of War throughout the World, protect us
from War and slaughter, scatter the Kingdoms that delight in War, break and
hinder all evil Counsels, and the purpose of such as mind after nothing else,
but the shedding of innocent blood.

Let them come to shame and perish, through their own imaginations, that
practice evil against thy Church.

Give all men a desire of peace, contented minds in their vocation, and a care
to advance the welfare of that place where they inhabit. Where Strife,
Contention, and Discord is amongst men, reconcile their hearts and minds, that
these flames and fires may speedily be put out: for thou can conclude a Truce
for us and all Men, and make the Wolf to dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard
to lie down with the Kid.

Make our Tabernacles safe and quiet, that about them there may be arich
tranquillity, which may abound like the Stream running over his Banks, and
our righteousness as the Waves of the Sea which is never dry. In thee shall
we have our wished peace, and the work of righteousness shall be peace, and
her fruit rest and quietness for ever, and thy people shall dwell in the Innes
of peace, and in sure dwellings, and in safe places of comfort.

Hear us, O Lord of peace, and grant that thy peace which passes all
understanding, may keep our hearts and minds in the love of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who lives and reigns with thee in the unity of the holy Spirit, now
and for evermore.

Amen.
O Lord increase our Faith in Peace.
A Prayer to be used of a Widow.
Does not the tears run down the Widows checkes? and her cry is against
them that causes them: for, from her cheeks do they go into heaven, and the
Lord which hears them, does accept them, Ecclus. 25. 15. She that is a
Widow indeed, and left alone, trusts in God, and continues in
supplications and prayers night and day: But she that lives in play, is dead
while she lives, 1 Timothy 5. 5 6.
O Eternal, and most merciful God, which according to thine holy will have
made me a poor distressed Widow, by taking away my bear and loving husband
out of this transitory world: unto thee do I cry in this my misery: have mercy
on me, I humbly beseech thee, and forgive all mine offenses, which I have
committed against thy divine ^aiesty: be favorable unto me, O Lord, and take
pity on me, for I am alone and comfortless. Behold mine affliction and
misery: relieve my wants, as thou did relieve that Widow of Sarepta, whom
thou did most miraculously preserve by the Prophet Elias: take the like
compassion on me, assist me, behold my necessity, and deliver me out of all
troubles. Grant likewise that I may find favor in the sight of all Governors
and Magistrates, that I be not injured contrary to equity. In like manner let
me find amongst men Christian consideration, and commiseration of my present
^state, and succor with godly counsel, protect me from false tongues, which
are like rasors, cutting deceitfully, and as the sharp arrows of a mighty
man, Keep me (O Lord) from slander, and from the tongues of wicked men, which
with poisoned words have bent themselves to cast down the poor and needy, and
to destroy such as are of upright conversation. I humbly beteech thee (O Lord)
to give me grace to live in this mine estate of widowhood, chastely and godly,
showing my self an example of godliness to others, putting always my hope
and affiance in thy mercy: let me with all patience and fortitude, endure all
crosses laid upon me, and continue faithfully in making of supplicatious night
and day unto thee. Look how the eyes of a servant are upon her Mistress, so
are mine eyes bent upon thee my Lord, until thou have mercy on me. Have mercy
therefore (O Lord) on me, for I am full of infirmity: hear me (O Father) even
for Christ's sake, thy Son and my Savior: to whom be given all praise and
honor now and evermore.

Amen.
A Prayer for one that prepares himself for marriage.
House and riches are the inheritance of the fathers, but a prudent wife
comes of the Lord, Pro. 19. 14. Well is he that dwells with a wife of
understanding, Ecclus. 25. 8. Blessed is he that has a virtuous wife, for the
number of his years shall be double: an honest woman recouereth her husband,
and she shall fill the years of his life with peace: A virtuous woman is a
good portion, which shall be given as a gift unto such as fear and serve the
Lord, Ecclus. 26. 1. 2. 3.
O Heavenly God, everlasting and most powerful Father, I do prostrate my self
before the throne of thy Majesty, humbly thanking thee, in that thou have
formed me in the womb of my mother, and suffered me to be borne such as I
am, maintained me likewise from mine infancy to this instant, and preserved me
from infinite perils: for it is through thy goodness and fatherly blessing,
that I have attained to the years I am now in, and in that time, thou have
taught me by thy holy word, to know Jesus Christ thy beloved Son, the only
joy and comfort that a Christian can have, because in the true knowledge of him
consists eternal life; and therefore I cannot sufficiently yield thee
praise, for the infinite and innumerable benefits thou have bestowed on me.
Nevertheless, because thou have commanded us to call upon thee in all our
necessities, and most lovingly have promised to hear us, let it now please
thee graciously to help me.

For I have found and proved, that in regard of mine own natures corruption, I
cannot continue chaste and blameless, except I use the means which thou have
ordained, and by thy holy Word have also approved the same, saying; To avoid
whoredom, let every man have his wife, and every woman her husband. Then I
beseech thee in mercy to lend m^e thy helping bend, and so bless me and my
Patents, that in this intended matter, we may not be abused by any exterior
appearance, either of beauty, riches, or deceiving speeches, which may
fore-runne, or proceed in this business: but as thy Word says, A virtuous
wife is a gift which comes from thee, O Lord* and as it is most certain, that
not only thou gave Eve to Adam, but did likewise conioyne Abraham with
Sarah, Iseac with Rebecca, and Jacob with his best esteemed Rachel; even so I
entreat and beseech thee, O Father of lights, not only to be my Father, but
also to appoint me my fellow-partner, in regard thou ought to be the author
and actor in so honorable a business. Send down the holy Angel to be my
guide and leader toward her whom thou have prepared for me, as (in like case)
thou made them servants to Abraham and young Tobias. Then let me meet her,
enjoy her, and live with her in thy fear and favor. O Lord Jesus, may it
please thee with thy blessing to be with me at my marriage, as thou did
vouchsafe to honor that at Cana in Galilee, with thy own presence.

And as thou art well pleased to conioyne man and wife, and to make them one
body, so unite us both unto thee, that we may evermore live in thee, and thou
in us.

Amen.
O Lord increase our Faith.
A Prayer for a young Man, or Maid, prepared to Marriage.
To avoid fornication, let every man have his wife, and let every woman have
her own husband, 1 Cor. 7. 2. The price of a virtuous woman is far above the
value of pearls: she will do her husband good, and not evil, all the days
of her life, Pro. 31. 10. 12.
O Omnipotent, and everliving God, without whom, men's enbenours are frivolous,
and cannot prosper in this world, I thy poor creature, and the work of thine
hands, whom thou have vouchsafed nevertheless to receive into the fellowship
of thy Saints, by the holy Sacrament of Baptism, do here present my self
before thy divine Majesty, humbly beseeching thee in the name of Jesus Christ,
thy beloved Son, to stretch forth thy holy hand, and help me, to the end
that if it be thy will I shall marry, thou ma^st lead and direct me to a
virtuous yoke fellow, with whom I may live, so long as we shall continue
together, in thy love and fear. O God, it was thou that gave Eve to Adam,
and did address the servant of Abraham to Rebecca, that she might be wife to
the Patriarch Isaac.

Thou did send thine Angel with young Tobias, to deliver Sara, the daughter
of Raguel, out of the poor, desolate, and approbrious condition wherein she
then lived, and to match her in marriage with the said Tobias. This is not a
case of chance or Fortune, neither guided by men's wisdom, for heaping up
goods together. It often happens, that after one has carefully considered all
circumstances, and causes thereto belonging, searching into the uttermost as
may be devised, that party falls short of his hopes expected, and in stead of an
helper, happens on an hinderer. I heartily therefore pray thee (O God) to
provide me such a one, as thou know fittest for me, and so to order the
deliberations, counsels, and enterprises of my Parents and friends, that the
whole issue and event may first redound to the advancement of thy glory, and
next to the endless contentment, good, and salvation of us all in Christ
Jesus, our Lord and only Savior.

Amen.
A Prayer to be said of Women with child.
Women shall be saved by bearing of children, if they continue in faith, and
love, and holines^e, with modesty, 1 Timothy 2. 15.
O Merciful and mighty God, the framer, wise governor, and gracious preserver
of all things, I render unto thy majesty most humble thanks, for that thou art
pleased of thy gracious goodness, to remove from me the reproach of
barrenness, and have opened my womb to conception: prosper, O Lord, within me
the work of thine own hands, which is wonderfully made, whose bones and
members are known to thee, whose very hayres thou numbrest and take care of
them. Bless (O Lord) the work of thme own hand within me, that it may
receive a perfect shape and portion, and live to praise thee in the midst of
the congregation: I commend it, with my self, into thy holy hands, whom I
beseech thee (O most gracious God) so to bless, guide, and preserve, that
neither the malice of the wicked spirit overcome me, nor any other
inconvenience approach nie me to hurt me: keep me from vame fears and
foolish destres, that without danger I may bear, and with joy bring forth the
fruit where with thou have blessed me, to the glory of thy most holy Name, and
my great comfort in thee: to whom be given and ascribed all honor, might,
power, and praise, now and for ever.

Amen.
O Lord increase my Faith.
A Prayer to be said of a Woman in travel.
O Good Lord, I acknowledge and confess, that thy displeasure for sin
committed, was, and is very great (which I do at this present feel) and was
first committed by our first mother Eve, and continued by us (we being by
nature inclined thereunto,) whom for punishment thereof, thou have said, in
sorrow we shall bring forth children: Impose not that heavy burden upon my
weak body, but regard me with thy favor in the promised Seed of the woman,
and give me comfort from heaven: lay upon me no more, then I shall be well
able to undergo, and even in the midst of my calamities, prepare thou the
way for me, that I may patiently bear them: strengthen (O Lord) my body, give
courage unto my heart, and comfort my soul, that in all parts being fastened
unto thee, neither frailty of the flesh, nor temptation of the Devil, in my
greatest extremity, may make me faint, or fall from thee, or have the least
distrust of thy gracious favor toward me. Thou art nigh (O Lord) unto all
that call upon thee in heart: I humbly beseech thee, not to be absent from me
at my time, but that the assurance of thy presence may be my stay and comfort,
that in respect thereof, I may sustain all torments, and wholly rest in thee,
which art the God of my strength and consolation: to whom be given all praise,
now and for ever.

Amen.
O Lord increase my Faith.
A Thanksgiving of a Woman after her Delivery.
Oeternall God, and most loving Father, thou art great, and worthy to be
feared, thou art gracious, and worthy to be praised, for thy mercy exceeds
all thy works: thou woundest, and thou healest, thou throwest down, and
helpest up again: I most humbly thank thee, my most loving and gentle Father,
that it has pleased thee in thy goodness, now, at the length, to deliver me
from the great extremity of childe-birth, and to give unto me the sweet taste
and feeling of thy comfort, not only in joy that a man is born into the world,
which makes me to forget my sorrows, but much more in the assurance of thy
blessed providence and care over me, whose holy hand has strengthened and
vpholden me, who has brought fa^te weather after storms, and joy after
tears: let thy sweet comfort always rest with me, and give me grace, since
it has pleased thee to make me a glad mother, that I may also become a good
mother, in showing my self obedient unto thee, and to be careful for the
instruction and bringing up of my child in thy ^eare, that we may show forth
thy glory in this life, and be made partakers of thy glory in the life to come,
through Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior: to whom, with thee, and the
sweet Comforter, the holy Ghost, three persons and one glorious God, be all
honor, and praise for ever and ever.

Amen.
O Lord increase my Faith.
A Prayer for a Man-seruant.
Let servants be subject to their Masters, and please them in all things, not
answering again, neither pickers; but that they show all good faithfulness,
that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things, 1 Tit. 2.
9. 10. and 1 Pet. 2. 18.
O Most merciful, and everliving God, who have ordained in the world, that
there should be masters and servants, and did hear Abraham's servant crying
to thee, I now prepare my self to thy divine Majesty, because service is
necessary for me, to maintain me in this life, and do beseech thee, O most
loving Father, to provide for me among good people, that may not debar me
from hearing thy Word, but rather give me occasion by their good example, to
seek those things which belong to my salvation. Assist me also by thy holy
Spirit, that I may render them good and honest service, and truly take charge
of whatsoever they trust me withal.

Prosper (O God) my labors, and give a blessing to those affairs which I
shall manage and undertake, that thy grace governing me while I serve on
earth, I may afterward be an Heir and fellow-Citizen (by Christ Jesus ^eanes)
in the Kingdom of heaven. Thy mercy was so great at Capernaum, to the
Centurions Servant, that he found a good Master. Thou did likewise so
lovingly respect poor Joseph, when he was a servant, that all things prospered
under his hand. I beseech thee, extend thy mercy to me a poor willing Servant,
and as thou have appointed, so let me rest contented.

Amen.
Lord increase my Faith, and prosper mine endeauours.
A Prayer of a Maid-seruant.
O My Lord and Savior, seeing it has pleased thee to call me to this estate
and condition, that I must serve to sustain life, and gain those benefits
necessarily belonging thereto, I submit my self willingly to thy providence
and appointment. For I know thou did not despise to speak to Abraham's
servant, Hagar, and did likewise provide good Mistresses for Bilha and
Zilpha; therefore, I humbly beseech thy Majesty, to provide an honest place for
me, where too much rigor, severity, and hard usage may not be showed me. Give
me grace also to yield unto them faithful and true service, carrying always a
good conscience, and keeping myself chaste and honest, with dutiful obedience
to my Mistress, and ordering my Masters business as it becomes me. Bless
all my indenours, that I neither waste, spoil, nor destroy any thing: Set a
lock on my lips, that by evil words, I give no occasion of st^ife or
dissension, but rather that I may procure peace, so much as lies in my power
to do. Thou know (O God) much better then my self, what is needful for
me, and thy word teaches me, that with the^ there is no respect of persons,
but thou hear the poor and needy, as well as the great and mighty, when
they unfeignedly make their prayers unto thee in the mediation of Christ Jesus,
our only Lord and Savior.

Amen.
A Thanksgiving before Meat.
O Lord our God and heavenly Father, which of thy unspeakable mercy toward us,
have provided Meat and drink, for the nourishment of our weak bodies, give
us grace to use them reverently, as from thy hands, with thankful hearts, let
thy blessing rest upon these thy good Creatures, to our comfort and
sustentation; and grant we humbly beseech thee, that as we do hunger and
thirst for this food of our bodies, so our souls may earnestly long after the
food of eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior.

Amen.
A Thanksgiving after Meat.
TO thee, O Lord our God, which have created, redeemed, continually preserved,
and at this time fed us, be ascribed all honor, glory, and power, might, and
Dominion, now and ever more. O Lord, preserve thy Church universal, this
Church wherein we live, the Kings Majesty, the Prince, and Realm. Grant thy
Gospel a free passage: confound Antichrist, and all Heresies: finish soon
these days of sin, and bring us to everlasting peace, through thy Son our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Amen.
FINIS.
A brief Table of all the Prayers, and other things, contained in this BOOK.
THe Motive for a private Prayer for the Morning. Fol. 1. A Prayer for the
Morning. 2 Morning Prayer, where the Family assembles. 6 The Motive for a
private Prayer for the Evening. 11 A Prayer for the Evening. 13 An Evening
Prayer where the Family assembles. 15 A Prayer to be used in private Families,
Morning and Evening. 22 In the Morning, add this. 29 In the Evening, add
this. 30 A Prayer for the King. 31 For obedience unto God. 33 To be confirmed
in the way of Righteousness. 36 For the assistance of the holy Ghost. 40 For
Sunday Morning. 42 Before the hearing of Gods Word. 44 For the Preaching of the
holy Word. 46 For Sunday night. 48 A Prayer to be said before a man begins his
Labor. 50 A Thanksgiving or Prayer to be used, after a man's Labor is
finished. 52 A general Confession for sins, and of the vanities of carnal
delights. 53 For humiliation and sorrow, after sin committed. 56 A
preparation to the Communion. 61 At the Communion. 66 After the Communion. 73 A
Motive to the Prayer following, against Temptation. 75 A Prayer against all
Temptations, especially to any particular sin. 78 For a prosperous Journey.
82 A Motive to a Prayer against Enemies. 85 A Prayer against Enemies. 87 Of the
flock for their faithful Pastor. 91 For observation of Gods Commandments. 95
A Prayer and Meditation concerning the continuance of Gods corrections. 104 A
fit and comfortable Meditation, when God seems most angry with us. 107
Against despair. 110 Against backslyding in Religion, and for increase of
Faith. 113 A comfortable Consultation, and sweet Resolution, what course to
take in time of deepest distress. 116 Effectual Prayers for distressed men.
133 A Motive to a Prayer for Patience in affliction. 135 A Prayer for Patience
in affliction. 136 Against the Temptations of the Devil. 140 The way truly to
seek our God, etc. being the first prayer in distress. 144 The Motive to the
second Prayer, to be said of distressed men. 150 The second Prayer for
Constancy in affliction. 152 The Motive to the third Prayer. 158 The third
Prayer: wherein he flies, and wholly relyeth upon God. 159 The Motive to the
fourth Prayer. 164 The fourth Prayer: wherein he prays for faith, zeal and
strength, to undergo Gods corrections. 166 A Moriue to the fifth Prayer. 172
The fifth prayer: wherein the poor man prays God to keep him from despair.
174 The Motive to the sixth prayer. 179 The sixth prayer to learn how to leave
the world, and to desire heaven. 180 A Motive to the seventh Prayer: wherein
the poor distressed man's desire is, to hold fast the promises of God, and to
show himself thankful. 185 The seventh prayer in distress. 186 The Motive
to the eight prayer: wherein the poor distressed man craves pardon for his
sins. 190 The Motive to the ninth prayer, for assurance of Gods providence.
197 The ninth prayer: wherein the poor distressed man acknowledges, that
though God do deservedly punish him, yet he assures himself, that God will
relieve him. 199 A Motive to thankfulness to God, for comfort and relief
received of him in the time of necessity and affliction. 206 Preparatiues to
Thankfulness. 238 A general Thanksgiving unto God, for all his benefits,
spiritual and corporal, 240 Another thanksgiving, in, and for Gods
corrections. 245 A Thanksgiving to God, for that enemies have not prevailed
according to their desires. 250 A Thanksgiving to be used after the return of
a Journey, or coming to some Inn, or place of rest. 253 A prayer for the
Fruits of the earth. 255.
Meditations.
COncerning the Majesty, Power and Love of God. 258 Concerning the Knowledge
and Providence of God. 264 Of the Word of God. 272 Of the benefit of Faith in
God, 279 Concerning the uncertainty of man's haphappinesse in this life. 285 A
sweet contemplation of heaven, and heavenly things. 291 A consideration of the
dangerous estate of the impenitent wicked ones after this life. 298 An
exhortatiue Conclusion: wherein the afflicted are stirred up to Patience, and
not to be ashamed of their miseries and base estate. 311 A Prayer to be used of
a sick man. 318 For Patience in sickness. 319 A Prayer to be said at the
point of death. 324 A Confession of sins, with a Prayer to be said of poor
distressed men, Morning and Evening, and at all times else as they shall be
there unto moved. 326 A very comfortable and most patheticall prayer, to be
said of such as are in greatest distress, having wife and children, and in
debt, not able to maintain the one, or satisfy the other. 331 A Prayer to be
used of a sick man when he is recovered. 339 In time of Infection, pray thus:
yea, often. 341 If not infected, pray thus. 345 In time of Tempests and
unseasonable weather. 348 For Peace in true Religion. 351 A devout Prayer to be
used of a Widow. 355 For one that prepares himself for Marriage. 358 For a
young Man or Maid preparing to Marriage. 361 A Prayer to be said of women great
with Child. 363 To be said of a woman in travel. 365 A Thanksgiving of a
Woman after her Delivery. 367 A Prayer of a Man-seruant. 370 A Prayer of a
Maid-seruant. 37^ A Thanksgiving before Meat. 373 A Thanksgiving after
Meat. 375
FINIS.

