A disclosing of the great Bull, and certain calves that he has gotten, and
specially the Monster Bull that roared at my Lord Bishops gate.

Imprinted at London by John Day dwelling over Aldersgate.

EXperience of the lewd lustiness and unchastity of Popish clergy has long
ago ministered an old tale, how a person of a town having the lordship
annexed to his personage, as many have, by reason thereof was by special
custom charged, as in many places they be, to keep a common Bull for the
town, whereby their cattle and his tithe might be increased, which Bull had
great liberty and is by custom not poundable. It happened that complaint was
brought to him by his neighbors of the insufficiency of his Bull, that he did
not get calves so plentifully as in time past they were wont to have. The
person a wise man of good skill as it should seem, c^used his Bull to be tied
fast and his crown to be shaven, and then let him go, saying, now go thy
way, there was never any bad of this mark, he will get calves I warrant him.
So is it happened that of late a holy Bull, I think some Jupiter is come for
love of his Io, or rather for just to some lewd Pasiphae arrived in this land.

It is the great persons bull, which person was wont by custom to find common
Bulls for all England, when he claimed or usurped the Lordship of England as
annexed to his personage. It is the same Bull that begat the famous Monecalfe
that of late years made the terrible expectation. Of late being against
custom empounded, or kept from breaking of hedges as he was wont to do, and
from spoiling of several pastures, he grew to some faintness. But now has
his owner new shaven his crown and sent him to get calves again for increase
of the towns heard and the persons tithe.

And surely the experience is notable, for since he came over so lately
disguised, he has light upon certain rank kyen, who I think by their long
forbearing are become the lustier, that is, treason, superstition, rebellion,
and such other, and with them he has so bestirred him, that by the help of
master Doctor Harding, Sanders, and other, some there, some here, jolly
cowkeepers and herdemen of Popish clergy, which sent and brought him over, and
brake open for him the several hedges and senses of true religion, obedience,
allegiance, faith, and honesty, he has begotten a marvelous number of calves
in few years, that is, since the year. 1567. he has begotten multitudes of
all the forms of calves hereafter mentioned, beside other in the wild woods
not yet known, and lastly he has begotten a most horrible monster, of whom
shall hereafter be entreated.

He has begotten some traitorous calves, as the practisers and underminers of
the state. Some rebellious calves, as those that have combred the realm with
unhappy sedition. Some deinty calves with white faces, as dissembling
hypocrites that watch their time. Some calves with black faces, as black soul
and his fellows common bleaters and railers at true religion. Some
Apostaticall calves, that have forsaken faith and do impugn the known truth.
Some tame drousy calves, that with their brutishe superstition can not raise up
their heads from ground, nor their eyes to heaven. Some mad wild calves, as
Roges and Rumor spreaders. Some running and gadding calves, wiser than Walthams
calfe that ran nine miles to suck a Bull, for these run above nine hundred
miles. And no marvel, for they desire not to suck milk but blood. Some
calves with horns, and some without, some with power running fiercely, some
pushing with their unarmed heads as eluishly as they be able. Some doctor
calves, some proctor calves, and some of other degrees. Some weyward calves,
ever running backward and athwart, without regard of ditch behind them, or
hedge before them. Some calves whom no fense will hold, no not the broad sea.
Some cow calves, some bull calves. Some calves that never will be but calves,
though they live these hundred years. Some winking calves. Some subtle
undermining calves. And some fond licking calves there he that be none of the
same Bulls calves, but calves out of Gods own heard, seduced by leude company
of other stray calves. These in seeking to lick wounds whole, do not only
lick poison into their own bodies, but also enuenime other thereby, and
specially the good damme with whose wholesome milk them selves be fed. This
Bulls calves since they received their sires blessing, are waxen wilder then
they were, no heardman can rule them, but as if the gad fly were in their
tails, they run whisking about, or of mere eluishnishe will taste no
wholesome and natural food.

The Monster of whom I told you, is no way so fitly to be described, as by the
old tale of the ancient Poets, that seem as it were to have foreshewed him in
figure, as follows. Pasiphae Queen of Creta, not sufficed with men,
conceived inordinate, unnatural, and therewith vntemperable lust to engender
with a Bull. Neither regard of virtue, honor, kindness, nature or shame, in
respect of God, her husband, her country, her self, or the whole world, could
restrain her violent rage of unclean affection. Yet wist she neither how to
woo the Bull, nor how to apply her self unto him. A mean at length was
found to make this unkindly coupling.

There lived then a cunning craftesman Dedalus, the self same Dedalus of whom
it is famous how he made him wings, wherewith by cunning guiding him self he
passed seas and countries at his pleasure. And wings he made also for Icarus
his son to fly with him. But the uncunning Icarus, climbing to near the
sons heat, his wings melting, fell into the water and gave name to the sea.

This fine Dedalus, to satisfy the wicked Queens feruor of lust, and to match
her and the Bull in abominable copulation, framed a cow, and so made covered
and used it with lewd devises, and therein so enclosed and placed the good
innocent and virtuous Lady, that of the Bull she conceived the abomination of
the world, and in time brought forth the monster Minotaurus half a Bull and
half a man, fierce, brutish, mischeuous, cruel, deformed, and odious.

To shroud this monster from common wonder, and yet therewithal to deliver him
the food and contentment of his cruelty the destruction of men, a Labyrinth
or Maze was builded by the same cunning Dedalus, wherein Minotaurus the Man
bull or Bull man lurked, and men passing in thither to him by entanglement of
the Maze and uncertain error of ways, were brought to miserable end, till at
length valiant Theseus, furnished with the policy of wise Ariadna, received of
her a clew of thread, by which, leaving the one end at the entry, he was
continually guyded and preserved from the deceauing Maze, and having slain the
monster, by conduct of the same thread safely returned.

The appliance hereof to the experience of our times has an apt resemblance,
not to prove but to show the image of some doings at these days, and
therewith by conference not only to sharpen an intentive sight of that which
we winck at, but also to raise a just lothing of that whereof by some hurtful
impedimentes we have not discerned or rather not merked the horror.

Lecherous Pasiphae may well be applied to treason in his estates addicted to
papistrie, forsaking Gods ordinance of humane royal government. Which when so
ever it happens, (for hap it may and has often so chanced) such treason
destroys good and natural affection, it kindles vile and beastly desires,
and among all other none comparable in filthiness to the lust of yelding them
selves to bear the engendring of the great Bull of Basan or rather of Babylon,
the oppression, incumbence, and tyranny of Rome, the usurpation of the Roman
siege the siege of all abomination. This principal traitorous lust, that
throws down the person under this unclean desire, throws away virtue and
respect of God, for Roman pride has climbed into the seat of God and shooued
to shoulder him out, and banished virtue by open dispensing with vice. It
expels remembrance of honor and kindness in regard of husband, for faith of
wedlock has no place in adulterers, and by Roman practices neither does
superstition permit the soul to keep her chastity from idolatries and from
forsaking Gods rules of religion, nor the wife her due faith from wandering
lust, nor the husband his safety from traitorous violence. It drives out
natural love of country, for it prostituteth all dominions to the common
adulterer, underminer, and forcer of kingdoms, the Bull of Rome. It banisheth
shame, for it boasts her filthinese to the worlds sight, soliciteth it
publicly, practices it openly, defends it impudently, and carries it in
glorious pomp and triumph, not as Io ryding on a Bulls back through the
water, but as it were carna^ly wallowing with a beast on the top of Traianes
pillar. And surely no more sodomiticall is in nature the unnatural mixture of
a Bull and a woman, than is sodomiticall in policy and religion the
intermedling of the popish usurpation of Rome with a temporal prince, yelding
his or her realm to Popish jurisdiction, or with the spouse of Christ the
universal church ravished by that Bulls force or desyled by his abuses. But
as in Pasiphae, so where such rage of traitorous and superstitious desire
enters, Gods grace forsakes, honest fear departs, shame flies, and the
lust is vntemperable.

The Daedalus that must bring the enioyeng of this horrible lust to effect, is
the treason of Popish Clergy, full of cunnyng workmanshyp, as the world has
long had great experience, even the same Popish Clergy that has framed to him
self wings, not naturally by Gods ordinance growyng to the body thereof, but
made of feathers pulled from temporal Princes and from Bishops in their own
Dioceses by usurpation, fastened together by art of symonie, and joined to
their bodies with the glue of superstitious credulity. With these have they
passed lands and seas, clymbyng and flyeng in air, that is, upon no steadfast
ground, above mountains, trees and countries, that is, above Emperors,
kings, just prelates and commonweals.

The son of this Dedalus, that is, of treason of popish clergy, is Icarus,
that is, aspiring treason of subject, which following his father and guide
popish treason, but not so well guiding himself for lack of experience, and
desiring to suddenly to climb to nere the Sun, or perhaps mounting with
more have than good speed before his wings were well fastened, or while
himself could but yet flutter with them and not perfectly fly, as God would,
his glue melting, and his wings dropping away, fell down in his climbing, and
no doubt will give name to the place where he lights for perpetual memory
of his undue presumption, surely yet piteously bewailed of papists as Icarus
was of Dedalus his father.

This cunning Daedalus, Popish treason, to bring this copulation to contentment
of the unchaste Pasiphae, encloseth her in a counterfeit cow, that is, such
princes or great estates as desire to lie under the Bull of Rome, popish
clergy turns into brutish shape to serve brutish lust, makes them beastly,
forsakyng the dignity of man and woman's shape, whom God made upright to look
to God and Gods seat the heaven, and it makes them cowishly stoop to
earthward, without regard of the nature of man, the dignity of kingdoms, the
reverent aspect to divinity, or any other manly and reasonable consideration,
without any more vigor, agilitie of soul and industry to do noblely than is
in a cow: a beast in deed profitable for worldly food, as Papistrie is, but
(as most part of beasts be) ready to promiscuous and vnchosen copulations, and
specially meet for a Bull, and among other pretty qualities having one special
grace, (as one of their own Popish Doctors preached) to swing away flies
with her tail wett in the water, as foolish papists swinge away sins and
temptations with a holy water sprinkle.

In this beastly likeness, degenerating from manly form, and majesty of
governance, by Dedalus workmanship, that is, by popish clergies traitorous
practice, ensued the copulation of a Bull and a Queen in a cowishe shape, that
is, Sodomiticall and unnatural mixture of popish usurpation with and upon
royal governance in brutish and reasonlesse form.

Of this ingendring is begotten Minotaurus, a compounded monster, half a Bull
and half a man, a beastly cruel body, roaring out with the voice or sound of
a Bull, and words of a man, the sense of a devil. The self same monster Bull
is he that lately roared out at the Bishops palace gate in the greatest city
of England, horrible blasphemies against God, and villainous dishonors against
the noblest Queen in the world Elizabeth the lawful Queen of England, he
stamped and scraped on the ground, flong dust of spiteful speches and vain
curses about him, pushed with his horns at her noble counselors and true
subjects, and for pure anger all to berayed the place where he stood. And all
this stir he kept, to make a proof if his horned army of calves would or
durst come flyngyng about him toward midsommer moon.

But he looked so beastly, and he raged so vaynely, that though the whole wood
rang of his noise, yet his sire the great Bull, his damme the prostitute cow,
and his children the foolish calves, were more ashamed of him than the noble
Lion was afraid of him. And therefore the Bull his fire, the cow his damme,
and the wysest of his calves, fled once again to Daedalus the treason of
Popish Clergy, for succor and good counsel, by whose good workmanshyp this
myngled monster is closed up in a Maze, that is, in uncertainty of vain and
false reports, and (as it happens in a Maze) by ways leadyng to other
places than they seem to tend unto, by crokednesse of devises, by spredyng into
sundry creekes of rumors, to hyde whence the Bull came or where he lurketh,
even as in the Maze of Daedalus it happened, so it comes to pass that the
Minotaure is not found out, and such as enter into the Maze, that is, into
following of Popish reports and devises, entangle them selves so, that
wanderyng uncertainly at length they may hap to perish in Daedalus engyne. And
judgment they lack (the evident proufes considered that are in that behalf
to be ministered) that believe the report to be true of transferring that Bull to
Protestants devises. But I fear a worse thing: for if they have no wisdom
that say so, wise great persons can not believe them: and if they lack not
wit, then can not them selves believe it, and so is their truth to the Prince
to be perilously suspected.

The remedy rests that some Theseus, some noble and valiant counselor, or
rather one body and consent of all true and good nobility and counselors
follow the good guiding thread, that is, godly policy delivered them by the
virgin whom they serve, and conducted thereby not only may pass without
error through the Maze and find out the monster Minotaure that roared so
rudely, but also destroy him and settle their Prince and them selves in
safety: so as, Pasiphae duly and deservedly ordered, Daedalus vnwynged and
banished, his feathers ryghtly restored, Icarus fair drowned, the cow
transformed, the Maze dissolved and razed, the monster destroyed, the calves
(after the cow perished) sent with Walthams calfe to suck their Bull, Theseus
may be victorious, the virgin Lady most honorable, the land quiet, the
subjects safe, and Gods providence ever justly praised not vaynely tempted,
his kyndnesse thankfully embraced, his name louyngly magnified, his policies
wisely followed, his Religion zelously mainteyned.

But till these noble enterprises be acchieued, it is not good to be hedelesse.
The Monster may be let out of the Maze, when it pleases Pasiphae and Daedalus.

It is good to be awake. Some men be wakened with tickelyng, and some with
pinchyng or pullyng by the ear, that is, some with merry resemblances, and some
with earnest admonitions. Some be raised out of sleep with noise, as by the
speech or calling of men, or by brute voices, as the roaring of Bulls and
noise of beasts, that is, either by aduises of them that warn with reason, or
with the bragges and threateninges of the enemies, or inklinges slipped out of
uncircumspect adversaries mouths. Some be wakened with very wisperinges, as
with secret rumors and intelligences. Some again are so vigilant and careful,
that the very weight of the cause and pensive thinking of it, will scarcely let
them sleep at all. But most miserable is their drowsinesse, or rather fatal
seems their sleepiness, that for all the means aforesaid, and specially so
leude and loud roaring of so rude and terrible a Bull, can not be wakened or
made to arm and bestirre them, till the tumult and alarm in the camp, the
clinking of armor, the sound of shot and strokes, the tumbling down of
tents round about them, the groaning of wounded men dying on every side of
them, treason, force, and hostility triumphing in their lustiest rage, and
Sinon, that persuaded the safety of the traitorous horse, insulting among
them, yea till the very enemies weapon in their body awake them. Such may hap
so to sleep as they may never wake.

Let us all wake in prayer to God. Let us cry louder in sincerity and
devotion, than the Bull is able to roar in treason and blasphemy. Let us pray
God to arm our Queen and Counsel with all wisdom and fortitude, and our
selves with all fidelity and manhood, and to repose our selves upon
confidence of their most blessed governance, and ready with our lives and all
that we have to follow and serve them.

Let us daily and nightly pray God to send a cursed Cow and a cursed Bull short
horns, or to be well capped, or well sawed of, that they budde no more, for
else it were better to take away head and all to be sure, least honester then
these calves be made calves, or knocked on the head as though they were calves.
Surely as of a body there is but one head that can not be spared, so in a body
may be many hods that must needs be spared, as perhaps twenty byles and
every one has a head, in which case there is no peril but least they go into
the body again and then perchance infect the heart blood and put the body in
danger. And the only peril of driving them in again you wot is cold and
cold handling. Some of our botches be run already, of some their heads be
broken, some ryping and I trust shall be well launced or clean drawn out in
time. In the mean time beware cold. And God send and maintain the warmth of
his grace.

Amen.
An addition declaratorie to the Bulls, with a searching of the Maze.

Seen and allowed.

Imprinted at London by John Day dwelling over Aldersgate.

THat ye be not deceived, good Readers, for I see it commonly mistaken, I
thought it good to let you know, that the Bull which is published in Print in
Latin and English, together with the form of Absolution annexed unto it, is
not the same Bull that was set up at the Bishops gate, as many suppose, but an
other. For plain explication of the truth, ye shall understand that there be
two Bulls. The one contains a power and form to pardon, assoyle, and
reconcile all such as would return from the Christian Religion now taught in
England, which they call heresy, and from obeying our Queen and her laws,
which they sclaunderously call schism, to the bosom of the Chirch of Rome
which we may truly call Helles mouth.

The dispensation publishing and employing of this Bull was committed to Doctor
Harding, and so many other severally, not only to relieve those Popish
Patriarchs with the gain of that pardon, but specially to send out those
Archepapistes with that Bull of reconcilement among the Queens saint subjects
English Papists, as it were capitaines to strike up their drommes to gather
soldiers, offering them great wages that should fight under the Popes banner
for an other head against our Queen, that is, remission of their sins, as
pure cleanenesse as when they were baptized, restitution to the communion of
the faithful, absolution from all sentences, and from all pains of
Purgatory, and the enjoying of life and kingdom everlasting.

With these Bulls and this proclaiming of wages, they have been gathering of
rebels ever since the year 1567. and have withal given to very many of them
pressed money to be ready in rebellions, that is, certain papers, and badges of
sundry forms, some with a figure of Christ crucified, some with five wounds,
and some other.

Since which time, namely in the end of February 1569. when the late
rebellion was ready laid and in hatching, the Popes holiness has decreed an
other Bull, no dout at the special suit, procurement, instance, and
importunate calling on of our English traitors, and among other D. Harding and
the rest that procured the other Bulls.

In this is contained an arrogant, tyrannical, and blasphemous taking to
himself the power, as committed to him from God, to destroy, transpose, and
alter kingdoms at his pleasure, a number of vile and horrible sclanders and
uncomely naminges of our Queen, such as a good subject can hardly hear with
patience, the very effect of a great part of the late rebels proclamation as
it were translated, and finally his lewd presumptuous sentence of her majesty's
deprivation, in so spiteful abominable, villainous, and traitorous form as is
not to be rehearsed. This is the Bull that was set up at the Bishops gate.

It seems by all probability, and no dout upon examinations it will so fall
out, that the original of this Bull sealed was among our rebels, and as it
is thought) brought them by Markenfeld or some such other, or delivered them
upon their conference with strangers, and kept close among them ready to be
published so sone as they should have been able to get into their company such
head as they desired to set up after our Queen, or such strength as that they
durst auow it. God so prevented them that they never came so far.

In hope of the success of this Bull, Pl. etc.
a number of Papists, that sometime did communicate with us, or at least came
ordinarily to our public prayers, have of late forborne, and by this note
shall ye know many of them.

In hope of the success of this Bull, were (as it is reported) letanies and
prayers in Rome for the good speed of our rebels.

In furtherance of the success of this Bull, was the spreading of false news
in Spain, of a great battle in Ireland between Papists and Christians,
wherein an Angel with a Chalice in his hand was reported to have discomfited
many thousands of our Queens subjects, for which there were in Spain
public gratulations, ringing of belles, and triumphinges, adorned with the
greatest presences there, or rather (as may well be suspected) prayers for our
rebels success, according to the good meaning of the holy league or the
conspiracy of Trent.

In hope of the success of this Bull, our Louanistes have stayed their hands
from writing, and stand in suspense (better it were they did hang in suspense)
and expectation what will become of these mischieues whereof them selves have
been the proctors.

In hope of the success of this Bull, Co. etc.
a number of Papists have fled of late, and some of them with promising or
rather threatening by letters a recompensing at their return of such
kindnesses as are showed to their friends in their absence, have uttered their
courage.

This is the Bull that makes so many Papists stand yet so stiffly in not
acknowledging her majesty's just authority. And whatsoever they pretend for
ecclesiastical causes, the very truth is to be thought that since the decree
and publication of this Bull, the most part of them esteem not the Queen
lawful Queen of this realm, sith the Pope has decreed the contrary, who
they think can not err. And no dout if an oath were ministered in this form
that they should acknowledge her majesty lawful Queen of this realm,
notwithstanding any sentence that the Pope has given or can give, and that if
he have or shall presume to give any such sentence they esteem if erroneous
and presumptuous, and will to their power resist him, his adherentes, and
fautors that shall attempt to put any such sentence in execution or affirm it
lawful: surely they would likewise refuse such oath, unless they would affirm
the Pope to err shamefully, iudicially, presumptuously, seditiously,
traitorously, and in vilest manner, which they would never sincerely confess:
but in answering the interrogatories ministered in the book of warning they
would show them selves as evil subjects in very deed as they have by some
proceeding, and specially by setting up of this Bull, showed the same warning to
be true and reasonable.

Because they never came in the rebellion time to possession and ability to
set up the Comete whom they meant to advance instead of the Sun rising, I
mean, they had not the person whom they would extol, nor the power to auow
it, neither by foreign joining, nor by domestical strength, it seems they did
forbear the proclaiming of this great Bull, and have hidden him in the Maze.
And yet having some hope left that toward summer perhaps some fools would be
mad, or yet at the least desperately at all a very ventures to utter their
stomach, they set up a printed copy of this Bull, whereby they have showed
that they not only had the original to be proclaimed if time and other
circumstances had served, but also had provided a number of copies printed,
suddenly to make it common, and therewithal by the way a signification that our
bookemen are privy to it.

Failing yet of this hope, and the wiser sort of them espiyng that the
unseasonable setting it up came not to so politic end as they looked for, to
supply the fault of that rashness, they have found a new devise. Their
accomplices, and the secret favorers of these treasons, or paraduenture such as
(for some respects) are loath that to much of the bottom of this treason
should be searched, have spread or favored a rumor, and given insinuation that
it is no true thing, but counterfaited by protestants to bring the papists in
hatred.

No, no, this fetch is to far set a great deal. Treason it is, and vile and
hie treason, to auance such a thing, whosoever do it, protestant or papist. And
no protestant, you may be sure, will traitorously overthrow this estate,
neither is any of them so mad to think it a good excuse for himself, if he
should be arrained for traitorous setting up of such a Bull or paper, to say he
did it of an other intent to bring papists the Queens enemies in hatred. And
so may we well be bold to say, that there is not a protestant in England of
sufficient wit and ability to forge such a Bull, that would be content
himself to be he hanged drawn and quartered to spite a papist, or that does
think he should spite a papist in procuring to himself so great a danger.

But the thing being so traitorous and perilous, even in a protestant so
intending as these pretend, I would feign learn, or rather have it remembered
of them to whom it apperteineth, of what quality the offense is in these
qualifiers to concele it. I do not mean of leaving it vndisclosed when they
know it, but of doing what they can by persuasion that other should not find
it, orby disswasion transferring the suspicion an other way. Such are not like
to such concelers of felonies and treasons as do not utter the felonies,
treasons and offenders that they know, but they are like unto those that when a
felon or traitor is pursued, do help to hide him, and convey him into bie
corners, and for the felons or traitors easier escape do tell them that pursue
him that he is gone a contrary way or give them contrary marks to keep them
from knowing and attaching him, or point them to a wrong person while the very
these or traitor may make shift for himself, yea and lend him some of their
own clothes to disguise him.

The thing is to evident, and thereby the truth of such hiders is the more
suspicious. There are intelligences enough that the effect of the thing it self
was more than a year ago decreed in Rome. The ordinary proceeding of the Pope
in like cases, and specially the following of the holy league induces it. The
print is not unknown. The very paper, after it was taken down, falling it
self into the former crestes and foldes and sise of the packet wherein it came
over, with a number of other plain evidences, disclose the thing, and whence
it came. Besides the very thing is such that he may well be said to lack
judgment that discerns it not to be a very Bull. Be not therefore deceived
ye good subjects: and ye deceivers, beware ye deceive not your selves.

Thus it is evident that such perswaders lack either wit or truth, but I fear
me they are so vain glorious, and stand so much upon undeserved reputation,
that they can be better content to be traitors than to be taken for fools.

But let us call to mind, and gather some fruit of the old tale of Cassandra
king Pryames daughter of Troy. She having the gift of prophecy by Apollo,
always to give true warninges, had yet this punishment anexed, that though she
prophesied truly she should never be believed. So happened it that when subtle
Sinon had persuaded the Troianes under false pretense of religion, and
specially a dissembling show of dedication to Pallas goddess of wisdom, that
is, under color of wisdom and policy, to break down their walls to
receive the horse that the Grecians had framed and stuffed full of chosen
soldiars, Cassandra gave warning what treason the horses womb contained. But
by the ordinary and fatal discredit that was laid upon her, and for that (as
Poets say) the fates and destinies of Troyes destruction were not remoueable,
she was not believed, the walls were broken down, the horse deuoutely
received, and though the armor within gave sound and noise, yet was he
unsearched, in the night Sinon opened the window, the armed men issued out, the
City was fired and destroyed, and all (as the Poets tell) by conduct of Pallas
goddess of wisdom and policy.

I will not at this time prosecute the tale of Laocoon, his office of
priesthood, his spear, the serpent from sea, his children, nor the rest,
whereof every point and every particle has his apt resemblance for our benefit.

Only this I will say, that it may be that for our sins we have Cassandraes
plague, though truth be told us, it is possibly not believed. The Grecians then
framed a horse. The Papists have now framed a Bull. Their horse was stuffed
full of soldiers lurking ready to be let out to set Troy on fire. This Bull is
stuffed with traitorous practices to destroy this realm. Sinon persuaded them
to receive the Troyan horse without violating or searching it. Our Sinons and
lewd qualifiers would have the Bull esteemed an other thing, and take from us the
desire to have his belly searched. Their horse with removing shook, and they
might hear the very sound of the armor within him. In this Bull the evidences
are plain of open treason, and the very effect of our rebels proclamation
translated sounds within it, and seems as it were out of the very Bulls
belly to roar and tell us that all they were privy to it that were by any
appendance or devise of conjunction or alliance knit to the late rebellion: as
also hard it is to excuse Aeneas and Antenor great Lords of Pryames house for
knowing to much of the Grecians counsel. Cassandra cries out against the
horse, the fates will not let her be believed, Sinon opened the window, the
horse vnladed his treasons. Lay this to our case, I will compare no more.

The Lord be merciful unto us and preserve our Prince, and country, which
without our prince can not in all likelihode be preserved. God keep her noble
Counselors, and give grace to all her subjects to stick fast and faithfully
to her, and grant to her majesty to continue to stick fast to true
subjects, and principaly that we all by repentance wipe away the sins that
are the impedidiment why Christian Cassandraes, the preachers of Gods truth,
and good admonitions, are not believed and followed to our preservation.


