Spiritus est Vicarius Christi in terra.

A brief and pithie sum of the christian faith, made in form of a
confession, with a confutation of the papists objections and arguments in
sundry points of religion, repugnaunt to the christian faith: made by John
Northbrooke, Minister and Preacher of the word of God.

Romans x. Cord enim creditur ad iustitiam:
ore autem confessio fit in salutem.
For with the heart man believes unto righteousness:
And with the mouth man confesses to salvation.
Seen and allowed, according to the order appointed in the Queens Injunctions.

At London. Printed by John Kingston for W. Williamson, dwelling in Powles
Churchyard, at the sign of the white Horse.

Anno. 1571.

To the right reverend Father in God, and his singular good Lord, Gylbert by
the merciful providence of God, Bishop of Bathe and Wells: John Northbrooke,
wishes all health and peace, in Christ Jesus our only Savior.
IF my power and ability, were aunswereable to my good will (right reverend
father) this token of mine humble duty, which I do now offer unto your
honor, should be as great and precious, as by reason of the contrary, it is
base and slender. Wherefore I most humbly beseech your honor in no worse
part to accept this little offer, then as the present of him, that is bound of
duty to love you, which would have brought better, if his power had been
thereafter. But followyng the example of the poor widow, Luke 21.^^.
which is so highly [of our Sauiour] commended in the Gospel. I offer unto
your honor, part of such fruictes, as have grown in a poor students
Garden. I have always been assured of your L. that you will accept that, that
a man has, 2. Cor. 12.
and not that he has not, and this Saint Paul gives for doctrine, whereby to
encourage the godly forwards, in the Lords business. For all are bydden to the
buildyng of Gods house, Exodus 25.3*
for when the Tabernacle of the lord was made by Moses, every one brought
such as he had: 4
some brought gold and silver: 5
other some brought precious stones: others brought clothe: 6
others skins and here of Goats and weathers: others brought woodde. 7
And the poor and meanest sort, brought somewhat also, 8
for they brought stones: and all this was put to the work. Even so I judge,
for the buildyng of this house of the Lord, 1. Cor. 3.17. Ephe. 2.21. Cap.
5.26.
which is his Church, every one should and ought to bring such as they
have: some more, some less, according to the talentes which the Lord of the
house has given them to profit withal. Matthew. 25.15.
I will content my self, to bring the little stones of the common sort for this
buildyng, and I hope that the master of the work, will not refuse my service,
nor my little stones, (although they be not hewn of the finest sort, yet I
trust they be all hewn out by the Square and rule of Gods word) forasmuch as
they may be a furtheraunce to the buildyng (as I hope they will be with gods
help.) For, as many as are christians, have given their faith unto Christ in
their baptism, to forsake the devil, the world, and the flesh, and to
continewe Christ's faithful soldiers and servants, to fight under his
Banner, all the days of their life, to the healping and mainteynyng of the
warring, The causes that made the aucthour to set forth this book. First
cause. Matthew. 3.12.
and striving faith. All this well considered, three causes has moved me, to
set forth this little treatise of my faith, at this time. The first is, for
that the Lord has in his hands, to fan, examine, and make clean again
his Church. To whom also it were very good (in my judgment) that the faith
of every one should be known, and especially, of those which make
profession of the Gospel, to instruct others, as the Doctors, Pastors, and
Ministers of the word and Sacraments, to the end that the false Prophets
and Papists, which now bow down their shoulders, and stretche out their
ears to the false papisticall doctrine of that Antichriste of Rome, were
known, driven away, and cast out from among the godly and faithful. For as
Barnarde says: Barnard super cant. Sermon. 66.
Plus long nocet falsus catholicus, quam si verus apparcat haereticus:
Therefore, Christ gave us warnyng to be ware of them that come in Sheep
clothyng, but inwardly are ravening woolues, Matthew. 7.15. Matthew. 23.27. 2. Cor.
11.13.14. Joshua. 9.3.4.
coming and living among us, as the Angels of light, but all is to beguile
the innocent and simple people, to make them twice the children of hell worse
then them selves are. How Joshua was deceived by the dissemblyng Gibeonites
through their fained and cloked holiness, saying: We become from far, for the
name of the Lord thy God, the history declares: So (right reverend father)
in these our days, we have many, and specially of the Clergy, that can say
now to our godly Bishops, how they are come from Rome, for the name of the
Lord our God, with their molded and wafer cake bread, old ragged garments
and shoes, when in deed it is but mere dissimulation that they do, to enter
into the Church for li^yng, to maintain ignorance there, and to keep out
Godly preachers. And these men have learned Arius practice, to convey all their
belief of the Romish faith, into their secret bosoms: and yet will with
hand and pen declare by subscribing and swearyng, as though they were
thoroughly persuaded and converted. They draw nigh with tongue and pen unto
us, but their hearts are to Rome: Papists have Jacobs voice, but Esaus heart
and hands. Eusebius.
a number of them have gospel talk, but yet a Romish faith, an English
face, but Spanishe hearts. We read in Eusebius Caesariensis: that writes how
that Constantius, the father of Constantine, fained upon a time that he would
put out all the christians, which would abide in their faith and religion,
from their honors and offices, but in deed the Godly would in no wise deny,
but rather choosed the loss of promotions and honor: but the others denied
the true faith because they would not loose their dignities. Would all princes
were of this mind.
Upon which trial, he excluded these dissemblers, and double faced neuters,
out of his realm, saying: They would not be faithful to him, which had
broken their faith unto God. So no doubt, if these men in our days were
tried, we should find of them the like. Therefore, if they were called, not
only to confess their faith, with word and pen, 1. Peter. 3.15.
but also to give a reason of their faith, to prove, and openly to show by
textes of the holy Scriptures, and manifest reasons builded thereon, in whom
they believe, what they believe, wherefore they believe, and how they believe, in
open pulpit, and also in writing, should do a thousand times more good, then
that they now do. For they think now, that if they subscribe, observe the
order of service, and wear a side gown, a square Cap, a Cope, and a Surples,
none can say black is their eyes, but that they are good protestants: yet
all this while they run into hugger mugger a whispering in corners, saying to
the simple people: Order fit for papists.
believe not this new doctrine, it is naught, it will not long endure, although
I use order among them outwardly, my heart and profession is from them,
agreeyng with the mother Church of Rome. No, no (say they) we do not preach
nor yet teach openly, we read their new devised homilies for a color, to
satisfy the time for a season. The fruits of time seruyng hypocrites.
By reason whereof, the poor seely people are kept back from coming
forwards to Christ: whereas if they were urged, both publicly* by
preaching, and also with their own hand writing, to render account of their
faith, They will dissemble a point with Leontius.
to the hearing and understanding of all the people, it would drive them for
very shame of them selves, from runnyng into corners a whisperyng, to persuade,
when as they openly have preached to the contrary. And by this means, they
should be easily tried out, and those that are not sound, nor yet meet,
drive them out of the Church, and make them wood-cariers, and water bearers, in
the common weal, as Joshua did the Gibeonites, teaching by their example,
others to beware to dissemble in their profession, Ios^a. 9.21.
although in deed we know no man's heart, yet let us use that means that
holy Scripture gives us to try the spirits, 1. John. 4.1.
whether they be of God or not. For we may easily perceive what danger it is
to have such dissemblers, and also dumb Idols, I mean, those Pastors that
the Prophet Zachary calls Idol Shepheardes, Zach. 11.17. Ministers should
be preachers.
that have mouths and cannot teach: feet and cannot go to preach: eyes and
cannot see the wickedness of the people: nor how to read the scriptures: hands
that cannot minister nor distribute the Sacraments a right: therefore it was
well said of Barnarde: Successores omnes cupiunt esse, Barnard. Sermo. ^8.
imitatures pauci. And if your L. would this do as I have before said, you
should make them to take heed to them selves, 1. Tim. 4.16.
and to learning, to continue therein. For in so doing, they shall save
themselves, and those that hear them. The second cause that moved me, Second
cause.
is, certain books being abroad, which came from Louane, books full of
scurrilitie and papistrie, wonderfullye enuiyng and slaunderyng the godly
Bishops and ministers of the Church of God, here in England: and among all,
they name me in their book, thinkyng thereby to discredit the doctrine that
we teach. For this is the nature of all Papists, when as they cannot stay us
from preaching, neither yet deny the doctrine we teach: then they will
always rear up some false reports and sclaunders upon the preachers, or else
if these monstrous Papists, do know or see, any old crimes or vices, which
have been in them before (which now is mortified and dead in them) they will
rake it up out of the filthy envious dounghill of their Romish hearts, 2.
Sam. 16.5.
like unto railyng Simeis, which coming out of Saules house of Rome, against
the godly David's, that go in the Lords business, they cast out stones, to stone
godly Stephens, they curse them that go in the Lords journey, they call them
murderers, that war in the Lords battle, they call them ungodly, that
live and preach virtuously, but notwithstanding all their false and wicked
reports, we must learn with David to possess our souls with patience, for
that it is done for our better trial and comfort. Matthew. 5.1^.
As Christ said: Blessed are ye when men revile you, and speak all manner
evil against you for my sake, rejoice and be glad, for great is your
reward in heaven: for so did they to the prophets which were before you: for
the servant, is not above the master. Did not always the enemies of God,
raise up such rumors upon Christ, and his Apostles? to that only end, to
draw the people from beleuyng or credityng them, and thereby to discredit
their heavenly doctrine that they taught, by the will of God. They made as
though they had been careful for godly men to enter into the Church, but they
meant nothing less: for, they passed not how wickedly any lived against gods
commandments, Matthew. 15.3.
so that theirs were observed and kept. So likewise, our Papists of Louane,
the Pharisees scholars, they seem in all their books to be very careful
for Church men (as they term them) when as in very deed, they pass not
what they are in life, so they continue with them in their filthy religion. Do
not we see, at this day that many of them, which are now converted to the
Gospel, are reproved by our papists and Louanistes, of some vices and faults,
that have been done by them, in their papistrie and blindness, and all for to
sclaunder the doctrine and religion withal, which during the time they were
papists, they were counted no faults, but virtues? Do not we see, that if any
of them keep whores and harlots, it is counted no fault nor sin among them,
but as one that lives chaste and well: if once he forsake them, and take a
lawful wife, do they not cry out of him, and say he is a fleshly man, a
carnal man, and one that is unchaste, and now he cannot serve God, because he
has broken the yoke of chastity, and lives in the flesh? The mark then
that they shoot at (right reverend father) is not our life, but to our
doctrine and religion, that they may discredit it, to draw the simple people
from beleuyng it. Alas, with what faces can these papistical Pharisees, thus
write against us concerning our lives, and what men we were? Matthew. 7.3. Turpe
est doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum.
Can they see little motes in our eyes, and cannot perceive the great beams in
their own eyes, and yet not in the meanest only, but in their cheifest heads?
yea even in those heads that they call, Lord of Lords, King of Kings, God
of Gods, their holy father the Pope (as they call him) which cannot err, nor
yet sin, as they affirm. In steed of many, I will recite a few of them,
that by those, the residue may be perceived: for they are all Herrynges of one
Barell. I pray you, what was Pope Bonifacius? was it for his holiness, Pope
Bonifacius.
that it was written of him, Intrauit vt Vulpes: Regnauit vt Lupus: mortuus est
vt Canis? He entered into the Popedom as a Fox: he reigned as a woolfe: and
died as a Dog? A whore Pope.
Pope Ioane, was she not an arrant whore? begotten with child by one of her
Cardinals, which these old verses besides infinite mo testimonies witness.
Penes portum Petri Pauli peperit Papa pater patriae, paruulum puerum. What was
Pope John the. 12? Pope John. 12.
not a most vile damnable man, did not he keep Rainerath, his man's wife? did
not he keep one Stephana, and her sister? which had been his fathers
concubines before? did not he keep one Anna a widow and her daughter? He
spared (says the stories) neither high nor low, old nor young, poor nor
rich, fair nor foul: so that no women durst come unto Rome on pilgrimage in
his time: he spared no place, but would use his filthy whordome, upon their
holy aulters: he would give to his whores, benefices, golden Chalices and
crosses, he would dance, leap, dice, card, swear, fight, run abroad in
the night, breakyng up doors and windows, and burn men's houses: one of his
Cardinals he gelded, he put out another eyes, which was his Godfather, he cut
of ones hand, of a another a tongue, of others a finger, a nose and an ear: in
his dice plaiyng he would call upon evil spirits, and drink to the devil:
being thus Pope and an unholy father, nine years, and three months and five
days, was stricken of the devil (as they say) as he was a bed with a another
man's wife, and so died within eight days after, most miserably. Pope Sergiu^.
So of this fathers godly life, came that proverb up (as merry as Pope John.)
What was Pope Sergius* not a man without al virtue and learning? kept not he a
whore, in the time of his Popedom, called Morozia? and had by her a bastard,
which was Pope long after him, called Pope John the.11. This filthy tyrant
did many villainous acts. What was Pope Marcellinus, Pope Marcellinus. Pope
Syluester Pope Liberius. Pope Leo. Pope Caelestinus. Pope Honorius. Pope Ioh.
22. Pope Hyldebrand.
not a great Idolater? what was Syluester the.2. not a great coniurer, and
gave himself body and soul to the devil, and by the devils procurement, was
made Pope? was not Pope Liberius an Arrian heritique? was not Pope Leo likewise
an Arrian? Pope Caelestinus, was he not a Nestorian heretic? was not Pope
Honorius a Monothelite heretic? Pope John the.22. was not he reproved as an
heretic at Paris, concerning the soul of man? I pray you, what was Pope
Hyldebrande? was he not an aduouterer, a Church robber, a pe^iured man, a
murderer, who poisoned six other Popes his predecessors, to make him self
room to the holy seat? was he not a great Sorcerer, and a reneger of the
faith? was not Pope Vrbanus a tyrannous murderer? that took five of his
Cardinals alive, Pope Vrbanus.
and put them into Sackes, and threw them into the Sea? I could speak of
Pope Stephen, of his handlyng of Formosus, Po^e Stephen.
his predecessor, in cuttyng of his fingers and head, and threw his carcass
into Tyber, and of many others of them, but that I should occupy and consume
much ynke and paper, about a sort of filthy livers: therefore Pope Adrian
the.4. was wont to say, Succedimus, no^ Petro in pascendo, sed Romulo in
parricidio. What should I speak of their holy Cardinals, are they not
Ruffians, toss pottes, whore masters, and buggerers with young boys like unto
the Sodomites? all the world knows it. What should I say of others their
Priests, how shamefully they lived in their holy orders, were not a number of
them thieves, periurers, murderers, buggerers with boys, Mares, and Sow
pigges: some of them have been arained at the Bar for it, in Excester and else
where, as the records can testify: and some of them were no small chickens in
the Popes Coube, what say you to those holy Fathers, at the last council of
Trydent, which were solemply gathered together (as they said) to reform
matters of religion, and suppressyng of vice, was not two of those holy
fathers, taken at that time in whordome? the one was stricken down with a Club,
the other taken with the manner, by the husband, and hanged by the neck out of
a great Lucane window in the street. What should I say, not long agone of
one in Winchester, a great D. of the Papists, who would drink, nothing but
water thrice a week, who under the color of virginity, of wearing a shurte of
here, and hanging his shrowde at his beds feet, and mortifiyng his body,
with straightnes of life, kept three whores at once in his Chamber, to serve
him and his fellows at need, which whores were fetched out by certain
Justices of peace. This is as true, as men use to eat meat upon a Boarde. D.
Boorde.
To conclude, and leave troublyng, of your Lordeships chaste and Godly ears,
we will say of their whole Clergy, as some of their own doctors have
written: Venalitate Curiae Roman inaniter praeficiuntur Lenones: Aureum.
Spe^^lu^ in Antilogia.
Coqui, Stabularij equorum, and pueri: Through the briberie of the Court of
Rome, Bawdes, Cooks, Hostlers, Horsekepers, and children are placed in
offices, to govern the Church. Thus I have, rather given an inkelyng hereof,
then opened the particular secrets of the matter, for as saint Barnarde says:
Barnard ad Clerum, in Sino. Rheme^. The third cause. The.vi. of August. Anno.
2591. ^. Cor. 5.
Qu^ in occul^^ fiunt ab Episcopis, turpe est vel dicere. The third cause is,
for that of late one Iho^ Blackeal, borne in Excester, did open penance at
Powles Cross, And then, and there, before all the congregation openly (for
that I detected his horible vices, and manifested the^ to certain of my
friends, to the end that he might be better reclaimed from his lewd and
wanton life, and so to satisfy the whole congregation with open repentance,
crauyng their prayers unto god for him) cried, and breathyng out against me,
many foul and sclaunderous reports, to the great grief of the godly, and
joy of the wicked Papists. But hereby easily appears the nature of the
wicked and malicious. For when any conversion is made (through gods spirit) by
any sinner, Luke 15.1. Matthew. 9.11.
they will envy, and use railyng words against that convert, as the wicked
Scribes, and Pharisees did. And will speak evil of them, because (says
Peter) they run not with them unto the same excess of riote: 1. Peter. 4.4.
therefore speak they evil of you. If I had been altogether as wicked, as he
declared openly: yet, he and all other envious men, ought not to have sorrowed:
Luke 15.10.
but ioyed, not to have envied* but loved Gods good workyng in me, with the
angels of heaven. This wicked man, will not light a Candle to seek a sinner:
but rather will bring a fire brande to consume his brother, with his flaming
words: but as David says, who^ burning Coals shall consume that same
tongue, Psalm. 114.10.11.
that will be the portion for ever, for all such liars and sclaunderers. A
sclaunderer is worse then a Raven, who eats men being dead: but a wicked
slaunderer eats men being a live. But let us examine (Reverend Father) how
this lewd man follows the Counsel of Solomon, Eccle. 8.5.
that says: Despise not a man that turns him self away from sin, nor
cast him not in the teeth with all: but remember that we are all worthy blame:
Galat. 6.1.
the like doctrine Paul teaches. Brethren, if a man be fallen by occas^ion
into any fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such one with the spirit of
meekness, considering thy self, Ezech. 18.21.
lest thou be tempted also. The Lord says, by his prophet, that he will not
remember, nor make mention, of the former life of a sinner, after his
conversion. But this envious, and sclaunderous man, will have in remembrance
things past, and make mention of that was never done, spoken, no^ said, to
the great infamy of the Gospel, because I am called (although unworthy) to
be a preacher thereof. Upon which reports, and manifest sclaunders spoken, the
Queens majesty's commissioners immediately sent for me to come before them,
and upon my apparaunce (he then being in the Marshal see a prisoner) found
such subtle and crafty means, that he stole away from his keeper: knowing
well in his conscience, that he falsely (for the most part) had accused me,
and wickedly sclaundered me. So that I could not have him face to face, before
the commissioners, to try whether it were all true he spoke at the Cross:
thus he ran away, and left the infamy to me, bihinde him. So now I must
refer my cause to God, who shall call us both to accomptes one day, from
whom, there shall be no runnyng, nor scapyng away. This Blackeall (reverend
Father) did open penance at Powles Cross, Blackeall has four wives alive at
once.
for that he had at that present four wives alive. And also, for that he
thrust himself into the ministry, for the space of.12. years, and yet was
never lawfully called, nor made by any Bishop accordingly. Four days after
his penance at the Cross, Blackeall is a Pillorie knight.

Blackeall uses ^eales to counterfeit Co^missions. Blackeall is a chopper of
benefices. He is a raker for men's money.

He is a common caryer about of whores and harlottes. He is ashamed of his own
name. Matthew. 3.7.


he was set in the Pillory in Chepeside, with papers on his head, for taking
the Bishop of Canterburies Seal from one writing, and set it to a counterfeict
Commission, wherewith he polled and pylled great sums of money from the poor
simple ministers, that dwelled in the country: he is one that choppeth and
changes benefices, passing little what means and ways he may practice, so
that he may have, and get money from any man. He has and does run, from
country to country, from town to town, leading about with him naughty
women, as in Gloucester shire, he led a naughty strompet about the country,
called green Apron. Also, he alters his name whersoeuer he comes. Sometime
he is called Blackeall (for that is his right name) sometime Barthall, sometime
Dorrell, sometime Barkeley, sometime Baker, sometime one name, sometime
another. This is that man (Reverend Father) that has Lynxes eyes, to see
Motes in his brothers eye: but cannot see great beams in his own. He looks
to his brothers sins that are past: but not to his own that are present and
emminent to all men's eyes. He casts that end of the wallet behind him, but
other that come after him, can and will see it truly: and reprove it godly,
and christianly: and not enuiously. For this envy, as Barnarde says, Barnard
in Sermon. 4.
is a bablyng evil, a secret poison, a hidden pestilence, the worker of
craft, the mother of dissimulation, the beginning of vices, a devouring canker
of holiness, the blinder of hearts: making diseases of remedies, and griefs of
medicine. But I will leave him now to the Lord, desiryng him, to convert him,
that he may amend his naughty life, and turn to the Lord with faith and true
repentance, and make his members to serve God, in righteousness and true
holiness, all the days of his life. This made me (Reverend Father) according
to the talent which God has given me, so in these evil days and times to
apply my labor, that all men (notwithstanding their filthy books, and railyng
words) may thoroughly see and perceive what I am and have been since I was
called into the ministry, thereby to satisfy a number of fickle heads, and
unstable people, which know me not in person: yet by this means, I shall
seem to be present to them, when they shall read this my little treatise of my
faith, for as Saint Hierome says: Letters and Epistles make men present, yet
being absent, not doubtyng but that little, with which GOD has endued me by
his free mercy, may shine through the Clouds and Mistes of errors, which
the Prince of darkness has blown abroad. And for that I was one of the
first ministers that ever your lordship laid hands on, and also for that God
has made you one of good will, desirous, and of authority, able to defend
the profession of a christian man: I could not but choose your Lordship, under
whose name, my little labor should appear, both for a testimony unto all men,
that you are one, in whom the godly do rejoice, and a provocation unto others,
to go forward in all godliness, in the buildyng up of Gods Church, which he
has purchased to him self, 1. Pet. 2.5. Romans 12.1.
to be a spiritual and holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices,
acceptable to God, by his precious death and passion. Humbly beseechyng your
honor, to take this my small talent in the best part, not lookyng in this
work of mine, for the pleasant speech of Isocrates: nor the high style of
Demosthenes, nor yet the excellent dignity of Plato, nor the reverend
majesty of Theucidides: but a bare and homely style, accept my good meaning
yet, which tends to gods glory, and advancement of his kingdom. Who
prosper and mainteyne your Lordship, in his fear, knowledge, and wisdom,
long to continue, enrichyng you with all good blessings, and govern you by
his holy spirit, in all your actions and doings, to the maintenance of his
glory, and comfort of his poor afflicted and warryng Church, until he shall
call you to come unto him self, there to continue in his glorious kingdom,
for ever and ever, Amen.

From Redcliffe in Bristoll. Your Lordships to use in the Lord, John
Northbrooke, preacher.

August. ad Marcellinum Epist. 7. Ego proinde fateor me eorum numero esse
conari:
qui proficiendo scribunt: and scribendo proficiunt.

To the Christian, and faithful Reader.
I Am not ignoraunte (gentle reader) how dangerous an enterprise it is, in
this our age, either to write, or diuulgate any work abroad: considering the
furiousness of certain snuffyng detractours in the world, and bityng zoilous
persons at home, August.
would make one like Augustines counsel, that says: Tutior est discentis,
quam docentis conditio. More safe is the condition of the learner, 1. Cor.
4.10* 11.12.13. Wisd. 2.24. Romans 16.17. 1. Cor. 4.18. 2. Cor. 10.2. Galat. 1.7.
2. Cor. 2.11.
then of the teacher. For it is no marvel, sith that pernicious and hurtful
stepdame (of Virtue) Disdain, and Envy, continually puts in her foot, to
hinder and let every honest enterprise. How hard a thing it is, and what great
impedimentes, and lettes there are to enterprise any act, not only daiely
experience sufficiently declares: but also that Proverb confirms it, which
says, that all things are heard which are fair and excellent. For
assuredly, Eccle. 2.1.
there is no condition without his enemy: no calling without some temptation,
no estate sure and clear. Therefore, the estate of man, so much the more is to
be lamented, how much the less it is regarded, would make a godly heart to
muse much and oftentimes, how he might be a fruictfull and painful labourer in
Gods Uineyarde.

Therefore, what soever the wicked shall say of me, I will say with David,
Psalm. 109.4.
Detrahebant mihi: ego autem orabam: For my friendship they were mine enemies:
but I gave my self unto prayer. After that I had ended this my book, it
happened by Gods providence (gentle reader) that in a Lecture of mine, at
Redclif in Bristoll, I had occasion given me by the text, which was taken out
of the.xxxj. Psalm (where David commends his spirit into the hands of God)
to prove that all the souls of the righteous, that died before Christ's
coming in the flesh, were in heaven, and not in any Purgatory, Limbo, or
Hell. That christ's soul should not need to go down thither to fetch them
out. And also declared that Christ used the like words upon the Cross, Luke
23.46.
by which is declared, that his soul (departing from his body) went
straight into heaven, and not into hell, the place of the dampened: But that the
efficacy, virtue, and power of his death and passion, did pearce through and
into the very hell it self, by his divine power and Godheade: Heb. 2.14.15. 1.
Cor. 15.55. Colo. 1.13.14 Ioh. 5.24.25. Revel. 14.13.
that all the damned souls, felt their full pain, and just damnation for
their infidelity: And Satan him self, felt all the power, and strength of his
tyranny, and darkness, was weakened, vanquished, and fallen to ruin and
utter decaie. etc. And that the souls of all them that died in the faith of
Christ (being in heaven) felt the fullness of their redemption: John. 19.30.
how it was now fully perfected, and ended for them. etc. This being by me
taught, it was noysed abroad in the peoples ears (and that by no mean men)
that I had denied an article of the Creed, and that I was an open heretic,
and such a one as was not worthy of life, but cruel death.

When those reports, and false rumors came unto mine ears, I besought God to
strengthen me in his faith, and give me patience, Acts. 24.14.
knowing well, that after the way (which they call heresy) so worship I, and
teach the God of my fathers: beleuyng all things which are written in the
law and the Prophets. I also considered with my self, what will this people
say and report, when as they shall happen to read my book, wherein this
article of Christ's deseension into hell, is handeled, that thus begin to
condemn and judge me, before they have known or heard the truth opened: upon
the occasion whereof, I clean altered my former preface to the reader, that I
had made before, and made this as an apology or defense thereof, against such
as will, or shall carpe against it. Wherefore, I beseech thee (friendly reader)
to lend me thy ears, to hear me, thy eyes to see me, thy tongue to read me,
thy mind and heart to judge me, with an upright judgment, according to the
truth of Gods word: which (as David says) is a Lantern unto our feet,
Psalm. 119.105. Psalm. 19.7.8.9.10.11.
and a light unto our paths: that is it that gives wisdom unto the simple,
it is that, Wisd. 10.21.
that gives light unto the eyes, by it the servant of God is made
circumspecte: our Savior Christ wills us to search the scriptures, John.
5.39. Acts. 17.11.
for those are they that bear witness of him. For, the mind must be
taught, and instructed of the will of God, by the word, like as the eyes are
taught, and instructed by outward things. August. de doctr. christia. lib.
1. cap. 37.
For as Augustine says: Titubat fides, si diuinarum scripturarum vacillat
authoritas. If the authority of the holy scriptures waver, then does
faith stumble.

I will now (according to my small skill) say of this matter, somewhat more
largely, then I have said already in my book: whether sufficient, or
insufficient, I shall pray thee to stand an indifferent judge. To thee it is
dedicated: and for thy sake it is written. Here must I say unto thee, even as
S. Hierome sometime said to his reader in the like case: Hieron. aduer. error.
Johan. Hierosolymitani.
Quaeso lector, vt memor Tribunalis domini, and de iuditio tuo, te intellige^s
iudicandu^, nec mihi, nec aduersario meo faueas: neue personas loquentiu^, sed
causam consideres: That is: I beseech thee, good reader, that, reme^bryng the
judgment seat of the Lord, and understanding, that as thou iudgest, so thou
shall be judged, thou favor neither me, nor mine adversary: And that thou
regard not the persons, but the cause only.

First, thou shalt understand (gentle reader) that this Article of Christ's
descendyng into hell, is not read (as Rofinus says) in the Roman Creed,
nor yet in the Nicen Creed, the East Church had it not, the Counsel of
Ephesus, and Constantinople left it out. For, we may read by the writings
of the old Fathers, that that part which is read in the Creed, was not in
old time so much used in the Churches (yet I do confess it is a necessary
article, meet to have a place in the Creed, as a thing that contains a very
profitable mystery of a weighty matter. Cyprian in Symbo. expositio.
) Saint Cyprian unto this says: Sciendum sane est, quod in Ecclesia Romana,
Symbolo non habetur additu^, descendit ad inferna. Sed neque in Orientis
ecclesiis habetur hic sermo. Know ye for certainty, that the Church of Rome
has not added this in the Creed, he descended into hell: No, neither yet the
East Churches has added this kind of speech (in the Creed.) Unto this
Erasmus fully agrees, saying: Atque adeo quum Symbolum Nicenae, Erasmus in
Symbolum cathechesis. 4.
sine Constantinopolitanae Synodi, nihil aliud sit, quam huius Symboli
explanatio, ne illic quidem quicquam est, quod huic particulae respondeat. Ipsa
denique inconcintas sermonis arguit ab alio quopiam intertextum emblema: That
is, Moreover, although the Simbole, or Creed, of the Sinode holden at Nice, or
the Sinode holden at Constantinople, is none other thing, then a declaration of
this Simbole, or Creed (called the Apostles Creed:) yet there is not so much as
any thing that is correspondent to this particle. Finally, the very
inco^cinnitie, and unhandsome joining, or hanging together of the speech and
oration, is an evident argument, that this parcel, or particle (he descended
into hell) was put in among the other Articles, by some other man. (As is
supposed by Thomas of Aquine) and immediately after, he shows the cause, why
the ancient fathers put not this Article into the Creed, (he descended into
hell. In eode^ loco.
) Quia vetustissimi patres magna Religion^ cauebant, ne quid asseuerarent
duntaxat in Symbolo, quod non esset euidenter expressum in sacris literis
vtriusque testimenti: Tal^^ sunt articuli omnes, hoc vno excepto: That is,
because the fathers of auncientest time, with great Religion, took heed and
were war^ that they would not affirm any thing, namely in the Creed, which
was not expressed in the Scriptures of both Testamentes. Such manner Articles
are all the other, only this one (he descended into hell) excepted. Thus far
Erasmus. Saint Augustine in his book, de Fide and Symbolo, expoundyng the
Creed of the Apostles, August. de ^^de and Symbo. cap. 5. Phil. 2.^.
coming to the Article of Christ's sufferynges, declares of his patience, and
humility in sufferyng death, even the death of the Cross, to take away the
horror of death from us: and that he was crucified and buried, under Pontius
Pilate, addyng Pilates name for the certainty of the time, and that he lay in
a grave, and before that in the womb of his mother, in which grave and
belly, never none lay before, nor after. etc. But of this article of Christ's
descention into hell, he never speaks word of it, nor yet recites it: for
if it had been an Article put in the Creed at the first, would saint
Augustine have left it out think you, or at least* never to have spoken word
of it in this place, having such an occasion, and opportunity as he had in
entreatyng of the belief? I can never believe that, for of all the old writers,
he was most precise, and vigilante in such poinctes of Religion that touched
faith. So that it must evidently appear, that it was put in by some
aftercommers, as Erasmus before has said. Whereby we may understand, the
care of the godly ones then, that would not put forth, or affirm any
thing, which could not be proved by the Scriptures. So Hierome says:
Hieron. i^ psalm. 98.
Omne quod loquimur, debemus affirmare de scripturis sanctis: What soever we
affirm, we must prove it by the holy scriptures. For Augustine says: Sine
scripturarum autoritate: nihil definiendum est. August. in epist. 157.
Nothing is to be determined, or affirmed, without the authority of the
holy and sacred scriptures. And likewise Saint Paul says: Now is the
righteousness of God made manifest without the Law, Romans 3.21.
having witness of the Law, and of the Prophets. Whereby is gathered, that
all truth and righteousness of Gods Religion, and our faith in the redemption
of his son, must have the witness of the Law and the Prophets: that is to
say, the holy Scriptures will ever acknowledge and allow it. And whereto it
gives no witness, that is always false and erroneous. For as saint Hierome
says: Hiero. in Matthew. 23.
Hoc quia ex sacris literis authoritatem non habet, eadem facilitate
refellitur, qua probatur: Seeing this, says he (speaking against those
Fathers, that did affirm, that that Zachary which Christ spoke of, being the
son of Barachie, was John Baptists father) has no authority out of the
scriptures, it may be as easily denied, as affirmed. Therefore I say, John.
5.3^. Acts. 17.1^*
search the holy scriptures, as they of Berea did as concerning this matter in
question: and yet thou shalt never be able to find there, that ever Christ
our Savior, in body or soul, descended into hell after his death, to the
place of the dampened, or into any Limbo. Only thou shall find there, that he
died, and rose again the third day. etc. Some will here reply and say:
What sir, you say not truly? Are there not scriptures sufficient to prove, he
descended into hell? although there are sondrie places, yet there are four
principal places, as in the Psalms, in Zachary, in the Acts of the
Apostles, and in Saint Peter's Epistle? Psalm. 16.10. Zach. 9.11. Acts. 2.31.
1. Peter. 3.19.
I pray you say they, is it not written in the Psalm thus? Non derelinques
animam meam in inferno? I do grant it is so written, but it follows not
hereby to prove that his soul, or that Christ's soul should go unto hell,
the place of the damned: for soul in this place, does not signify the soul
of Christ, but it signifies the body, or person of Christ: and by hell he
understands, not the place of the damned, but the grave or sepulcher, and
therefore Stephanus translation has, Non relinques corpus meu^ in sepulchro,
thou shalt not leave my body or person in the grave: So has the Tygurian
translation also. For this Hebrew word, N^pesch, signifies a body, Leui.
21.1.11. Number. 9.10.
or person, as you may read in Leuiticus, and in Numeri.

Also, for this word, Soul, in that place and many others, is taken for the
whole natural man: for we read in Genesis, that all the souls that came with
Jacob into Egypt, Genesis 46.26.
which came out of his loins, were in the whole, threescore and six fowls:
that is, threescore and six persons or bodies. And in the Acts it is said:
Acts. 2.41.
There were added to the Church (by Peter's Sermon) about three thousand
souls: 1. Pet. 3.20.
that is, three thousand persons. And so Peter uses the same when he says:
Wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved in the water: that is, eight
persons or bodies S. Paul also uses that word, saying: Romans 13.1.
Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. etc. That is, let every
body or person be subject. etc. By this you may soon perceive what David
means by this word, soul: that it should not lie in the grave for ever, but
should rise up again. ^ob. 19.20.
So Job says, in matter one, although in other words, where he says:
Though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet I shall see God in my
flesh. As for this word, Hell, it is taken in diverse significations in the
Scriptures, as you may ^ee in my book, where I do entreat of this article:
but in this place it signifies not the place of the damned, but the grave
wherein he was buried. So likewise, S. Cyprian d^eth expound that word (hell)
saying: Vis tamen verbi eadem videtur esse in eo quod sepultu^ dicitur: Cypr.
in Symbo.
That is, howbeit, there seems to be the same strength of the word (hell) in
that he is said to have been buried.

As for the place of Zachary, where he says: Thou also shall be saved
through the blood of thy covenant: Zach. 9.11.
I have loosed thy prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water, serves little
and nothing at all for the proof of Christ's descention into hell. For the
Prophets meaning is in that place, that God saves his Church by the blood of
Christ, whereof the blood of the sacrifices was a figure, and is here called
the covenant of the Church, Genesis 17.9.
which he did make with Abraham, promisyng unto him, that all nations should be
blessed in his seed, which is our savior Christ. And so Zachary compares
the babylonicall overthrow, (wherein the people was oppressed) to a dry pyt.
So that he understands by the prisoners, (not any souls in hell, but) the
children and servants of God, which were and are captives under Satan the
devil, man's enemy: who was prefigured before, by that cruel tyrant Pharao,
and by the king of Babylon: And by the waterlesse pit, he understands the
goulfe of all miseries and calamities, whence it is impossible for man to come
out by any means: without the helping hand, and out stretched arm of Gods
almighty power. And that you shall not think this to be of my own
exposition, August. de ciuit. dei. lib. 18. cap. 35.
I will show you what S. Augustine says upon this place: Alio loco ad ipsum
Christum in spiritu Prophe^ia loquens, de remissio^e peccatorum per eius
sanguinem: Tu quoque inquit, in sanguine Testamenti tui ^misisti vinctos tuos
de lacu in quo non est aqua. Quid per hunc locum velit intelligi, possunt
diuersa sentiri etiam secundum rectam fidem. Mihi autem videtur non eo
significari melius, nisi humanae miseriae si^cam profundi^atem quodammodo, and
sterilem, vbi non sunt fluentia iustitiae, sed iniquitatis lucum. D^ hoc quippe
lac^^ in psalmo dicitur: and eduxit me de lacu miseriae, and de lu^^ l^mi: that
is to say: And in an other place, speaking of the spirit of prophecy unto
Christ him self, touching the remission of sins through his blood: Thou
also says he, have through the blood of thy Testamente, let the prisoners
out of the pit where no water is: what he will have to be understood by
this lake, or pit, men may judge many ways, and that after the right
faith. But I think, that nothing can better be understood by it, then the
dry, and as it were the barraine profunditie of the depenesse of man's misery,
where the streams of righteousness are not, but the mudde of iniquity. And
of this pit it is spoken in the Psalm: Psalm. 59.2.
and he has (says he) brought me* out of the pit of misery: and out of
the mire and claie. Hitherto Augustine. Thus you may easily perceive that this
saying of the Prophet, nothing appertains unto the dead, which are
already delivered from those miseries, that are signified by the waterlesse
pit: but unto the living. For he says directly after. Turn you to the
strong hold, ye prisoners of hope. Which words can not be applied to the
dead: Zach. 9.12.
but to the living only. For, the Prophet bids them turn into the holy
land, where the city and temple are, where God will defend them. Saint
Hierome therefore says, to all them that do hang upon bare words of the
scriptures: Nec putemus in verbis scripturarum esse Euangelium, Hiero. in
Epist. ad Gala. cap. 1.
sed in sensu: non in superficie, sed in medulla: non in sermonum folijs, sed
in radice rationis. That is: Neither let us think that the Gospel
consists in the words of the scriptures, but in the meaning: not in the
bark, but in the pithe: not in the leaves of words, but in the root of the
meaning. 2. Peter. 1.20.
Peter confirms this, saying: So that ye first know this, that no prophecy
in the scripture is of any private interpretation. Thus much as concerning the
place of the Prophet Zachary.

As for the place in the Acts of the Apostles, what is said above, Act. 2.30.
upon the Psalm may suffice: for that that was spoken by David in the Psalm,
was prophetically spoken of Christ, not that his soul should go and preach,
or bring out any soul from hell, that was nothing the Prophets meaning. But
he prophesied there, only of the death and resurrection of Christ. Act. 2.30.
For so does saint Peter open and expound it, saying: Therefore, seeing he
was a Prophet, and knew that God had sworn with an oath to him, that of the
fruicte of his loins, he would raise up Christ, concerning the flesh, to set
him upon his Throne. 31
He knowing this before, spoke of the resurrection of Christ, that his soul
(that is his person or body) should not be left in grave: neither his flesh
should se corruption. Here note, 32
that where in one place he calls it by the name of the soul, or body,
immediately he names it flesh. Thus you may see how one Scripture opens
another. So Hierome says: Moris scripturarum obscuris, manifesta subnectere:
that is, Hieron. in Esai. cap. 9. August. in lib. 83. question. quest. 64.
It is the order of the scriptures, after hard things, to join other things
that be plain. Saint Augustine also says: Solet circumstantia scripturarum
illuminare sententiam: The circumstaunces of the scriptures is wont to give
light, and to open the meaning. M. Theodorus Beza, translateth that verse, Non
derelinques animam meam in inferno, Theodo. Beza. in Act. 2.
thus, Non relinques cadauer meu^ in sepulchro. For as he says, Nequ^ enim
Petrus hic disputat de animi immortalitate, sed de corporis resurrectione,
eaque eiusmodi vt nulla praecesserit corruption. Peter (faith he) does not here
in this place, dispute of the immortality of the soul, but of the
resurrection of Christ's body, in such manner that no corruption could, or
should, corrupt it. Again he says: Dico igitur nunquam praetermissuros
fuisse Euangelistas istiusmodi historiam descensus animae Christi ad inferos,
In ^ode^ loco.
and arbitror (quod cum veterum pace dictum sit) somnia esse quacunque de hac
re apud illos co^memorantur: that is: Therefore I say, that the Evangelists
would never have over passed, or let slip (with silence) such an history
of the descendyng of the soul of Christ into hell (if it had been so) and I
judge and say (by the leave of the ancient fathers) what soever of this matter
they have written, or remembered amongeste them, to be but dreams and
fantasies. etc. Therefore saint Augustine gives this counsel: August. de
tempore. Sermon. 145.
Nemo de Christo creda^, nisi quod dese credi voluit Christus: That is. Let
no man believe more of Christ, then Christ has willed thee to believe. And
this be spoken as sufficient for this present, upon this place of the acts.

Now lastly, 1. Peter 3.18.19.
is that place of S. Peter, where he says that Christ was put to death
concerning the flesh: but was quickened in the spirit, Erasmus is very corrupt
upon this place, but it seems that he well understands it not, for he says
in the margene it is, locus dur^s. Calvin in com. 1. Pet. 3.
by the which he also went, and preached unto the spirits that were in prison.
Hereupon they blow up the Trumpet, but yet stay a little, thou must note
(gentle reader) that here is no mention made, Anima Christi, of the soul of
Christ: but that he went, tantum spiritu, only in his spirit. For as M.
Calvin says: Sunt autem haec long diuersa, animam Christi venisse, et
Christum praedicasse spiritus sui potentia. These are (says he) great
differences (to say) that the soul of Christ to have come: And (to say)
Christ to have preached by the power of his spirit. Now (friendly reader)
here is the difficulty in these two words: Spiritus, and carcer: the spirit,
and the prison. Understande that by this word (spirit) is not meant nor taken
in this place, for the soul of Christ: but for the power of his Godhead. For
it was not his soul that was able to quicken him self, but the spirit of god
quickened him: that is, his godly and divine power that quickened his humanity.
Paul opens this very plainly to the Cor. saying: Christ was crucified
concerning his infirmity, 2. Cor. 13.4.
yet lives he through the power of God. etc. Where Peter names it the
spirit, Paul calls it the power of God. And he calls it the operation of
God, which raised (and quickened) him from the dead. Coloss. 2.12.
And to the Romans he shewth that the virtue of the spirit was not only
showed in the person of Christ: but is showed also upon us all, saying: If the
spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, Romans 8.11.
dwell in you: he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your
mortal bodies because that his spirit dwells in you. By these places we may
understand what Peter meant by the spirit: that is, Gods divine power and
might, and not the soul of Christ.

Now, in that Peter calls it a prison, is not to be taken here, The Greek
word signifies an high tower where watch is kept. Genesis 6.3.
that he understands by it, the place of hell for the damned, but he aludeth
it to that place of Genesis, where it is said: Non permanebit spiritus meus in
homine inaeternum, quia caro est: My spirit shall not strive with man, because
he is but flesh. So that it is a common phrase of speech in the Scriptures,
that Peter here uses, for the Prophet Esai has the like saying: Isaiah. 42.7.
Vt aperires oculos caecorum, and educeres de conclusione vinctum, de domo
carceris sedentes in tenebris: That thou may open the eyes of the blind,
and bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out
of the prison house. Isaiah. 29.9.
And in another place he says: Vt dicetis his qui vincti sunt, exite: and his
qui in tenebris, reuelamini: That thou may say to the prisoners, Gala.
4.3.23.
go forth: and to them that are in darkness, show your selves. Saint Paul in
a manner uses the like phrase, saying: Before says came, we were kept under
the law, and shut up unto the faith, which should afterward be revealed. Luke
4.18. Isa. 61.1.
Our savior Christ uses it often, where it is written: The spirit of the
Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me, that I should preach the
Gospel to the poor: he has sent me, that I should heal the broken hearted,
that I should preach deliverance to the captives, and recoueryng of sight to
the blind: that I should set at liberty them that are bruised. Saint Peter
him self, in the fourth Chapter following, 1. Pet. 4.6.
speaks of this matter: but yet in other words, saying: For unto this
purpose was the Gospel preached also unto the dead, that they might be
condemned according to men in the flesh: but might live according to God in
the spirit: that is to say, the Gospel was preached (not to the dead bodies
in the graves, nor to the souls in hell) but to them of time past, which now
are dead, to the intent that they might have been condemned, or dead unto sin
in the flesh, and might have lived to God in the spirit: which two are the
effect of the Gospel. 2. Peter. 2.^.
And in his second Epistle, he calls them the world of the ungodly, saying:
Neither has spared the old world, but saved Noe the eight person, a preacher
of righteousness, and brought in the flood upon the world of the ungodly.
etc.

So now, we may perceive by the conference of those places, what Peter means
by the spirits that were in prison, that are all those which were in the
prison of sin and death. etc. For Peter's only purpose in this place is, to
set forth the universal preaching of repentance, which was preached in the
times of Noe: even with the same open and universal preaching, Matthew. 28.19.
Mark. 16.15. 2. Peter. 2.5.
that was dooen in all the world, in the time of Christ the son of God,
after his resurrection from the dead. For, the son of God did preach in the
time of Noe, in the spirit: that is, by his spiritual preaching of
repentance, did call the spirits that were in prison, that is, those wicked
men that were shut up in the prisone of wickedness and sin, and for their
sinfulness, are worthy of death, and hell. So says Titleman, Franciscus
Titlemanus. Hesselensis in 1. Peter. 3.
Veniens ad illos incredulos homines, qui tunc in tenebrosa caligine errorum
snorum iacebant demersi* veniens (inquam) spiritu, praedicauit eis ad
poenitentiam reuerti, vt possent cum Noe saluari, inspirando Prophetas and Noe,
qui ex ore domini populum a m^lis reuocare quaerebant: That is, Coming to
those unbelieving men, which then did lie drowned in the darekenesse of their
errors: Coming (I say) in spirit, did preach to them, to turn to
repentance, that they might be saved with Noe, inspiryng the Prophets and
Noe: did seek to call the people back from their euilnesse, by the mouth of
God. Also he sets forth the merciful goodness, and long sufferaunce, in
that he called them to repentance by Noe, whiles the Arc was a preparing, by
the space of a hundred and twenty years, which leuitie, goodness, and long
sufferaunce of GOD they did despise, Romans 2.4. 2. Peter. 3.15.
and neglecte: for which the flood of Gods vengeance came upon them, that
were disobedient, in the times of Noe.

The very text it self, plainly declares that this exposition is true. For
if we mark the words of the text, as they lie in order, 1. Pet. 3.18.19.
it will soon open Peter's whole meaning. The words are these: But was
quickened in the spirit: by which he also went, and preached unto the spirits
that were in prisone (then immediately follows what those spirits were)
which (says he) were in time passed disobedient, when once the long
sufferyng of God abode. (Now he shows when it was) in the days of Noe. (Then
he declares the time, and how long they were disobediente) while the Arc was
preparyng (says he. Genesis 6.3.
) Which latter words makes it plain. For he says, he preached in the
spirit, to the prisoners that were disobedient, while the Arc was a making.
So that it appears that those prisoners were a live, at the making and
preparyng of the Arc. And during all that time of a 120. years, Christ
preached to them in his spirit, 2. Pet. 2.5. Eccle. 2.20.21.
by Noe the eight person, a preacher of righteousness, to turn them from
their sins, and so be saved. And because they would not, in their life time
obey Gods word: are cast now after their life, into judgment of hell fire,
as we have said before. And by the same argument, Matt. 10.20.
Peter goes about to move the Jews, by their example, to be obedient to
Gods calling, that calls them by his spirit, through his Preachers and
Ministers, by his long sufferaunce to repentance, and amendment of life,
whiles they are here in the earth. Otherwise, for their disobedience, now in
their life time, Luke 10.16. Matt. 10.40. John. 13.20.
unto the preaching of his Ministers, shall be damned after this life, as they
are. Christ our Savior does teach this plainly, at whose mouth Peter
learned this, that now he has taught in this Epistle to the Jews: When as
he spoke of the end of the world, saying: As the days of Noe were, so
likewise shall the coming of the son of man be. Matthew. 24.37.38.39.42.44.
Luke 17.26.
For, they did eat and drink, marry, and give in marriage, unto the day that
Noe entered into the Arc: And knew nothing, till the floodde came and took
them away, so also shall the coming of the son of man be. And then
immediately after, he gives this commandment to the^, saying: Wake therefore,
for ye know not what hour your master will come. Mark. 13.33.
Therefore be ye also ready: for in the hour that ye think not, will the
son of man come. Now we may see, that all this is spoken to that end, to
move us by their example, to turn from our sins, and wicked life: and not
to prove hereby, 1. Cor. 10.11.
that the souls of any of the righteous before Christ's coming were in hell:
and so Christ's soul must fetch them out, which are but the imaginations of
men. For so says Erasmus: Erasmus in Symbolum.
Talia multa and circa hanc adiecticiam particulam quidam commenti sunt,
narrantes quos Christus abduxerit, quos ibi reliquerit, quae quibus ad singulos
circulos sit loquutus. etc: That is, Many such manner of things have certain
men imagined also, about this particle (he descended into hell) which we have
showed to be an addition to the Creed, tellyng what persons Christ did bring
from hell, and whom he did leave there still, and what things: with what
words he did speak to every one of the Circles. etc. Therefore he says:
Tibi satis est profiteri Christum sic descendisse ad inferos, In eode^ lo^^.
quemadmodum sentit scriptura. etc. It is sufficient for thee (says he) to
profess that Christ did so descend to hell, as the scripture means.

For we must understand, Christ being from the beginning, head, and governor
of his Church, came in the days of Noe, not in body, which then he had not:
but in spirit, and preached by the mouth of Noe to the disobedient, which
would not then repent: and therefore, now are reserved to the last judgment.
For Paul says, Jesus Christ, yesterday and to day, Hebr. 13.8. John. 8.58.
Ephe 2.20.21.22. 1. Cor. 3.11. Revel. 1.11. 2. Pet. 1.21.
the same is also for ever: as if he would say, Christ was, and shall be the
foundation of all his Church for ever. Peter also says: The prophecy came not
in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spoke, as they were moved
by the spirit (of God). Whereupon I say, as the son of GOD did preach in
his spirit, to them that were in prisone (as Peter says) that is, 1. Peter.
3.19.
to them that were then in the prison of their sins, that they should repent
(as we have before written) and so be saved. John. 15.26. cap. 16.7.8.13.
Even so now, at this day, he is quickened in the spirit, and by the same
spirit, continually does preach, and teach, by his ministers, Joel.
2.12.13. Matthew. 3.3. cap. 28.19. Mark. 16.15. Acts 2.36.37.38.39.40.41. Romans
1.16. 1. Cor. 18. 2. Cor. 3.6. Hylarius. lib. 4. de Trinita.
unto the worlds end, to those people, that are in the prisone of sin,
ignorance, and disobedience, to turn them to the Lord, that every one that
believes, may be saved. This is the very meaning of this place, therefore we
must not gather, or descante upon bare words, and take them literally, as we
list: But we must gather of the cause. For so says saint Hillarie.
Intelligentia dictorum, ex causis est assumenda dicendi, quia non sermoni res,
sed rei est sermo subiectus. That is. The meaning of words is to be
gathered, by the causes of the speaking, for the matter is not subject to the
word: Erasmus in Symbol.
but the word to the matter. Erasmus says, that some came after, and seemed
to gather out of the Scriptures, some sentences, whereto they added some
reasons. Non illas quidem adamantinas: But not those reasons (says he)
verelie most strong: but such as are of no weighte. And after that he has
recited up all the places that seem to make for Christ's soul to have
descended into hell, the place of the dampened: he concludes, saying. In eode^
loco.
Verum horum nihil est, quod cogat credere, Christi animam per se decendisse ad
tartarum, si^e, vt illi loquuntur, ad Limbum. That is. There is none of all
those aucthorities (of scriptures) that may constrain any to believe, that the
soul of Christ, went down by him self personally to hell, or as they call
it, to Lymbum. Hereunto agrees one Pampolitanus, that says: Richard.
Pampolitanus in Symbo.
In inferno igitur damnatorum pro peccato actuali, Christus non fuit, quia vt
ipse dicit: inter vos and nos chaos magnum statutum est etc. Sicut enim coelum
Empyrium est locus gloria: Ita infernus est locus aeterne poenae. Sicut ergo
damnatus non potest ascendera coelum Empyrium: Ita nullus saluatus potest
descendere in locum damnatorum: Luke 16.26.
ergo neque Christus. That is to say. In the hell of the dampened, for actual
sin committed, Christ was not, for because he says: Between you and us
there is a great goulfe set. etc. For, as the Imperial heaven is a place of
glory: So hell is a place of extreme pain and punishemente. Therefore, as the
dampened cannot ascend into the Imperial heaven: So none of the saved, Wisd.
3.10. Deuteronomy. 33.3. wisd. 3.1.2.3.4. Romans 8.1.
can descend into the place of the dampened: Therefore, much less Christ. By
which testemonies it is plain, agreeable to the word of God, that Christ's
soul, after his death, never went down to hell the place of the dampened, or
into any Lymbum: but it went directly into heaven, as he did commend it upon
the Cross. Luke 23.4^.


The reason that moves men to judge, that his soul went into hell, is, for
that they supposed all the souls of the righteous, before Christ's coming,
went down to hell. And of this gross judgment was saint Augustine,
Origene, Hierome, Chrysostom, Gregory, Folengius. etc. And therefore, they
affirmed that Christ's soul did fetch out Adam, and Eve, Abel, Seth, Noe,
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob. etc. How far wide all they were, from the truth
herein, it may easily appear by the sacred Scriptures. For there it is fully
expressed, that the Church of Christ did begin, from the creation of the
world and from the first righteous man that ever was, and that it shall
continue, and endure unto the last day, for ever. For, the Church of the
Patriarchs and Prophettes, that have been before Christ's coming, is all one,
with the Church of his Apostles and Evangelists: and the faithful of the
old Testamente: and the faithful of the new, are all one people and one
Church: Hebr. 11.6.
they have had all one God, one Christ, and the very same promises. They have
had all one spirit of faith, and have all eaten of one spiritual food, 1.
Cor. 10.3.4.
and drunk of one spiritual drink, with us. So says Leo. Misteria pro
temporum ratione variata sunt, Leo de nattitate domi. Sermon. 3.
quu^ fides, qua viuimus nulla fuerit aetate diuersa: That is. Their
Sacraments, by reason of the time were diverse, when as the faith, by the
which we all live, in no age was diverse. August. in Ioh. tract. 26.
So says saint Augustine likewise. Sacrame^ta illa fuerunt in signis
diuersa, in rebus quae significaba^tur pariae: that is: Their Sacraments in
outward signs, were diverse (from ours) but as concerning the things which
they did signify, August. de utilitate poeniton. cap. 1.
are equal, and one (with ours.) Tunc Christus venturus, modo Christus venit,
venturus: and venit: diuersa verba sunt: sed idem Christus. That is: Then was,
Christ shall come: now is, Christ is come. Shall come, and is come, are
sundry words: But Christ is all one, whereupon I may well conclude, that
all the faithful, in the old Testament: and the faithful in the new, have
had, and have now: but one place of rest, and joy, to be received in after
their life. Chrisost. in Luca^. Tom. 6. Hom. 15.
Chrysostom herein says: That the bosom of Abraham, was unto the poor
Lazarus, Paradise, or heaven. Some will reply (says he) in Paradise: but I
confess also the holy Paradise. etc.

Now (gentle Reader) understand, that the promise was made unto Adam, Genesis
3.15.
touching the seed of the woman, that should break the Serpents head: and
that has been confirmed again, and more plainly set forth unto the other
Patriarchs, and especially unto Abraham and David, all they (I say) that did
give credit unto it, Genesis 15.4. cap. 17.7.8.9.10. 2. Sam. 7.12.13 14.15.16.
Galat. 3.6.
and believed that they should be saved by the blessed promised seed, have all
entered into the heavenly joy: which has been purchased unto them, and us,
by our savior Jesus Christ. And for thy better learning (good reader) mark
this what I say. Although our Savior Christ has been offered up upon the
Cross, for to make satisfaction unto the righteousness of God for us, Eccle.
4.4.
at the time that was appoincted him of the father: yet was he slain, and
offered in the presence of God, from the beginnng of the world. For it is
written: The Lamb was slain from the beginning of the world. Revel. 13.8.
Again, Hebr. 13.8.
Jesus Christ yesterdaie, and to day, the same also is for ever. In this, the
Apostle co^prehendeth all the whole time passed* present, John. 8.56.
and to come. Jesus him self had respect hereto, when he said, your father
Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad. Uerely, verily,
I say unto Hebr. 11.10.
before Abraham was, I am: that is to say, not only God, but the mediator,
between GOD and man, appoincted from before all eternity. For, although in
respect of us, he was crucified in the fullness of time, and in the latter
days: yet in the presence of God, Galat. 4.4.
he has been always crucified, and his Sacrifice has been everlastingly
present with him. For, in God is no difference of time, as is in us, because
that all things are present unto him, and for that he is above, and beyond
the time, Psalm. 90.4. 2. Peter. 3.8 August. in lib. qustio. 85. quest. 15.16.
In lib. de predestinatione and gratia. cap. 5. In lib. de triplici habitaculo.
cap. 5.
and out of it. For, a thousand years, are unto him, but as as one day. So
saint Augustine says: Apud deum autem nihil deest, nec praeteritum igitur,
nec futurum: sed omne praesens est apud deum. That is: With God there is
nothing wantyng, nothing paste, or to come, but all things are present. etc.
Wherefore, even as the death, and passion of Christ, does serve us now unto
salvation, which believe that he has been crucified for us, although he
hangs no more on the cross: So be ye certain and sure, that it has
profited them* that have lived before that he was Crucified, which believed
that he should come, and dye for them: as we do believe that he is come, and
has died for us.

Therefore we ought to acknowledge, no iij.iiij.v.vj.vij.viij.ix.x. or a xj.
places, as if some souls had been lodged in hell, some in Limbo, some in a
dark place in hell, where was no pain: Some in Paradise, some in heaven, some
in earth below, some in Purgatory fire, some in the water, some in the air,
some in houses and cloisters, and some in fields. etc. But notwithstanding all
these fantasies of men's devises, Luke 16.22. Wisd. 3.10. cap. 5.2. Matthew
25.4^. August. de verbis Apost. Sermon. 18.
Christ gives unto them all their lodgyng, either in Abrahames bosom: or in
the unquenchable fire of hell: that is to say, either in heaven, or hell. For
so Augustine says. Du^ quippe habit^tiones sunt, vna, in igne aeterno, alia
in regno aeterno. There are but two habitations, one is in the everlasting
fire of hell, the other is in the everlasting kingdom of heaven. Whereupon we
may gather, that Christ's soul went straighte (being separated from his
body) into heaven, Luke 23.
and not to hell. For, he says him self to the Theife that honge on the
cross (after he desired to remember him, 42
when he came into his kingdom) to day shalt thou be with me in Paradise. 43
Also, Christ commended his soul into the hands of his father. 46
His body was laid in the grave, 53
his soul was in heaven, for so he said the Theife should be there that day
with him. etc. And so he desired his father in his prayer, John. 17.24.
that al they which his father had given unto him, might be with him even
where he is. etc. Now I marvel what part should go into hell then?

The principalleste cause of this error is (as I judge) for that they think
and suppose, God the father did never love us nor favor us, before, we, and
they, were reconciled to him by the death of his son: which is clean
contrary: For, GOD the Father did with his love preuente, 1. John. 4.29.
and go before, as the efficiente cause, Deuteronomy. 4.37.
of our reconciliation in Christ: Yea, because he first loved us, therefore he
afterward reconcileth us unto him self. And for this cause saint Paul
says, God sets out his love toward us, Romans 5.8. John. 3.16.
seeing that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. And saint Ihon
says, God so loved the world, that he has given his only begotten son,
that who soever believes in him, The efficie^t. The material. The formal.
The final cause of our salvation. 1. Peter. 1.2. August. in Ioh. tract. 110.
should not perish, but have everlasting life. For the free election of Gods
love is the efficient cause of our Salvation: Christ's obeidience the material
cause: our calling by the outward word, the formal cause: Our
sanctification by the holy Ghost, the final cause. Hereunto agrees that
saying of saint Augustine, where he says, Quapropter, incomprehensibilis
est dilectio qua diligit Deus: neque mutabilis. Non enim ex quo si reconciliati
sumus per sanguinem fil^^ eius nos caepit diligere, sed ante mundi
constitutionem dilexit nos: vt cum eius vnigenito etiam nos filij eius essemus:
priusquam omnino aliquid essemus. Quod ergo reconciliati sumus deo per mortem
Christi, non sic accipiatur, quasi ideo nos reconciliauerit ei filius, vt iam
amare inciperet quos oderat: Sed iam nos diligenti reconciliati sumus ei, cum
quo, propter peccatum, immicitias habeamus. Quod vtrum verum dicam, attestetur
Apostolus. Commendat, inquit, dilectionem suam deus erga nos, Romans 5.8.
quoniam cum adhuc peccatores essemus, Christus pro nobis mortuus est, habebat
itaque ille erga nos charitatem, etiam cum inimicitias aduersus eum exercentes,
operaremur iniquitatem. Proinde miro and diuino modo, and quando nos oderat,
dilegebat. Oderat enim nos, quales ipse non fecerat: and quia iniquitas nostra,
opus eius non omni ex part consumpserat. Nouerat simul in vno quoque nostrum
and odisse quod feceramus, and amare quod fecerat: that is to say in English:
The love of God is incomprehensible, and vnchaungable. For he began not to love
us, since the time that we were reconciled to him, by the blood of his son:
but before the making of the world he loved us, even before we were any thing
at all, that we might also be his children, with his only begotten son.
Therefore, whereas we are reconciled by the death of Christ, it is not so to
be taken, as though the Son did therefore reconcile us unto him, that he
might now begin to love us, whom he hated before: But we are reconciled to
him, that already loved us, to whom we were enemies, by reason of sin. And
whether this be true or no, that I say, let the Apostle bear witness.
Romans 5.8.
He does commend (says he) his love toward us, because when we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us: he therefore had a love to us, even then when we
were enemies to him, and wrought wickedness. Therefore, after a marvelous and
divine manner he loved us, even then when he hated us. For, he hated us in that
we were such, as he had not made us, and because our wickedness had on each
side, wasted away his work, he knew how in every one of us, both to hate
that which our selves had made, and to love that which he had made. Thus
far Augustine. Whereby we have to learn what a comfortable doctrine the
Predestination of GOD is (which many can not abide, 2. Tim. 4.3.^.
of whom saint Paul long before spoke of). Also how so ever we be sinners
by our own fault, Jude. 1.10.
yet we remain his creatures. And howsoever we have purchased death to our
selves: yet he made us unto life. So is he moved by mere and free loving of
us, to receive us, and also to reconcile us by his son Christ, into his
favor. Therefore, in respect of our corrupt nature, Romans 10.32.
and then of evil life added unto it: truly we are in displeasure of God:
guilty in his sight, and borne to dampnation of hell. But because the lord
will not loose that which is his in us, he finds yet somewhat, that he of
his only goodness, may love us (without any goodness or worthiness that is
in us) through his Son Christ, our only Savior. To this saint Augustine
says: Due res sunt homo and peccator. Quod audis homo, fecit deus. Quod audis
peccator ipse homo fecit: dele quod fecisti, vt deus saluet quod fecit, August.
in Ioh. tract. 12. and in psalm. 137.
oportet vt oderis in te opus tuum, and ames in te opus dei. The^e are two
things, Man, and Sinner, That thou hear man, God made it. That thou hear
sinner, Man himself made: take away that thou haste made, that God may save
that he has made. It behooves that thou hate in thy self, thine own work,
that thou may love the work of God in thee. Psalm.
51.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.12.13.14.
Hereto David says: Behold, I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my
mother conceived me. Pourge me with Hysope, and I shall be clean: Wash me,
and I shall be whiter then Snow* etc. This doctrine well waighed, will easily
teach us, that all the righteous Souls departed (in the faith) before
Christ's coming, were in heaven. And therefore no need for Christ his soul
to go into hell, to fetch them out, for in that place they never were: nor
none of Gods predestinate, and elect children was, or ever shall be. For
whom the Lord ever loved (says the Scripture) be loves unto the end.

Now if any man should ask me, when Christ went down to hell? I will
answer him. When he prayed to escape death, he began to go down: and so all
his sufferynges, that he suffered afterward in body and soul, for our
sins, was his going into hell. For he felt the burden, and weight of Gods
wrath for our iniquities, Isaiah. 53.3.4.5.6. Matthew. 8.17. 1. Peter.
2.21.22.23.24. ^. Peter. 3.18.
in such sort, that no pain, tormente, grief, sorrow, nor punishment that
ever sin and disobedience, had deserved in hell. But that it was laid upon
Christ for us, to bring us unto God, which pains and torments he felt in his
body and soul. Whereby we may gather, how grievous and terrible torments he
suffered, when he knew himself to be arained for our cause, before the
judgment seat of GOD. For there can be imagined, no more dreadful
bottomless depth, then for one to feel himself forsaken and estraunged from
God, and not to be heard when he calls upon him: even as if God himself had
conspired his destruction. Even thither we see that Christ was thrown down,
Luke 22.44.
so far that by inforcemente of pain, and torments of hell, Psalm. 22.2.
Matt. 27.46.
did sweat, and his sweat was like drops of blood, trickelyng down to the
ground. And he was compelled to cry out: My God, my GOD: why haste thou
forsaken me. etc. Here thou may note, that in the Creed, we read not in the
singular number, descendit ad infernum, he descended into hell (as though it
did speak of a place certain, where into he was gone): but in the plural
number, descendit in inferna, he descended into the helles, Comprehendyng all
that was before said in many words, 1. Tim. 6.13.
how he suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried: in this
one word, helles.

Now (gentle Reader) I pray thee, not to take me in this my writing, that I
do deny this Article, of Christ's descendyng into hell: for, I do constantly
believe it, and will in no wise (God willing) deny it, but affirm that he
descended into hell accordyngly: But of the manner of his descension into hell,
is our question. They say his soul went down thither: which they can not
prove by the word of God, and therefore I can not believe it. But I say this,
that the force, efficacy, and strength of his death and passion, did pearce
unto the damned souls in hell (through his divine power and godheade) to the
greater increase, and certifiyng of their eternal and just damnation. For I
say unto thee (in the word of God, and lie not) that all Christ's
sufferynges, sorrows, and passions, that he sustained here (for us) upon the
earth, and upon the Cross, in body, and in his soul (for our sins) was his
going down into the helles* Wherefore, let us constantly believe this, that he
was once in the flesh, Hebr. 2.7. Cap. 4.15. Luke 1.31.32. Cap. 2.11. Matthew.
1.21. Cap. 26.38.
a very man, like unto us in all thing, (sin only excepted) and came down
for us men, and for our salvation: that he did verily suffer passion of body
and soul: that he has verily died, and been buried. And that he has been
verily revived again, and the very same soul returned again into his own
natural body, John. 19.40.41.42. Cap. 27.17. Cap. 21.1. Luke 24.51. Acts.
1.9. Romans 8.34. Hebr. 7.25.
and after did ascend up into heaven, and there sits on the right hand of
the father to make daiely and continual intercession for all his elect, and
to save all them that come to God by him. etc.

As many therefore, as be Christians, have given their faith unto Christ in
their Baptism, under the witness of a great meany. There they promised to
forsake the flesh, the world, and the devil. If now they will be at league
with the sinner, and at agreement with the devil, and the evil doer, they
have broken their first promise, 1. Tim. 5.12.
and are found unfaithful: for whereunto they are overcome, Romans 6.16. 2.
Peter. 2.19. Matthew. 10.33. Luke 9.62. 2. Peter. 2.15. Hebr. 6.4. Cap. 10.26.
Ephe. 4.5.6.7
his servants they are, whether it be of sin unto death, or of obedience
unto righteousness. And for their faith thus violated, given unto the
immortal God: God again will break with them his couenaunte of mercy, if in
time they repent not. Let us hold therefore unity in doctrine: Secondly,
universality in ioynyng of voices: Thirdly, consent in spirit and
judgment. For the Papists have turned unity, to division: Uniuersalitie, to
singularity: Consent, to open and plain discention. And so, under the name
of the faith, they persecute the faith. etc. For if thou do forsake
Christ's Ship, and wilt row in the Popes Boat, his Oars will directly row
thee to that haven and port, where doctor Story, of late cast his Anchor,
and brake his neck: and for that his hands were haltered, he gave all
traitorous Papists, the Popes blessyng with his heels at Tybourne. An end
and blessyng most meet for all sorts of Papists. God of his mercy
quickly convert them that are alive, or else good Lord send a merry wind,
to blow them all into that course, that Felton, and Story before have run.
For I am fully persuaded, that what soever he be, high or low, rich or
poor, that holds with any Popish, or Papisticall doctrine, he is a rank
traitor in his heart: 2. Sam. 15.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8. Psa. 21.11.12. Prou. 21.29.
Psalm. 121.5.6.7.8.
and when time serves, it will so fall out in proof, as daiely experience
teaches us, by our late traitorous rebels, which sought the suppressyng of
the faith of Christ: the overthrow of the Queens Majesty, and utter
desolation of this our Realm: If the almighty Lord had not prevented them,
of his mercy toward us.

What rests now, Psalm. 127..1. Psalm. 118.10. Eccle. 2.16. John. 14.24. Deuteronomy.
5.10. Cap. 6.5. Matthew. 22.37. Luke 10.27* Mark. 12.2^. Romans 13.1. Titus. 3.1.
1. Peter. 2.13. Isaiah. 66.1. Acts. 7.48. Psalm. 119. Isaiah. 30.21. John 5.39.
Acts. 17.11. Romans 15.4. John. 17.14.
but that we love God, and his word: and obey our Queen and her Magistrates,
and also to consider our ways, and see whether we walk as he has taught us.
For, there is no heaven, but his dwelling place: no walkyng unto it, but by his
commandments: and his commandments no where to be found, but in the holy
Scriptures, which he has left us. Next unto Gods glory, we have nothing so
precious, as the sauegarde of our souls. And where shall we find it, but in
the word of God. And here I make an end of this my long preface, most
heartely besechyng thee, to accept in good part, this simple and rude work
of mine, consider my good meaning and will, toward the buildyng of Gods
Church, who would have given thee better, if better he had in store. I must
warn thee, not to look in this book: for the pleasant speech of Isocrates,
nor the high style of Demosthenes, nor for the excellent dignity of Plato, nor
the eloquent words of Cicero, or for the reverend majesty of Theucidides:
For then thou will foulie be deceived: But for bare and simple words: 1. Cor.
10.24. 2. Cor. 12.14.
for I seek not goods, but God: not gasinges, but gain: not praise, but
profit: not money, but men. Therefore, (gentle and freendly reader) if thou
receive any fruicte of my labors, help me with thy prayers to God our
Father, in the name of his Soonne and our only Savior. In readyng hereof, let
reason lead thee: let the aucthorities persuade thee: and let truth enforce
thee. GOD of his mercy quickly convert, or soon overthrow al his enemies,
and the Queens fooes that hold of any doctrine, contrary to the true and
christian faith: Confound all errors (O Lord,) give the victory to thy
truth, and glory to thy holy and blessed name, now and for ever. Amen. Fare
well (Gentle Reader) from Redcliffe in Bristoll.

Thy poor brother in Christ, John Northbrooke Preacher.

The contents of all the Chapiters
OF Gods creation and governance of all things: of Christ's conception and
birth, of his death and passion. etc. Cap. 1. fol. 1. Christ's death and
passion, is a sufficient sacrifice for all mankind. Cap. 2. fol. 2. The means
whereby the death and sacrifice of Christ, may be applied unto us. Cap. 3. fol.
3. Of Christ's burial, and the profit that we have got^en thereby. Cap. 4. fol.
4. How many ways this word (hell) is taken in the scripture, and after what
manner Christ descended into hell. Cap. 5. fol. 5. Reasons and arguments of
those that hold that Christ went down to hell in his soul: Answered. Cap.
6. fol. 7. Christ is our true Purgatory, and the Papists purgatory is fall.
Ca. 7. fo. 9. Popish purgatory is flat against the word of God. For it
makes Christ's death and passion of little or none effect. Cap. 8. fol. 11.
Against praying for the dead: and apparations of the dead after their departing
hence. Cap. 9. fol. 14. Children that are dead borne, or dye before that they
can come to baptism not damned, nor yet go into the Popish Lymbe. Cap. 10.
fol. 15. What comfort we have gotten by Christ's rising from death again, and
that it should be unto us as a glass in this life. Cap. 11. fol. 31. Of
Christ's ascension into heaven, and how it is said that he fitteth at the
right hand of god. etc. And after what manner he is here amongst us. ca. 12. fo.
34 Christ's humane body can be but in one place at once, and not in many and
diverse places. Cap. 13. fol. 37. Against Popish transubstantiation. Cap. 14.
fol. 40. what it is to be guilty of the body and blood of Christ. Cap. 15. fol
47. The ^acrament ought to be ministered to all the people in both kinds. Cap*
16. fol. 49. Against worshipping of the Sacrament. Cap. 17. fol 56. How the
unworthy receauers, are guilty of the body and blood of Christ, although he
be not corporally in the Sacrament. Cap. 18. fol. 59. whether the papists have
still the same body in the Sacrament, that was given upon the Cross. Cap. 19.
fol. 61. Against the carnal presence of Christ in the Sacrament. Cap. 20. fol.
64. The wicked do neither eat nor drink the body and blood of Christ.
Cap. 21. fol. 66. The true exposition of these words (Hoc est corpus meum) and
that Sacraments are called by those names whereof they are Sacraments. Cap. 22.
fol. 68. The godly in the old law, did eat and drink the same flesh and
blood of Christ, that we do now in the new Testament. Cap. 23. fol. 78. What
comfort we have by Christ's ascension into heaven. Cap. 24. fol. 79. Against
praying and intercession to Saints. Cap. 25. fol. 80. Christ is both our
mediator of salvation, and also of intercession. Ca. 26. fo. ^2. The
principal arguments that the papists allege for praying to Saints:
Answered. Cap. 27. fol. 85. How and wherein we ought to honor the Saints.
Cap. 28. fol. 98. Of Christ's coming to judgment in the last day. Cap. 29.
fol. 99. To who^ the sharp sentences of the scriptures are terrible. Cap. 30.
fol. 102. The subtle means that Satan uses, to bring us into security. Cap.
31. fol. 104. The Pope is Antechriste, and that man of sin, which shall be
revealed before Christ's coming to judgment. Cap. 32. fol. 107. The strength
and operation of the holy ghost working in us. Ca. 33. fo. 108. What is the
true Church of God, and where it is. Cap. 34. fol. 111. Christ is the head of
his Church, and not the Pope. Cap. 35. fol. 112. All the Apostles had equal
power, to bind and to loose, with Peter, and the keys were equally delivered
to them all. Cap. 36. fol. 113. The true Church of Christ is but as a witness
to the word of God, adding nothing to it: nor taking ought from it. Cap. 37.
fol. 117. The true Church is known by the word of God. Cap. 38. fol. 119. Of
the office and authority of the Church: and how it may err, and how it can
not err. Cap. 39. fol. 121. Our offenses and sins are forgiven us, by faith
through Christ, and not by our works and merits. Cap. 40. fol. 123. Faith
only justifies us before God. Cap. 41. fol. 127. It is no presumption, to be
sure and certain of our salvation. Cap. 42. fol. 132. Of free will. Cap. 43.
fol. 133. Of the general resurrection, both of the godly, and wicked, at the
last day. Cap. 44. fol. 142.
FINIS.
A brief Sum of the Christian faith.
The first Chapter. Of Gods creation and governance of all things: of
Christ's conception and birth, of his death and passion. etc.
I Do not only confess that there is a true living God, I believe in God
the father Almighty, etc.
who by his almighty power, did of nothing make both heaven and earth, and
all the creatures that be in them, both visible, and invisible, but also I
do unfeignedly believe that the same true living God, God does govern, rule
and preserve all his creatures.
(who by his almighty power, has created all things, and now by his
unsearchable wisdom, and unspeakable goodness) does govern, rule, and
preserve all his creatures, will be a most loving, and merciful father unto
me, and unto all the faithful beleuers, Nothing able to resist Gods holy will.
for as he is almighty, and able to do what soever he will, both in heaven
and in earth, so that nothing is able to resist, or withstand his holy and
blessed will (for even the very deuilles, 1 Reg. 22.22. Job. 1.12. Mat. 8.31.
2. Cor. 12.7.
and wicked spirits, will they, nill they, must be obedient unto him, and can
do no more then he does appoint, suffer, and permit them) so is he most loving
and merciful, unto all those that put all their whole trust and confidence
in him.

And therefore we must take hold upon his fatherly promises, And in Jesus
Christ his only son our Lord. Galat. 4.4. Heb. 3.16. Which was conceived
by the holy ghost.
through a lively faith in our savior Jesus Christ, his only begotten son
our Lord. Who being true and natural God, begotten of the father before all
beginnings, coeternall, and coequall with him in power and Godhead, did at the
fullness of time, take our frail nature upon him, and was conceived by the
mighty operation of the holy ghost, in the blessed virgins womb, of whom he
took his undefiled substance, to wit, his mortal body, that so he might
offer him self, an omnisufficiente Sacrifice unto God his father, for the
redemption of mankind, Deuteronomy. 27.15. Galath. 3.13. Romans 8.3.
and deliver us all that take hold by faith, upon the merits of his death
and bloodsheddyng, from the curse, and malediction of the Law, whereunto all
men of their own nature are subject.

Heb. 4.15.
He then being both God and man, and touching his ma^hode, subject to all
manner of infirmities, that we are subject unto, Suffered under pontius pilate.
sin only being excepted. Did suffer a most cruel, and opprobrious death,
upon the cross, under Poncius Pilat, who was at the same time the Emperors
deputy, and liefetenaunt in the land of Iewrie, Math* 27.2.
before whom he was brought, and by his determinate sentence, judged, and
condemned, and so delivered into the hands of the tormentors, to the end that I
and all faithful beleuers should not be condemned, Wherefore Christ was
judged and condemned before pilate.
before the judgment seat of almighty God, nor put into the hands of the
devil, nor yet sent into the everlasting fire of hell, but that I and all
other that believe truly, should find favor and be quieted before the great
and everlasting judge.

Romans 8.33.
And say boldly with the holy Apostle, who shall lay any thing to the charge
of Gods chosen, it is GOD that justifies, who shall then condemn, it is
Christ which is dead, yea rather, which is risen again, Hebre. 10.12.
Hebre. 1.3. Heb. 4.16.
which is also on the right hand of God, and makes intercession for us. Let
us therefore, go boldly unto the seat of grace, that we may receive
mercy, and find grace to help in the time of need. Thus being judged and
condemned, for to deliver us that believe, from the fearful judgment of God,
and from the condemnation, that is due unto us for our sins.

Was crucified.
He was with all dispitefulnesse nailed upon a Cross, as it was signified and
prefigured before, by the listyng up of the brazen Serpente in the wilderness.
Nomb, 21.8. John. 3.14.
For, as the brazen Serpente was elevated, and lifted up in the deserte by
Moises, for to heal all those, that did look upon it, so it was necessary,
that our savior Jesus Christ (as he him self does expound) should be hanged
upon the cross, and lifted up on high, for to heal all those, that be deadly
stonge, and wounded by the old serpent the devil. What the Serpent signified.


And as the brazen serpent, had the figure, form, and shape of a serpent and
yet it was no serpent, Heb. 4.15. Romans 8.3. Christ a most holsom medicine and
salve to all poor sinners.
nor yet had any venime or poison: So our Savior Jesus Christ, did take upon
him the shape of a sinner, and yet he was no sinner, but was, and is a most
wholesome medicine, and salve unto all poor sinners, that do behold and look
upon him by faith, and that seek for salvation no where else, but in the only
merits of his death, passion, and bloodsheddyng: although this mean and way
to save men, does seem very vile, and strange unto man's reason, 1. Cor. 1.18.
which judges this wisdom of God, and the preaching of the cross, to be
mere foolishness.

And yet notwithstanding, as there was no physic, medicine, nor salve that
could heal those, that were stong of the fiery serpents, but only the loking
upon the brazen serpent, that was erected and set up, Mark this ye Mass
mongers, which seek such means as god never appointed.
by the commandment of god: so have we no manner of Physic, or salve against
sin, and everlasting death, for to bring soul health, and salvation unto us,
but only Jesus christ, being crucified, who is given unto us of God, for it
does not belong unto us, to choose the medicine, or salve, but it pertains
only to god our sovereign physician, who alone is able to heal us from this
deadly sickness, who alone knows what medicine, or salve is necessary for
us. And gives such as pleases him, and such as he gives, is sufficient, so
that we can find none other, that is worth any thing, and that does not
rather bring death then life, if we do put any confidence in it, or seek to
obtain through it, salvation and forgiveness of our sins.

Also because that it is written: Deuteronomy. 27.15.
cursed is every one that continues not in all things, which are written in
the book of this law, to fulfill them: whereby all men were brought under the
malediction, Ephe. 2.3. Galath. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 27.15.
and curse of the law, and so made the children of everlasting damnation: The
only begotten son of God, did vouchsafe for to deliver us from this curse,
and malediction of the law, to hang on a tree, and to be made accursed for us
(for it is written: Gene. 12.3. Gala. 3.13.
Cursed is every one that hangs on tree) that the blessyng of Abraham, which
was promised him in his seed, who is our Savior Jesus christ, might come upon
us, Esaie. 53.3. Psalm. 22.6.
for whose sake and love, he was made lower then all men, yea, he was reputed
as a worm, and not as a man, he was most despitefully, and opprobriously
hanged between two thieves, Luk 23.33. Psalm. 22.6. Esai. 53.3.
and counted among the wicked, being a very scorn of men, and the out cast of
the people, that the Prophecies of David, and Esaie might be fulfilled.

The second Chapter. Christ's death and passion, is a sufficient Sacrifice
for all mankind.
BUT as I do believe that the only begotten son of GOD, did suffer this
most shameful, and opprobrious kind of death upon the cross. So this shall
be my believe and my faith, as long as I live, that his bitter passion and
bloudshedding, is an omnisufficiente Sacrifice, for the redemption of all
mankind, and that who soever does acknowledge any other Sacrifice for sin,
Hebr. 9.11. Hebr. 10.18.
he shall have no part in this most perfect, and consummate Sacrifice, which
being offered once for ever, can be offered no more. Except we will make the
precious death, and bloudsheddyng of the only begotten son of God, to be of
no more virtue, efficacy, and strength, then the blood of the brute beasts,
Hebr. 10.4.
that were offered in the old law, which as the Apostle does testify,
having but the shadow of good things to come, and not the things of their
own fashion, can never with the Sacrifices, which they offer year by year
continually, make the comers thereunto perfect.

For, would not then those Sacrifices have ceased to have been offered, Why the
sacrifices of the old law were offered often.
because that the offerers being once pourged, should have no more conscience
of sin? We see here plainly that the causes, why the Sacrifices of the old
law, were offered more then once, that is to say, many times, and often, were
the insufficiency of them, and also because that they could not make the
comers thereunto perfect, Heb. 10.1. Hebr. 9.14.
nor purge their consciences from dead works, for to serve the living God.

Heb. 9.25. Heb. 9.11.
And therefore, every Priest was ready, daiely ministeryng, and often times
offered, one manner of offering, which could never take away sins, but our
savior Jesus Christ, being an high Priest of good things to come, did by his
own blood enter once for all, into the holy place, and has found eternal
redemption: so that having offered one Sacrifice for sins, Hebr. 1.3. Ephe.
1.20.
he is set down for ever, on the right hand of God, and from henceforthe
tarieth, till his foes be made his foot stool.

For, with one only offering, he has made them perfect for ever, that are
sanctified: That the saying of the Prophet might be fulfilled, Zacha. 3.9.
where the lord himself does speak these words. Behold, I will bring
forth the branch of my servant: For lo, A place of Esai expounded.
the stone that I have laid before Iehosua: upon one stone shall be seven
eyes, behold, I will hew him out, and take away the sin of the land in
one day. This branch that the Lord does speak of here, is our Savior
Jesus Christ, Romans 9.5. 1. Cor. 10.4. Mat. 16.18.
who is the branch of David, of whom he did come, touching the flesh. He is
also the sure rock, and stone, whereupon all the faithful beleuers are
builded, having the eyes of their faith (which be signified by the seven eyes
that should be upon the stone) fastened still upon him, as upon their mighty
deliverer, and omnisufficient savior.

And this rock or stone did the lord hew out, when he did deliver his only
begotten son, unto the bitter death of the Cross, whereby he did take away
the sins of the land in one day. Therefore, sith that full remission, and
forgiveness of sins, wherefore than does their popish Mass serve.
is purchased unto all true and faithful beleuers, by this one only
Sacrifice, I dare conclude with saint Paul, that there is no more offering
for sin, and that they that go about to persuade the simple, and ignoraunte
people, that they do offer every day in the Church, an expiatorie,
satisfactorie, or propitiatory Sacrifice for the sins, both of the quick,
and of the dead, as they are most shameful, and abominable liars (for why
the holy ghost does testify plainly, that there is no more offering for
sin) so are they most cruel, and detestable murderers, of the only
begotten son of GOD, whom (as they will make us to believe, and that with fire
and sword) they do offer daiely, in their blasphemous sacrifice of the Mass.

For, these are the very words of the holy Apostle, Christ is not entered into
the holy places, Hebre. 9.11.
that are made with hands, which are but similitudes of true things, but is
entered into very heaven, for to appear now in the sight of God for us, not to
offer him self often, Christ can not be offered, except he be slain and put
to death. Every person that does offer, is of more worthiness the^ the thing
which he offers.

But ye priest does offer the body of christ. Ergo, the priest is of more
worthiness, then the body of Christ (O blaspemie most intolerable.)


as the high Priest entered into the holy place, every year with strange
blood, for then must he have often suffered since the world began. These
words do plainly declare, that our savior Jesus Christ can not be offered,
except he does suffer also, and be slain. How many times then, and in how
many places, do these folk slay, and murder our savior Jesus Christ?

I do here let pass, that they will be counted of the people (although they
dare not say so them selves) to be of more dignity and worthiness, then
the only begotten son of God, for he that offers, must be of more
worthiness, then the sacrifice that he does offer: for the person is not
accepted, because of the Sacrifice, but the Sacrifice is accepted, because of
the person, which is made acceptable and worthy, only and solely, through
faith in our Savior Jesus Christ, who being holy, harmless, undefiled,
separated from sinners, and made higher then heaven, needs not daiely (as
yonder Priests) to offer up Sacrifice, Haggai, 2.14. Heb. 7.26. Ephe. 1.21.
first for his own sin, and then for the sins of the people, for that did
he once for all, when he offered up him self.

The third Chapter The means whereby the death, and Sacrifice of Christ, may
be applied unto us.
ANd as he is a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech, Psalm. 110.4.
Hebre. 7.17.
and needs no successor (for he indureth ever, and has an ever lastyng
Priesthood, being able therefore to save them fully and perfectly, that come
unto God by him) so is his Sacrifice ever of one efficacy, strength, and
virtue, and works still a most perfect salvation in them, that take a sure
hold upon it by faith. And none other means do I know; whereby the
Sacrifice, I mean, the benefits of Christ's death, passion, and bloudsheddyng
can be applied unto us, but the true preaching of Gods word, and the right
ministration of the Sacraments, according to the Lords institution, and
ordinance: Mark. 16.15.
The truth him self, saying: Go ye into all the world, and preach the
Gospel to all creatures, he that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved.

Again, Luke. 24.7.
thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise again from death the third day,
and that repentance, and remission of sins, should be preached in his name,
amongst all nations. And in an other place, Math. 28.19^
go therefore, and teach all nations, baptisyng them, In the name of the
father, of the son, and of the holy ghost, teaching them to observe all
things, what soever I command you. And in the Gospel of Ihon, these be
also the words of our Savior, John. 5.24.
he that hears my word, and believes in him that sent me, has life
everlasting, he shall not come into condemnation, or judgment, but is passed
from death to life.

Whereupon I do conclude, A conclusion.
that the true preaching of gods word, apprehended, and taken hold of by
faith: and the right ministration of the Sacraments, being duly, and
worthily received, are the only means* whereby this most worthy Sacrifice,
The benefits of christ's death.
should be applied unto us, and whereby we should be put in full
possession, of all the benefits of Christ's death, passion, and bloudshedding:
which are, justification before God, free remission of our sins, peace of
conscience, and life everlasting. Being so far of, that their wicked and
blasphemous Mass, should apply this most omnisufficient Sacrifice of
Christ's death unto us, or that by it, we should be made partakers of the
benefits thereof, By the mass the wrath of God is kindled,
but rather by it, the wrath of God is still more and more kindeled, and the
death of his only begotten son, made altogether unprofitable, and of no
value unto us.

Therefore, I do utterly ^eteste and abhor it, and do from my very heart,
and with all thankfulness, that can be possible, receive and embrace, those
singular, and sovereign means, that have been by Gods providence, appoincted
unto us, that by them we might be made, through faith, partakers of all the
benefits of the precious death, and bloudshedding of his entirely beloved, and
only begotten son, our only and sufficient savior Jesus Christ our Lord.

The.iiij. Chapter. Of Christ's burial, and the profit that we have gotten
thereby.
And was buried.
WHo for a better, and more sure confirmation of his death, and for to declare,
and testify unto all the world, that touching his manhood, he was dead in
deed, without any faynednesse or dissimulation (for, sith that he must dye
for our sins, if he had not been dead in very deed, we should have
remained still subject, Mat. 27.57: Luke 23.50. John. 19.39.
unto everlasting death) would be taken down from the cross, and by men of
good and honest report, that is to say, Nichodemus, and Joseph of Aramathia
be decently and honorably buried, Pontius Pilate, who was certified of his
death, consentyng, and agreyng unto the same, laid in a new grave, Why Christ
would be laid in a new grave.
that was he wen out of a rock, or stone, and wherein no man was laid before,
lest it should be blown abroad by his enemies, and noysed among the people,
that it was not he that was risen again, but some other man, that was there
buried before him: or that he was not risen again, by his own virtue, but by
the virtue of some holy prophet that was laid there before, as he that was
cast into the grave of Elizeus, 2. Reg. 13.21. Eccle. 48.14.
was revived, and restored unto life again, as soon as he did touch the dead
bones of the Prophet.

Why Christ was laid in another ma^s grave, and not in his own.
And as for that, that he was laid in an other man's grave, and not in his own,
the same was dooen, for to signify unto us, that as he was come into our
flesh, for to sanctify it, in the which, he did dye, not for his own, but
for our sins, thereby to take away the styng of death, and to sanctify our
death, to the end, that it should be no more a dreadful death unto us, but a
joyful passage unto everlasting life, so would he be buried in a grave of
ours, Note.
for to sanctify and open our graves, and as it were, for to constrain and
compel them, to give up our bodies again, at the day of the general
resurrection of al flesh.

Again, What the new grave does signify. John. 14.23. Matthew. 23.27.
the grave that he was laid in, was new, which is a lesson unto us, that if
we will have Christ to dwell in our hearts, we must be no stinckyng graves, but
put away all filthiness, and s^incking abomination: we must be made new
creatures altogether, and put of the old Adam, which is corrupted through the
deceivable lusts, and put on that new man, Ephe. 4.24.
which after the Image of God, is shapen in righteousness and true holiness.

And as the same grave was hewn out, What is signified by the grave that was
hewn out of ye rock. Mat. 16.18. Ephe. 4.14.
even in the rock, so must we (if at least we will have Christ to dwell and
continue in us) be hewn out, and created in him, who is that strong and sure
rock, that the true Church, and faithful congregation is builded upon: we
must be no waueryng children, that be carried with every wind of doctrine, by
the wiliness of men and craftines, whereby they lay awaite for us, to deceive
us, Ephe. 1.12. Ephe. 2.20.
but abide steadfast in the truth, and grow in him that is the head, that is
to say, Christ.

Who also would be buried, although he might have risen again, The mystery
of Jonas fulfilled in Christ. Mat. 12.40. Jonas. 2.3.
without any such thing, I mean, without the costs and charges of any
buriyng, for to signify unto us, that the mystery and sign of the Prophet
Jonas was fulfilled in him, as he him self does manifestly declare unto the
Jews, for as Jonas, was cast into the Sea, for to assuage, and still the
tempeste, that was raised and stirred up, by the mighty wind of Gods wrath,
and was received into the Whales belly, abidyng three days and nights, in
the deep of the Sea, being still in the Whales belly: And after three days,
was cast out again upon the dry land alive, and without any hurt: so it
was necessary, that the only begotten son of God our savior Jesus Christ,
A comfortable mystery.
for to pacify and still the wrath of his father, should be cast into the
deep, and bottomless geulfes of death, which thought to devour and swallowe
him up: and that he should be in the bowels of the earth, as the Prophet
Jonas was in the belly of the Whale, and so rise again the third day.

Which truly is a mystery that passes all mysteries, for, who in all the
world, Jonas. 2.3.
would have thought, that Jonas being thus cast into the bottom of the raging
Sea, should have escaped death, or who would have believed, that our savior
Jesus Christ should in death, find everlasting life unto us, and that after
such opprobriousnes and confusion of the Cross, having been driven down,
Aug. lib. 22. de ciuitate dei Cap. 5.
even to very hell gates, he should rise again, with such an excellent glory,
power and majesty, and that by his death, the wrath of God should be pacified,
as the tempeste of the Sea was pacified and ceased as soon as Jonas was
hurled into it: By the death of christ gods wrath was pacified.
that calmness should be given unto the troubled consciences of sinners, and
peace made betwixt God and men. And yet contrary to the expectation of all the
wicked world, all these things, I mean everlasting life, forgiveness of our
sins, Romans 5.2.
the pacifiyng of Gods wrath, tranquillity and peace of conscience, and a most
sure atonement between God, and us, are mightily purchased unto us, by the
death and buriyng of the only begotten son of God, our savior Jesus Christ.

The.v. Chapter. How many ways this word (hell) is taken in Scripture, and
after what manner Christ descended into hell.
He descendid into hell.
WHom I do steadfastly believe to have descended into hell, for whether ye do
take this word hell, for death it self, and for Job. 14.17. Nomb. 16.21.32.
Ezech. 32.21.22.
and consequently for the guiltiness of sin, for the sting and power of
death, for the judgment and wrath of god, and for the bottomless Pit of all
miseries, and calamities: when our savior Jesus Christ was so outragiously
dealte withal, Math. 16. 1. Sam. 2.31. Job. 10.1.22. Math. 26.38. Luke. 22.44.
Math. 27. A very hell. Esaie. 53.4.5.7.8.9.10.11. Gal. 3.13. Luke. 23.31. 1.
Peter. 3.18. Heb. 9.15. Romans 5.6.
when he did sweat blood, when his soul was heavy even unto the death, and
when he was hanged most opprobriously, despitefully, and shamefully, betwixt
two thieves, as forsaken of God, and al creatures, without aid, help or
comfort, and so hangyng on a tree, did give up the ghost, bearing the curse,
anger and fury of God, which is a very hell, and feelyng upon him the
condempnation, pains and torments, that were due unto us for our sins, then
went he in deed down into hell, which thought to ouerwhealme him, but it
could not, because he was without sin.

Or if ye take this word hell, for the grave and sepulcher, then did our
savior Christ go down into hell, when he was Ge. 37.44. Esaie. 14. Ephe. 4.9.
and descended into the lower parts of the earth, as the Apostle does
witness, and testify.

Or if ye do understand by it, the estate and condition of Abraham's bosom.
of his death that he suffered for them, and the fruits of his passion, and
bloodsheddyng.

Or if ye will take hell in this place (which the Latins do Inferna, Inferna.
in the plural number) for the place of the damned: I say that our savior
Jesus christ went down unto them. I mean, unto the reprobate and damned, when
they did feel, How Christ went in to the hell of the damned.
perceive and understand, (through his divine and godly power,) that they were
deprived of the merits of his death and passion, and of the grace, health and
salvation, that he had brought and purchased unto his elect and chosen
children: And when he did, by the virtue, efficacy, and strength of his death,
and bloodshedding, break the Serpents head, Gene. 3. The breakyng of the
Serpents head. Math. 16. John. 10.
according to the promise, that was made unto our first parents, Adam and
Eve, that is to say, when he did so overthrow Satan the devil, and all the
power of hell, that he and his, can no more prevail against the chosen and
elect of God, nor yet against his true church, and faithful congregation.

What is to be understood when we say that Christ harowed hell.
Then went he in deed down into hell, and did harrowe it, which is a phrase
and manner of speaking, that many do use, but very few do understand it,
for why? they do not perceive, that it is borrowed of an old custom and
fashion, that was used commonly among ancient kings, and princes, when they
did make any notable war against their enemies, for then if they had taken
any city or town, they were wont not only to beat it down, even to the
ground, but also to plowe it, sow it with Salt, and to harrowe it, (as the
like ye may read in the book of Judges, how Abimeleche sowed Salt, Iudic.
9.
so we read of Frederick Oenobarbus the Emperor, that ouerthrewe Millane,
An. do. 1165.
and sowed Salt there, for that city took part with Alexander the third,
being Pope, against Caesar (and harrowed it after the Salt was sown) thereby
to declare, that the same city or town, was brought into utter desolation,
and that it should never be builded any more (...).

The meaning of harowing of hell. 1. Cor. 1. 1. Cor. 4.
Therefore when it is said, that our savior Jesus Christ, did harrow hell, the
meaning of it is, (though it be understood of few) that Christ our savior,
did give such an overthrow unto satan the devil, that he did so bruise and
break his head, and that he has gotten such a victory over all the whole
power of hell, that it is no more able to hurt or hinder the children of God
(for unto them only this vi^^^ie is gotten, Unto whom hell is overcome.
hell having still, his full power over the unfaithful and reprobate) than a
city or town, that is beaten down even to the ground, and which is
ploughed, so wen over with Salt, and harrowed, is able to recover it self, or
to harm the enemies that have served it so.

The foolish imagination of them that think Christ went to fetch Adam out of
hell. Luke 16.
We must not yet imagine, that our savior Jesus Christ, did in his own person,
go down into the hell of the damned, and that breakyng the iron gates, he did
bring out, in a row, the patriarchs and other faithful fathers of the old
Testament, for they were not there, but were in the bosom of Abraham, which
(as the truth does say him self) is a place of joy, rest, and comfort,
such a space being betwixt it, and hell, that the one can have no access unto
the other.

And as for those that say, The objections of those that say that christ's
soul did suffer in hell fire.
that the soul of our Savior Christ, did suffer in hell fire, (although they
do bring and allege certain reasons and arguments for them selves) which
at the first, may seem to have some color, for to ^^sell the eyes of the
simple, and ignorant, yet can I in no wise allow their opinions and judgment
in this point.

The.vj. Chapter. Reasons and arguments of those that hold, that Christ
went down to hell in his soul: Answered.
THeir reasons and arguments are these, since that our Savior Christ (say
they) did come into this world for to deliver mankind from everlasting
damnation, it was necessary, that for to make satisfaction unto the justice
and righteousness of God, he should bear the whole malediction, curse; and
damnation, that all mankind did deserve: but the malediction, curse, and
damnation, that our savior christ did bear in the body, when he did suffer
his death and passion, was not sufficient for the sin of man, which he has
deserved, and does deserve everlasting damnation, is not only in the flesh,
and in the body of man, but most specially in the soul.

Therefore, it has not been ordained of God, that the body and flesh only
should suffer punishment, but also the soul. Sith then, that man was judged
and condemned, because of his sin, to suffer everlasting punishment, both in
body and soul. It was also requisite, that Christ, for a full satisfaction
for our sins, should suffer the same, that we should have suffered. Which
thing he had not done, if he had not suffered punishment, as well in the soul
as in the body.

Whereupon they do conclude, that as he has suffered in the body, A false
conclusion.
here upon the earth: so he did also suffer in soul, beneath in hell: that the
satisfaction might be whole, perfect, and full. And of this opinion, many of
the ancient and late writers have been. Bid makes mention of it, in a
certain place, not affirmyng that it was so, but alledgyng only the opinion
of some, Tertullian. Origin. Ierom. 9 of the Preacher.
and yet without namyng of them, howbeit I think that he did understand
Origene, Jerome, and Tertullian. But now we will see, how well this does
agree with the person of Christ our Savior.

Answer to the foresaid objections.
First and formoste, if they will have the punishments, pains, and torments,
that Christ suffered, to be in all points corespondent, unto those sinners,
for whom Christ died, had deserved, it had not been only necessary, that he
should have suffered here, in the body upon the earth: And that the soul
should also have suffered in hell for a while, but that he should have
suffered both in body and soul everlasting punishments with the damned.

Whereto God had a respect in his son our savior. Romans 5.19.
But God his father did content himself, with the pains, and torments, that he
was in for a while, having a respect not only unto the pains that he did
suffer, but unto his righteousness, innocence, and obedience, which caused him
to take and allow the pains, which our Savior Christ did suffer for a
time, Note.
as sufficient for to obtain and purchase unto the faithful believers, a full
deliverance from everlasting pains and torments, which they had deserved,
through their sins.

Now the soul of christ did suffer.
Moreover, it was no need at all, that the soul of our Savior Christ should
go down into hell for to suffer there, for it has suffered punishment enough
here upon earth, sith that in it, I mean, in his soul, he did bear the same
judgment and condempnation, that we had deserved: for the body did not suffer
without the soul, yea, if the sorrows and pains of the one, could be
separated from the sorrows and pains of the other, whiles the body and soul
be joined together by life: we should have a just occation to say, that the
soul did suffer before the body, and that the sorrows and griefs of the body,
did proceed and come first of the soul.

Math. 24. Mark. 14. Luke. 22. John. 18.
For else, what did these words mean: my soul is heavy unto the very death,
whereof came this woeful sweat, that did run down to the ground, as
drops of blood, and the complainte that he made to GOD his father, in the
Garden? Whereof did also come, Luke. 22.
that great fear, trouble, and horror, that he was possessed withal, as the
Evangelists do testify unto us? If he had not been in an extreme agony,
and much greater, then man's wisdom can comprehend: What need should he have
of the Angels for to comfort him?

Again, who would not wonder and marvel to see christ our savior so sore
affraide and troubled (as the Evangelists do set him forth unto us) for the
death, that he should suffer, if he should have had respect to none other thing
but only unto the death? Do we think that there was less heart, less
courage, constancy, and manfulnes, in our savior christ, then in many
thousand of Martyrs, that have gone so joyfully and merely unto their death
for his sake?

But what do I speak of Martyrs? how many wicked doers do we see daiely
go to their death) (which they have deserved) with their wicked and
abominable doings, most manfully, and with such a face and countenance,
that ye would think that they did go to a feast or banquet? Shall we say
that the son of god had less courage, What thing caused Christ to be so heavy
before his death.
then these have, in so good a cause, as he did die in? It must needs be then,
that there was some greater thing then death of the Cross, which was at hand,
somewhat there was, I say, that was of more weight and importance, then that
which did appear outwardly.

His body was not yet in the hands of the tormentours, he had only the death
before his eyes, and as it were an imagination of it, which troubled him
nothing so much, as the dreadful judgment of God, which he knew he must
needs bear. When he did then enter into this agony, then did he^ begin
already to descend and go down into this horrible hell, Horrible hell.
where he was detained and kept a while for our sakes, for, what greater hell
can one imagine to be unto man, than to feel gods wrath thoroughly kindled
against him, to be feign to bear his terrible judgment, and fury, and to be
in the same estate that our savior Christ was in, when he did cry out, Math.
27.
saying. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

Although he was true and natural God, and also true and natural man, so that
his godhead could not be separated from his manhood: yet the humanity was
then as if it had been utterly forsaken of the divinity, and left
succourlesse, and as if it had been both in body and soul driven down into
the bottomless pit of hell, and given over of God.

Therefore it was no need, that the soul of christ should go down after any
other sort, for to suffer the pains and torments that we had deserved. For
the places do not agrauate the pains, Note.
or make them more heavy and grievous: but the heavy and intolerable burden
of Gods wrath and judgment, wheresoever it is felt, or whersoeuer men are
feign to bear it.

Therefore, they that do affirm, that the soul of our savior Christ must
needs of necessity, They know not what hell is.
suffer in hell, do plainly declare, that they know not what hell is, nor
what our savior christ did suffer for them, nor yet what the virtue and
efficacy of his death and passion is. I allow better the opinion of them, The
spiritual going down of Christ into hell.
which say, that this is to be understood of a spiritual descendyng or
going down, whereby it was declared, and preached through the efficacy,
virtue and power of christ's holy spirit, unto the souls of the reprobate,
that were in the unquenchable fire of hell, that their unbelief and
stubburnnesse was the cause of their eternal and everlasting damnation, and
that they should have no deliverance from it, by the death and passion of the
only begotten son of god our savior Jesus Christ, 1. Peter. 3. By the
spirit he means the power of the godhead, and not of the soul of Christ.
where unto the words of saint Peter seems well to agree, (saying,) Christ
has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, for to bring us to
God, and was killed, as pertainyng to the flesh, but was quickened in ^he
spirit, in which spirit, he also went and preached unto the spirits that
were in prisone, which were in times past disobedient.

Both wicked and godly had one feeling of Christ's death, but to diverse ends.
So we perceive by these words of the Apostle, that both the damned and saved
had alone manner of feeling of the death and passion of Christ, but yet to
diverse ends, for the one (that is) to the godly that were in Abraham's bosom,
was certified by the divine power and godhead of Christ, that now was the
fulness of time come, 1. Cor. 1.
to fill up the measure of their joy, and everlasting salvation, that they
long looked, hoped, and thirsted for. And to the damned was preached christ
crucified, but to the increasing and augmentyng of their own damnation, for
that they had no part or portion by his death, of gods favor: But rather an
heavy judgment, because as S. Paul (says) Christ, is, Odor mortis ad
mortem his. etc. That is, the savor of death unto death to those that believe
not. 2. Cor. 2.


But howsoever men list to take it, this shall be my belief, that the going
down of Christ into hell, What Christ's going down to hell is.
is our deliverance from thence. For except our savior Christ had been
environed and compassed about, with the sorrows and pains of hell, and in a
manner overwhelmed with them for a while, hell would have swallowed us up unto
everlasting damnation: we should have perished utterly both in body and soul:
we should never have escaped the tyranny of Satan, nor be healed of the
deadly wound, that we have received of that old venomous serpent, the devil,
and enemy to our salvation. So that, Act. 2.23.24.27.31.32. By the soul is
meant the body or person of Christ. By hell is meant the grave. Romans 13. Hebr.
12.
I deny not that article of Christ's discention, but of the manner how, is the
question, for when it is said, he will not leave his soul in hell: he
speaks not of his discendyng into hell of the damned, but that he shall rise
again from the dead, that is, he shall not leave him in death: or liyng
continually in the grave. For the soul in that place, is taken for the whole
natural man. etc. For, seek all the scriptures from one end to a another, and
ye shall never find, that Christ, in body or soul, Mat. 12. Acts. 2. Luke
21. Look more hereof in Erasmus upon the Creed. Christ descended three manner
of ways into hell.
descended into hell, but that he died, and rose again the third day,
according to the Scriptures. For, you shall note, that the East Church had it
not, the Counsel of Nicen Creed has it not, nor the Counsel of Ephesus.
etc. But to be short, ye shall understand, that christ descended into hell,
three manner of ways. Videl. First in power, as when the Uaile of the Temple
did rent in twain, from the top to the bottom, and the earth did quake, and
the stones were cloven, and the graves did open them selves, and many bodies of
the Saints which slept, arose, and came out of the graves after his
resurrection, Mat. 27.51. In power.
and went into the holy City, and appeared unto many. In spirit. Mat. 2^.38.
Mat. 27.46. John. 19.40.
Secondly, in spirit, when as he said, my soul is heavy even unto the death,
and when he cried, my God, my my God, why have thou forsaken me? The third,
in person, when as he was laid in the grave, as we read, that they took the
body of Jesus, Ephe. 4.9.
and wrapped it in linen clothes, with the odours, as the manner of ye Jews is
to bury, and Paul says now in that he ascended, what is it but that he had
also descended first into the lower part of the earth? This dear brother is
my belief, grounded upon the word of GOD, and not upon men, A request of the
aucthour to the gentle reader.
or men's dreams, or phantacies. And report not that I do deny any article
of the faith (God forbid I should) wherefore, read with judgment, and with
the spirit of mildenes, come not pre iudicio, but with iudicio.

The opinion of some, concerning christ's going down to hell.
Some there be again that be of opinion, that the soul of Christ went not
down into the hell of the damned, but that it went only down for to deliver
the Patriarchs and other holy fathers, of the old Testament out of the Lymbe*
and also for to deliver the souls of them, that were of less perfection, then
the Patriarchs, and other holy fathers, out of the pains of purgatory, where
they were kept for to make satisfaction for those sins that they had done no
penance for in this world: What Abraham's bosom is.
But as for Lymbe, I know none but Abraham's bosom, which to say truly, is
that most blessed life, (which they that dye, in the faith that Abraham did)
shall enjoy after this world.

The.vij. Chapter. Christ is our true Purgatory, and the Papists Purgatory
is false.
The true purgatory. 1. John. 1.
AS for Purgatory, I know none other but the blood of Jesus Christ our only
savior, that does cleanse us from all our sins. Again, none other fire do
I know in all the Scriptures, that has any virtue or power to purge sins,
Acts. 1. Matthew. 3. John. 1. Luke 3.
but the fire of his holy spirit, wherewith he promised to Baptize his elect
and chosen, and the fire of his sacred and divine word, whereof him self
speaks on this manner, John. 15.
ye are clean because of the word that I have spoken unto you. This is true
purgatory, wherein all must be purged before that they can enter into the
kingdom of God.

That other Purgatory that they have invented of their own heads, The
papists purgatory.
without, and against Gods word, is a most deuillishe, and abominable
blasphemyng against the merits and bloodshedding of our savior Christ's death
and Passion: For by it the only begotten son of God, is made an imperfect
savior, and of less authority, power, and strength then they will have that
fleshely ydoll of Rome and most pernicious antichriste to be: The Pope of
greater authority and force, then Christ the son of god, among the
papists. O most abominable blasphemy.
unto whom they dare attribute and give full authority and power to absolve
men, and to grant unto them a full pardon of all their sins, even a poena,
and a culpa, that is to say, to deliver them, not only from the offense it
self, but also from the pain or punishment that is due unto it.

Whereas poor Christ, who has shed his heart blood for us, and who has
trodden the Wine press alone, is scarcely able by their doctrine, to forgive us
our offenses, at least, he cannot release us of the pain. Esai. 63.5.
For, if it be of his forgeuing, we must suffer the pains that be due unto our
sins, in the fire of Purgatory, till we have made satisfaction for them, or
till we have bought them out at the antichrists hands, and at the hands of
his shauelinges: or else, we must make a full satisfaction for them, here in
this world, whiles we are here yet a live, if at least we entend for to escape
that whot burning fire of theirs: So that every way Christ shall be but half
a a Savior, and God his father, a most abominable and deceitful liar, for
(he says) at what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sin, Ezech.
18.
from the bottom of his heart, I will put his wickedness out of my remembrance,
so that it shall no more be thought upon.

How is this promise fulfilled, If the papists purgatory should stand, Gods
promises must needs be false.
I pray you, if he do so cruelly punish our wickedness, and offenses in the
fire of purgatory after that he has forgeuen and pardoned them? Is this to
think no more upon them? what can these deuillishe and abominable Sophisters
allege now for them selves, will they say, that GOD is a lier, and that he
does not perform and fulfill his promises most truly? either they must say
so (what startyng holes soever they can find out) or else confess and
acknowledge, that their doctrine is most detestable, and also blasphemous
against the truth of Gods promises, and against the merits of the most
precious death, passion, and bloodsheddyng, of his only begotten son our
Savior Jesus Christ.

And in a another place, this most merciful Father, and bounteous Lord, who
is always true and most faithful in all his promises, does cry out, saying:
I am he, I am he, that takes away thy wickedness, Esai. 43.
and that for mine own sake, and thy sins will I remember no more: Here in
these few words, which are both so sweet and so comfortable, we have three
godly promises: The place of Esai expounded.
First, how that he will take away our wickedness, our sins, and offenses,
which thing he did already fulfill and perform by the death and passion of his
son Jesus Christ our Lord, of whom, John, Zacharias son did say, John. 1.
this is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. Does not
this sufficiently teach us, that it is God only and none other, that takes
away our sins, and that he does it by none other purgatory, but by the
blood of his only begotten son our savior and redeemer? The second promise
is, that he will put away our sins and offenses, for his own sake, and not
for any respect that he should have either to the merits of our own works,
or to any satisfaction, that we be able to make here in this world, whiles we
be yet alive, for he says that he will do it for his own sake, or for his
own self (that is to say) of his own mere goodness and mercy, being
provoked thereto, by no manner of merits or deseruinges of our behalf, as
Paul plainly sets it out, when he says, Romans ^.
Commendat autem suam charitatem erga nos Deus, quod cum adhuc essemus
peccatores, christus pro nobis mortuus fuit. That is to say, God sets out
his love toward us, seeing that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for
us.

They therefore that say, that they only do escape the pains of purgatory,
that do bear here a sufficient penance, and make satisfaction for there
sins, do most shamefully belie the truth of Gods promises: whereby we are
certified and assured, that God does take away our sins, for his own sake
only, and not for any merits or satisfaction, that we can make, That is, nine
hundred threescore and nine years. Genesis 5.
either in purgatory or any where else, though we were able to live,
Mathusalahes life: yea, by their own doctrine, as ye shall find it written,
in the master of sentences, though all the pains, griefs, sorrows, and
torments that ever were suffered by men, sense the beginning of the world, and
shall be suffered unto the last day of judgment, were heaped together one
upon a another, yet they should not be able to put away the least sin that
is committed in this world.

Saint Augustine says very well, Aug. in Psalm. 31.
acccordyng to the truth in the Psalms. Non tibi deus reddit debitam paenam,
sed donat indebita^ gratiam. That is to say, God does not render to thee due
punishment, but does give to thee his undeserved grace. For as Peter Marter
says upon the Romans. Christus enim nobis donatus est gratis, Petrus Martyr
in Romans
nullis intercedentibus nostris meritis. Christus autem sibi nos non gratis,
sed suo sanguine and cruce acquisiuit. That is to say, Christ is given unto
us freely, without any our merits, but christ has gotten us unto him self,
not freely, but by his blood and Cross. Bernarde in annunciatione Marie. Ser.
1.
And Saint Barnarde says plainly these words. Traditus est enim, propter
peccata nostra, nec dubium, quin potentior and efficatior sit mors illius in
bonum, quam peccata nostra in malum. That is to say, He was delivered up, or
died for our sins, neither is it to be doubted, but that his death is
mightier, and of more force and effect in good toward us, then our sins in
evil. As though he in few words had said, Christ's death is more stronger
to get salvation to us, then our sins was, Romans ^. More gains by Christ,
then loss in Adam.
to get us dampnation, for we have gotten more by our new Adam, then we lost
by our old Adams fall.

The.viij. Chapter. Popish purgatory is flat against the word of God. For
it makes Christ's death and passion of little or none effect^.
WHereby we see plainly that their purgatory pickpurse, is clean contrary
to the true doctrine of Christ's passion, for if I may, or can make a
satisfaction by suffering of pains in purgatory for my sins, then Saint
Augustines words are false, The papists do make Augustine a liar.
for he should say, he does render to thee thy deserved pain or punishment,
and not to say, he does not render to thee thy deserved punishment, and
again, thy deserved grace, The papists do make Barnarde alyer.
and not undeserved grace. Saint Barnardes, words are not true if I may make,
or get to my self satisfaction, by suffering of punishment in purgatory for my
sins, for he should have said, we have gotten more by our sins in
sufferyng pain, then we have by Christ's death. And so consequently, pain was
more effectual and strong to us, to obtain heaven, then was Christ's passion
which suffered for our sins, and therefore sin was good to us by this
reason: for through sin came punishment, in purgatory, and by punishment
comes life everlasting, Galath. ^.
as the Papist affirms, so then we may say Christ died in vain, and he
shed his precious heart blood in vain.

The third promise, is much like unto that which he made before, Ezech. 18.
by the prophet Ezechiell, he does promise here, that he will no more remember
our sins, but utterly forget them, and never think upon them. Which is
signified unto us, in many other places of the scripture, as when it is said,
that the lord himself will cast away our sins, in to the bottom of the
Sea. Again, that as high as the Heavens be from the earth, Psalm. 103.
and as far of as the East is from the West, so far the Lord will put
away our sins from us. Is it to be thought then, that forgettyng his
promises, he will so tyrannously punish our sins, after that he has once
forgiven and pardoned them, and also so substauncially purged them, by the
only and true purgatory, which is the most precious blood, of his only
begotten son our savior Christ? who being the wisdom of the father,
appointed and ordained of him to be our only teacher and instructour, Mat. 17.
in things that parteine to his glory, and to our salvation, and whose
doctrine we ought to content our selves withal, Broad way, and narowe.
does make mention only, of two ways: of the which, the one being narowe,
and straight, Matthew. 7.
does lead them that walk in it, unto life and salvation. And that the other
way, is both wide and broad, unto utter perdition, and death everlasting.

And as he does here speak, Two ways only.
only of two ways, that does lead e^ther to life or destruction: Luke 16.
so does he in Saint Luke, appointe only two sundry estates, and conditions
of the dead, placing all the faithful departed, Two estates of dead.
in the bo^ome of Abraham, where they were in felicity and joy, and all the
unfaithful, and reprobates, in the uttermost darkness of hell, where the rich
glotton was in intolerable torments, The rich glutton. Purgatory scullians.
John. 5.
and pains. But yet does he more lively stop the mouths, of our purgatory
Scullians when he says, verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my
words, and believes on him that s^nt me, has everlasting life, and shall
not come into judgment or condemnation, but is passed from death unto life.

These words are most diligently to be noted and marked* for many comfortable
lessons, may be learned of them, to the quietyng of our own consciences, and
to the great comfort of our souls.

First and foremost, What we learn by this place of saint John. The place of
John expounded truly.
we learn, that they shall take hold by faith, upon the glad and joyful
tidings of our sauation, (...) in his word, how that our savior Jesus
Christ, did bring into this world, and believe that God, who did send him, is
become a most merciful and loving father unto us, being always ready, for his
son Jesus christ's sake, who by his death, has pacified his wrath, and made
atonement (...) him and us, Note.
to receive us unto his mercy, and to pardone (...) all ou^ sins: have
already everlasting life, being as sure of it, as if they were already in full
possession of it, triumphyng with their head in the glorious kindome of heaven.

For we do receive it already in this life by faith, Now we are already in
possession of gods kingdom.
we are already possessed of it by hope, and we are therein already confirmed by
holiness of life. But how could it be verified, that the faithful believers
have everlasting life, as being already in full possession of it, if after
their death and departing out of this life, How long we must suffer in
Purgatory for every sin. Wherein the fire of Purgatory does differ from the
fire of hell.
they must be broyled and roasted in their Purgatory fire, by the space of.vij.
years, for every sin that they have committed in this life, if their
doctrine be true, it were in a manner better for them, that they had never been
borne. For, they say, that the fire of purgatory, does differ nothing from
the unquenchable fire of hell, saving only that the one is everlasting, and the
other lasts but for a time. Is this the blesfull rest, that the holy ghost
does promise unto them that die in the Lord, that is to say, in the faith of
the only begotten son of God our Savior Christ? Apoc. 14.


The spirit says, that they shall after their death rest from their
labors, verily that were a poor resse, if when a man has toyled and labored
all the day long, Note.
he should be feign to lie all night in a whotte burning Oven, I judge he
would not be very hasty to go unto his rest.

Secondly, here we shall mark, that the true believers shall not come into
judgment of condemnation, How it is to be understood that the faithful
shall not come into judgment.
that is to sa^e, nothing shall be laid to their chardge, no sins shall be
imputed unto them, but through faith, in the only begotten son of God, they
shall be accounted as righteous, as if they had never committed any offense. For
why, Christ our Savior is made unto them, 1. Cor. 1.
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, how can it be then, that they
must suffer such grievous pains in a fire, which is altogether like unto hell
fire (as they say) if no judgment shall be given against them. No offendour is
wont to suffer punishment, except he be judged and condemned to it. But the
truth it self does say, that they that believe, shall not come into
judgment or condemnation, whereunto the Appostle does say, Nulla igitur nunc
est condemnatio his qui insiti sunt christo Jesus, Romans 8.
qui non iuxta carnem versantur, sed iuxta spiritu^. That is to say, there is
now no condemnation to them yt are in christ Jesus, which walk not after the
flesh, but after the spirit.

They therefore, which do say and affirm, that the faithful shall in the
other world, suffer the pains and punishementes that are due to their
offenses and sins, are directly against the Scriptures and word of God.

Last of all, this a^e we assured of, that they, which take hold upon the
mercy of God, declared unto us in our savior Jesus Christ, are already
passed from death to life, meaning thereby, that they be delivered from the
styng and power of death, How we are passed from death to life.
which is sin, and from all the penalties that are belongyng unto it, and
that there remained no more after this mortal life, but to enjoy, and
possess that eternal and everlasting life, that the only begotten son of
god, has so dearly bought and purchased unto us: which thing the holy
Scripture does declare, and set forth unto us, by many goodly and comfortable
examples, Poor Lazarus. Luke 16.
for there do we read, that as soon as the poor Lazarus was dead, his
soul was by the hands of the Angels, carried up into the bosom of Abraham
(that is to say) into joy and felicity.

Again, as soon as the thief; that hong on a Cross by christ, Mat. 27. Luke
23.
did say, remember me, O Lord, when thou come into thy kingdom, straight
ways our savior Christ gave him this most comfortable answer: verily I
say unto thee, to day, thou shall be with me in Paradise, that is to say,
in my heavenly kingdom, John. 24.
for so christ prayed his father, as John records in his Gospel, saying*
father, I will that they which thou haste given me, be with me, even where I
am, that they may behold my glory. So likewise, the wise man in his book, (nay
rather the spirit of god in the wise man) says, Wisd. 3. Deuteronomy. 33.
the souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and no torment shall
touch them. And whereas they do bring here a trick of their wicked and
ungodly sophistry, A papisticall trick.
saying, that the thief did obtain this free pardon at Christ's hands by a
singular privilege, which al men must not look to enjoy, for privileges, as
the Lawiers be wont to say, be not common to all men.

I do answer, We are al saved by privilege.
that no man is saved but by privilege, which does only parteine unto the
true and faithful believers, and not to the unfaithful and reprobate, in
comparison of whom, the chosen and elect of god, are very few in number, for
though many be called, Mat. 20.
yet few are chosen, and elected, to these few does the privilege, of the
children of god belong, and not unto all men, so that the Lawiers saying, shall
also be verified in this point, as then the poor Lazarus, and also the (...)
in rest and quietness, and the souls of the ungodly (...) punishments, until
the bodies of those do ^se again unto life everlasting, and the bodies of
^hese unto eternal death, which is also called the second death, (...)
plainly does he yet in an other place (...) before our eyes, the whole
substance of the matter, August. cont. Pelagianos, Hypponostico^, lib. 5.
when he says, (...) locum fides catholicorum diuina (...) regnum (...) esse
(...): Secundum gehennam: Vbi omnis apostat^, vel a christi fide alienus
aeterna supplicia experietur. Tertium penitu^ ignora^^^: (...) nec esse in
scripturis sanct^ (...). That is (...) the faith of the catholics by the
divine (...) that there is the kingdom of heaven: And secondly, (...) is a
hell fire, wherein all Apostates, and all they that be (...) from the faith of
Christ* do s^ffe^ torments and pains.

No third play at all do we know, nor find in the holy Scriptures. Mark
this ye purgatory builders, that do hold and mainteyne a third place.
And (...) place* he (...). (says he) (...) places, the one (...) the
everlasting kingdom, and the other (...) the eternal (...). And again, De
verbis apostoli. Sermon. 18.
he says, know ye that when the soul is departed from the body; either is
it by and by put in Paradise, or else it is thruste into ^ell for h^^ sins. De
vanitate huius seculi.
But to stay lon^ upon the foolish and lip labor prayer, for the dead, it
shall be needelesse, for although they (I mean the Papists) have devised
diverse and sundry lies, as ye may ^ead^ in their legends* how that the souls
of the dead appeared to their friends, willing them in any wise to pro^^^e
Masses, and (...) for them, for that they, were in the pains of (...), and so
under (...) robbed the peoples purses, and did their souls less good* yet I
say they have no warrant in gods book for their (...).

The.ix. Chapter. Against praiyng for the dead* and apparitions of the dead
after their departing hence.
FOR if prayer were so necessary for the dead, no doubt holy scripture would
have made mention thereof, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
as it does of all other things needeful for us to learn. Saint Paul
says, I would not have you ignorant brethren, concerning them which are a
sleep, that ye sorrow not as men without hope, for if we believe that Jesus is
dead, and is risen, even so them which sleep in Jesus will GOD bring with him
(and in the end he concludes with this Counsel) wherefore comfort your
selves one another with these words. Here Paul had a good occasion to move
the people to pray for the dead, if it had been necessary, for when he had
comforted them with the hope of the resurrection, he would have said, comfort
your friends souls, or the souls of the dead with your prayers, alms
deeds, Masses and Diriges, but he never spoke word of all this, but simply
said, comfort your selves one another in this life, meaning, with the word
of God, which certifieth us that we shall all dye, yet rise again, at the
joyful and general resurrection, with these our brethren and sisters, and
meet the Lord in the Clouds, wherefore the Scripture says, the dead has no
part in this world, Eccle. 9.
not in any work under the Sun. Hierome in Eccle. 9.
Saint Hierome upon that place says, the dead (says he) can add nothing
unto that which they have taken with them out of this life, for they can
neither do good, nor sin, neither increase in virtue, nor vice. etc* To what
end then do our prayers extend, or what good does it them, when in hell they
can not increase in good, nor in heaven to virtue, so either it ^^^teth not, or
needs not.

Ambr. de bono mort. cap. 2.
Saint Ambrose says, upon these words. I am a stranger in the earth, as all
my Fathers were, therefore (says he) as a pilgrim he has^ed to the common
co^^trie of the saints. He that has not here received forgiveness of his
sins, shall not be there, for he cannot come into everlasting life, for
everlasting life is the forgiveness of our sins. But S. Ciprian plainly
says, Cip^. contra Demetrianu^.
Quando is it huc excessum fuerit, nullus iam locus paenitentiae est nullus
satisfactionis effectus. Hic vi^a aut amittitur: au^ tenetur: hic saluti
aetern^ cultu dei, and fructu fidei prouidetur. That is as much to say, after
we be once departed out of this life, there is no more place of repentance,
there is no more effect or workyng of satisfaction, life is here either lost
or won, everlasting salvation is here provided for, by the due worshipping of
God, and the fruictes of faith, and a little before in this same place he says
again, Ibidem.
Transierunt omnia illa tanquam vmbra, erit tunc sine fructu paenitentiae: and
dolor paena: and inanis ploratio: and inefficax depracatio. That is, all those
things pass away as a shadow (meaning pride, riches, vaineglory, which he
speaks of before) then he shall be without fruict of repentance, grief of
pain, and in vain weepyng shall be then, and prayer shall be of no force.

Thus good people you see by Scriptures and Fathers, how vain prayer is for
the dead, but yet the Pope has for money all things to sell. For as one
says of Rome. Roma dat omnibus omnia dantibus: Barnardus Cluniacen. in
Satyra. Rome.
omnia Romae cu^ praetio. Rome gives al things to them, that give: all things
at Rome will pass for money, for it is an old saying. Curia Romana non captat
ouem sine lana. The Court of Rome will not take the sheep without the ^leese.
And there full well was Rome painted out of his trade of marchaundise, by one
Baptista, and yet he was no Caluenist but a Papist, Baptista ma^tuanus. The
marchaundise of Rome.
which says, Vonalia nobis templa, Sacerdotes, Altaria, Sacra, Coronae,
Ignis, Thura, praeces, Caelum, est venale, Deusque: That is, among us in Rome
Church, Priests, Alters, Masses, Crowns, Fire, Incence, prayers and heaven,
are set to sale, yea, God himself among us may be had for money. But I leave
this, for that the breath of Rome declares his own stinche, the Lord has
opened all her sleightes, that they which cannot see, may yet feel and
understand it.

Well, by these testimonies then you may see, that prayer for the dead
avails nothing, No penny, no Paternosti^.
and that the Popish Priests, have no Pater noster without a Penie. And as
for the apparitions of souls, it is false, for after they be delivered, of the
burden of the flesh, they are in joy and felicity, and wander not abroad as
foolishly is surmised.

Hear therefore what Saint Chrysostom, Chriso^t. in Mat. cap. 8. Hom. 2^.
an aunciente doctor says to this, Quid ergo respondebimus ad illas voces:
anima calis ego sum (excipit) non anima defunctiest quae ista dicet, sed demon,
qui hec vt (...) decipiut effugit, and mo^^: Quare ^^ularum haec verba, imo
desipientium ducendit sunt, and patrorum ludibria, and iterum, non potest anima
a corpore separata in his regionibus errare, iustorum anima in manu dei sunt
infantium similiter non enim peccarunt. Peccatorum vero post hunc exitum
contin^^ abducuntur, quod a Lazaro, and Diuite planum efficitur. etc. That is,
what shall we say therefore to those voices which say: I am such a soul*
he answers, that voice that speaks these things, is not the soul of any
person departed, but it is the devil which does feign these things, to
deceive the hearers, wherefore, such words are to be counted old wives
tales, and foolish fables of children: Wisd. 3.
for the soul separate from the body, does not wander in this world, for the
souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, likewise souls of infantes,
for they have not sinned, the souls of the sinners, after their departure, are
straight way carried to their place, which plainly appears by Lazarus, the
righteous, and the wicked rich man.

August. lib. 2. quest. 3. ad Simplicianu^. Read. Deuteronomy. 18. Esai. 8. Luke 16.
De ciuitat. dei. lib. 20. cap. 16. Rabanus. Read the.2. chap. of the book of
wis^.
Saint Augustine also says, that the spirit of Samuel, which the woman
sorcerer raised to Saul, was no^ the so^le of Samuel, but the devil, which
appeared in Samuel^ likeness, for to deceive Saul. And therefore he pronounces
plainly, and says, either they be sayings of lying men, or the wonders of
deceitfulll ^e^uls. Thus thou may plainly see, how vainly and deceitfully
Rabanus, Archbishop of Magunce, recites out of Gregory the first, and of
Be^ta, with the rablement of all the papists, the apparitions of souls
departed, to mainteyne their fained purgatory, and praiyng for the dead, which
I confess to be most flat against the written word of God.

By all these testimonies, which without all dout, have a most sure ground and
foundation in the word of God, and agree in all points with his holy
Scriptures. All they, and especially Saint Augustine, does plainly overthrow
their new forged purgatory; prayer for the dead, and apparitions of souls.

The.x. Chapter. Children that are dead borne, or dye bef^^^ that they can
(...) to baptism, are (...), nor yet go into the popish limb.
ALso the Lymbe of the children, The Lymbe of the children that be still borne,
or dye without baptism.
that either be still borne, or else dye before that they can receive baptism:
these after the doctrine of the papists, shall never enter into the kingdom
of heaven, but shall be everlastingly detained and kept in a Lymbe, Lib.
senten. 4. distinct. 1. Si vero did. 4. cap. necessariu^ and cum filius cum de
Sacra. This doctrine has no ground in Gods word.
besides the hell of the damned. Where, though they shall not, nor do not feel
the pains and torments of the unquenchable fire of hell, as the other damned
do: yet they shall be deprived for ever of the fruition of Gods glory, and of
all other (...) and joy of heaven, cursyng continually both father and mother,
and the hour that ever they were conceived and begotten, so that it were
better that a whole city, yea, a whole realm should perish and ^^icke down,
than that one only child should deceasse and dye unbaptized.

Thus they do blasphemous^y preach, and teach, and set forth by writing, not
only to the great derogation of Gods mercy, but also to the great
discomforting of the poor seely parents, unto whom such things have by the
providence of God, happened and chanced, either through sickness, or by some
other casualtie and mischaunce, The great cruelty of the papists against
poor infantes that be still borne or which dye without baptism.
that both men and women are at all times subject unto, in this wretched and
miserable world: yea, for to declare and testify openly unto all men, that
they do not hold them for true members of the body of Christ* but for such as
be everlastingly banished from the socretie and fellowship of all faithful
Christians, and of all the blessed spirits and souls, they will in no wise
suffer them to be buried in their hallowed ground, I mean, among other
Christians, but cause the poor afflicted parents, to bury them in a ditch,
or in a doung hill as a dise stinckyng ca^^on: how much better, into more
conformable, or agreeyng unto the Gospel of christ, were it, to teach the
poor miserable and afflicted Parents, that there can be no fault, Beanard^,
non priuato, sed contemptus baptismi damnat.
offense, or trespass, but only in breakyng the Lords commandments: and
that where no despising of his holy ^^^^tution, and ordinance is, there he
does accept the good will of them, that would gladly have obeyed his laws and
commandments; if they had not been ^etted, by some urgent, and vnexchuable
necessity.

If then any infantes or children, be prevented by death, before that the
faithful Parents, can bring and offer them, unto God by baptism, which
above all things, they would have had (if it had been possible by any means)
to be ministered unto their fruict, seed, and issue, whom they know to be
comprehended with them, Genesis 17.
under the couenaunte that God has made with Abraham, and with all faithful
beleuers: we must not by and by, with such cruel temeritie and rashness, that
has no ground, but only upon the foolish persuasion of men, following their
own fantasies and dreams, hold them for damned and cast away. For, besides
that which has been said already, we must consider and way, not with our
Ballaunces, but with the true and infallible Ballaunce of gods holy word, and
sacred scriptures, that we be not saved by the outward ceremonies of the
Sacraments, but by the virtue, strength, and efficacy of the Lords covenant
that he has made with us, Genesis 17.
saying unto our father Abraham, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed
after thee.

Whereunto he has added his sacraments, as heavenly seals of his blessed will
and favor toward us, and our seed, whose God he affirms himself to be, as
well as ours, Saint Paul says, Romans 4.
that faith was imputed unto Abraham for righteousness. How was it then
imputed? when he was circumcised, or uncircumcised? not when he was
circumcised, but when he was uncircumcised, Genesis 17.
after he received the sign of circumcision, as the seal of the righteousness
of the faith, which he had when he was uncircumcised, that he should be the
father of all them that believe, not being circumcised, that righteousness might
be imputed to them also. So we see why the sacraments were ordained, Why the
samentes were ordained. Genesis 22.
to be as seals and witnesses to our weakness of Gods promises made unto us,
and our seed for ever, so the Lord said unto Abraham. In thy seed all
nations shall be blessed.

If then we do take hold by faith upon his holy covenant, we and our children
shall be saved, by the virtue, strength, and efficacy of it, though it were so
that by some casualtie, or chance, not coming through our own fault, we
should be put from the outward seals or sacraments of it. Mark this ye
Anabaptists.
In deed, if it were so that we might conuenientlye receive the Sacraments,
that the Lord instituted and ordained in his word, and yet would not receive
them, but contemn them, and despise them, as things nothing parteyning unto
us: I would not say for all the goods in the world, that either we, or our
seed should enjoy the benefits of the covenant. For that were a plain
contempt, or rather a rebellious stubbournnes, which we can in no wise excuse
before god, who does always punish most sharply, Leuit. 10.
and with all severity, the contemners of his holy institution and ordinances.

But if we be prevented by death, or being let by some other urgent
necessity or cause, can not rightlye come by them, nor receive them. I do
steadfastly believe, that the omitting of them, Genesis 17.
shall not be imputed unto us. The Lord had ordained in his law, that all men
children should be circumcised, addyng unto it a very terrible threatenyng,
when he says, Every man child, that has not his foreskin cut of, his soul
shall perish from his people, because he has broken my Testament. And yet it
is not to be thought, but that many died before they came to eight days old,
at which age and not before, they ought to be circumcised, that all men
children, that died among the Isralites, even after this Law was made, not
having their foreskinnes cut of, Exodus 1.
according to this law, did perish, or were damned, for how many thousand,
besides the infirmity of natural death, were slain and drowned in the great
river Nylus in Egypt, by the commandment of that cruelty of Pharao, before
that their foreskinnes could be cut of? shall we say that they all be damned,
condemned, and cast away?

The holy Patriarchs and Prophets, were in no such belief, as it appears
by the example of Moses, who by the space of forty years, Joshua. 5.
that the children of Israel did wander in the wilderness, did not circumcise
the men children, that were borne there, but deferd the circumcision since
their coming out of Egipte, until they entered into the land of Canaan, yet
it is to be believed that many might die in the mean while, not having their
foreskinne cut of: and though none had died, yet any man might have judged,
that both Moses, and all the other Israelites, did against the ordinance of
God, because that they ministered not the circumcision, upon that day that God
had appointed.

But these ancient Fathers did well declare unto us by their example, how we
ought to understand the matter of the outward Sacraments, for although it be
written of the circumcision: This is my testament, Genesis 17.
that ye shall keep betwixt me and you, and thy seed after thee, the day
being appointed, when it shall be ministered, and given, with many other like
circumstaunces, yet they understood right well, that this was a Public
ceremony, which was as a most sure witness of the couenaunte, that GOD had
made betwixt him and his people in the Israelitishe Church, as the Paschall
lamb, and other Sacraments were. Therefore, when they have had a just
impediment or let, or when they wanted time and place, and other things that
were necessary for their ceremonies, they made no great conscience to leave
them vnministred, nor yet thought that their souls health, or salvation,
should be in any danger for it, as long as they knew that the thing came not
through their negligence, nor through the contempt of Gods holy ordinances.

The women of the Israelites were saved by the inward circumcision.
As then they did judge, that the women should be saved through faith, and by
the inward and spiritual circumcision, without the other that was ministered
in the flesh outwardly, so they did judge of the men children, in the time of
necessity, knowing that they were comprehended, in the Testament, and
covenant of God, whereby he does of his mere grace and mercy, grant
salvation unto his chosen and elect: which he gives by his holy spirit, as it
pleases him, as well without Sacraments as with Sacraments. Acts. 10.
Cornelius.
As we may evidently see by Cornelius, and those that were in his house, who
had received the holy ghost, Though we have never so strong a faith, yet ought
we not to despise the Sacraments.
before that they were baptized by Peter, yet notwithstanding, they despised not
the outward baptism, although they were already baptized with the holy ghost,
for that man were too presumptious and arrogant, that would despise baptism,
which was instituted and ordained by our savior Christ, Matthew. 3. Luke 3.
since that he himself, who is the fountain and well of all holiness, that does
sanctify all sinners: And who baptizeth with the holy ghost, and with fire,
did not despise the baptism of John Zacharies son.

And John Baptist himself, Luke 1.
was he not sanctified, not only before his circumcision, but also before he was
borne. The same may we say of Jacob, Romans 9. Iere. 1. Galat, 1. The chosen
among the heathen were saved without circumcision. Iona. 3. 4. Reg. 5. Job. 24.
of Jerome, of Saint Paul, and other like, whom God had sainctified unto
himself, even from the mothers womb. And if the chosen, as well the children,
as other that were among the Heathen, and Panymes, were saved without the
outward circumcision, as it appears in the Nyniuites, in Nahaman, in Job, and
other like, which have had a knowledge of god, having always their refuge
unto his grace, wherefore should the same privilege be denied unto those,
whom he has not only chosen by his eternal election, which does parteine
unto all his servants, but also unto whom he has given a sure, and an
infallible token and testimony of it, by his outward Sacraments: if they
have as reasonable lettes, and excuses, as those gentiles and heathen might have.

For the first foundation of our election, What is the first foundation of our
election. Ephe. 1.2. Romans 8.9.10. 1. Pet. 1. The efficie^t. The material. The
formal. The final cause of our salvation.
is neither faith, hope, love, baptism, nor fear of god, but only the
election and predestination of god, as. S. Paul declares plainly, and
largely. And. S. Peter says, Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the
father, unto sanctification of the spirit, through obedience and sprinkelyng
of the blood of Jesus Christ, grace and peace be multiplied unto you. In which
we may see plainly, that the free election of god, is the efficient cause of
our salvation, Chistes obedience the material cause, our effectual calling is
the formal cause, and and our sanctification, is the final cause.

To be short, we must beware that we put no such necessity in the outward
sacraments, that we should judge or think, that all other necessities must
give place unto it: But contrariwise we must consider, that many times the
ministration of the outward Sacraments, Joshua. 5.
deferde and left of because of the necessities of men, and of the impedimentes
and lettes that has happened unto them, which thing we may perfectly
understand by the example of the circumcision, that differed among the
Isralites, if we will consider the circumstaunces that be in it, Mark this ye
cruel papists.
for when they were in the deserte, and must always be ready to remove their
host, and all their houshoulde, at the time and hour that the Lord should
command them, they did well judge that God would not have them to be
murderers of their own children, whom they could not have circumcised, but
that they must have been very sick, and in ieopardy of death, if they had not
had time and place to see well unto them, which thing we may see plainelye, by
them of Sychem, The Sichemites. Genesis 34.
which were so sick after their circumcision, that they altogether, were not
able to defend them selves against two of Jacobs sons.

Therefore Moses did well consider, that circumcision was made and ordained for
man, Mat. 12. Mark. ^. Luke 6. John. ^.
and not man for circumcision, as it is written of the Sabbath day. Even the
like may we say of Baptism, which is a Sacrament of the people of the new
Testament, which they have received of the Lord, in steed of the blooddy
circumcision. For as by circumcision, which was a cuttyng of of the foreskinne,
the children of the Hebrews were brought unto God, were sealed up with the
Seal of his covenant, and received into his Church, to the great comfort
and joy of the Parents, which were certified by the same, that God was not
only their God: but also the God of their posterity and seed, and yet if any
thing had happened unto them, before that they could be circumcised, they
mistrusted not, but that God would by the virtue of his Testament, save them,
as we have already sufficiently proved.

By baptism the children of the christians are brought unto Christ.
So by baptism, the children of the christians, are brought unto Christ, are
sealed up with the Seal of the people of god, and received into his Church,
as members of his son Jesus christ, and fellow heirs with him of his heavenly
kingdom: which thing, unto the faithful Parents must be a heavenly
comfort. For by it they are certified and assured, that their sins be not
only washed away with the blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, but also the
sins of their posterity and children. But if it be not the pleasure of God,
that the fathers and mothers should see their children alive, for to offer and
present them unto him by baptism, why should we think that God would use such
cruel tyranny against the poor infantes, and against the poor seely
parents, that are already afflicted enough? What injury is this, that we do
unto our Savior Jesus Christ? the still borne children, should have but
small occasion to bless his coming, and to sing with those that received him,
when he entered into Jerusalem: Blessed be the son of David, Mat. 21. Mark.
11. Luke 19.
which comes in the name of the Lord.

They should rather have a just occasion to curse and ban his coming: since
that in ^teede of bettering of their estate, he should have empayred it, and
made them more miserable than the children of the Jews. They can not deny
this absurdity and inconvenience, if at least they will mainteyne their
doctrine to be true, which declares it self to be most repugnant and contrary
unto the Gospel of our Savior Jesus Christ, which is a doctrine altogether
full of goodly comfort, in steed whereof, What fruit their doctrine brings,
ye condemn* still borne children.
their doctrine brings nothing else, but discomfort and despair, as the
experience has showed it many times.

But I do hear what they do begin to say: the children of the Hebrews (for
thus peradventure they will reply) that were still borne, Objection.
went no more in to Paradise, than the still borne of the Christians do:
Therefore it can not be said, that that our Savior Jesus Christ should
impair or worse the estate of the still borne of the Christians. If the still
borne of the Israelites went into the Lymbe, Answer.
which ye say was before the coming of Christ our Savior, then was there no
greater punishment for them, than for the other that had been circumcised, since
that they went all thither indifferently.

Moreover, they that were then in the Lymbe, had some hope to be delivered,
which is altogether denied unto the poor seely infantes of the christians,
that be still borne, or that dye without baptism. Whereby it should follow
that Christ did rather come to bring the wrath and judgment of God, than his
grace and mercy. Luke 1^.
Again, they that were in the bosom of Abraham (for, none other Lymbe do I
acknowledge) were not without taste and feeling of the very joys of heaven, as
it appears by the answer that Abraham made unto the rich glutton, Luke 16.
saying: Son, remember that thou in thy life time did receive thy
pleasure, The comfort that they had in the bosom of Abraham.
and contrariwise, Lazarus received pain: now therefore is he comofrted, and
thou art punished. They can not deny these words to be true. Then must they
confess that there is comfort, rest, and joy in the bosom of Abraham: And
how can these things be without the kingdom of God, Romans 14.
which is, righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy ghost?

Or if they will say that the still borne of the Jews went not in to the Lymbe
of the fathers, but in to a Lymbe by them selves. A question.
Then must they forge many Lymbes. But if one should ask them, where the
Scriptures are that they have for to prove such things, they can bring nothing
else but the vain fantasies and dreams of their own heads, whereof they may
be ashamed, if any shamefastness be in them, at least, or any point of
honesty. Objection.
I know that they will allege the saying of Christ against me, in Saint
John's Gospel, where he says, John. 3.
Except that a man be borne of water and the spirit, he can not enter into
the kingdom of God. Whereupon they will conclude, that the baptism of water is
necessary to salvation, and that he that is not baptized with water, shall not
enter into the kingdom of God. For, he did not only say, he that is borne of
the spirit, but he did also add, water, for to show that both of them are so
necessary, that the one can not save without the other.

They do well confess, that the water is not sufficient without the spirit,
and that the visible and outward baptism without faith cannot save, because
that Christ says first: he that shall believe, and afterward adds unto
it, and shall be baptized, Mark. 16.
shall be saved. But in nowise they will grant that the baptism of the
spirit, without the visible and outward baptism, is able to save, though a
body be driven to such an extreme necessity, that he cannot come by it
though he would never so feign. Answer.
Before that we go any further, we must note diligently, that although our
savior Christ has said: he that shall believe, and shall be baptized, shall be
saved, yet notwithstanding in the contrary sentence that follows immediately,
baptism is not mentioned of, nor repeated, he did not say: he that shall not
believe, nor be baptized, shall be condemned.

But he speaks only of the faith and belief, showing plainly that without
it, Without faith no man can be delivered from comdemnation.
no man can be delivered from condemnation, which he said not of baptism,
and yet he spoke there of the outward and visible baptism. Howbeit, I would
not that any man should go about to gather of my words, that I do little
esteem or regard the visible and outward sacraments, or that I go about to
minister occasion unto men, to have them in less estimation then they ought,
and to set little, or nothing by them: For I have been always of a contrary
mind, as it does sufficiently appear by my words that go before. Yea, I
have at all times in my sermons, exhorted most earnestly all men, that they
should be diligent to receive the holy and blessed sacraments, that God has
instituted and ordained in his word, whenever they might have them ministered
unto them, What danger it is, to refuse to receive the holy Sacraments,
according to the lords institution and ordinance, showing and prouyng unto
them, that they ought in no wise to look for to enjoy the benefits of Gods
covenant and promises, if they should maliciously contemn and despise the
holy and blessed sacraments, which be as heavenly seals annexed unto them.
But as I would not have them to be despised in any wise (for cursed be he,
that despises the Lords institution and ordinance) so would I not have to
much to be ascribed and attributed unto them: nor yet our salvation to be
alligated and bound unto the outward ceremonies of them, as though we could not
be saved, if for some necessity and urgent cause, Augustine.
they should be left vnministred. But Saint Augustine plainly says, No^
aligata est gratia dei sacramentis. The grace of God is not bound to
sacraments. As for an example: if there were some good man among the Turks,
Example.
or else among the Idolaters and Infidels, which had the knowledge of the
Gospel, and a true faith in our Savior Christ, and yet could by no manner of
means come by the Sacrament of baptism, nor be baptized, I cannot believe,
that he should be damned for lack of a little water, August. in Io. tracta.
80.
sith that he has the chief and principal, that is to say, a true
iustifiyng faith: else the water should have more virtue and efficacy, then
the blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, These things are diligently to be noted
and marked.
or at least as much: and the Priest that should minister the outward
baptism, should be of as much power, as Jesus Christ him self. For, as the
water and the Minister, Chris. Ho. 27.
can do nothing without the spirit, and blood of our Savior Christ: so it
should follow, that Jesus Christ, his spirit and blood, should be able to
do nothing, without the water and minister. And so by this mean, our savior
Christ and his spirit, should be as subject unto the Minister and water, as
the water and the Minister, should be subject unto Christ and his holy spirit,
and so consequently, his grace and mercy should be alligated and bound unto
corruptible elimentes, and made subject unto men. Whereby it should come to
pass, that Jesus Christ should be no more true God, nor yet true Savior.

A question.
Here may be a question demanded of those elimentaries, and children damners,
whether we are saved by water, or by Christ, or else by both, if they say by
both, as so they hold opinion, then it follows, A great absurdity granted.
that the water died for our sins, and so must we say that the water has
life, and yet being our servant, and created for us, is our Savior, we would
then judge easily, that such doctrine came not of God, since that it does so
evidently repugne unto his grace, and unto the justification of faith,
overthrowing altogether the whole mystery of our redemption, purchased unto us
by our Savior Jesus Christ.

And because it shall not be thought, that I do take and expound the
Scriptures at mine own pleasure, and as I list: Ye shall hear the meaning,
not only of the ancient writers, but also of the schole doctors, and namely,
of the master of the Sentences, Sent. 4. did. 4. ca. Sunt.
who does prove by good reasons, and also by the aucthorities of the fathers of
the ancient catholic church, that some are justified and saved without
baptism: among whom Saint Augustine does comprehend al those, August. de
ciuitate dei. lib. 13. cap. 7.
that be dead, and have suffered martyrdom for the confession of Jesus Christ.
Likewise the authority of saint Cyprian is set forth by the master of the
Sentences, De consecrat. Distinct. 4. cap. Baptismi. De vnita bapt. lib. 4.
Lib. 4. de bapt. Glossa. de consecra. distinct. 4. S. Bapti. and Cyprian. Luke
23. August. in Psalm. 34.
whereby he does testify and prove, that says, repentance, and the
conversion or tourning of the heart, are in steed of baptism unto them, that
had neither time nor place for to receive it, calling it the baptism of
devotion, and for a better confirmation of this, he does bring the example of
the thief that hong by christ, who, as he says, was not nailed on the Cross
for the name of Jesus christ, but for his own merits and wicked doings, nor
yet suffered because that he did believe, but as he was suffering he did
believe, and came unto the faith.

It is then declared in the same thief, how faith is available unto
salvation, without the Sacrament of the visible baptism: as saint Paul
says: Romans 10.
The belief of the heart justifies, and to confess or acknowledge with the
mouth, makes a man safe. Note this.
But this is fulfilled and performed inuisiblye, when the necessity does
exclude or keep of the sacrament of baptism, and not the contempt of
religion. There may be some baptism, without conversion, or turnyng of the
heart. And conversion or tournyng of the heart, can be in some without having
received baptism. But it can not be where baptism is despised: nor we ought
in any wise to ca^ it conversion or tournyng of the heart unto God, when the
Sacrament of God is despised.

This is the aucthority, D^ consecrat. distinct. 4. ca. baptismi. Senten. 4.
di^^^nct. 4. Ambr. de obitu valenti. Chanes. de Sacramentis.
that Gratianus does allege upon this matter, in the book of the decrees, and
also the master of sentences, being taken out of Cyprian, whereunto is added
the saying of. S. Ambrose, who speaking of the death of Valen^^tianus the
Emperor without baptism, did say: I have lo^^e him, whom I should have
regenerated or begotten a new? but he has not lost the grace, which he did
require. Likewise Chanesius, who has written of the Sacraments in verses,
being of the same opinion, does bring a Jew for an example, who being
converted unto our savior Jesus Christ, does with all haste run unto the
Church for to be baptized, and yet for lack of water, and of a Priest, does
die without Baptism. He does conclude, that nevertheless he shall be saved, if
he do steadfastly believe in our Savior Christ.

August. in Ioh. tracta. 80.
Now, if we ought to have such a confidence and trust of the salvation of
those, that being of age and of years could not be baptized: how much more
ought we to believe and trust, that the little infantes that die before that they
can come unto baptism, are saved by the virtue of the Testament, and of the
blood of the only begotten son of God, which is shed for us, and for our
seed, to wash away all our sins, both original and other? For, if they be
of the elect and chosen of God, it lies in his power to baptize them in the
mothers womb, Genesis 25. Mala. 1. Romans 10. Iere. 1. Luke 1. Galat. 1. The place
is the third of John.
by his holy spirit, and to to sanctify them, as it is written of Job, of
Jeremy, of John Baptiste, and of Paul.

And as for the saying of our savior Christ, which they say is general, and
does except no man, if they will understand it of the sacrament of baptism,
as many of the old and late writers have done, and go to the rigor of the
letter: we may say the like, of that which he has said of his flesh and of
his blood, John. 6.
in the sixth of John, speaking on this manner: verily, verily, I say unto you,
Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall
not have life in you, which is as much as if he should say: whosoever does
not eat my flesh, nor drink my blood, he shall not have life everlasting.
This no man is able to deny.

It follows then, that all little children, with all those that have not
received the sacrament o^ the body and blood of christ, are damned, if it be
true that Christ our Savior, is really, substauncially, naturally, flesh,
blood and bones in the sacra^ent, and we must eat his flesh, and drink his
blood, after the same manner and sort that they do teach us. Therefore it
shall be as requisite, necessary, and needful, that the sacrament of the
bo^^ and blood (...) Christ, be ministered unto the little infantes and
children (...) the sacrament of baptism. The Euchariste ministered unto little
infants. The manner of the Iacobites and Greeks.


And here is, it does ^ome that even in Cha^^lemagnes time, they did keep the
Sacrament, for to give it unto the little children when they were sick,
thinking it to be a thing very necessary. And yet now a days, even at this
present, the Iacobites and Greeks, as some do write, do minister the Sacrament
under both kinds, unto young babes that are suckyng on the mothers breast. We
do read in a manner the like of the Bohemians, The manner of the Bohemians and
Morauians.
and of the Morauians. Both Origene, and also Cyprian, were wont to minister
the Communion unto the little children, that were brought in the arms of the
Parents, when they came to receive the sacrament, Mark what we ought to do,
if we should follow the fathers in all things. The cause that the fathers did
thus err.
geuyng unto them, not only the mystical bread, but also the mystical Cup.

And in Saint Augustines time, they did commonly minister the Sacrament in both
kinds, unto the young infantes and children, when they were baptized. And all
this did come to pass, because the ancient fathers, and great learned men,
did take the sayings of our Savior Christ, after the rigor of the letter.
Whereof it did come also, that some did think, that if a man after that he was
baptized, An error of certain fools.
had once received the sacrament, he could never be damned, or at least, he
should once be delivered from damnation, because that our Savior Jesus Christ
did say: I am the bread of life, which is come down from heaven: John. 6.
he that shall eat of this bread, shall live for ever.

They did always stick unto the bare letter, saying that our Savior Christ,
who had promised the same, could not lie. But Saint Augustine does both
reprove, August. de ciuitat. dei. lib. 27. cap. 25. A merry story of the Person
of Trumpington.
and also confute that error. These men are like to the person of Trumpington,
who readyng the.27. Chapter of Matthew, on Passion sunday, as they call it, and
when he came to these words: Eli, Eli, ^ama-sabacthani, called the Church
wardens to him, and said, truly this book does appertain to the Bishop of
Ely, for his name is here, I will scrape out his name, and put in our own
parishes name, and so he did, then he began to read again, Trumpington,
Trumpington, Lama-sabacthani. Thus we may see, what absurdities men be wont
to fall into, for lack that they do not examine thoroughly the meaning of the
scriptures, but will go still to the rigor of the letter.

Saint Hierome says very notably, Non in verbis scripturarum est euangelium,
Hiero. in. 1. cap. and Galat.
sed in sensu. The gospel stands not in the bare words of the Scriptures,
but in the meaning. Therefore we may say unto them, as Saint Ciprian once
said to the Nouatian heretics: Cypri. ad Nouatianum. ^omo. 2.
Andite Nouatiani, apud quos scripture c^lestes leguntur potius, quam
intelliguntur. Hearken hereto, ye Nouatian heretics, amongst whom the
heavenly Scriptures are read, rather the^ well perceived or understood. For,
if following the doctrine and opinion of the Papists, touching the Sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ, we would take after the rigor of the letter, the
same that our Savior Christ does speak of the eating of his flesh, and of
the drinkyng of his blood: without all doubt we shall be feign to confess, that
all they that have once received the Sacrament, shall be saved, and that all they
that never received it, and so die, shall be damned for ever.

Whereby it must needs follow, that it is no less necessary to minister the
Sacrament of the body and blood of christ unto the children, then to baptize or
christen them. Wherefore I should think good, They may as lawfully do one as
the other.
that they should as well give authority, unto the Midwiues, to minister the
Lords supper unto the infantes in time of necessity, as they give them
aucthority to minister baptism, which is a Sacrament of no less efficacy
and dignity then the other is, yea rather, by their doctrine, it is of more
virtue and strength. For, I have not yet read, that ever they condemned any,
because that they had not received the Sacrament of the Euchariste, whereas they
do send all them to the devil, that die without the receiving of baptism,
thought they would never so feign have come to it.

But whereas, we spoke before of Midwiues, how they baptized by the authority
of the papists in time of necessity, I speak it not so as that I do allow
their doings, Hebr. ^.
for I am of a clean contrary mind, and do say with saint Paul, that none
ought to take authority upon them in the Church, to use any ministration,
unless they are called lawfully as Aaron was. Mat. 28.
Christ gave authority to his Apostles only, to baptize, and to preach. 1.
Cor. 14. Argumentum minore ad marus.
Saint Paul, in no wise, would have a woman to speak in the congregation,
much less to minister a Sacrament, which must be always done with doctrine,
for they must go both together. Therefore was it rightly condemned, and flatly
forbidden in the council of Carthage, Ca^. 100.
without any manner of exception, that women should once presume to baptize any
at all.

And where they hang so much of necessity, if the child be ready to dye,
that then she may and ought to do it. Saint Augustine doubts whether it be
lawful or no, for them to do it at that instant of necessity, August. contra
Epist. Parmeniani. 2. ca. 13.
for his words are these. Et si laicus necessitate compulsus baptismum
dederit: nescis an pie quisqua^ dixerit esse repetendum. Although a lay man
compelled by necessity, do give baptism, I can not tell whether a man may
godly say that it ought to be iterated. How the custom was before that
Augustine was borne, is gathered of Tertullian, that it is not permitted to a
woman to speak in the Church, nor teach, nor to baptize, nor to offer, that
she should not claim to her self the execution of any man's office, much less
of the priests. Of the same thing Epiphanius is a substantial witness, Libr.
contra herese. 1.
where he reproves Martion that he gave women liberty to baptize.

Many foolish women and men do say, if the infantes dye without baptism, they
are deprived of Gods grace, and of their salvation. Genesis 22. Mala. 1. Ierem. 1.
Luke 1. Romans 8. and. 9. Nora.
Not so, God pronounces that he adopteth our infantes to be his own before
they be borne, when as he promises that he will be a God to us, and to our
seed after us. In this word is contained their salvation, for the first
foundation of our salvation, is neither faith, hope, love, nor fear of God,
but the election of GOD, by which are saved, not only they, which of full
years of understanding, do believe, hope, love, fear, call upon, hear and obey
God. etc: But also infantes, albeit that they be taken out of this life without
baptism, wherefore, let us not hang so much upon creatures, that we exclude and
doubt of our creator, and for our foolish good intentes sake, 1. Sam. 1^.
will suffer sacraments to be ministered by women, Not lawful for Midwiues to
baptize in any case.
clean and besides the express word of GOD. Wherefore, I do hold and
believe, that it is no more meet and lawful for a Midwife to baptize children
in time of necessity, then it is for her to preach publicly, and minister
the Euchariste openly, or otherwise.

But let us come again to the saying of our savior Christ* that they have
always in their mouths, for to condemn and cast away the poor seely
infantes and children of the christians, which dye without baptism: It is to
be understood (yea, they that will consider diligently, and weigh the
absurdities that do ensue and follow of the exposition of them that do
understand it of baptism, going thus to the rigor of the letter, shall
confess even the same) that our Savior Jesus Christ, who alone, by his holy
spirit does sanctify all men, and even the very babes in their mothers
belly: How the place of the.3. of Ioh. ought to be understood.
does there speak of the spiritual regeneration of man, and of his new
birth, declaryng what is requisite and necessary for him, for to be a
christian: that is to say, how that it is necessary that he forsake his first
generation and birth, which is altogether corrupted, 1. Pet. 1. 2. Cor. 3.5.
accursed, and naught, and that he be regenerated and borne again by the
spirit of God, and by the incorruptible seed of his word, so that he must be
made a new creature, bearing the image of Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 15.
the true heavenly Adam, as he did bear the image of the old Adam.

John. 3.
And therefore he says, Except a man be borne a new, or from above, he cannot
see the kingdom of God. And then afterward he does expound by an other
sentence following, the self same thing that he had said before. For, to be
borne a new, or from above, and to be borne of water, and the spirit, are
phrases, Phrases of Scriptures.
and manner of speakinges, which do signify all one thing: so that those two
sentences of Christ, do differ in nothing, saving only, that the last does
expound the first, being somewhat more ample and copious. For sith that our
first generation and birth is carnal, it behooves that the second be
spiritual: 2. Cor. 15.
since that the first man; being of the earth, is earthy: it is requisite and
necessary, that the second, which is from heaven, be heavenly and spiritual.
But this generation and change can not be done, but by the spirit of god. For
as it is written in the same place. That which is borne of the spirit, John.
3.
is spirit.

And therefore, our Savior Christ, going about to expound the same unto
Nicodemus, that he had said before: Excepts a man be borne a new, or from
above, he cannot see the kingdom of God, he does say afterward: Except
that a man be borne, of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God, The spirit of God works in us our regeneration. Objection.
because that the spirit, the aucthour of this generation, is given from
above, who works this new birth in us, which is altogether heavenly and
spiritual. But paraduenture they will say: what need he to add water, was it
not enough to name the spirit? Unto whom I answer: Wherefore did John
Baptiste say, Answer.
speaking of the office and ministry of our Savior Christ, that he should
baptize with the holy ghost, Matthew. 3.
and with fire? What need had he, since that he had named the spirit, to make
any mention of fire?

Shall it therefore be necessary, to appointe a Baptism of fire, August. lib.
de Haere. cap. 59. Alphons. de Haere. lib. 2.
as they say that some folk have done, and yet do at this present day?
Saint Augustine does testify, that the heretics Seleucus and Hermias, who
were Galatians, did not baptize with water, he tells not wherewith they did
baptize, but other writers say, that they did baptize with fire. We read
likewise, Bern. Luke Cato. Haere. lib. 2.
that the Iacobites do use fire in the circumcision of their children,
wherewith they be wont to mark them either in the forehead, or in the cheek.
They say also that the Indians, Ethiopians, and Persians, which count them
selves to be Christians, do yet at this present time, use fire in steed of
water in their baptism. Which error, without all doubt, did come of the false
intelligence and understanding of our savior Christ's words.

For they do not perceive nor understand, that fire is taken of our Savior
Christ, and also of John Baptiste, by a figurative manner of speaking, for the
holy spirit of God, that so they might the more lively express the nature and
property of the holy ghost. Why the spirit of God is called fire.
For, as the fire is pure and clean, and can suffer no uncleanness: so the
holy ghost does pourge, and cleanse, and lighten the consciences, setting them
on fire with the love of God. Acts. 2.
For the which cause, he was sent unto the Apostles in the likeness of
fiery tongues. Which thing was both foreseen, and forespoken of John
Baptiste, and also meant by our Savior Christ.

If we do not stick to take fire in that place, for the holy spirit of
God, and for a more ample exposition, and setting forth of his nature and
properties, wherefore should we stick to take water here in this place, for the
same self spirit, considering the conformity, agreement, and affinity, that
the water has with the nature and properties of the holy Ghost? yea all
things being well considered, it stands with more reason, then the other
does. For, Saint John speaks of the holy ghost first, John speaks of the
holy ghost first.
and then makes mention of the fire.

Therefore a man might think, that either he did understand two several
things, or that he did expound one thing that is plain of it self, by an
other thing which is obscure and dark. Christ speaks of the water first.
But in this place our savior Christ, does put the water first, and then
afterward, as though he would expound unto us his figurative manner of
speaking, and give unto it a greater light, he does declare what he will have
us to understand by the same water, that is to say, his holy spirit, unto
whom he gives this name, for many causes.

The holy ghost for many causes is called by sundry names in the Scriptures.
First, because that as the fire is an Elemente exceadyng pure and clean, and
so necessary for man's life, that it is impossible that men might forgo it: So
the water is very needful, being of a very clear, pure, and clean nature,
and very meet for to represent and signify the nature, and properties of the
holy ghost. For, as the water does renew the earth, makes it fertile, Why
the holy ghost is called water.
causyng it to bring forth fruit, and does wash the filthiness of the
bodies: so the holy ghost does wash, purify, refresh, and water the hearts and
consciences of men, comfortyng them, Psalm. 50. Hebr. 6. Psalm. 1.
and also making them to bring forth pleasant fruictes and acceptable to God.

And as water does put out fire, and quench the thirste, so the holy Ghost
does quench the fire of the evil concupiscences of the flesh, John. 4. What
Christ would have us further to understand by this manner of speaking. Esai.
44. Ezech. 36.
he does also quench the thirste of the poor troubled souls, satisfiyng
them for evermore. Secondly, he would by this manner of speaking, make us to
understand those ceremonies, washynges, and purifiynges that be contained in
the Law of Moses, and likewise those Prophecies, whereby the holy ghost was
promised, and specially by Esaias, and Ezechiell, unto which Prophecies he had
now a respect.

Therefore he would declare unto us, that those waters that were promised of
God, did signify nothing else, but the aboundaunt gifts of the holy spirit of
God, which should be powered upon all flesh, as a stream or flood of water,
that does run down and ouerfloweth all the whole earth, which thing. S.
Peter does testify, to have been fulfilled, both in himself, and in all the
other disciples of our Savior Christ, Acts. 2. Joel. 2.
in the feast of Whitsontide, according to the Prophecy of Ioell. And for this
cause our savior Jesus christ, John. 4.
both in this place, and when he did talk with the woman of Samaria, and also
when he did bid them that were in the Temple, John. 7.
that they should come to drink those lively waters, did use the same manner of
speakinges, for to declare unto us also, to what end he did institute the
sign of water in baptism. And that this is true that I say, I do take John
for my witness: who expoundyng the words of his master, did say, that by
those waters, he did understand the holy ghost, which they that believed,
should receive.

Thirdly, by this figurative manner of speaking, he does instruct and teach
us, what a Christian man, that is regenerated by the holy spirit of god, ought
to be, comparyng the water and the wind, which are creatures most fine,
clear, and pure, with the earth, which is an element more gross, more heavy,
and more material. These words then do signify as much, as if he should
say: that in steed of that gross, earthy, and corruptible man, he must be
renewed and made altogether a new creature, heavenly, spiritual, and perfect,
differyng as much from him that is earthy, and corruptible, as the water and
wind do differ from the earth, and that this must be done by the holy ghost,
who is that true water that works this purifiyng in us.

But let us grant unto them, that this text ought in deed to be understand
of the visible baptism, what shall they get by it? Does not the master of
Sentences him self, having all questions, Sent. lib. 4. distinct. 4. cap. his
autem.
that could be moved upon this text, affirm that this place ought to be
understood of them that could be baptized, and did not esteem it? The
doctors themselves, perceauing what absurdities and inconveniences should
follow, if they would understand this text, The doctors forced to confess
three manners of Baptism. De consecra. distinct. 4. Ca. Bapti.
of the outward baptism only, and go to the rigor of the letter, were feign
to confess that there be.iij. manner of baptismes, that is to say, the baptism
of water, the baptism of the holy Ghost, and the baptism of blood. Whereby
they do confess, that there is some other baptism besides the baptism of
water, whereby a man may be saved.

There is the baptism of the holy ghost and of faith, which can be without the
baptism of the water. whereupon the master of Sentences does allege S.
Augustine, Senten. 4. distin 4. Ca. his autem. August. de vni. Bapti.
saying, Thou do ask, which is greater, faith, or the water? I do not
doubt, but that thou will answer, faith. If that then which is less can
sanctify, how much more shall that which is greater, be able to do it? that
is to say, faith of the which Christ says: John. 11.
he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live. Objection.
Here again will they allege Saint Augustine, against me, In the ancient
Church they that had received the Gospel and were not baptized, were called
Catechuminie, because that they were instructed in the faith. Answer. Holcot.
Sent. 4. distin. 4. que. 1.
who writes on this manner: We do not believe, that any Cathechumene has life
everlasting, though he dye in good works, except he be baptized, or suffer
Martyrdom. Again: we do believe that there is no way of salvation, but for
them that are baptized.

I think they be not so ignorant, but that they know what their own Doctors
are wont to answer to this place, among whom, one Holcot by name, does
openly withstand Saint Augustine, sayng that his exception is not sufficient,
and that a man that knows and believes in our savior Jesus Christ, can be
saved by some other means then by martyrdom, though he dye without baptism.
Yea, moreover he is of opinion, that if a man should believe perfectely that
he were baptized, although he were not, yet he should be out of the danger of
damnation, and says plainly, that this faith should serve him unto
salvation, though it were founded upon a falshoode.

Therefore the master of Sentences, aunswering to such objections, Sent. 4.
distin. 4. Cap. his au^^in.
says, that these words of Saint Augustine, must be understood, according
to the declaration, that he gives in other places, where he does entreat
more largely of this matter. And therefore he does write, that these things
must be understood of those, that had time to make them selves to be baptized
and did it not. For, if any man having faith and charity, The papists own
doctors condemn them. An example. 2. Cor. 8.
would be baptized, and can not, being prevented by some necessity, the mercy
and goodness of almighty god, does recompense that, which does lack of the
Sacrament. For, when he is able to pay, if he paieth not, he remains bound
still. But if he cannot, and yet has a good will to do it, god, who does not
bind his power unto the Sacraments, shall not impute it unto him. I have
alleged even the very words, as they are written in the book of the master
of Sentences, who does prove also by Saint Augustine, August. in Leuiti. que.
88.
that the invisible sanctifiyng, has been in some, and has profited them,
without the visible Sacraments, saying on this wise and manner.

The visible sanctifiyng which is done and wrought by the visible Sacrament,
may be without the invisible, but it profits nothing. Sent. 4. did. 4.
Yet we must not therefore contemn and despise the visible sacrament, for the
despiser, and contemner of it, can not be sanctified inuisibly. And as for
master Holtcot, although he does allow that, which the other have written of
the baptism of blood, yet does he sufficiently declare, that he, that being
unbaptized, does shed his blood for the name of Jesus christ, is not baptized,
by that blood that he has shed, but that the Church does hold him for
baptized, because that he has sufficiently declared that he did not despise
baptism, but that he would gladly have received it, if it had been possible
for him, since that he has showed such a faith in the gospel of our Savior
Jesus Christ.

There is yet a place, Objections.
that they be wont to allege out of a certain book that goes under the
title and name of Saint Augustine. August. lib. de fide. ad pet.
The words are these: hold this for a suertie, and doubt in no wise of it,
that not only they that do already use reason, or be of years of discretion,
but also the little infantes, that begin to live in their mothers womb, and
die there with out the Sacrament of holy baptism, which is given in the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, or they that without it
pass forth of this world, after that they be borne, shall be punished with
everlasting fire. For, although they have no actual sin of their own, yet
have they drawn by their conception and birth, the damnation of Original
sin.

Answer. The papists unawares to them selves overthrow their own Lymbe.
Let them turn them selves which way soever they list, and yet, thinking to
maintain and uphold the Lymbe of the little infantes, they do utterly
overthrow it, and that unawares to them selves. For, whosoever is aucthour of
this book, that they do father upon Saint Augustine, the same that they do
allege and bring out of it, does utterly cast them in their own talk. For,
if these words be true, after the sense that they give unto them, the little
infantes dying without baptism, shall not only be deprived of the fruition of
Gods glory, and of all other joys of heaven, but also shall be punished with
unquenchable and everlasting fire.

Therefore, what shall it need to forge a new Lymbe for them? Many Doctors
considering the great rigor that he did use against the little infantes, What
certain of the le^rned called Saint Augusti. for his rigor toward infantes
not baptized.
have been of another opinion much contrary, in so much that some among them,
did not stick to call Saint Augustine, Carnificem infantium, that is to say,
an unmerciful tormentour of infantes, though he be worthy that men should
speak of him more reverently. But first and foremost, it is uncertain whether
this book, out of the which this sentence is taken, be saint Augustines, or
not. For the style and phrase of this book, does nothing resemble the phrase
that Saint Augustine does use in those books that be certainly known to be
his. Augustines modesty in writing of matters of religion.
For, this holy doctor does always with great modesty and sobriety, both
write and speak of those things that do parteyne unto the Church, and unto
the salvation of men, being never wont to affirm any thing rashly, without
some sure ground or foundation in Gods word, which thing he does not observe
in this book.

For what Scriptures does he aleadge for to prove that rigorous sentence, that
he does give against those poor infantes that dye without baptism? And yet he
says, hold this for a surety, and not only in this place, but also in many
other, thorowout all the whole book, having always these words in his mouth:
hold for a surety: believe undoubtedly. I do here let pass many other
reasons, that did move many great learned men to doubt of the aucthour of this
book.

But let us grant that it is Saint Augustines. Ye have heard already, how he
does trim their new forged Lymbe, that they do assign unto the poor seely
infantes, that either be still borne, or dye without baptism. Again, we must
not think, that he him self will have these words of his to be taken after
the rigor of the letter. And therefore we must consider what occasions he
might have, to write after the same sort. For, if the necessity and
unableness does excuse them that be of age, why should young infantes be more
inexcusable, which have yet a more reasonable excuse, then they that be of
years can have? For, when they dye being little ones, either in their mothers
belly, or out of it, was it long of them that they were not baptized?

Has God conceived a greater hatred against those poor seely infantes, which
are only infected with original sin, than against them which being of age,
have besides original sin, ten hundred thousand talentes weight of their
own actual sins? Although the baptism of water were as necessary unto
salvation, as ye do make it: yet if there be some exception for the one, by
what right or reason should it be denied unto the other, when the cause and
excuses be a like?

But we must weigh and mark, What moved Saint Augustine to write as he did of
children not baptized. Some make any ydol of the sacraments.

Others make none account of the sacraments. Wherein the Anabaptists exceeded.


that in Saint Augustines time, there were many that had not the Sacraments in
such estimation and reverence, as they ought to have them. As in these our
days we see, that some folk do attribute so much unto them, that they make of
the visible signs, and corruptible clementes, a Jesus Christ, and an ydoll: and
some again, do take them but for bare signs, without any virtue or efficacy,
esteeming them no more then they esteem the common badges or cognisaunces that
the servants or soldiers do wear, for to declare what Lords or masters
they do serve.

And in this thing the Anabaptists exceeded above al other: not only in this,
that they would be baptized again, but most chiefly in that, that they do
utterly condemn the baptism of young children, and will have it to be
deferred, till they come to years of discretion, whose doctrine is no more to
be allowed, then the doctrine and opinion of them, that do affirm that young
infantes that dye without baptism, are euerlastyngly banished from the
kingdom of God.

For, since that the infantes are sanctified by the holy spirit of God, being
washed in the blood of his only begotten son our Savior Jesus christ, and
comprehended in the covenant that he has made with us and our seed, Genes.
22.
by the virtue and efficacy of which covenant, being confirmed by the
bloodsheddyng of the only begotten son of God, we look only to be saved:
why should the seal of this everlasting Testament be denied unto them now,
more then it was to the children of the Hebrews? Because forsooth that they
do not believe, nor be able yet to make any profession of their faith.

What if I should reason after this forte: without faith it is impossible to
please GOD, but little infantes and babes do please God, Hebr. 11. Math. 19.14.
Mark. 13. Luke. 18.15.
in so much, that our savior christ, rebuked them that would not suffer them
to be brought unto him. I might then conclude that they have faith, though
they cannot yet declare it outwardely. And Saint Augustine does plainly say,
that they have faith, August. Epist. 23.
whose words are these. Infantes habent fidem, prop^er fidei sacramentum. The
little infantes or children, have faith, because they have the Sacrament of
faith.

As then the children of the Hebrews were circumcised in their infancy and
childehoode, and afterward were brought up in the knowledge of the Law of
God, and in his true religion and worshippyng: so it is behoueful that the
infantes and children of the Christians, be baptized, and receive the Scale of
the everlasting covenant. (For, since that by the faith of the parents, though
but one of them did believe, they are sanctified) and afterward, that they be
brought up in the true religion of Christ: Whereof confirmation did come.
As it appears that it was done in the old ancient catholic church, whereof
confirmation did come, that children after certain years, were presented to
the Bishop, and renderyng an account of that faith of theirs (which their
parents or friends in baptism professed, to have them baptized therein) have
hands laid on them: which is nothing else, Aug. de bap. cont. Don. li. 3.
Cap. 16.
but prayer made for them, so says Saint Augustine, Quid enim est aliud
manum impositio, quam oration super hominem? For what is laiyng on of hands
else, but prayer over a man?

Which thing is now turned among the Papists, to be one of the Sacraments
to make up the number of their five fained Sacraments, yea, and such a
Sacrament they affirm it to be, that it is greater then Baptism, for this
they write them self in their own books. Lib. 4. distin. 7. cap. 2.
Sacramentum confirmationis, dicitur esse maius baptismo, quia a dignioribus
datur, and in digniore part corporis. That is to say, the Sacrament of
confirmation, is said to be greater then the Sacrament of baptism, (and
afterward the cause is added) because it is given of worthier persons, The
Papist does openly maintain an herisie of Donatus.
and in the worthier part of the body, here we may easily see, an heresy of
Donatus, maintained by the Papists, which will have Sacraments to take their
force and authority in respect of the person that ministers it, not only
the master of sentences, says this, but also the decree confirms that
doctrine. Melchiades.
Melchiades, an aucther of the Papists, and a Pope, says. Sacramentum manus
impositionis, sicut nisi a maioribus perfici non potest, ita and maiori
veneratione venerandum est and tenendum. The Sacrament of laiyng on of hands,
as it cannot be made, but only of the greater, so is it to be worshipped with
greater reverence, and so to be defended.

This is a very strange religion, that a drop of grease, enchaunted and
coniured, Oil for a Sacrament* more fit for a Sallet.
with mumblyng of a few words, to be compared to Christ's sacrament?
preferred before the water sanctified by the word of God. But this is their
manner, to deprave Gods laws, Math. 15.
and dignifie their own, I marvel what authority they have to make this a
sacrament, for I am sure, that none can make a sacrament, An argument.
but he that can give power, strength, and virtue to it, but the Pope can give
no power, strength and virtue, to it, therefore he cannot make a Sacrament, for
we are not makers, nor co^secrators of sacraments, but ministrators. Saint
Augustine says, Accedat verbum elemento, and fit sacramentum. Aug. in Ioh.
tract. 80.
Let the word come to the element, and it is made a sacrament. Here I consider
two things, that a sacrament consists of the word, and the element: now let
them show me the word for their sacrament of confirmation, that it may be
put to the elemente, but here they are dumb.

Whereto the papists have brought the order of confirmation.
To speak further, how they have brought this order of confirmation (which at
the beginning was ordained, as you have heard before, for good purposes) to
toys, trifles, and gewgawes. As Oil, to grease them: Spittle, to poison them:
Salt, to dry them up: Bands about their necks, to choke them: Tapers
burning in their hands, to consume them: with a number of other toys, and
superstitions, of them devised, without any foundation or warraunt in Gods
word.

Wherefore I persuade my self, that rather fond Nurses have inured them, then
conscience or reason persuaded them. Scriptures have they none, but the same
condemn them: nor godly fathers any, but the same be against them.

But now come again to some other of the Anabaptists sayings and objections,
Objection.
that they bring against the baptism of infantes: we do not read (say they)
that the Apostles did baptize any children, in those families and housholdes
which they did baptize. Answer. Acts. 16. ^. Cor. 1.
How could it then be, that they had baptized the whole housholdes, as they
them selves do write that they did, if they had left the children that were in
them (if at least there were any) unbaptized? Are not the children part of the
householde? yea, are they not rather the chief parts of the household? Isaac was
so of the household of Abraham, Genesis 21.
that for his sake, Ismaell with his mother, was driven out of the door, and
clean put away.

If then the Apostles did baptize the whole housholdes, as they themselves do
testify, This the wicked Anabaptists can not abide.
without all doubt, they baptized also the little infantes that were in them.
For, as in the old law, when any stranger, forsaking his Idolatry, would be
joined unto the people of God, and profess the same religion that they
professed, both he, and all his men children were circumcised, were they never
so young: so in the Apostles time, and many years after, when any were
converted unto the faith of christ, not only they, but all their whole
housholdes, both old and young, were sealed up, with the seal of the people of
God.

The holy Apostle says: Romans 8.
that any man, that has not the spirit of Christ, the same is none of his:
Whereby it follows, that whosoever has the spirit of Christ: the same is
one of his: ^n argument.
And again, that any man which is Christ's, the same has his spirit: But
the little infantes and children of the christians, not only as soon as they be
borne, but also as soon as they begin to live in the mothers belly, are
Christ's: that is to say, they pertain unto Christ and unto his kingdom, as
he has plainly declared unto us, by the example of John Baptiste, Jeremy,
Luke. 1. Ierer 1.
and of many other.

Therefore, I do conclude, that they have his spirit, and that they ought to
be baptized. For Saint Peter says, can any man forbid water, Acts. 10.
that these should not be baptized, which have received the holy ghost, as
well as we? Since then that young children, have the spirit of Christ, because
that they are his, who but Antichriste will forbid them to be baptized?

It is to be noted then, that in Augustines time, many were exceedyng negligent
about the sacraments, What caused the fathers to magnify the Sacraments so
much.
which thing, has caused the ancient fathers, to magnify the same so much.
And therefore, they that did come after them, not considering the causes why
they had done so, did take the words rawly, taking no heed to their
figurative and hyperbolical speeches, How at length they that understood not
the Fathers, did make plain Idols of the Sacraments.
whereby it did come to pass at length, that they did make plain ydols of the
sacraments, as though the virtue of our savior Christ, and the whole
efficacy of our religion should consist in the visible and corruptible
elements or signs.

There were many among them, that had received the Gospel, which did defer
to be baptized till the very hour of their death, Uaine opinions of sundry
men.
some of them doing it by negligence, and some again, because that they were
persuaded, that in baptism, all the sins that could be in man, should be
washed away, for this cause, they tarried as long as they could, that so they
might depart out of this life, clean and pure from all sins: yea, many
(which thing was worse) did take, upon that hope, the greater boldness to
sin. Which thing did move S. Chrysostom, and also Basilius Magnus, to write
very sharply against their manner of doings, Chrisost. in Epist. ad Heb.
and to rebuke them that dye so, very sore.

As they then that were of age, did defer and prolong their baptism: so it
is not to be doubted, but that they did the like in their own children, for
the causes above rehearsed. And therefore it is no marvel, if Saint Augustine,
or any other in his name, whosoever he be, has written and spoken this of
baptism, for to redress such faults, negligences, and opinions, and for to
stir and move the christians to do better their duty in that point, as well
for themselves, as for their children. For this cause it was also ordained in
the ancient catholic church (for, Historia Tripartita.
as the ecclesiastical histories do testify, they baptized but once in the
year, in Thessalia, where it came to pass that many dyed without baptism)
that baptism should be ministered twice in the year, De conse. distinct. 4.
that is to say, at Easter, and at Whitsontyde.

There might be yet an other cause, that did move this author to speak after
this fashion. He did see, that many were infected with the heresy of the
Pelagians, which did attribute little or nothing unto the grace of God,
Pelagians.
and as they regarded nothing original sin, so they did wonderfully magnify
and extol the strength and power of man. Wherefore they had also baptism in
small reputation. And therefore that he might the better show, and put before
our eyes, the nature of original sin, and so move men to have the
Sacraments in better estimation and reverence, he does declare that though the
little children, Original sin.
have yet no actual sin of their own, notwithstanding, they be not without
sin that deserves death, and everlasting damnation, because of their
corrupted nature, which they have, as it were, by right of inheritance,
drawn of their fathers, and mothers, in their conception and birth.

Wherefore it was well said of one Gulielmus, that a man is in such manner
conceived in the womb, Gulielmus parisiensis in lib. Summa de vitus and virtut.
as if a man should fall into a mierie deep, and stony place, and so should
both be drowned, be arrayed with mire, and also be hurt: So (says he) by
original sin we are drowned, into the darkness of ignorance: we are
defiled with lusts and concupiscence: and we are wounded, in our powers and
faculties of the mind, to do any good. For, they have both been conceived,
and borne in sin, Psalm. 51.
and can be none other, but such, as the sinful ofspryng and original is.
For, that is borne of flesh, is flesh. What can be clean, John. 3.
that comes of an unclean seed. A woolfe can engender none other, Job. 14.
then a woolfe, nor yet a Serpent, any other, then a Serpent. And as we do not
let to hate young whelps of a Woolfe, though they have yet killed no sheep, or
the young ones of a Serpent, though they have not yet cast out their poison,
because of their wooluishe, and poisoned natures: So we must judge, that God
has no less occasion, to hate and condemn us, even from our mothers womb,
because of our perverse and malicious nature, that is engendered within us.

And that we might the better understand, that such corrupted and perverse
nature, is in the children and young infantes, even from their mothers womb,
the holy ghost does testify unto us, Romans 5.
by the mouth of the blessed Apostle Saint Paul, that they are also subject
unto death, which is the first fruicte and reward of sin.

Whosoever was then aucthour of this book, he had a good cause to aggrauate or
set forth to the uttermost, this natural corruption, and to say, that not
only they that be of age, but also the very infantes and children, are even
from their mothers womb, guilty of everlasting damnation, when they die
without Baptism, if he do understand by it the grace and mercy of God, and
the pourgyng that we have in the blood of our savior Jesus Christ, which by
baptism is signified and represented unto us, and also communicated unto the
chosen and elect of God.

And verily I think that he did so understand it. For, if he will, after the
rigor of the letter, take there, baptism for the visible sign and outward
ceremony, I would in no wise hold with him, since that he alleges no
sufficient auctorities of the scriptures, for to prove and confirm this saying
of his, which is both so rigorous and so repugnaunt unto the goodness and
grace of God, as it has been already sufficiently proved: But I do rather
judge, that he does understand by baptism, the virtue and efficacy of the
blood of Christ, which is signified and represented unto us, by the visible
sign and outward ceremony: whereby, nevertheless is signified and
comprehended all the whole virtue of the true baptism of Christ, after the
phrase and manner of speaking, that the Scripture is wont to use. The sign and
the figure many times are taken for the things that they do signify. Genesis
17. Exodus 12. Gala. 3. Romans 6. Acts. 8.
For in it the sign and the figure, are many times taken for the things, that
are signified and represented, because that the scripture does most chiefly
speak unto the faithful, which do not receive the sacraments in vain,
without the spiritual thing, that is represented by them: And therefore the
Apostle says: all ye that are baptized, are apparelled, or clothed with
Christ.

Simon Magus was baptized outwardly by Philip, and yet I do not believe, that
ever he had put on our savior Christ, and that he was apparelled with him.
Nevertheless, S. Luke, who has written the history, says that he did
believe, using the common phrase and manner that men do use commonly, Why Luke
said Simon did believe.
speaking of things as they do appear outwardely, and leauyng the judgment
of the heart unto God. Which phrase and manner of speaking, is also customably
used in the Scriptures. And therefore Saint Augustine, and other ancient
writers do expound this place of Saint Luke after this sort and manner: How
Saint Aug. and other ancient writers expounded this place of the.viij. of the
Acts.
he did believe, that is to say: he did feign him self to believe.

Now, these things being diligently considered and weighed, all men may easily
perceive, what ought to be the right use of the Sacraments, what ought to be
the true baptism, and the true regeneration, or new birth of man. Which, if
they do once understand perfectly and well, they shall be no more in doubt,
What profit and commodity does come to them that are persuaded in this
doctrine. Gen^. 17.
nor yet in any perplexity touching the little infantes and children that dye
without baptism, but will leave them in the hands of God, and commit them to
his bounteous goodness and mercis, and so endeavor them selves, that they them
selves may be of the number of the faithful, and the children of the
everlasting Testament, wherein god has promised that he will be our God, and
the God of our seed after us.

If they do so, they may be sure that God will, (according to his promise) save
them and their children, though he takes them away in the very mothers belly:
or before that they can receive the outward and visible baptism, which is but
a sign of the spiritual and inward washing, wherewith God is able him self
to baptize the young infantes and children of his faithful servants, as soon
as they begin to live in the mothers womb.

Again, they shall (if they be once brought to this point) epsy out the
deuillishe and abominable error of them that did carry their still borne
children unto idols, What many foolish people used to do, in carrying their
children to ydols.
for to obtain life unto them, as to our Lady of Ipswiche, and to our Lady
of Walsingham, to Joseph of Aramathia, to Saint Rock, and to such other.

It ought to suffice now at this time, that the soul of our savior Jesus
Christ, is delivered from the pains of the unquenchable fire of hell, Revel.
14.
and the poor seely souls of the christians that dye in the Lord, John.
5.11. Eccle. 3.
put out of pickpurse Purgatory, and brought into the heavenly rest, and that
the woeful prison that the papists did build for the poor children and
infantes of the faithful, that be still borne, or dye without baptism, is
quite overthrown, to their own shame that devised the place, and to the
comfort of the seely infantes in the everlasting habitation: so that in despite
of all popish hearts, there shall remain no more, but heaven and hell, as it
is sufficiently declared unto us by the words and example of our Savior Jesus
Christ.

All these good benefits have we gotten by Christ's precious death, Luke. 16.
Luke. 27. 1. Cor. 2.
bloodshedding, and buryall: such comfort I say, that tongue can not express:
such good, that heart can not conceive.

Full well spoke Barnarde. Barnardu^ in annunciation^ Marie. Ser. 1.
Traditus est enim propter peccata nostra, nec dubium, quin potentior and
efficatior sit mors illius in bonum, quam peccata nostra in malum. Christ was
delivered, and suffered for our sins, doubtless, his death was stronger, and
more effectual in goodness (toward us, Romans 5.
) then our sins was in evil. For he has vanquished death, Satan the
devil, and all the whole power of hell.

The.xj. Chapter. What comfort we have gotten by Christ's rising from death
again. And that it should be unto us as a glass in this life. etc.
The third day he rose again from death. Romans 4.
ANd did rise again most gloriously and triumphantly on the third day, for our
justification. For as Saint Paul says, he was delivered for our sins, and
rose again for our justification: meaning thereby, that as by the death of
Christ, sin is taken away, so by his resurrection or rising again,
righteousness is restored unto us. For, if he had not risen again, it had
been an evident sign or token, that death had gotten the victory of him, and
that hell had swalowed him up, as the other children of Adam. Now if death had
vanquished him, and not he death, 1. Cor. 15.
we should have remained still in our sins, and also in death.

And again, how should he by his death have delivered us from death, if he
him self had been vanquished and overcome? How should he have gotten unto us
the victory, if he him self had been overthrown in the battle? Therefore;
we do so part the whole matter of our saluatian, We do part our salvation
between Christ's death and his resurrection.
between his death, and his resurrection, that as we do believe, that by his
death, sin is taken away and abolished, and death vanquished and
overthrown: So by his resurrection, or risyng again, righteousness is
restored, and life given unto us again. And thereof it comes, that although
we have our full salvation in the death of Christ: for, by it we are reconciled
unto God: satisfaction is made unto his righteous judgment: Gala. 3.
the curse is taken away, and all the whole penalty paid: yet it is not
said, that we are begotten again by his death, 1. Pet. 1.
unto a lively hope, but by his resurrection from the dead, to enjoy an
inheritance, immortal and undefiled, and that perishes not.

As then the resurrection of Christ, whereby he did rise again most
gloriously from death, in the self same body that he took in the virgins
womb, of whom he took his undefiled substance, The fruits of Christ's
glorious resurrection.
and in the which he did suffer a most bitter death for us, which was taken
down from the cross, and laid in the grave, is an infallible and most sure
token and sign of his divine virtue and power, and of his triumphant victory
that he has gotten against death, The office of Christ our Savior.
Satan the devil, and against all the whole power of hell: for it was his
office to swalowe up death: who could do that but life it self. It was his
office to overcome sin: who could do that but righteousness it self? It
was his office to vanquishe the whole power of the enemy, world, and flesh:
who could do that but an absolute power, of him self?

So this is a full certifiyng, and a most certain assurance unto us, Romans 6.
that we shall rise again with him. For as when we see with the eyes of our
faith our savior Jesus Christ rise again from death, Coloss. 2.
we do see him as a noble and valiant captain, and as a most victorious
king, 1. Cor. 15. Hosea. 1^.
lead sin, death, Satan the devil, and all the whole power of hell, captives
before him, as all vanquished, beaten down and overthrown, so that they can
have no more power upon the elect and chosen of God, that believe in him, then
they have had upon Jesus christ him self.

So do we see our flesh rise again, with his flesh, sith that our flesh
that he took upon him, in the which he suffered, and did bear the terrible
judgment and curse of God, Deuteronomy. 21. Galat. 3.
diyng in it a most opprobrious and shameful death for our sins, is
triumphantly and victoriously risen again from death, in him death and all
other enemies being utterly discomfited and put to flight. 1. Cor. 15.


And for this cause our savior Christ, Coloss. 1. 1. Cor. 15. How Christ is
the first fruits of them that sleep. John. 12. 1. Reg. 17.
is called the first fruictes of them that sleep, and the first borne of the
dead: not because that he has been the first, that has been raised up again
among me^. For, many have been raised up again before him, as well by himself,
as by his Prophets: but because that he is the first, and he only that is
risen again, by his own divine virtue and power, and which is the offpryng,
original, and fountain of the resurrection and life of all other that dye, and
are raised up again in him, Jesus christ has taken a pledge of us, and has
left us one. Acts. 2.
and by him.

And for a better confirmation and sealyng up of this hope in our hearts, he
has given us a pledge, and taken one of us. Because he would not leave us in
any doubt, he has taken our flesh, and has borne it up into heaven, whereby
we are already put in full possession of it, and are set down with him in the
heavenly seats.

On the other side, he has given unto us his holy spirit for an earnest penny,
Ephe. 1. Romans 8.
for to seal up his promises in our hearts: which does testify unto our
spirit, that we are the children of God. Gala. 4. 1. Peter. 1.
Since then that we are the children of god, and have his divine and heavenly
seed in us, we ought not to doubt, but that our savior Christ has made us
partakers of his divine nature, 2. Peter. 1.
as he would be partaker of ours, and would be made man, to make us Gods: that
is to say, heavenly and spiritual. As then the Corn that is sowed in the
ground, John. 12. 1. Cor. 15.
diyng in it, brauncheth and takes root, and then comes forth, and
grows, and does at length bring forth fruict: so are we most sure, that when
we die, and are laid in the ground, we be as sown, and that we shall
branch and rise again immortal and incorruptible, since that we carry away
with us the grain or seed of the holy spirit of God, which cannot dye. And
although our flesh shall corrupt, yet the spirit of God shall deliver from
corruption this body, which shall be raised up again by the divine virtue and
power of him that has raised up our savior Christ, who shall viuiste and
quicken again our mortal members.

And whiles that we are yet in this mortal life, we must to the vttermoste of
our power, express this faith and belief that we have in the resurrection of
Christ, Thessal. 3.
and of our risyng again through him, in our conversation and living, walkyng
still in a new life, which in this world, is to rise again with Christ,
Coll. 3.
as Saint Paul testifies, saying, We are buried with him by baptism, for to
dye, that likewise, as Christ was raised up from death by the glory of his
father, Romans 6.
even so we should also walk in a new life. For if we be graft in death like
unto him, even so must we be in the resurrection.

These words shall the easlier be understood, if we will consider and mark,
How we ought to practice the whole life of Christ in our selves.
that the whole life of our savior Christ ought to serve us in steed of an
Allegory, whereby we should make our selves conformable unto him spiritually,
in those things that have been truly and really, or in very deed fulfilled
in his body, and can in no wise be fulfilled in ours. As for an example: our
savior Christ has been conceived by the holy ghost, borne of the virgin
Marie, he has been crucified, and put to death, he did rise again the third
day, and ascended into heaven. All those things cannot be performed nor
fulfilled in our bodies, as they were in his. But let us endeavor our selves,
that our spirit or inward man, may be fashioned and made conformable unto
him in these things.

Our bodies are conceived and borne in sin, Psalm. 51.
not by the holy Ghost, nor in the womb of a virgin, as our Savior Christ
was, but they are conceived by the carnal copulation of man and woman, Job. 14.
and of corruptible seed. That we may therefore be conformable unto him in
this point, A spiritual conception and birth.
let us come unto his true Church, and believe his gospel. And when we be in
the true Church of Christ, which is both our mother, and a chaste virgin,
1. Pet. 1. Galat. 4. Ephe. 5. John. 3. Ephe. 4.
we shall be conceived and begotten in it, by the incorruptible seed of the
word of God our heavenly father, and by the virtue of his holy spirit, and
shall be borne again the children of god, and made new creatures, we shall put
of the old man, and put one the new, bearyng the image of the new Adam, 1.
Cor. 15.
which is Jesus Christ, as we have borne the image of the old Adam, and of
the man of sin.

After that we be thus conceived by the holy ghost, 2. Cor. 11. Ephe. 5.
and borne of a virgin, which is the true Church and spouse of our savior
christ, the residue of our life must also be conformable unto the life of our
savior christ, as our spiritual conception and birth is. We be not crucified
and put to death, as he was: but we learn of him to bear the Cross with him,
and to be crucified unto the world, Gala. 6. Galat. 5. What it is to be
crucified to the world.
that the world may be crucified unto us, as Saint Paul writes of him self.
But to be crucified and dead unto the world, is to be crucified and dead unto
sin. And to be crucified and dead unto sin, is to forsake sin, to have no
more acquaintance with it, Romans 6. What it is to be dead unto sin.
and to be no more a servant unto it, then the dead be wont to serve the
living. For, as the dead has no more to do with the living, but are separated
from them: so they be dead unto the world, that have forsaken it, for to serve
the living God, and that will not fasshion themselves after it, Romans 6. Ephe. 4.
nor walk after the flesh, and the concupiscence of it.

Now, it is impossible that they that be thus dead unto the world, should not
live unto God, and that the world should not be dead unto them. As
contrariwise, they that live unto the world, and the world unto them, they
are dead unto GOD: As Saint Paul has written of the widow that lives in
pleasure, 1. Tim. 5. Revel. 3.
saying: that widow that lives in pleasure, is dead even yet alive. Because
she lives unto the world, and is dead unto God, that was the meaning of our
savior Christ (when he said to the young man, that would go and bury his
father, let the dead bury their dead, Matthew. 8.
follow thou me) when we die then unto the world, we rise again unto God.

Again, we practice spiritually in us, the example of the death of Christ,
when we do mortify our earthy members, when we offer our bodies a lively
sacrifice unto god, Coloss. 3. Romans 12.
when we do slaie with the sword of Gods word, and also burn with the fire
of his spirit, Ephe. 6. Matthew. 3.
our concupiscences and carnal affections, which are the brute beasts that we
sacrifice unto God, that the offering and sacrifice of our bodies may be
reasonable.

How we do dye with our Savior Christ. How we do rise with Christ. Phil. 3.
Coloss. 3.
Therefore we dye with our Savior Christ, when we do kill and mortify our old
Adam: we do also rise again with him, when we do put on Jesus christ, and be
apparelled with him: when we serve to righteousness, and despise this world,
with all the pomp and pride thereof, having our minds and conversation in
heaven, where we do seek for our ^auiour Jesus Christ, fittyng on the right
hand of God the father.

The Apostles, and specially Saint Paul, do teach us, that we ought after
this manner, to apply and set before us the death and resurrection of our
savior Christ, of a lively image and pattern of the Christian and spiritual
life: The signification of baptism.
And do declare unto us, that baptism is a sacrament of all these things.
For, the water that is powered upon us in baptism, it is first and foremost
unto us, a certificat, sign, token, and seal of the free remission and
forgiveness of our sins, and of the holy ghost, What the signification of
water is in our baptism.
who is the lively water, that washes and cleanses our consciences from
sin, as the visible water does wash away the filthiness of the body.

Moreover, it is a sacrament of repentance, which teaches us, that as the
water does come upon us, as it were for to cover and ouerwhelme us: so it
behooves that our old man of sin be drowned, Exodus 14. Romans 6.
as Pharao, and the Egiptians were drowned in the red Sea, and that we must be
buried with our savior Christ.

But in this, that the water does not remain still upon our heads, nor yet
drown us, it is thereby signified unto us, that the repentance and mortifiyng
that god does require of us, is not unto death, Exodus 14.
but unto life: so that by death, he makes us to enter into life, as the
children of Israel going through the red Sea, were brought out of servitude
and boundage in to a goodly liberty: Luke 24.
And as our savior Christ did by his death and cross enter into the glory of
his father.

And so, the grace and mercy of God, are not only represented unto us in our
baptism: we are not only by it grafted in his Testament, and received into
his church: but also we have there, the sacrament of the death, buriyng, and
resurrection of our savior Christ, and of our death, buriyng, and resurrection
with him. What a large doctrine our baptism does preach unto us.
We have also there, repentance, and of remission of sins, and the sum of
the whole doctrine of the Gospel, and also a lively image of all the whole
christian life, preached unto us.

But to come again to our purpose: After that our savior Christ had by many
tokens and signs, declared that he was truly risen again (for he was by the
space of.xl. days after his resurrection, Acts. 1.
always conuersaunt with his Apostles and disciples, Luke 24. John. 21. 1.
Cor. 15. John. 20.
eating and drinkyng with them, and biddyng them to handle and feel his body,
and for a further proof or trial, to put their fingers into his wounds, that
they might be in no doubt, Acts. 1.
but that it was the same self body, that he died and was buried in.

The.xij. Chapter. Of Christ's ascension into heaven, and how it is said that
he sits at the right hand of god. etc. And after what manner he is here
amongst us.
AND he did most triumphantly in the sight of al his Apostles and Disciples, He
ascended into heaven. Acts. 1.
ascend up into heaven, where a cloud received him up out of their sight: the
Angels testifiyng that as he was taken up from us, into heaven, so he shall be
seen come again at the dreadful day of judgment, when he shall, being
accompanied with his holy angels, come down to judge both the quick and the
dead.

In the mean season, we must not think, though he has taken the real
presence of his body away from us, that therefore he has forsaken us, or that
he does not assist, aid, and help his chosen and elect, as long as they be
pylgrimes and strangers here in the earth. For, according to his promise* he
is always with us unto the worlds end. Which thing must be understood of
his godly power, Ioh. 14. and. 16.
and invisible grace.

So does Saint Augustine say. Secundum presentiam maiestatis semper habomus
christum. August. in Ioh. tract. 50.
According to the presence, or as he is God, we have always christ with us,
again he says in the same place. Nam secundum maiestatem suam: secundum
prouidentiam: secundum ineffabilem et inuisibilem gratiam, Ibidem.
impletur quod ab e^ dictum est, ecce ego vobiscu^ sum omnibus diebus: vsque ad
consummationem seculi. That is to say in english, as concerning his divine
majesty: his providence: his inestimable and invisible grace, these words are
fulfilled that were spoken by him, behold, I am with you all the days of your
life, unto the worlds end.

For as touching his humanity or manhood, he is absent from us, and will be
to the worlds end, until he shall be seen visibly of all flesh to come
again, thereto accords S. Augustine, In Ioh. 112.50.
saying, Secundum presentiam carnis, recte dictum est discipulis sui^, me autem
non semper habebitis. According to the presence of his flesh, or body, it was
rightly and truly said unto his disciples, me you shall not have always: For
it is to be noted, that as he is both God and man, so touching his manhood or
humanity, that he took in the virgins womb* he is in all things like unto
us (sin only being excepted) as the holy apostle does write, Hebr. 2.
saying: he took not on him Angels, but the seed of Abraham, that in all
things he might be like unto his brethren.

As then he did hunger and thirst in the same body, Heb. 4.
and was subject to all manner of infirmities, that we his brethren are subject
unto, (sin always being excepted) therefore Barnarde very pretily said,
Barnard^ in cantic. Ser. ^0.
Christ loved us, dulcior, sapientior, fortior. Sweetly, in that he took our
flesh upon him: wisely, in that he had no sin by taking our nature upon
him: strongly, in that he vanquished Satan, death, and sin.

So having fulfilled the things that he took it for, he did carry it up into
heaven, and there he sits in the same human body, being now glorified and
immortal, on the right hand of God the father Almighty, Phil. 2. Matthew. 28.
1. Cor. 15. Hebr. 10.1.
which is as much to say, as that he is exalted above the heavens, having
received a full authority and power over all creatures, both in heaven and in
earth, and reigning there in glory with the father, till his enemies be made
his footstool. For, when we hear that Christ is set down on the right hand
of his father: we must put all gross imaginations out of our minds: We must
beware that we imagine not, that God the father is set down as an earthly
king, in some visible and material seat, and that Jesus Christ is set down
by him in another, August. de fide et simbo.
as his son, or one of his princes and lords.

Again, we must not think that God the father in his divine essence, This was
the heresy of the Antropomorphites, Similitude.
has a right hand, and a left hand, with other humayne lymmes, as we see
mortal men to have: For, that were to fall into the heresy of the
Antropomorphites: but rather we must mark, that it is spoken by a similitude,
being borrowed of princes and kings of the world. For, as a king does commonly
cause that man to sit by him, and at his right hand, whom he will most honor,
and unto whom he will give most authority and power: so we do understand by
these words, Phil. 3.
that our Savior Christ is exalted above all creatures, and that he has
power given unto him, both in heaven and in earth, and that he reigns with
the father, having equal power with him.

August. de agone christia. cap. 26.
Or, by the right hand of God, we may right well understand with Saint
Augustine, the place of felicity and joy, where our Savior Christ does
reign now in glory, with the holy angels, and with all the blessed spirits
and souls of the chosen and elect of God: Matthew. 25.
As contrariwise, by his left hand, the state and condition of the reprobate,
is understood and signified unto us.

What it is to sit on ye right hand of the father. Numb. 32. Mich. 4.
Again, it is not known to them that read the scriptures, that to sit, is
many times taken for to be in quiet, peace, and rest: as when Moses says to
the children of Gad, and of Ruben: Shall your brethren go forth unto the
war, and ye sit here? Again, in the prophet, Every man shall sit under his
Fig tree.

When we say then that our Savior Christ is set down, we do understand, that
he is after the paynefull labors of this life, and the woeful death of the
cross, entered into a joyful and quiet rest, where he shall be, touching his
humanity and manhood, as lord and head ruler of all creatures, both in
heaven, and in the earth, until the time that all things, which God has spoken
by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began, Luke 1.
be restored again, as the holy Apostle saint Peter does testify unto us in
the Acts. Acts. 3.


For a better understanding of the whole matter, and also that the ignorant
and simple persons, The tricks of the deuillishe sophistry.
may the better avoid the subtle tricks of the deuyls Sophistry, which is
wont to dasill the eyes of the unlearned, with this and like arguments: The
right hand of God, is taken for his almighty power: but his almighty power,
is, and can be every where: Ergo, since that Christ touching his manhood, The
right hand of God taken two manner of ways.
is on the right hand of God, the humanity or manhood of Christ can be every
where. It is to be noted and marked, that the right hand of God is taken two
manner of ways.

First, by it the almighty power of God is understood, as when Moses does
say in his Canticle: Exodus 15.
Thine hand, Lord, is glorious, thine hand has all too dashed the enemy.
And in the Acts of the Apostles, Acts. 5. 1. Peter. 5.
Saint Peter says: him has God lift up with his right hand. In these
places, and such like, the right hand of god, is taken for his almighty power,
wherewith he did overthrow that cruel tyrant Pharao, and also raised up his
son Jesus Christ from death, Phil. 2.
exaltyng him above all creatures.

If we should say that our Savior Christ, touching his manhood, does sit
on the right hand of God, being taken in that sense and signification, and
that therefore his glorified body can be every where, and in all places, even
as far forth as the almighty power of God does stretche or extend, then
should we be feign to confess with that heretic Eutiches, Eutiches.
that the body of Christ is deified or turned into the godhead. For, it is
against the property of any creature to be every where, or in mo places then
in one at once.

As we may gather of the argument that Didimus does make, for to prove the
holy ghost to be true and natural god, equal with the father and the son,
and also a Creator, and not a creature. If the holy Ghost (says he) were
one of the creatures, Didimus de spiritu sancto.
he should have a circumscribed or limited substance, as all other things
that be made. For, although the invisible creatures are not comprehended within
bonds and limittes, yet by the property of their substance they are
limited: but the holy ghost, though he be in many, yet has he no
comprehensible subaunce.

And Saint Basil writes thus: Basilius de spiritu sancto. cap. 22.
The Angel that stood by Cornelius, was not all that present hour with
Philip, nor the angel that spoke to Zachary from the alter, did at the self
same time fill his standing or seat in heaven: But we believe that the holy
ghost was all at one time with Baruch in Jury, and with Daniell in Babylon,
and also that he was with Jeremy in the mierie doungeon, and with Ezechiel in
Chobar. Whereupon he does conclude, that the holy ghost is true and natural
God, equal with the father and the son, in deity, power, and godhead.

We may see then, that it parteineth only unto God, and to no creature,
whether it be in heaven, or in earth, to be every where, or in mo places then
in one at once. But I believe certainly, that the body of Christ is a
creature, not only before his death and passion: The body of Christ is a
creature.
but also after his ascendyng up into heaven, and that it shall continue so for
ever. Therefore it can be but in one place at once.

The heresy of Eutiches is now renewed by the papists.
And verily, I do marvel that the Popecatholikes dot not see, that they do by
their doctrine uphold and maintain, that abominable herisie of Eutiches, who
did affirm that the ma^hoode of Christ was courned into his godhead, so that
he was no more both God and man, but only pure and perfect God: his humanity
being clean swalowed up, and consumed with his Godhead. Which thing, will
they, nyll they, they must grant to be true, if they will have the body of
Christ to be every where, or in mo places then in one at once, which is
against the property of any creature.

Objection.
But an objection will they now make here, thinkyng therewith to blind all the
simple and ignorant in the world. The Godhead and manhood of Christ (say
they) be so jointly joined together, that they cannot be separated one from an
other: but that wheresoever the one is, there the other must be also: But the
godhead of Christ can be every where, and in mo places then one at once, Ergo
the manhood of christ can be every where, and in mo places then one at once.

The shameless heresy of the papists. Matthew. 28.
This cupstantiall argument have they always in their mouths, in so much
that they be not ashamed to say, that these words of our savior Christ,
behold I am with you always unto the worlds end, ought not only to be
understood of his godhead, but also of his manhood, though any child in the
street may easily see, that they speak directly against the meaning of
Christ, and against all the old doctors of the ancient catholic church.

August. in Io. tract. 50.
Of whom, Saint Augustine says: When Christ did say, ye shall not have me
always with you, he did speak of the presence of his body, for touching his
majesty, touching his power, touching his providence, touching his
unspeakable and invisible grace, that is fulfilled which was spoken of him:
behold, I am with you always unto the worlds end. But touching his flesh
that the word did take, touching that, that he was borne of a virgin,
touching that, that he was taken of the Jews, that he was crucified, that he
was taken down, that he was wound in a sheet, that he was laid in the
grave, that he was manifested in the resurrection (his saying is fulfilled
where he says) ye shall not have me always with you. Acts. 1.
Wherefore? for he was.40. days touching the presence of his flesh conuersaunt
with his disciples, and as they accompanied him, with seeing; and not with
following, be ascended up into heaven, and is not here. For, there he sits on
the right hand of the Father. And yet he is here. For, he is not gone away
touching the presence of his majesty. Otherwise, we have always Christ
present with us, touching his majesty: but touching the presence of his
flesh, it is well said: ye shall not have me always with you. For, the
Church had him few days touching the presence of his flesh, now she holds
him fast with faith, she sees him not with her eyes. Thus far he.

What could be spoken more plainly then this is? Is there any child in the
world, that is not able to perceive by these plain words of saint
Augustine, that all that they do is a mere ingling, and a manifest and open
castyng of mist before the eyes of the poor ignorant and unlearned people?
but we will hear also that good ancient Father, Vigilius Ma^ter. cont. here.
lib. 1.
Vigilius Martyr, who writing against that abominable heretic Eutiches,
whose disciples the Popecatholikes will be, in despite of all men's hearts,
does say after this manner.

This was to go unto the Father, and to depart away from us, to take away
out of this world, the humane nature that he had taken of us. Behold the
miracle: Behold the mi^terie of both the properties: the son of God touching
his flesh does go away from us, but touching his divinity he says unto
us: behold, I am with you always unto the worlds end. Then by and by after it
follows: he is with us, and he is not with us: for, whom he has left, and
from whom he is gone by his manhood, them has he not left nor forsaken,
touching his divinity and godhead. For touching the shape of a servant,
which he took away from us into heaven, he is absent from us, but touching
the shape of God, whereby he departs not away from us, he is in the earth
present unto us: yet notwithstanding, both present and absent, he is one christ
and the same unto us.

Here might I allege Ciryll with many other of the ancient fathers, that do
agree with us in this point: But these two aucthours shall suffice for to prove,
that these words of our Savior Christ: Matt. 28.
behold I am with you always unto the worlds end, can not be understood of
the natural presence of his flesh, but of his divinity and godhead only.

The.xiij. Chapter. Christ's humane body can be but in one place at once* and
no^ in many and diverse places.
An answer to the objection that was made before.
NOW will I come to their gaie painted reason, whereby they goo about to prove,
that whersoeuer the divinity and godhead of Christ is* there must his
manhood be also, because that they be so jointly joined together, Christ's
body can be but in one place at once.
that they cannot be separated one from another.

But I entende (God willing) t^ prove now ^oth by natural reason, by the
Scriptures, and also by the ancient Fathers, that it is not the property and
nature of those things, Fallacia aesidentis.
that be so jointly joined together, that the one can not be separated from
the other: that wheresoever the one is, there the other must be also.

For, first and foremost the body of the son and light of it, are so jointly
joined together, that the one cannot be separate^ from the other, yet it
follows not, that whersoeuer the light of the son is, there the body of the
son must be also.

A goodly si^^^^tude.
And hereupon may I gather a go^^y similitude, (...) y^meete for our purpose.
For, as the Son (...) in the ^lement, Genesis 3.
according to the order that God has appointed among his creatures, does with
his light, refreshe, comfort, quicken, and viuifie all things here upon the
earth: so our Savior Christ Jesus, who is the true son of righteousness,
being still (until the time that GOD has appointed) on the right hand of his
father, touching his manhood, that is to say, above in heaven, in the place of
beatitude, felicity and joy, reigning there with the father, in coequall
glory and majesty, does continually assiste, aid and comfort his Church by
his holy spirit, being always present with his elect and chosen, by his
divine majesty, Aug. tract. 50.
providence, and invisible grace, whom he does not cease through his almighty
power, the spirit being the worker of it, to feed still with the wholesome
food of his most precious flesh and blood.

And yet, as it were most noisome and hurtefull unto all the whole earth, if
we had here below the body of the son: so is it not expedient that the
church and congregation of the faithful should have Christ still present
here, touching his humanity and manhood. John. 16.
For, so says he himself: It is expedient for you, that I go hence, for,
unless I go away, the comforter shall not come.

Again, A similitude of the eye.
they can not deny, but that the eye and the sight of it, be so ioyintly and
inseparably joined together, that as long as the eye is whole and sound, the
one can not be separated from the other: will they say therefore, that the eye
is in all places, A similitude of Gods severity and mercy.
that the sight does reach too? Severity and mercy are in God so ioyntely
joined together, that the one cannot be separated from the other, and yet they
that feel his severity, do not feel his mercy, that is to say, whom he
does according to his righteous judgment punish everlastingly in hell fire,
them does he utterly banishe and put away from his bounteous goodness and
mercy. But now will I come to the Scriptures and word of God. John. 3.
When our Savior Christ did talk with Nicodemus, where was he touching his
humanity and manhood, in heaven or in earth? I am sure that they will not say
that he was in heaven. And yet he says: No man ascends into heaven, but he
that came down from heaven, the son of man that is in heaven. Here do we
manifestly see, that the Godhead of Christ was then in heaven, and yet no man
will say, that his humanity and manhood was there. For, he did then in it
talk with Nicodemus here upon the earth.

Again, when Lazarus was dead, Christ being then away from Jury, did say to
his Apostles: Lazarus is dead, and I am glad for your sake that I was not
there, John. 11.
that ye may believe. Christ at the same time that he spoke these words, was
in his humanity or manhood conuersaunte with his Apostles out of the land of
Jury, that is to say, far from among the Jews, that sought his death, and
yet without all paraduenture, he was in his Godhead present with Lazarus when
he departed.

When that Marie Magdalene came to the grave, to embalme the body of Christ,
did not the Angel say unto them, non est hic, he is not here, he is risen, as
he said; come and see the place where the lord was laid: And behold, he
goes into Galilee before you, Matthew. 28.
there ye shall see him, here is plainly opened, that his human nature was
not in the Sepulcher, and at Galile, and doubtless, his divinity and Godhead
was both in the grave and at Galilee too.

Therefore that ancient father, Fulgentius says: Christ being one and the
same, Fulgentius ad thrasmundum regem. lib. 2.
is a local man, of man (that is to say, touching his manhood that he took
of man, he is contained in place) Who is God incomprehensible, of the father,
being one and the same, touching his humanity or manhood, was absent from
heaven when he was in earth, and leaving the earth when he ascended up into
heaven: but touching his incomprehensible and divine substance, he was not
absent from heaven, when he was in the earth* nor forsaking the earth, when he
went up into heaven. And that he might show unto his Apostles, that his
humanity or manhood was local: that is to say, contained in place, he did
say: I go unto my father, and unto your father. John. 20.
Again, when he had said: Lazarus is dead, John. 11.
he did add by and by, And I am glad for your sake, that I was not there. But
declaring the incomprehensiblenesse of his divinity or Godhead, he did say,
Behold, I am with you always unto the worlds end. Matthew. 28.
How did he ascend up into heaven, but that because being the same, he is
local and true man? And how is he always with his elect, but that because
being the same Christ, he is incomprehensible, and true God?

Whereunto Saint Augustine does agree, August. ad Daidanum Epist. 57.
saying, Doubt not but that Christ being man, is there, from whence he shall
come to judge the quick and the dead. Hold faithfully, and bear in
remembrance the christian confession, how that he rose again the third day,
he ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of the father, and that
he shall come from none other place, but from thence, to judge the quick and
the dead, Acts. 1.
and that he shall so come, (the angelical voice testifiyng the same) as he
was seen to go up into heaven: that is to say, in the same shape and
substance, unto the which he gave immortality, but he did not take away the
nature of it, we must not think, that touching his shape and substance, he is
every where, for, we must beware that we do not so defend the divinity of
man, that thereby we should take away the verity of his body. It is not
convenient nor meet, that the same that is in God, Acts. 17. 1. John. 4.
should be every where as God. For the infallible Scripture says of us, that
we be in God, that we live and move in him, and yet we are not in all places as
he is.

And a little after he concludes, saying, Ne dubites, christum esse in aliquo
loco celi; propter very corporis modum. Do not doubt, Christ to be in some
certain place of heaven, because of the property and form of a very body:
for he had said a little before: Christ, in that he is God, is every where, or
in all places: and in that he is man, he is in heaven. Again he says in an
other place. August. in Ioh. tract. 30.
Corpus enim domini in quo resurrexit in vno loco esse oportet, veritas eius
vbique diffusa est: The body of Christ, in the which he rose, can be but in
one place, but his truth is dispersed every where: August. ad Daidanum. Epist.
57.
Again he says, Spatia locorum toll corporibut, et nusquam erunt, and quia
nusquam erunt, nec erunt, toll ipsa corpora qualitatibus corporum non erit,
vbi sint, and ideo necesse vt non sint. That is to say, take away from bodies
limitation of places, and the bodies will be no where, and because they be no
where, they will be nothing, take away from bodies the qualities of bodies,
there will be no place for them to be in: and therefore the same bodies must
needs be no bodies at all. Contr. Faustu^. lib. 20. ca. 11.


Again he says, Christus secundum presentiam corporalem, in Luna, in Sole,
and in Cruce, simul esse non potuit: Christ, as touching his corporal presence,
could not be in the Sun, in the Moon, and upon the Cross, at one time.

Ciryll in Ioh. lib. 9. cap. 21.
Saint Ciryll also says, Secundum carnem abiturus erat, adest autem semper
virtute deitatis: Touching Christ's body or flesh, it is gone,
notwithstanding, he is present always by the power of his godhead, again: Nam
and si corpore abfuero, tamen presens vt deus ero: Although I shall be absent
in my body, notwithstanding, Ibidem.
I shall be present as I am God.

Saint Origene also speaks most plainly, It is not christ as being man,
Origin in Mat. tract. 32.
that is whersoeuer two or three be gathered together in his name: neither
christ as being man, is with us al days unto the worlds end: nor Christ as
being man, is present with the faithful every where gathered together: but the
divine power or nature that is in Christ.

Gregorius de Pascha. Ho. 30.
Gregory a Pope, some time of Rome, says in the like sort. Verbum
incarnatum manet, and recedit, manet diuinitate, recedit corpore. The word
incarnate does tarry, and does go away: does tarry and remain by his divinity
and Godhead: does depart or go away, by, or in his body.

Vigilius cont. Eutichen. lib. 4. and. lib. 1.
But yet Vigilius Martyr does make the matter more plain, when he says, If
the nature of the flesh, and of the word, is all one, how does it chance,
that whereas the word is every where, the flesh is not also found to be
every where. Caro Christi quando in terra fuit, no^ erat in celo, and nune quia
est in caelo non vtique in terris est.
For, when it was in earth, truly it was not in heaven: and now that it is in
heaven, truly it is not in the earth: and in so much it is not in the earth,
that we look that Christ shall come from heaven touching his flesh, whom
touching the word, we believe to be always with us.

Therefore, after your opinion, either the word is contained in place with his
flesh, or the flesh is euerywhere with the word. For, one nature does
conceive no contrary thing in it self. But it is most contrary and unlike,
to be every where, and to be contained in place.

I trust that we have already sufficiently proved, that although the humanity
and Godhead of Christ, be so jointly joined together in unity of person, that
the one can not be separated from the other: yet it follows not, that
wheresoever the Godhead is, there the manhood and humanity must be also.

Therefore, when the Scriptures says that our Savior Jesus Christ is sit
down on the right hand of the father: they shall be feign in despite of their
hearts, there to understand with Saint Augustine, Aug. de agone christiano.
by the right hand, a place of eternal rest, felicity, and joy, where our
Savior Christ touching his manhood, being accompanied with all the holy
angels, and with all the blessed spirits and souls departed, does reign with
the father in coequal glory and majesty. For, that the same right hand,
whereon our savior Christ should sit, is a certain local place, it
evidently appears by his own words where he says,

If any man does minister unto me, let him follow me, and where I am, John.
12. John. 17.
there shall my minister be also. Again, I will that they which thou have given
unto me, be with me where I am, that they may see my glory which thou have
given unto me. Who does not see, that he does here speak, of some certain
local place, where his elect and chosen should be with him in everlasting
glory and joy? For, touching his Godhead, his chosen and elect are with him,
and he with them, according to the promise, that he has made unto us, saying:
Behold, I am with you always unto the worlds end: Matthew. 2^. John. 14.
Again, if any man love me, he keeps my word, and my father shall love him,
and we will come unto him, and dwell with him.

Therefore, those places and textes must be understood of Christ being true
and perfect man, with whom being in the glorious kingdom of his father, all
his faithful servant and ministers shall be* Else, if they will still
maintain stiflie, that Christ touching his manhood can be every where, they
shall be feign to grant also, that his faithful servants and ministers be
every where with him. John. 12.
For he says: where I am, there shall my ministers be also.

The.xiiij. Chapter. Against popish transubstantiation.
THis answer I know they will make: Since that our savior Christ did say,
Objection.
holdyng the bread of the Sacrament in his hands: Matthew. 26. Luke. 22. Mark.
14. 1. Cor. 11.
This is my body, the body of christ must needs be wheresoever the Sacrament
is ministered, though it be in ten thousand places at once. For, he said, and
they were made: Psalm. 33. Psalm. 148.
he commanded, and they were created. This is most certain and sure, his word
must be fulfilled, it must needs be as he said, though we can not comprehend
by our natural reason, how it can be done or brought to pass.

Math. 18. Deuteronomy. 17.
Moreover, say they, where as two witnesses by the law of God, are sufficient
to prove and confirm a truth, we have four of the cheifest, that ever were
in all the whole world. For, Matthew. 26. Mark. 14. Luke 22. 1. Cor. 11.
we have three of the Evangelists, and the blessed apostle Saint Paul, which
do with a whole and full consent rehearse these words that we have alleged,
which the truth him self did use in the institution of his Sacrament, all
after one fashion. Which thing, they would not have done, if our Savior
Christ had meant some other thing, then the bare words do sound, but one or
other would have expounded them.

1. Cor. 11.
Again, how could it be that they that do eat of that bread, and drink of
that Cup unworthily, should be guilty of the body and blood of Christ, and
receive their damnation, because they make no difference of the Lords body,
except the very natural body and blood of the Lord, were there present in
the holy communion.

First and foremost, I grant that the word of the Lord must be fulfilled,
Answer.
and that it must needs be, as the truth says. But then we must take the
words of that the Lord does speak in their right sense, and according to
the meaning that he has spoken them, and not after the vain imagination of of
men's wits.

For that holy father Tertullian says, we must not bring our own senses to
the readyng of Scriptures, Tertul. cont. Praxeam.
but we must take the sense that the Scripture does give, by conferryng one
Scripture by another, and therefore he says, Oportet secundum plura,
intelligi pa^ciora. The fewer places must be expounded by the mo.

Saint Hierome also says, Non in verbis scripturarum est euangelium, Iere. in
1. cap. ad Gal.
sed in sensu. The Gospel stands not in the bare words of the Scriptures,
but in the meaning.

Saint Augustine also says, Solet circumstantia scripturaru^, illuminare
sententiam. August. lib. 83 quest. 61.
The circumstances of the scriptures is wont to give light, Ioh. 10. Ioh. 15.
and to open the meaning. Else it will be very strange, as when he says, I
am the door: I am the true vine, we might, by as good reason, imagine that he
is a material door, and a material vine, and that his Apostles are vine
branches, because that he says: and ye are the branches.

Again, Mat. 5.
ye are (speaking to his Apostles) the Salt of the earth: Again, when Paul
did say: and the rock was christ, men readyng or hearing the same, 1. Cor.
10.
might have surmised, that the Apostles were very Salt, Exodus 17.
that the Rock, which the Isralites drank of in the wilderness, was very
Christ in deed, why? because that the words do sound so, and seem unto the
ignorant to signify so.

Therefore, if we will have the true and lively word of god to take effect, we
must with diligent conferryng of the Scriptures, search out the meaning and
right sense of it, as we have said a little above out of the Fathers, else we
may say long enough, even until our heads do ache: this is gods word, thus
and thus did the Lord say, before that we can prove any thing. And whereas
they do boast and crake so much of their witnesses, which do al with one
consent rehearse these words of the lords institution. This is my body, after
one manner and fashion, they do in that point, but deceive the poor simple and
ignorant people: For, although they do nothing vary in the repeatyng of
these words: This is my body: yet when they rehearse the words of our Savior
Christ, which he spoke touching the Cup, they do sufficiently declare,
how these words of Christ ought to be taken and understood, and what is
the true sense and meaning of them.

Mat. 26. Mar. 14.
For, where Matthewe and Mark, do say in the person of Christ: This is my
blood, both Luke and the blessed apostle S. Paul, Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
as faithful interpreters of our savior christ's words, do say: This cup
is the new Testament in my blood. Which words, if they be well considered and
marked, do open the understanding of all the whole matter.

what the meaning of this word: the new testament: is,
For, as the Cup, or that which is in the Cup, is the new Testament (by the
new Testament he does understand the free remission of our sins, that we
have through the merits of his death, passion, and bloodshedding) so the bread
is the body of Christ.

But the cup does only signify and represent unto us the new Testament,
that is to say, the forgeuenes of our sins, which we have in the blood of
Christ, whereof we are made partakers in his holy and blessed Sacrament:
therefore, we can conclude none otherwise, but that the bread does only
represent and signify unto us, the blessed body of christ, which was broken
for us: the virtue of which body is communicated and given unto us by the due
ministration, and worthy receauyng of the holy and blessed Communion.

Their argument brought upon their own heads.
Again, if the multitude of witnesses, ought to take place, three of the chief
Evangelists do testify unto us, that our Savior Christ did say: Ye shall
not have me always with you, Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Ioh. 12 Acts. ^.
unto whom we may add Peter for the fourth, whose words are these: Repent ye
therefore and turn, that your sins may be done away, when the time of
refreshyng comes, which we shall have of the presence of the Lord, and when
God shall send him which before was preached unto you, that is to wit, Jesus
Christ, who must receive heaven, until the time that all things, which God
has spoken by the mouth of his holy prophets sense the world began, be
restored again.

An objection
Here Doctor Harding, with the residue of the louanistes* will reply and say,
why sir, this place of Peter makes little or nothing for you, for this word
(oportet) in the Acts, which signifies (must) does not importe so much as
you would infer of necessity, as may evidently appear by Saint Paul, where
he says, 1. Tim. 3
Oportet Episcopum esse vnius vxoris virum. A Bishop must be the husband of
one wife. Here you may see (say they) that (oportet) does not importe such
a necessity as you make, that he that never was married, may be a Bishop. Here
gentle reader, understand thou, that this place of Paul, by them alleged,
Answer.
is not alike, which these Papisticall Louanistes go about to compare: For,
in comparyng of the Scriptures, we must not consider the naked words, but the
meaning thereof: for as saint Hierome says: Ne putemus, in verbis
scripturarum esse euangelium, sed in sensu: That is, let us not think, the
Gospel stands in the words of the scriptures, but in the meaning. For, this
place of Saint Paul (by them alleged) does declare of what equality a
Bishop ought to be: But in the other place, S. Peter teaches us, the place
where Christ must necessarily be until the end of the world: which we
ought to believe to be true, according to our Creed. And this comparison of
this word (oportet) does no more answer this place of Peter in the Acts,
then if I would say, of you being here present: How the papists shi^teth this
word: Oportet.
Oportet te hic esse: You must needs be here: which imports such necessity
for the time, that you can none otherwise be, but here: And yet our
Popecatholiques go about in words, to avoid this necessity with an other
(oportet) in another sense, as this, Oportet te esse virum bonum. You must be a
good man: here (oportet) does not in very deed conclude any such
necessity, but that you may be as evil a man as a papist. Thus you may see
how that their objection is frivolous and vain, and to no purpose, but only
to deceive the simple and ignorant.

All the four Evangelists do also witness unto us, Mat. 26 Mar. 14 Luke 22
Ioh. 16
that these are christ's words: from henceforth, the son of man shall be
sittyng on the right hand of the power of God. And: I went out from the
father, and came into the world: and I leave the world again, and go unto
the father. The blessed Euangeliste saint Mark, Mar. 16*
does write on this manner: When the Lord had spoken unto them, he was
received into heaven, and sat him down on the right hand of GOD. These words
have we written in Luke: Luke 24.
he led them out into Bethanie, and lift up his hands, and blessed them. And
it came to pass, as he blessed them, he departed from them, and was carried up
into heaven.

Act. 1.
But he does so lively set out the matter (I mean the ascendyng up of Christ
into heaven, in the book of the Acts of the Apostles) that they may be
ashamed to open their mouths for to say, that the body of Christ is still
here in earth, whersoeuer their holy anointed do blow upon a piece of bread,
or upon a wafer cake.

Again, when the blessed Apostle saint Paul does bid us to seek Christ, he
bids us not to seek for him in the Sacrament, but, above in heaven, where
he sits on the right hand of the father. Colo^^. 3.
If ye be (says he) risen again with christ, seek those things, which are
above where Christ sits on the right hand of God. Phil. 3.
And in a another place: Our conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for
the Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall change our vile bodies,
that they may be fashioned like unto his glorious body.

By these words we do plainly learn, that Christ is not only in heaven
touching his manhood, Mark this argument.
but that he shall also when he comes again, make our vile and corruptible
bodies like unto his glorious body. Whereby it should follow, if the body of
our Savior Christ, being glorified and immortal, can be every where, or in
mo places then in one at once, that our bodies also, since that they shall be
made like unto his glorious body, could be every where and in all places, after
the general resurrection, whereby the same that the Apostle does speak of
here, shall be performed and fulfilled.

But this absurdity is so great, that no christian ever is able to hear it.
Christ him self, willing that we should seek him none other where but in
heaven, and also armyng us against those false Prophets that should go about
to persuade us, that he is here still upon the earth, does say these words.
Take heed, I have told you before, if they shall say unto you: behold, Mat.
24.
he is in the deserte, go not forth: behold he is in the secret places,
believe not. Why should we then at these antichrists bidding, run from
altar to altar, and from pixe to pixe, for to seek our Savior Christ?

Ought we not rather to do, In vitis Patio^.
as we read that an old ancient father did: unto whom the devil did appear
in the likeness of Christ, saying: behold thy Lord and thy King? This good
old ancient father, hearing this blasphemous voice, did shut up his eyes,
saying: I will not see my Lord and my King in this world. For he himself,
even my Savior and redeemer, did give me warning, that if any should say, that
he were in the desert, Mat. 24
or in some secret places, I should not believe it: And so the foul spirit
did by and by vanishe away from him.

If we would do the like, when these false anointed do most lyingly say unto
us: Behold, Christ is in this altar, or in that altar, he is in this pixe or
that pixe, this abominable spirit of idolatry, whereby the christian people is
plucked away from the true worshipping of God, to the honoring and worshipping
of a piece of bread, which being a good creature of God, they make a stinking
idol, should seen vanishe away from us.

But hear yet what Saint Paul says, Christ having in his own person, Hebr.
1.
purged our sins, sits on the right hand of the majesty, in the highest
places. And in another place he says, Hebr. 10.
This man, after that he had offered one sacrifice for sins, sits for ever
at the right hand of God, and from henceforth tarieth til his enemies be made
his footstool.

Let us but mark this last saying of Paul. For here he does teach us, that
our Savior Jesus Christ, after that he had performed and done the thing,
wherefore he had put on our frail nature, he did take it up into heaven, where
he sits down in it, on the right hand of ye majesty of god, not for a year
or two, or for to be here at every papists beck, almost every hour of the
day, but for ever, even till his enemies be made his footstool: which thing
shall never be till the worlds end.

In the mean season, let us follow the commandment of the Apostle: 1. Cor.
11.
where he says, Whenever ye eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, ye
shall show forth the Lords death till he come. These words, till he come:
must be understood either of his manhood, or of his Godhead: But of his
Godhead they can not be understood: Matthew. 18. Isido. de eccle. offici. cap.
10. Ambr. Hexa. lib. 3. cap. 5.
for, touching it, he is wheresoever two or three are gathered in his name:
much more, where the whole congregation of the faithful be assembled together,
for to hear his word, and to receive his holy Sacraments. They must then of
necessity be understood of his manhood, which if it were there, the Apostle
needed not to say, till he come: for he should be there already present.

These places and other like, which I need not now to bring in, (for I have
witnesses enowe for their four, of the which yet, two do make directly against
them) do sufficiently declare that these words of our Savior Christ, Matthew.
26. Mark. 14. Luke. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
This is my body, ought not to be taken in that sense and signification, that
they will have us to take them for.

First and foremost, let us mark the whole tenor of the words, Christ our
Savior says: This is my body, which is given for you. Hebr. 2. Hebr. 4.
Here he speaks of a mortal body, which in all things was like unto our
bodies (sin only excepted) and which has a due proportion of lymmes, with
all other dimensions that pertain to an human body, and without the which,
it could be no human body.

Ioh. 20.
And I do believe that he did rise again, and was glorified in the same body,
having his due proportion of lymmes, and all other dimensions still, that do
pertain to man's body. I believe also, that the same body (though it be now
immortal) is still of a just height, length, breadth, and thickenesse, having,
a head, arms, hands, and feet, and all other members that are required in a
perfect man's body.

Which thing they will confess (except that they will affirm with Martion)
that Christ had a fantastical body, Martions heresy.
which appeared outwardely to be a very man's body, and yet was none. Eutiches
heresy.
Or, except they will say with Eutiches, that the body of christ is deified or
turned into the godhead. But I know that they would not for all the goods in
the world be companions of heretics.

A question.
Therefore, I would feign know of them, how and after what sort this body of
Christ, which lacks nothing to the perfection of an human body, should
be in such a small piece of bread. I am sure that they will say that the body
of Christ is in heaven, on the right hand of the father, with his due
proportion of lymmes, and other dimensions that apperteyne to a perfect man's
body, that is to wit, with his just height, length, breadth and thickness.

But it is in the Sacrament without any of al those things, It is a monstrous
body that the papists will have in the Sacrament.
so that if we ask them, where the head is, where the feet be, and the arms,
they will immediately answer, that all is head, all is feet, all is arms,
breast, and shoulders, and that we must seek there for no distinct proportion
of lymmes, nor any due order of the members.

But let them drink water still with the Swannes of Thamesis, till they have
proved their monstrous doctrine by the word of God, or by any authority of
the ancient fathers of the true Catholic Church, and then I warrant that
they shall never go drunken to bed.

Yea, they are not ashamed to say, that in the Sacrament, the body of Christ
does occupy no place, and yet they will have there, the same self body that
was borne of the virgin, that hong on the cross, and that ascended up into
heaven. Is not this I pray you, to spoil our savior Christ of the verity and
truth of a body?

For, August. ad Darda. Epi. 57.
as Saint Augustine faith, Take away the limittation of places from the bodies,
and they shall be no where, and because that they shall be no where, they shall not
be at all. Sith then, that they will not have the body of Christ to occupy
any place in the sacrament, we can conclude none other by the words of saint
Augustine, but that it is not there at all. For, the natural body of Christ
does occupy a place, where so ever it be, as ours shall, after the general
resurrection of al flesh.

So the same Saint Augustine says, a little after the place before rehearsed.
Ne dubites, Christum esse in aliquo loco celi, propter very corporis modum. Do
not doubt, Christ to be in some one place of heaven, because of the property
and measure of a very body.

August. de essentia diuinitatis.
Again he says, Christum secundum humanitatem, visibilem, corporem, localem,
atque omnia membra humana veraciter habentem credere conuenit, and confiteri.
We must believe and confess, that Christ according to his humanity, is
visible, has the substance and properties of a body, is contained in place,
and verily has all the members, and the whole proportion of a man. These
testimonies are so manifest, that unless the papists have whorishe
foreheades, they will blushe and be ashamed.

Objection.
But here they will allege against me, the wondrous works that our Savior
Christ did work in his body, both before his resurrection and after, John. 6.
Matthew. 14.
saying: May not the natural body of Christ, be as well under a small piece of
bread, as he did walk upon the waters, John. 20.
which is clean contrary to the nature of an human body, or as well as he
did come in to his apostles, through the doors, being shut fast? Is the hand
of god now shortened? or is he not still almighty, and able to do what so
ever he will, both in heaven and in earth?

Answer.
No man, I trow does deny the almighty power of God. For we do all confess,
with all submission and due reverence, that he is able to do whatsoever he
will, both in heaven and in earth. But it follows not, because he is
almighty, and able to do whatsoever he will, that therefore, he will do
whatsouer we shall imagine or invent out of our own heads, and brains,
besides or against the manifest and sacred scriptures. We must not think that
his omnipotency or almighty power, will be bound to our vain imaginations
and fantasies.

The childish argument of the papists. A possibili ad esse non valet
consequentia. Gene. 1.
Again, it has been always counted a childishe argument, and unworthy to be
used among the learned, to reason, a posse ad esse. For, who would not deride
and laugh him to scorn, that would reason after this manner: God is able
through his omnipotency, and almighty power, to do this or that, Ergo, he
has done it? God was able to make us, Swine, Sheep, Oxen, Horses, Trees,
Stones, Frogs, Lice, Dogs. etc. Yet he has not done so, Gene. 7. Coloss.
3. Galat. 4.
but of his mere goodness and mercy, he has made us after his own
similitude and image, for to inherit with him his glorious kingdom of heaven.

Hearken what that ancient father Tertullian says, Tertul. contr. Praxeam.
touching the omnipotency or almighty power of GOD: Some man peradventure
(says he) will say, there is nothing impossible to God: let us use this
saying in our presumptious fancies, and then may we imagine of God, whatsoever
we list, as though he has done it, Non autem quia omnia potest facere, idioque
credendu^ est ill^ fecisse, sed an fecerit requirendum est. Posse. Nolle.
because he is able to do it. For, we must not think, because that god is
almighty, that therefore he has done the thing which he never did. Sed an
fecerit requirendum est. But we must first enquire whether he has done it or
no. And so there shall be some thing impossible to GOD, that is to wit,
whatsoever he will not. Dei enim, posse, velle est, and non posse, nolle. For,
in God to be willing, is to be able: and to be unwilling, is to be unable.

And unto this may be added the saying of Theodoretus, Theodor. in suo. 30.
dialo. qui dicitur impatibili^.
who is also a very ancient writer. GOD (says he) is able to do, whatsoever
he will, but he will do none of those things, that be not in him of their
own nature. Since then, that God is true of his own nature, he can do nothing
that is against his word. Not because (says the other catholic Fathers)
that he is not able to do it, but because that he will do nothing against his
own nature. And again, because that it is unmeet that he should work against
himself. Thus far he.

We may understand by these auctorities now by me alleged, how we ought to
reason upon the omnipotency and almighty power of God. It is not enough for
us to say: God is almighty and able to do all things: Ergo, the body of
christ, is really and substantially, flesh, blood, and bones in the sacrament,
but first we must enquire whether God will have it so or not.

If the word of God should certify us, that he would have the body of his
only begotten son our savior Jesus christ, after the same monstrous sort
in the Sacrament, as they do imagine, Hebre. 10.
and will have other men to believe: then ought we to believe it undoubtedly,
and without any contradiction or resistaunce.

But the scriptures do teach us clean contrary. For, they all testify unto
us, that Christ our Savior, having offered one oblation or sacrifice for
sins, Hebr. 1.
is set down on the right hand of God for ever, tariyng there, till his fooes
be made his footstool, Hebre. 10.
as it has been sufficiently proved before.

They do therefore allege in vain the omnipotency and almighty power of
God, for to prove thereby, their deuillishe and monstrous opinion, The papists
like the Anabaptists.
being in this point like unto the anabaptists, which, when they be so sore
pressed with the scirptures, that they know not which way to escape, do
fly straight way unto the spirit, having then none other thing in their
mouths: but the spirit: the spirit.

So, these ioly fellows, when they be beaten with the scriptures, that they
have not one word to say, will by and by with a great circumstaunce of
words, and fetchyng about, allege the omnipotency and almighty power of
God, The fetch of the papists.
setting forth his wondrous works, and miracles, that he has wrought by it,
that so they may under the shadow of them deceive and blind the poor
unlearned people, which have no understanding nor perceiueraunce of things.

The shameful arguments of the papists.
These be for the most part, the goodly arguments and reasons that they do
use: if god has done this thing, or that thing (then will they bring in some
excellent miracle that god did work in times paste) may not he by his
omnipotency and mighty power, bring to pass that the natural body of his
son Christ should be in the Sacrament? ye may see, how these new fangled
fellows do most shamefully deny the omnipotency of God.

The papists be utter enemies to the almighty power of God.
These and other like things, they do daiely vomit out against the true
ministers of Gods word, in their railyng books, and upon their Alebenche,
where as they themselves are utter enemies and subuer^ours of the omnipotency
and almighty power of God. For they do preach, and daily show, teach and
write, Fire and sword are the best arguments that the papists use.
and also with fire and sword, compel men to believe, that christ can not
give unto us his flesh to eat, except his natural body, that he took of
the virgin Marie, that died upon the cross, and ascended up into heaven, be
there in the Sacrament* really and substancially in deed, more like a
monstrous thing, then an human body.

Whereas on the contrary, we do both believe and teach, that our savior
christ is able by his everlasting and almighty spirit, How Christ feeds us
with his body and blood.
whenever we do worthily receive his Sacrament, to feed with his most
precious flesh and blood, both our souls and bodies unto life everlasting: and
yet that he needs not therefore, to come down from heaven, nor to be after
such a monstrous fashion in the sacramental bread and wine.

For, 1. John. 1.
as the blood of our savior christ does cleanse us from all our sins, and
yet we need not to have it really present with us, Mark this.
for to be washed or bathed in it: so Christ our savior, according to his
promise, does daily, or whenever we do come worthily to his holy Table,
feed both our bodies and souls with the wholesome and heavenly food of his
precious body and blood, and this does he by his eternal and almighty
spirit, so that he needs not therefore to come down at the beck and
commandment of every iuglyng Papiste, and to be really present in a piece of
their sterched bread, after that they have with gapyng and blowyng spoken,
four or five words upon it.

Let any man that has any spark of the spirit of GOD, judge, whether this
manner of feedyng upon the body and blood of Christ in the holy Sacrament
(which as I said, is done by his eternal spirit) does not in all poinctes
agree with the holy Scriptures, and with the almighty power of God, who is
never wont, since that of his own nature he is most true, to do or work any
thing against his own word and sacred Scriptures, whereby we are certified,
that the heavens must hold our Savior Christ, Acts. 3.
till all things be restored again, that God has spoken by the mouth of all
his holy prophets since the world began.

The examples that they do bring of the walkyng of our Savior Christ upon the
waters, John. 6. Matthew. 14. John. 20.
or of his coming in, to his disciples and apostles, when the doors were
fast shut, if they be well considered and looked upon, it shall be easy for to
perceive and understand, that they make nothing for them, but rather against
them.

For, when our Savior Christ did walk upon the Sea, (although he did it by
his divine and godly power) yet had he at the same present hour, Christ had a
true and natural body. Due proportion of lymmes.
his true and natural body, with due proportion of lymmes, and all other
dimensions that do pertain to a man's body: so that he could then be seen
with the bodily eyes of his apostles, and taken up sensibly into the Boat that
they were in. No such thing in the Sacrament.
But no such thing will they allow in their monstrous being of christ his
true and natural body in their Sacrament. Therefore, this example makes not
for them, but against them.

Now again where they say that our Savior Christ, did go in to his apostles
through the doors, being fast shut, here they make a shameful lie. John. 20.
The papists lie.
For neither in the Greek nor in the Latin, we shall find that it is written,
through the doors being fast shut: but the doors being shut, or when the
doors were fast shut. Whereby the Evangelist does signify unto us the time,
that our Savior Christ came in to his disciples. For, thereby may we
understand, that it was very late in the night when he came in to them: as
when any of us does say: I came home by candle light, The door being shut, yt
was, in the night season.
or when all the doors were fast shut: yet no man is so foolish, as for to
construe upon his words, that he had light borne before him, or that he went
in, through the doors: but by this manner of speaking we be wont to gather,
that it was late in the night when he came home.

Acts. 5. The apostles put in ye common prison. The angel of the Lord. Doors
of the prison fast shut. Acts. 12. Herod. Peter.
Moreover, we do read in the book of the Acts, that the apostles were put in
the common prison at Jerusalem: but the angel of the Lord, by night opened
the doors of the prison and brought them forth, the doors of the prison
being shut fast again, as sure as it was possible, and yet none of the keepers
that were standing without before the doors, and keeping them with all
diligence, did epsy it, when it was done.

Likewise in the same book, we find written, that when Herod would have
brought forth Peter, for to put him to death, the angel of the Lord did come
unto him, as he slept between two soldiers, bound with two chains, and
the keepers that watched and warded the prison, The angel smote Peter on the
side.
standing without before the doors. And as soon as the angel smote Peter on
the side and waked him, his chains fell of from his hands, and also that when
he and the angel were paste the first and second watch, and were come to
the iron gate, that leads into the city, it did open unto them of his own
accord.

Shall we say now, that an Angel, was able so to open and shut again the
door of the prison that the apostles were in, that none of the keepers could
perceive nor epsy it when it was done: And that our Savior Christ, who is the
Lord of al angels, was not able to open and shut again the door of the
Parlour, where his apostles were, either by the ministry of his angels, or by
his own divine and godly power, but that he must be seen and heard when he
was doing of it? Shall the iron gate of Herodes prison open of his own accord
unto Peter, and unto the Angel, and shall not the door of the Parlour, where
the apostles were gathered together, open and shut again of his own accord,
unto the only begotten son of god: but that either it must be opened by man's
hand, or else the son of God must creep through it?

Here then do we learn, Matthew. 28. John. 17. Hebre. 2. Phil. 4.
that all power is given unto our savior Christ, both in heaven and in earth,
and that all creatures be subject and obedient unto him. For, he did declare no
less by this miraculous coming in to his apostles and disciples. Therefore,
when they do say, and all to mainteyne their monstrous doctrine, that Christ
went through the doors as they were fast shut, which thing they do by false
interpreting of the Scriptures, as it does appear both by the Greek and
Latin text, they do not a little derogate to his divine and godly power.

For, they make that he could not come to his apostles, the doors being shut
fast, The blasphemy of the papists.
except he should put away from him all the properties of his true and natural
body, that he took of us, in the virgins womb, of whom he took his undefiled
substance, and specially, since that, after their doctrine and sayings, he went
through the same doors being shut, as he is in their sacrament, where they
will have his body to be without his due proportion of lymmes, and all other
dimentions that do pertain to a perfect man's body, which is nothing else
but to take away altogether, the verity and truth of his manhood.

But let us grant unto them, that he went, as they will have it, through the
doors, as they were made fast, what shall they get by it? For after our
savior Christ was gotten in, Luke 24.
and the apostles were abashed and affraied, supposing that they had seen a
spirit: he said straight ways unto them: why are ye troubled, John. 20.
and why do thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold my hands and my feet,
that it is even I my self. Handle me and see: for* spirits have not flesh
and boones, as ye see me have. And when he had thus spoken, he showed them his
hands and his feet.

Now, having the scriptures so plain unto us, as we have, which do witness
unto us, Hebre. 1.
that our savior Christ, having in his own person, pourged our sins, is
set down on the right hand of the majesty on high, we are abashed at their
doctrine, and be afraied, lest they will have us to receive and worship a false
Christ, we are troubled at the strangeness of this new learning of theirs,
and thoughts do arise in our hearts. This must the papists do if that will
have us to believe them.
Therefore, if they will have us to be without trouble in our consciences and
minds, if they will have us to believe and credit them, let them so work,
that we may handle, and see him, let them show us his hands, and his feet,
and then the battle is fought, and the victory theirs.

August. de essentia diuinitatis.
For Saint Augustine says plainly, without any dark speaking: Christum
secundum humanitatem, visibilem, corporeum, localem, atque omnia membra humana
veraciter habentem credere conuenit, and confiteri: That is to say in
english, we must believe and confess, that christ according to his
humanity, is visible, has the sustaunce and properties of a body, is
contained in place, and verily has all the members, and the whole proportion
of a man. Therefore, let them as we have said, show unto us, that we may see
Christ in the cake, or otherwise the feelde is ours, the overthrow and shame
theirs.

The.xv. Chapter. What it is to be guilty of the body and blood of Christ.
BUt now I will come to their common objection, Objection. 1. Cor. 11.
that they be wont to make out of the eleue^th chapter of the first to the
Corinthians, where the apostle does say: whosoever shall eat of this bread, or
drink of this cup unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the
lord: or he shall eat and drink his own damnation, because that he makes no
difference of the Lords body. How could it be (say they) that they which
do eat of this bread, and drink of this cup unworthily, should be guilty of
the body and blood of Christ: or that they should eat or drink their own
damnation, because that they make no difference of the Lords body, except the
very natural body and blood of Christ, were there present in the holy
Sacrament? I will first declare what it is to receive this holy Sacrament
unworthily, Answer.
and then will I answer at large to all the rest.

They eat and drink unworthily this holy and blessed sacrament, that come
unto it, What it is to receive the Sacrament unworthily.
not having truly examined their own selves, that come unto it, without faith
in the merits of the death, passion, and bloodsheddyng of our Savior Jesus
Christ, or without true repentance, unfeigned confession of their sins unto
God, without amendment of their own lives, and without love and charity:
They do also receive unworthily, that handle the mysteries otherwise then the
lord has instituted and ordained them. For, they can not have a devout mind
to God, that presume to minister or receive the Sacraments and mysteries,
otherwise then the aucthour of them has appointed: For, there shall be a
judgment where every man shall give answer, how he has received, even at
the day of the Lord Jesus Christ.

For, they that come to it, not obseruyng the tradition, ordinances, and
institution of the Lord, and without a christian like conversation, are
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. Saint Ambrose says, But what is
it to be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord? Ambr. in. ^. Cor. cap. 11.
even to be punished for his death. For, he is dead for them, that set naught
by his benefit.

Ciprian. De ablutione pedum.
Saint Ciprian also says* Impijs, in morte christi nullus superest quaestus:
iustissime eos beneficia neglecta condemnant. That is to say, the wicked have
no gain by the death of Christ: but the benefits, that they have despised,
do most justly condemn them. August. ad Bonifacium. Epistol. 50.
Saint Augustine plainly says, Habent foris sacramentum corporis christi:
sed rem ipsam non tenent intus, cuius est illud sacramentum. Et ideo sibi
iudicium manducant, and bibunt: Outwardely they have the Sacrament of Christ's
body: but the thing it self inwardely in their hearts they have not. And
therefore they eat, August. de tempore, and sermo. 20.
and drink their own judgment. Again he says, Re^s erit, non paruipretij,
sed sanguini^ christi, qui violat, and commaculat animam, christi sanguine, and
passione mundatam: He is guilty of no small price, but even of the blood of
Christ, that defiles his own soul, that was made clean by the passion, and
blood of Christ. Athana. de passione, and cruce domin.
Athanasius also says, Adorantes dominum, neque ita, vt dignum est eo,
viuentes, non sentiunt se reos fieri dominicae mortis^ Worshippyng our Lord,
and not living so as it is meet for our Lord, they feel not that thereby
they are made guilty of our Lords death.

So that we may easily perceive, by these testimonies, that Saint Paul's
meaning is, that the wicked, resortyng unworthily to the holy mysteries, and
having no regard what is meant thereby, and makes no more accounte of it,
then if he did eat and drink at an Alehouse upon an Alchentche, is guilty
of the Lords body and blood: August. contra Cresconium. lib. 2. cap. 13.
for so Saint Augustine speaks of the water of baptism. Baptismum multi
habent, no^ ad vitam aetern^m, sed ad panam aeternam, no^ been vtentes tanto
bono. That is to say, some have baptism, not to life everlasting, but to
pain everlasting, not well using so good a thing. Thus you have heard out of
these ancient fathers, what it is to be guilty of the body and blood of the
Lord.

Papists are guilty of the body and blood of Christ. Papists alter Christ
his holy institution.
Whereby our Pope catholics may learn, that they all receive this sacrament
unworthily, and that they are all guilty of the body and blood of the lord,
and so eat and drink their own damnation. For, they do most shamefully
alter and change the holy institution and ordinance of our Savior Christ,
not only in this, that they do without any ground of the scriptures, take
away the cup of the lord, from the laity or lay people, for whom he did
shead his precious blood, as well, as for our gallaunt masters of the Clergy,
but also in this that they do suffer their shauelinges to eat and drink up
all alone, Ca cob.
blessyng the people with an empty Cup, A Papistical blessyng.
and sendyng them home again, as much fools as they came.

But if they be guilty of the body and blood of the lord: if they eat and
drink there (I mean in the Sacrament) their own damnation, Why the Papists
can not perceive, in what peril they be,
and yet do not understand nor perceive in what peril they be, and that very
damnation does hang over their heads, it ought to be no marueyle unto us. For,
GOD has given them over into a reprobate sense, he has made their wisdom
mere foolishenes. 1. Cor. 1
And why? because that they have preferred their own wisdom, before the
wisdom of our savior christ, who is the wisdom of the heavenly father.

The.xvj. Chapter. The Sacrament ought to be ministered to all the people in
both kinds.
OUr Savior Christ did appointe, institute, and ordeine, Both kinds to be
received. Mat. 26 Mar. 14 Luke 22
that his holy sacrament should be received in both kinds, and that the
faithful should take the mystical cup, and divide it among themselves. For,
these are his words: Take this, and divide it among you. Which thing they did
immediately. For, as the blessed Euangeliste Saint Mark does write, they al
drank of it. No, no, Per concomitantiam. A term of the Papists that in
receiuyng part* we receive the whole. The papists make Christ our savior to
have no wit nor understanding what he did, or said at his last supper.
will these wise folks say, it needs not to be so. For, since the bread is
the natural body of Christ, it can not be without blood. If the people then
do receive the bread being made the body of Christ, they do, per
concomitantiam (for so they term it, whereby they signify, that the body
cannot be without the blood, nor the blood without the body) receive both the
flesh, and blood together, and have no need to receive the mystical cup: for
that were to receive the blood of Christ twice.

In deed, Christ our savior had not the wit, to perceive so much, or else,
his mind was so much upon his death and passion, that he should suffer the
next day, that he wiste not well what he did. O ye blind bussardes, and
wicked obstinate enemies of al truth, will yet set the wisdom of god to
schole? or if it be so as ye say, that the one is sufficient, so that
receiving the one, we receive both together, what need have your shaven
Madianites of such sippyng and lickyng, as they use in their abominable and
blasphemous Masses? If by our goodly concomitantiam, the flesh and blood, are
so contained and joined together under the accidents of bread (as ye say) that
no man can receive the sacramental bread, but he must receive both the body,
and blood together, why do your Priests both sippe and lick up the blood,
severally by it self in the Chalice? why is it not as lawful for the laity
or lay people, to drink the Cup of the Lord, as ye make it lawful for your
anointed gentlemen? was it not as well instituted for us, as for you, or for
either? Matthew. 26. Mark. 14.
Does not the wisdom of God say, himself: drink ye all of this? And Mark
writes, that according to the lords commandment, they drank all of it?

Objection.
Yea, say they: but this was spoken to the apostles only, who alone were there
present, we read not that their were any besides them, in the company of
Christ, or that fate with him at boorde, when he did institute this sacrament.
Since tha^ that the priests, are the apostles successors, it is most requisite
that they should communicate in both kinds, and that the laity or lay
people, of whom, none was with christ at the first institution of the
sacrament, do content themselves with one kind.

Uerely this is well hit. If they do put away the lay people from the
mystical cup, Answer.
because that none of them was present with christ at the first institution of
his sacrament, how dare they be so bold to minister unto them, the sacramental
bread, since that Christ did give it to none of the laity then, nor commanded
afterward that the one should be more given unto them then the other? The
popish priests may not drink the blood of Christ, but only when they be at
Mass. Gelasius papa de consecra.
Or how does it chance, that when your sacred apostles do communicate without
Mass, and receive the Sacrament at their holy brethrens hands, they do
utterly refuse the mystical cup of the precious blood of our Savior Jesus
Christ? (Are they the apostles successors only whiles they say Mass? do they
not run into the curse the of Pope Gelasius: whose words are these: we have
understood, that some having only received the holy portion of the body, do
abstain from the cup of the holy blood. distinct. 2. cap. comperimus.
But since that they are moved by a fond superstition, which I know not, thus
to abstain, either let them receive the whole Sacrament, or be put from all.
For, there can be no division of this one Sacrament and high mystery, without
great sacrilege.

The gloss that is written upon this Canon does also say: The gloss upon the
same Canon.
It is not without a just and necessary cause, that the Sacrament is taken
under both kinds. For, the kind or form of bread, is referred to the flesh:
and the kind or form of wine, to the soul. Again, it is taken or received
under both kinds, for to signify, that Christ did take upon him, both an
human body, and an human soul, and also for to signify that the receauyng
of this sacrament, is available both to the flesh, and also to the soul.
For, if it were only received under one kind, it should be signified, that it
is available only for the tuition and safegarde of the one.

Hearken what Gerardus Lorichius, one that is a great defendour of
Transubstantiation, Gerardus Lorichius in 7. part. canonis.
and a papist for his life, says to this matter: They be false Catholics
(says this man) that are not ashamed by all means to hinder the reformation
of the Church. They to the intent the other kind of the sacrament may not be
restored unto the lay people, spare no kind of blasphemies. For they say,
that Christ said only unto his apostles, Blushe at this ye papists.
drink ye all of this: but the words of the Canon be these: take, and eat ye
al of this. Here I beseech them, let them tell me, whether they will have
these words also, only to pertain unto the apostles. Then we see that the
papists are pestilent, detestable, and blasphemous heretics.
Tha^ must the lay people abstain from the other kind (the bread also).
Which thing to say, is an herisie, and a pestilent, and a detestable
blasphemy. Wherefore it follows, that each of these words was spoken unto the
whole church. Thus far Lorichius the papists own doctor.

Let them make what shift soever they will or can, they shall never be able to
clear them selves, but that they be most abominable prophanatours of the
Lords Sacraments and mysteries, and also most detestable and accursed
sacriledgers, since that they do not only rob the christian people (for whom
our Savior Christ did shed his most precious blood) of the chief and most
principal part of his Sacrament, but also do abstain them selves from it,
whenever they list, having no commandment of the Lord for to do any such
thing. Therefore we may turn the saying of S. Basil against them who says
these words: Basilius moral Summa. cap. 14.
Who so forbids the thing that God commands, and who so commands the
thing that God forbids, is taken as accursed of all them that love the
Lord. Where you have done the like, against the commandment of the Lord,
and commanded what he has flatly forbidden, your whole religion declares:
for through your own commandments, ye make Gods commandments of little
force: Matthew. 15.
yea, you have done contrary to your own laws and decrees, The papists do
against the^ own decrees.
which do excommunicate all those that dare presume to take half of this
sacrament, and leave the other half vnreceaued.

The blessed martyr Saint Ciprian does say, How shall we teach, Cipria. ad
Cornelium papam Epist. 2.
exhort, and provoke them (says he) to shed their blood for the confession of
the name of Christ, if we do deny, or will not give unto them the blood of
Christ, when they should fight and stand manfully in the quarrel of their
master and Lord Christ? Or, how shall we make them apt to drink the cup of
martyrdom, if we do not permit nor suffer them to drink the cup of the Lord
in the Church, by the right tha^ they have to communicate with us? May not all
men see and perceive by these few words of this holy and blessed martyr, what
wrong and injury these antichrists do unto us? Haymo in. 1. Cor. 11.
Haymo says, Appellatur calix communicatio, propter participationem: quiae
omnes communicant ex illo. The cup is called the communication, because of the
participation, for that every man receaueth of it. This says he, and yet no
Protestant nor Caluenist.

If any war does chance for the name of Christ (as is at this day in France
and Flaunders) or if any persecution for his religon sake does happen, they
will give us good leave to stand in the forefront of the battle: yea, they
will thrust us forwards, and be ready them selves to shed our blood, and yet
they will not as much as suffer us once to receive the mystical cup of the
Lords blood, whereby we should be animated and encouraged to shed our heart
blood in the quarrel of his truth.

Besides this, any child may easily perceive by these few aucthorities by me
alleged, The Communion ministered in both kinds in the Primative Church.
that they were wont in the Primative Church to minister indifferently unto
all men (of what condition or estate soever they were) the Communion in both
kinds, and that it was counted a plain sacrilege, (that is to say) a plain
robbing of Gods glory, to do otherwise. For, they did always stick to the
institution and ordinance of the Lord, till at the length, in the abominable
and sacrilegious counsel of Constance, The counsel of Constance was holden in
the year of our. 1414. Objection.
a most wicked and ungodly decree was made to the contrary. Many other reasons
are they wont to bring for the defense of their accursed and detestable
sacrilege.

If the mystical Cup (say they) were indifferently ministered unto al men and
women that come to the Lords boorde, it might chance that it should be at
one time or other, spylled, which thing could not happen without a great
slander in the Church: And therefore, for avoiding of this offense, that
might happen (by reason many has the paulsie and falling sickness) it has
been appointed by the fathers, that the Sacrament should be only ministered
under one kind.

Belike our Savior Christ, Answer.
the wisdom of the father, when he did first institute his Sacrament, could
not by his eternal spirit, foresee such things, nor yet the blessed Apostle
Saint Paul, when he did above.xxvj. years after his masters ascension, The
papists make Christ to be very ignorant. 1. Cor. 11.
write unto the Church of the Corinthians. Might not we by as good a reason,
because that many offenses do daily arise, by the preaching of Gods word, put
down the Scriptures altogether, as antechrist is wont to do, where soever he
bears any rule? Might we not with as just cause, since that many do surfeit by
meat and drink, and in their drunkenness do work mischief, take away
clean from them, the use of meat and drink? Shall we, because that good
things may, through the naughtiness and negligence of men, be misused, take
away the right use of them? or abolishe therefore the institution and
ordinance of GOD, who has ordained and appointed such things for the comfort
and health of men?

Let them give a strait charge to their ministers, that they be sober and
discrete, when that they go about such holy mysteries, and that they take good
heed to them selves, that no such offenses do arise through their negligence,
or rash behavior. If they would do so, and suffer the holy institution of the
Lord to stand whole, then should they do well, and please God highly, ^. Sam.
15.
who requires nothing else, but a true obedience toward his statutes and
laws: whereas, in doing as they do, they declare them selves to be void of
the spirit of God, and of all due obedience that ought to be in all faithful
christians, and true servants of God. Ciprian de caena domini.
For, we must be subject to God in obedience, joined to him in our wills, and
united in our affections.

Objection.
If we should (say they again) minister the mystical cup to the lay people,
we should be feign to keep the sacramental wine, as well as the sacramental
bread. But the wine can not be kept long, but it waxes eger, so that it can
not be drunken for egernesse. Therefore the Church of Rome has thought good,
that the cup should be clean taken away from the lay people.

Who would not laugh at this balde reason of theirs, do not your holy cakes in
the pixe, Answer. Cakes moulde in the Pixe.
if they be to long kept, moulde also and finnie: yea, and run full of
maggottes and worms too, so that ye be feign many times, to burn that blessed
body of the Lord, that ye your selves have made, and to burye the ashes in
some blind and dark corner? Let the cautels of your Mass, bear witness of
the thing. How chances it that your whorishe mother, the Church of
antechriste, did not for the same cause, put the lay people from the
sacramental bread too? Does not the one stand with as good a reason as the
other? For if ye can find a remedy, that the bread shall not wax out of
fashion, by often changing of your holy cakes: that is to say, by often
taking away of the old, and putting in of new, may not the same remedy be
used in the wine? Whereas they say, the wine can not be kept or reserved, for
causes before expressed. Herein they show them selves most miserable
blasphemers. From where, and from whence have they this authority, to reserve
and lock up their consecrated bread? Against the papistical reservation.
(as they call it) scriptures they can show none, and the learned are against
them: yea, and some of their own proctours and doctors.

Gabriell Biell, a great stickeler in your Transubstantiation, says,
Gabriel. lectione. 26.
Non dedit discipulis, vt ipsum honorifice conseruarent: sed dedit in sui vsum,
dicens, accipito, and manducate. Christ gave not (the sacrament) to his
disciples, that they should reverently reserve it: Ciprian de coena domini.
but he gave it for their use, sayng: take and eat. Saint Ciprian, an old
ancient Father, says, Panis iste recipitur, non includitur. This bread is
received, and not shut up. Clemens likewise says, Clemens Epistola secunda.
Tanta in altario Holoc^usta offerantur, quanta populo sufficere debeant: quod
^i remanserint, in crastinum non reseruentur. Let there be so many Hosts, or
so much bread offered at the altar, as may be sufficient for the people, if
any thing remain, let it not be kept until the morning. Origene and Cirill
say also very plainly. Origin Cirill in Leuit. Ho ^.
Dominus, pan^m quem discipulis suis dabat, non distulit, nec iussit seruari in
crastinum. The bread, that our Lord gave to his disciples, he lengred it not,
nor ^ad it to be kept until the morning.

Saint Hierome, Hier. in. 1. Cor. 11.
showing the order of the Church of Corinth, says: After the Communion was
done, whatsoever portion of the Sacrifices remained, they spent it there
together in the Church, Hesichius in Leuit. lib. 2. Cap 8.
eating their common supper. Hesichius shows the order in his time, of that,
that was left of the sacrament, and says: that the remanentes of the
Sacrament were burnt immediately in the fire. Nicephorus. lib. 17. cap. 25.
Nicephorus also says of the order in his time, of that was left after the
people had communicated together: that the remanentes of the same, in some
places were given to the children that went to schole, to be eaten by them
presently in the Church.

These testimonies are sufficient to disprove all that they have, or can
allege for their reservation, and if they would use this order, as they have
declared, they should never doubt of ^nowing, moulding, and sowring of the
sacramental bread and wine: but yet a little more to reason with these
fellows of Rome, Note.
about the sowryng of the wine: for the which cause it can not be reserved,
say they. If it be the blood of christ, how can it corrupt or change? or if
it does corrupt and change: how can it be the blood of Christ? Is not the
blood of Christ incorruptible, Mark this ye papists and answer it.
and no more subject to alteration? Your own reasons (whatsoever ye can
imagine and prate of your accidents without substance, or of your substance
without accidents) do quite overthrow your false and erroneous doctrine of
Transubstantiation. The papists own reasons do quite overthrow their
transubstantiation.
But that I should be somewhat shorter, you have no commandment in all the
scriptures, to do as you do.

Is not this that ye do in keepyng any part of the Sacrament, one of your
beggarly traditions? Math. 15.
Do ye not most ungodly contemn, despise, and break the holy
commandments of the lord, that so ye may maintain and uphold your lousie
inventions? The wisdom of the father, our savior Jesus Christ does say: Math.
26.
drink ye all of this, divide this among you: which thing the holy apostles
(whom we ought most chiefly to follow next unto Christ) did perform
immediately. For, they drank all of it: Mark. 14.
But this wholesome commandment of our Savior, Math. 15.
is clean put down, that your wise traditions may stand and take place.
When we do reprove your false, shameful, and detestable abuses, wherewith ye
have filled the Church of Christ, ye cry out still against us: The Fathers,
The Fathers: and nothing have ye in your mouths, but the Fathers.

Hear then what Saint Ciprian, who is one of the most ancient writers of
the true Church, Ciprian* Epist. 3. lib. 2.
does say: if in the sacrifice, which is Christ (says he) Christ only
ought to be followed, truly we must hear and do the same, that Christ our
Savior did, John. 15.
and commanded to be done. For, he says in his gospel, if ye do the
things that I command you, I will no more call you servants, but friends.
And that christ alone ought to be heard, the father does also testify from
heaven, saying: Math. 17.
This is my well-beloved son, in whom I am pleased, hear him. If Christ only
must be heard, we ought not to care, what any man has thought good to be done
before us, but what Christ first, who is before all, has done. For we ought
not to follow man's custom, but the truth of God. Since that the Lord does
cry out by Esaias, Matthew. 1^.
saying: They worship me in vain, teaching the doctrines and commandments
of men. And he says a little after: Matthew. 5.
whosoever breaks one of the least of these commandments, and teaches men
so to do, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven. If it be not
lawful (says he) to break the least of the lords commandments: How much
less ought we to break or transgress those great and weighty
commandments, and that do so much pertain to the Sacrament of the Lords
death, and of our redemption: or to change them into any other thing, than it
has been instituted or ordained of God?

Saint Ambrose also has a notable saying: Ambro. in quest. veteri and noui
testam. quest. 114. lib. 4. de virginib.
Nos noua omnia, qu^ christus non docuit, iure damnamus, quia christus
fidelibus via est: Si igitur christus non docuit quod docemus, etiam nos id
detestabile iudicamus. That is to say, we do rightly condemn al new things
which Christ has not taught, because christ is the way to the faithful: if
therefore we teach that, which Christ has not taught we judge it detestable.
These substanciall sayings of these most ancient fathers, which be so surely
grounded in the Scriptures and word of God, should make you to be afraied for
to change, alter, and teach, any manner of thing in the Lords institution and
ordinance, that he him self has done and appointed. If ye had the word of
God, and the sayings of the fathers in any estimation or reverence (as ye will
make us to believe ye have) you would never so much abuse Gods mysteries and
commandments as ye do.

But ye neither regard Gods word, nor yet the sayings of the ancient
fathers: Wherein the papists have the ancient fathers in estimation.
but as farfoorth, as they write as men, and so doing seem somewhat to bear
with your beggarly and dirtie traditions, which ye will have to stand,
whatsoever God and his son Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior, do command
to the contrary, Iere. 44. Papists alms.
else, all his faithful servant and true prophets shall drink of the whip,
and fry a Faggot.

Yet they go forth still with their own reasons, that they may beat down
altogether the ordinance and institution of our savior Christ* and set up
their own. Objection.
There be many in the church (say they) that of their own nature do so
abhor wine, that it is death to them, either to smell it, or to drink a drop
of it. How should the sacrament be ministered unto them in both kinds? would
they not always be ready to vomet, when the Cup should be offered unto them?
Again, if the cup were kept from them, when they should see the other to
communicate in both kinds, would not that same be a wound to their
consciences, Nay rather, a stepmother.
and an occasion of despair? The Church therefore, condescendyng to their
infirmity, and as a tender mother bearyng with the weakness of her children,
did institute and ordain, that all the lay people should in general,
abstain from the Cup, lest through our liberty, our weak brethren should
perish, for whom Christ has suffered his precious death. For, if they
should communicate but in one kind, and see all the other communicate in
both, they should always be in a perplexity, thinkyng still that they had not
received the Sacrament, as they ought to do, and so should never be quiet in
their consciences.

Answer.
All men that have any wit or reason, or any spark of charity in them, will
confess with you, that our weak brethren are to be borne withal, as much as
may be: But not in all things. How far our weak brethren ought to be borne
withal.
For* if God does either command, or forbid any thing expressly in his
holy word, I am bound to obey it, though all the whole world were offended
at it: and if I do it not for fear of the offenses of men, damnation hangs
over my head. Barnarde gives a very good counsel therefore to us, Barnardus
in epist. 78. ad Suggerium. Abbat. Sanct. Dionisij.

Wherein we must bear with our weak brethren.


saying, Melius est vt scandalum oriatur, quam voritas relinquatur. That is to
say, it is better that offense should spring or rise, then the truth should
be left (doing his commandment.) S. Gregory says, when there comes
more offense then hurt, we may not stick to offend. But in things
indifferent, that is to say, which we may use with thanks geuyng, without
the displeasure of God, and also forbear, ^^ time and necessity, but
specially, the love of our neighbor does require. Romans 14.
As is the choice of meats, and such like, we are bound to bear with the
weakness of our brethren, and to take heed, that we cast not them away with
our liberty, for whom the only begotten son of God did vouchesafe to shead
his most precious blood. The ministration orreceauing of the Sacraments is not
indifferent.
If they could prove that the ministration or receauyng of the Sacraments were
indifferent for all men, to use them at their own pleasure, and as they list,
then had they said some what, and the battle ended. But that shall they never
be able to prove. For, in the Sacrament, the only institution and ordinance
of the lord must be observed and kept.

And whosoever does handle them, or use him self about them, otherwise than
the Lord has instituted and ordained, he is an unworthy receauer of them, as
Saint Ambrose does sufficiently declare, Amb. 1.^0.11.
saying, Indignus est domino, qui aliter Mysterium celebrat, quam ab eo
traditum est. Non enim potest denotus esse qui aliter praesumit, quam datum est
ab autore. He is unworthy of the Lord, that does otherwise celebrate the
mystery, then it was delivered of the Lord. For he cannot be devout, that
takes it otherwise then it was given of the aucthor. Thus far he. Therefore,
we ought in no wise to alter the Lords institution, for fear of men or few
men's sakes, which because of some natural let, can not receive the visible
and outward signs, else because that there be some, that be deaf, and cannot
here the preaching of Gods word, which doubtelesse, unto them is a great
grief; or rather a Hell of conscience. For they might surmise that GOD has
utterly forsaken them, since that he has deprived them of that mean whereby he
does commonly call his elect and chosen, Romans 10. Romans 8.
and certifieth them of their salvation, we should have as just cause to
take away clean from the congregation, the preaching of Gods word, least we
should minister unto them a farther occasion of despair. Who, having any wit
in his head, would allow our doing, if we should so do? And yet this
stands with as good reason, as the other.

Why do ye not rather by Gods word, show and declare unto these weak
brethren that have such natural impedimentes, and lettes, that they can not
receive the Sacrament whole, as the truth himself, and the wisdom of the
father has instituted and ordained, that the forbearing of the visible signs,
since that they do it not of a contempt, can not hurt nor hinder them, if
they do with a lively faith, take hold upon the things that be signified
and represented unto us by the Sacraments.

When the Jews were in captivity, and could not offer the Sacrifices that
God had commanded them, in the place, and with such ceremonies as God had
ordained in his law, they offered none at all, and yet this was not imputed
unto them, as long as they forsook not the law of god, and his true religion,
they were still partakers of the spiritual things, that were signified unto
them by these outward ceremonies and Sacrifices. Iosu. 5.
When the Israelites were in the wilderness, they ministered not the outward
circumcision unto their men children, by the space of forty years, because
that they could not do it conveniently. And yet it is not to be thought, that
god was displeased therefore, though he him self had commanded circumcision
to be ministered upon the eight day after the childrens birth, and that with a
sore threatnyng, as it appears in Genesis: Genesis 17.
Even so may we say of those folk, that have such natural impedimentes,
that they can not receive the whole Sacraments, according to the institution
and ordinance of our Savior Christ: If they have a true lively faith, and
take hold thereby upon the mercy of God, declared unto us in our Savior
Christ. Faith eats.


August. in Ioh. tract. 26.
For so does S. Augustine say: Credere in christum, hoc est manducare panem
viuum: nolite parare fauces, sed cor. To believe in Christ, that is the eating
of the bread of life: prepare not your mouths, August. in Ioh. tract. 26.
prepare your haertes. Again: Qui manducat intus, non foris: qui manducat in
cord, non qui premit dente. He that eats Christ's body inwardly, not that
eats outwardly: he that eats the body of Christ it self in his heart, not
that presses (the Sacrament) with his teeth. Again, Quid paras dentem, August
in Ioh. tract. 25.
and ventrem? creed, and manducasti. What preparest thou thy tooth, and thy
belly? believe, and thou have eaten. Saint, Tertullian says: Tert. de
resurrectio. carnis.
Christus auditu deuorandus est: intellectu rumina^du^ est: and fide
digerendus. That is to say, christ must be devoured by hearing: chewed by
understanding: digested by faith. S. Ciprian affirms all this: Cyprian de
coena dom.
when he says, Quod est esca carni, hoc est animae fides. Non dentes ad
mordendum acuimus: sed fide sincera panem sanctum frangimus. That meat is unto
our flesh, the same is faith unto our souls. We sharpen not our teeth to bite
withal: but with pure faith we break this holy bread. Barnarde says also,
Barnardus de diligendo deo.
Qui manducat carnem meam, and bibit sanguinem meum, habet vitam eternam: hoc
est, qui recolit mortem meam, and exemplo meo, mortificat membra sua super
terram, habet vitam eternam. That is to say, he that eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood has eternal life: that is, he that believes or remembers my
precious death and by my example does mortify his members upon the earth,
Coloss. 5.
has eternal life.

By these testimonies we may see, how the papists might persuade the weak
ones that they speak of, how that Christ is eaten by faith. It is better to
re^rayne from the whole sacrament, then to mangle it, or leave part undone.
etc. For truly they ought rather to forbear the whole Sacrament, then by
mangling of it, break the institution of the Lord. But these ioly fellows,
which are so afraid to offend a few persons, in whom no offense is to be
feared, if they be well instructed and taught, make no conscience at all to
offend all the whole christendom, by mangling of the holy sacramentees, and
by taking half of it away from the laity. For, how can men knowing the
institution and ordinance of Christ, communicate under one kind, with a good
and safe conscience? Matthew. 5.
And specially, when they see them that should be the Lanternes and lights of
the world, to communicate under both kinds? If they be so charitable, as they
will seem to be, why do they not them selves abstain from the cup, least
they minister occasion unto the poor lay brethren, to think that they do not
receive the Communion a right, or as they ought to do: and so to be disquieted
in their consciences as long as they live?

But what should I tarry any longer about this matter? They do not only take
away half the Sacrament from the christian people, (which thing as their own
aucthours do testify, can not be done without great sacrilege) but also they
do so shamefully use the sacramental bread, Gelasius papa. cont. ^utich.
that they do also about it, break altogether the Lords institution and
ordinance. For, How the mystical bread is abused in the sacrament.
whereas our Savior Christ did break the bread, and did give it to his
apostles, bidding them, and all his faithful ministers to do the same: that is
to say, to break the bread, and to distribute it to all faithful
communicantes, they do eat up all alone, making none partakers with them at
all.

In deed they break the bread, but it is only for a face, and as it were for
an apishe counterfeyting of the Lords institution: but no man does fa^e the
better for it. For, they eat up all alone nevertheless, and not one crumbe do
they give to the poor people that stands by them: Papists are cormorantes.
so that we may better call it an union, or rather an excommunication, than a
Communion: And a most deuillishe and detestable sacrilege, rather than a holy
and blessed Sacrament.

By the papists doings all the people were excommunicated.
For, through their miserable doing, in sufferyng the people to be present at
prayer, and not communicate together, according to the decrees, were all
excommunicated, ipso facto. In the Council of Antioche it was decreed thus:
Omnes qui ingrediuntur in ecclesiam dei, and sacras scripturas audiunt,
auersantur antem preceptionem dominici sacramenti, Council. Antiochen. Can. 2.
and ab ecclesia abijci oportet etc. All that come into the Church of God, and
hear the holy Scriptures, and refuse the receauyng of the Lords Sacrament,
let them be put from the Church, Canon. Apost. canon. 10.
etc. The very like words ye have in the Canon of the apostles Hugo Cardinali^
says, In the Primative Church (says he) as many as were present at the Canon
of the Mass, Hugo Cardi. in Luk ca. 24. Durandus in Rational. lib. 4 cap. 55.
did daiely communicate: and if they would not, they departed as excommunicate.
Durandus says, In the Primative Church, all the faithful daily received the
Communion.

By these testimonies we may perceive two things: First, that none came into
the Church, but they were excommunicated, if they were not communicantes.
Secondly, how in the Primative Church, both the priests, and lay people,
received the Communion with the Minister. These doctors are no protestants
nor Hugonites, but papists, as ye are. Thus we may see, that they stick not,
to break the lords institution, the Canons of the apostles, nor yet pass
upon their own doctors sayings: to these men, no order, rule, nor Law will
serve.

Again, Mark. 14.
whereas our savior Christ says, Take, eat. etc. These our gentlemen are
wont to say, Gape wide*
Nay, not so: but, gape wide, and we will cast it into your mouths: or, ye
shall fall down upon your knees, and with knocking upon your breasts, and
holding up of your hands, ye shall devoutly worship it. So that here they
make the poor ignorant and simple people, How the poor and ignorant people
are abused.
to believe that he, who has sanctified their mouths, has not sanctified
their hands also: whereby it comes to pass, that if they handle the visible
and outward Sacraments, with gloves on their hands, Sheep skins and old
rotten dog skins.
which are made of sheep skins, and old rotten dog skins, they make no
conscience of it: but if they chance to touch either the consecrated host,
or the Chalice* with their bare skin, which Christ has sanctified with his
precious blood: and has promised to glorify it at the day of the general
resurrection, they are so troubled in their consciences, that they think
verily, that they shall sincke down quick into hell: or that their fingers
and hands shall rotte of. Such godly doctrine do our papists beat into poor
men's heads.

But the angel did teach Moses another lesson. For, when he was coming to
the fiery bushe, he did bid him to put of his shoes, Exodus 3. Joshua. 5. Acts.
7. We are admonished of two things, by that Moses was bidden to put of his
shoes.
because that he stood in a holy place: whereby we are admonished of two
things. First, how that God does prefer our bare skin, which he has
sanctified with the blood of his son, before the skin of dead beasts,
which shall never rise again, nor be partakers of the glory that the children
of God shall have at the general resurrection of all flesh, both in their
bodies, and in their souls. Secondly, how that we ought to put away all dead
works from us, if we will truly, and as we should do, handle holy things:
or if we look for to obtain true holiness at Gods hand. These godly lessons
should they teach the people when they come to the Communion, and as true and
faithful Pastors, they should endeavor themselves, to deliver them from the
abominable superstition of these false apostles, which according to the
doctrines and precepts of men, Coloss. 2.
be wont to say: Touch not: eat not: handle not.

The.xvij. Chapter. Against wo^shippyng of the Sacrament.
NOw to speak of the detestable Idolatry, that they do with all tyranny and
cruelty compel men to commit, making them to worship a piece of bread, in
steed of the living God, creator of all things, it will be necessary: for
whereas the Sacrament of the body and blood of christ, was instituted and
ordained, for to put us in remembrance of the death, passion, and
bloodsheddyng of our savior christ, Wherefore the sacrament was instituted.
Behold ye papists, we do make more then ^are signs of the sacrament.
and that we should in it (being duly ministered, and worthily received) be
made partakers of all the merits thereof: that is to ^aie, be put in full
possession of all, that he did purchase by the death of his body, and by the
sheddyng of his blood: they make of it a plain ydoll, causing the simple
ignoraunte people, to give godly honor to the corruptible elements of bread
and wine, which thing they can not deny, but to be directly against all the
scriptures, which do always teach us to lift up our hearts and minds unto
the Lord: that is to say, unto the things that by the Sacraments are
signified unto us, and not unto the visible elements and signs of them. For
as saint Chrysostom says, The Infidel, Chris. in Epist. ad Cor. Ho. 7.
when he hears of the water of baptism, thinks it to be only plain
water: but I that believe in Christ, do not only see water, but also the
cleansyng of the soul, by the spirit of God. I consider christ's burial, his
resurrection, our sanctification, righteousness, and the fulness of the spirit:
the thing that I see, I judge not with my bodily eyes, but with the eyes of my
mind: Thus far he. Saint Augustine therefore plainly says to them that
hang so upon the visible signs: Ea demum est miserabilis animae seruitus,
signa pro rebus accipere. This is a miserable bondage of the soul, August. de
doct. Christia. lib. 3. cap. 5.
to take the signs, in steed of the things that be signified. And for this
cause were they wont to say: Lift up your hearts, all the people or
congregation answered, Colos. 3.
We have lift them up unto the Lord.

To be short, Christ our savior, who says that he has showed and declared
unto us, John. 15.
all that he heard of his father, makes no mention at all of this
worshippyng, but says only: Take, Math. 26. 1. Cor. 11.
eat. etc. The blessed Apostle S. Paul, who does set forth at large the
whole institution of his master Christ, says not: Let a man fall down on his
knees, and worship the bread and wine: But, let a man examine him self: that
is to say, What it is to examine our selves.
descend into his own conscience, and try his own heart and so let him eat
of this bread, and drink of this cup. If any such worshippyng had been
requisite and necessary, both Christ our Savior himself, and also his
Apostle, would not have left it out unspoken of.

Whereby we may conclude, that all that they do in the honoring of the
mystical bread and wine, is a mere invention of theirs, and a most detestable
idolatry, which ought in no wise to be suffered in the church of christ. For
by it, the honor that is due unto the living God only, the creator and maker
of all things, and unto his son Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior, is given
unto the dumb and insensible creatures, and corruptible elements of bread and
wine. That they are corruptible creatures, Augustine de baptism contra
Dona^ist. lib. 3. Cap. 10.
Saint Augustine says, If we behold the visible creatures (as the bread and
the wine) wherein the sacraments are ministered, who sees not that they be
corruptible? But if we consider the things that are wrought thereby, who sees
not, Origin. in matthew. cap. 15.
that they can not be corrupted. Saint Origene says, The meat that is
sanctified by the word of God, and by prayer, according to the material part
that is in it, passes into the belly, and so forth into the privy. etc.
Therefore, let us follow S. Chrisostomes council: where he says. Nolimus
creatorem cum creatura confundere: Chrisost. in Iohanem, Homil. 3.
ne illud audiamus, seruierunt creature potius, quam creatori. Let us not
confound the creature, and the creator both together: lest it be said of us,
they have honored a creature more then their creator. For says he in a
another place, Homil. 33.
creatures are to worship: and the creator to be worshipped.

Objection.
But here they will say, that they worship not the bread and the wine, Than it
is no sacrament.
but the body and blood of Christ, that be there really present, under the
forms of bread and wine, for to be received of the faithful communicantes. Be
not these Saint Augustines words (say they? August. in Psalm. 98.
) No man does eat the flesh of christ, except he worship it first, and not
only we do not sin, if we worship it, but rather we do sin if we worship it
not.

They can neither prove by this place of Saint Augustine, that the body and
blood of Christ, be really present under the forms of bread and wine: Answer.
nor yet maintain their idolatrous worshipping of the Sacrament by it. For,
all faithful christians being commanded to lift up their hearts, do
worship the flesh of Christ (in his Godhead) sitting in glory on the right
hand of the father, before that they feed upon it by faith, through the
mighty operation of the eternal spirit of God. And that this is the meaning
of Saint Augustine, it may easyly appear by that that follows. For, by and by
after he says, that we ought not to stick long in the flesh, but to clyme
up higher unto the godhead of Christ. And verily, their very words that they
do use before that they go about, or even when they go about their holy
mysteries, saying unto the people, Lift up your hearts, ^ursum corda.
do utterly condemn them. For, by them, following in this point the custom of
the ancient Catholic Church, they do exhort the people that they stick
not unto the visible elements, and signs of bread and wine, but that they
lift up their hearts and minds unto him that is signified by them.

Ciprian in oratione Domini.
Saint Ciprian therefore says full well: Before prayer, the priest with a
preface prepares the hearts of the brethren, saying unto them, Lift up your
hearts: that when the people answers, We lift them up unto the Lord, they
may be put in mind to think of nothing else, but of the Lord.

Chrisost. in mat. homil. 9.
Chrysostom also says, Clamamus in conspectu sacrificij, Sursum corda. We
cry a loud in the sight of the oblation, Lift up your hearts. August. in
Psalm. 39.
S. Augustine upon the Psalms, says: Let us lift up our hearts, if ye be
risen again with christ, he says unto the faithful, Coloss. 3.
he says unto them, that receive the body and blood of our Lord. If ye be
risen again with Christ, savor those things, that are above: where Christ
is at the right hand of God: seek for the things that be above: not for the
things that be in earth. Ca. 10. fol. 45.
Their own manipulus curatorum: says thus, Before the Canon the Priest says,
Lift up your hearts: As if he would say, who so will receive this Sacrament,
ought to have his heart lifted up unto God.

But let us grant unto them, by way of disputation, that the natural body
and blood of Christ be really present under the forms of bread and wine, yet
we shall always be in fear to commit Idolatry, if at least their doctrine
be true. For they say, except the Priests do pronounce the words of
consecration (which words they be in doubt of them selves, and cannot well tell
which they be) upon the creatures of bread and wine, Cum intention
consecrandi. That is, with an intent and mind to consecrate, they be not made
the body and blood of Christ, but remain still nude nude, and bare creatures
of bread and wine. Therefore Holtcot says upon the master of sentences.
Holtcot.
Laicus adorat hostiam non consecratam. The lay people (says he) worshippeth
a wafer that is not consecrated. Thomas de Aquino in Rationale diuinorum
officiorum.
And therefore, that peril and danger of Idolatry may be avoided at all
times, Thomas de Aquino, in a certain book, gives us counsel that we
worship it with a condition, saying: Lord, if thou be there, I do worship
thee, if thou be not there, I worship thee not.

Is not this a sure and certain doctrine, think ye, and most worthy to be
maintained with fire and sword, and with such sheddyng of innnocent blood? A
short exhortation to magistrates.
Repent then ye Magistrates, and rulers of the people, and be sorry in your
hearts, that ever ye consented to the death of so many Martyrs, that in these
our days have been most cruelly put to death for the truethes sake, and cry
God mercy betimes, lest ye with the beast and her false Prophets, whose
slaves ye are now become (though some of you perceive it not) be cast for ever
into the lake that burns with fire and Brimstone, Revelation Cap. 21.
which is the second death.

There be some in the world that allege Saint Ciprian, to prove that the
Sacrament must be worshipped. Objection.
And these words of his do they bring forth. Ciprianus.
The Sacraments, as much as in them is, can never be without the proper
virtue, nor the divine majesty can in any wise absent it self from the
mysteries: It follows then say they, that they must be worshipped, since that
the divine majesty is never absent from them.

Answer.
I would feign ask these great doctors of divinity, why they do not then
worship the water of baptism, wherein we are apparelled with Christ, Romans 6.
renewed with the holy ghost, and receive free remission of our sins? I am
sure that the divine majesty of God, is no more absent from the Sacrament of
baptism, then from the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. And yet
none of them all, will grant that the water of baptism should be worshipped.
Christ our savior, who is the truth himself and can not lie, does say in
his Gospel: He that loves me, John. 14.
keeps my word and my father shall love him, and we will come to him, and
dwell with him. Again, He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood,
dwells in me, John. 6.
and I in him. These also are saint John's words: whosoever confesses, 1.
Ihon. 4.
that Jesus is the son of god, God dwells in him, and he in God.

By these textes we do learn, that God the father, God the son, and God the
holy Ghost, dwells in all the faithful believers: yea, I dare say, a
thousand times more effectuously, then in the invisible elements of water, or
bread, or of wine: And yet no godly honor ought to be done unto them, for that
were a plain Idolatry: Christ our Savior saying: Thou shall honor the
Lord thy God, Math. 4. Luke. 4.
and him only shalt thou serve and worship. Now all men may see that the
saying of Saint Ciprian helps them nothing, for to maintain their
Idolatrous worshippyng of the sacrament, except they will also grant that
the water of Baptism, and every true christian man must be worshipped also.

But peradventure some man will ask: will ye have no manner of honor to be done
unto the Sacraments? What honor we ought to do unto the Sacraments
I do answer, that we do sufficient honor unto them, when we do receive
them with an unfeigned faith, and as Christ has instituted them, submitting our
selves obediently unto his holy institution and ordinance. If we do
otherwise, we receive them unworthily* to our utter undoing and condemnation.
If then S. Ambroses saying after they receive the Sacrament unworthily that
handle the mysteries otherwise than Christ has instituted: Ambros. in. 1. Cor.
11.
If they be also guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, that come to this
holy Supper, not obseruyng the institution of him, that is the aucthour of it:
where shall our Pope catholics become? How shall they escape damnation? For,
None do break the Lords institution more, then the Papists. Deuteronomy. 4. Revel.
22.
none in all the whole world, if we consider well, what has been said
before, do more abhominably and shamefully break the ordinance of God, then
they do.

Can they therefore have a devout mind toward him, that says: Ye shall not
do every thing as ye think best, but that which I command you, that shall
ye do only: I am the Lord your God. Add nothing unto it, nor take ought
away from it: but leaving them: to the righteous judgment of him, Leuit. 10.
that with the fire of his wrath did consume Nadab and Abihu in the sight of
all the people, because that they had offered strange fire, which the lord
had not commanded them. I will go through, by the help of God, with the rest
of their objection.

We said before, A recapitulation.
that they eat the bread of the Lord, and drink his Cup unworthily, that
come to the holy mysteries, not having truly examined themselves, or that come
to them, without true faith in the merits of the death, passion, and blood
shedding of our Savior Jesus Christ, and that presume to take or receive them,
without true repentance, unfeigned confession of their sins, and without
amendment of their own lives. I said also, that after the saying of Saint
Ambrose, Ambrosius i^ 1. Cor. 11.
they receive this Sacrament unworthily, that handle the mysteries otherwise
than the lord has instituted and ordained them, and that they be guilty of
the body and blood of the Lord (which as this father does write, is to be
punished for the death of Christ, or to suffer the punishment that they shall
suffer and have, that did put him to death, and did shed his most precious
blood) that come to this holy Table, not obseruyng the institution and
ordinance of Christ, and without a christianlike conversation.

The.xviij. Chapter. How the unworthy receivers, are guilty of the body and
blood of Christ, although he be not corporally in the Sacrament.
Now let us see, whether the unworthy receauers of this holy Sacrament, can
not eat and drink their own damnation, or be guilty of the body and blood
of Christ, except our Savior both God and man, flesh, blood, and bones, as he
was borne of the virgin Marie, 1. Cor. 11. An answer to the objection that is
made out of the.11. to the Corinthians. Math. 25.
be there under the forms of bread and wine really present. Christ our
savior did say with his own mouth: Uerely I say unto you, whatsoever ye do
to one of these little ones, ye do it unto me. Shall we say therefore, that Christ
is naturally, flesh, blood, and bones in every poor body that lies impotent
and sick, or that goes from door to door? It were too much madness so to
say.

As then our Savior Jesus Christ, is either refreshed or despised in his
poor needy members, Mark this well.
so is he honored or dishonored in his Sacraments. And as he does reckon and
impute that to be done unto him, Math. 25.
that we do unto his poor needy members, so does he reckon and impute that to
be done unto his body and blood, that is done unto the sacrament of the same.
In an other place he says unto Saul, who persecuted his Church: Saul, Saul,
why do thou persecute me? Christ was then risen from death, Acts. 9.
and could die no more, or yet be persecuted of any man: and nevertheless he
says, Why do thou persecute me? Shall we by and by descant upon these
words, that Christ our Savior, is really in every one of his faithful members
that be persecuted? If we should so do, all the world might count and reckon us
for mad, and out of our right wits.

We may say then as we did before: As our savior Christ does impute that
persecution to be done unto his own body, and unto his own person, that is
done unto his faithful members: so if we do with an unworthy and vnreuerent
receiving, and with a presumptious or wilful disobedience toward his
institution and ordinance, Nota.
pollute and defile his holy Sacraments, he will impute it to be done unto the
very things that they do signify, and not to the visible signs and
elements. The Lord him self says, Zachary. 2.
He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye. He were a very idiote
that would upon the occasion of this text, affirm and mainteyne, that every
one of the faithful is really the apple of the Lords eye. What we learn of
the Lords. words in Zacherie.
We do rather learn by this text, that God does love his elect and chosen, as
dearly as a man does love the apple of his own eye, and that he will as sore
punish the cruel tyrants of the world, that persecute and hurt them, as he
would punish them that should hurt the apple of his own eye. Which, as it is
a dreadful saying for the tyrants and persecutours of Gods people, so is it
very comfortable for all those that suffer persecution here in this world for
righteousness sake. Math. 57.


Many like textes have we in the Scriptures, as when S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 11.
A man praying or propheciyng, and having any thing on his head* does dishonor
his head. And before he said, that the head of every man is Christ. It should
follow then by their own doctrine, that Christ could not be dishonored,
except he were really and substantially in every man's head that does pray or
prophecy. But they will neither perceive nor understand that this manner of
speaking, that the holy ghost does use here in this place, is borrowed of the
common phrase and speech that is used among men. A similitude.
If I should send a gift or a present unto a man, if he would not take it,
but refuse it despitefully, or contemn it, I would verily think that he had
contemned and disdayned me, and not my gift or present. But what would I
think, if he should cast it into the dirt, and tread it under foot?

When an earthly king does send forth his broad seal among his subjects,
The Kings broad seal.
thereby to declare his princely favor toward them, and that he will help,
aid* and succor them in all their necessities and troubles, and deliver them
from all peryls and dangers, as much as in him lies: If any man should
despitefully take it, break it in pieces, and cast it into the mire, or
esteem it no more than other common wax: Would it not be said, that he
should commit treason against the kings person? And yet no man will say, that
the kings person is there really under the wax, or that the wax is the
kings person.

The Sacraments are the true Seals, of our heavenly king.
So the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, is the true seal of our
heavenly king, whereby he does seal up unto us, all the benefits of his
precious death, passion, and bloodsheeding, and also certify us, that if we
will take hold upon him by faith, he will deliver us from all our enemies,
both bodyly and ghostly, and as long as we be in this mortal war, fighting
against the whole world, Satan the devil, and the flesh, feed and comfort
us with the heavenly food of his most precious body and blood, and at length
make us fellow heirs with him of his heavenly kingdom.

Galat. 3.4.
Therefore, if we do handle it irreverently, not considering who is the aucthour
of it, nor who it is that offers him self so mercifully and lovingly unto
us: Is it marueyle that the holy Apostle says, that we are guilty of the body
and blood of the Lord, that is to say, that we are before the judgment seat
of almighty God, Note.
because of our unthankfulness, and vnreuerent handling of the holy mysteries,
counted as guilty as if we had slain the body of the only begotten son of
god, and shed his most precious blood upon the cross? And yet it follows
not, that the body and blood of Christ, be really present there in the
Sacrament. The Apostle Saint Paul does write, that they that fall away from
the known truth, do crucify a new the only begotten son of God. Shall we
therefore say that they have our savior Jesus Christ among them? Hebre. 6.
and that they nail him upon the cross, as the Jews did under Pontius
Pilate, Math. 27.
when they did by the hands of the Gentiles, put him to a most shameful
death? That were to great a blasphemy against the glorious resurrection of our
savior Jesus Christ, who rising again from the dead, dies no more: death has
no more power over him. Roma. 6.


Mark this similitude.
Again, as if a wilful and rebellious subject, should no more esteem or
regard his princes seal, than other common wax, or have it in no greater
reverence, than the seal of some private man, it might rightly be said, that
he makes no difference of his princes person: that is to say, that he does no
more esteem him, than he does other men: yet it needs not that the kings
person be there really present: So when we come to the Lords boorde, if we do
take irreverently the mystical bread and wine, as other common meats
appoincted for the belly, Nota.
then make we no difference of the Lords body: we do not esteem the
worthiness, price, and virtue of it, which in the holy mysteries, is so freely,
and so liberally offered unto us.

And therefore it is no marvel, that in steed of grace, in steed of
forgiveness of our sins, and of life everlasting, we do eat and drink our
own damnation: Hebre. 6.
They (says saint Paul) that sin after that they have received the
knowledge of the truth, loking for another sacrifice for sins, do esteem
the blood of the Testament, as a profane and unholy thing: that is to say,
they make no difference of it, they have it in no more estimation then the
blood of Calves and of Goats. He that would gather upon this place, that they
have the blood of Christ really among them, were a very Idiot fool, and well
worthy to be laughed to scorn of all men.

In like manner, although the unworthy receauers of the sacraments, do eat
and drink there, their own damnation, because that they make no difference of
the Lords body: yet it follows not therefore, that the body of Christ must
needs be there really present, under the forms of bread and wine: Yea, if it
were there, or if the bread and wine were really the body and blood of our
Savior Christ, Mark this diligently.
the unworthy receauers could not eat and drink there, their own damnation,
but rather they should eat life, and drink life, since that the truth himself
does say: he that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, John. 6.
has life everlasting. Again: he that eats me, lives through me.

And therefore saint Augustine says: August. in Io. tract. 26.
The Sacrament of the unity of the body and blood of Christ, is taken from
the Lords body, to some men unto life everlasting, and to some men unto
destruction. But the thing it self, whereof it is a Sacrament, is to all men
unto salvation, and unto no man to destruction, whosoever is partaker of it.
These words are plain, and do sufficiently declare unto us, that if the
body and blood of our Savior Christ were really present under the forms of
bread and wine, or that the bread and wine were transubstantiated, or really
changed into the natural body and blood of Christ, the unworthy receauers
could not eat and drink their own damnation: but rather, as I said before,
they should eat and drink life everlasting, and have salvation. For, the
flesh and blood of Christ (whereof the bread and wine are Sacraments) is to
all men unto salvation, and to no man unto destruction, as we learn here by S.
Augustines words.

The.xix. Chapter. Whether the Papists have still the ^ame body in the
Sacrament that was given upon the Cross.
NOw that I have sufficiently answered to their objections: I will ask them
this question: whether they have still the same body, Mark this question.
that Christ^ did give at his last supper, or not? I am sure that they will
answer that they have still the same body. Nota.
Then will I ask them again: whether the body that Christ did give at his
last supper, was mortal, or immortal? If they say that it was immortal,
they shall be proved liars by the Scriptures, which do testify unto us, that
his body that he took of the virgin Marie, Math. 27.
was put to death the next day. If they say that it was mortal, since that
they have the same still in their Sacrament, it should follow, that the body
of Christ were not yet glorified, but mortal still, and subject unto death.

They are driven to confess either the one or the other: that is to say, that
either it was mortal, or immortal. For, it could not be both at one time, no
not when he did show a taste of his glory unto his disciples upon the mount
Thabor. Math. 17. Vigilius Martyr. lib. 4. con^ra Eutichen.
For, as Vigilius Martyr says, One nature or substance, can not receive
diverse and contrary things in it self at one time. Therefore, let them give
what answer soever they will, they can not escape: but that they shall be
proved most shameful liars both ways, and that the body that they boast them
selves to have in their Sacrament, can not be the true body of Christ, that he
took in the virgins womb, of whom he took his undefiled substance, (for as it
was then mortal, when he did institute his holy Supper, so is it now glorified
and immortal: and in it does our Savior Christ fit now on the right hand of
the father for ever, Hebre. 10. Hebre. 11.
till his enemies be made his footstool:) But a new fantastical body of
their own imagination and forging, have they, and none other. If they will
flee to the omnipotency, or almighty power of God (as they be wont to do
always, when they are put to their trompes) they have learned before, how
far forth it will help them. The almighty power of God, and his sacred and
holy word, are so joined and knit together, that as he is able to do
whatsoever he does promise in his word: so will he do nothing, nor can do
nothing that is contrary unto it, Theodoretus 3. Dialogo.
as the words of Theodoretus by me alleged before, do sufficiently declare.
Again, when our Savior Christ did at his last Supper, institute his holy
Sacrament, he was there present him self, in his true and natural body,
talking with his Apostles, and also eating and drinking with them of the
mystical bread, and of the mystical cup, Epiphanius contra haereses lib. 3.
tomo. 2.
of the which, being insensible creatures, voluit dicere per gratiam, he did
vouchsafe through grace to say: This is my body, and: This is my blood. For, as
he had before called his body Wheat and bread, Theodoretus Dialogo. 1.
and him self a Uine: so did he then honor the bread and the wine, with the
names (...) his body and blood. Chrisostom^^ ad Caesarium.
Chrysostom says also: before the bread be ^^^ctified, we call it bread: but
after that by the mean of the (...), the heavenly grace has hallowed it, it is
discharged from the name of bread, and is vouchsaued to be called by the name
of our Lords body: notwithstanding, the nature of the bread remains still.
Ireneus cont^^ Valent. lib. Cap. 3. Ciprian. lib. 1. Epist. ad Magnu^.
Ireneus says, Christ confessed bread, which is a creature, to be his body,
and the cup to be his blood. Read Ciprian ad magnum, which speaks most
plainly hereof also.

Shall they not be feign to say then, if they will have their doctrine to
stand, that Christ had then two bodies, one that did eat and drink, and the
other that was eaten up, and drunken even of his own self? The body of Christ
(say they) only when it is glorified and immortal, can be every where, or in
mo places then in one at once: but it was not then glorified, nor yet
immortal, (for why? he died the next day after) how could it be then all at
once, sitting at the boorde, and in the hands and mouths of all his Apostles
round about him?

Objection.
As for the first absurdity, they go about to put away by S. Augustines words,
August. in* Psalm. 33.
which are these: Christ was borne in his own hands, when, commending or
delivering his body, he did say: This is my body. For, he did bear the same
body in his own hands. As it is then no absurdity to say that Christ did
bear him self, or the same body that he gave them, in his own hands: so it
ought to seem no strangeness, if we say according to the scriptures and the
fathers, that christ did eat his own body. For, as being borne in his own
hands, he did declare that there was somewhat in him more excellent than in
other men, which, though they can be borne with other men's hands, yet they can
not be borne in their own: so by eating his own body, which thing no mortal
man is able to do, he did show openly, that he could work above the
possibility of man.

Answer.
I am well content to grant, that Christ our Savior did eat his own body, as
he did bear him self in his own hands. But how was he borne in his own
hands? For when he did commend or deliver the same body of his, and also his
blood, he took that in his hands, August. in. Psalm. 33.
which the faithful do know, and bare him self after a certain manner, when
he did say: This is my body. These are Saint Augustines very words as he
wrote them also, whereby he does let us to understand, how we ought to take
his words before. For, adding this word, quodammodo, Quodammodo.
after a manner, he does signify thereby how Christ did bear his flesh in his
own hands: that is to say, Sacramentally. For, Augustine ad Bonifacium Epist.
23.
as he says in another place: Except the Sacraments should have a
similitude of the things whereof they be Sacraments, they should be no
Sacraments, and by reason of this similitude or likeness, they receive many
times the names of the things, whereof they be Sacraments. For, as the
Sacrament of the body of Christ, is, Secundum quendam modum, after a certain
manner* the body of Christ, and the Sacrament of his blood, his blood: so is the
Sacrament of faith, faith. By the Sacrament of faith, he understands
baptism, which, because of the similitude, or affinity that it has with the
thing whereof it is a Sacrament, is called by the name of it. When he says
then, that Christ did bear him self in his own hands after a certain
manner, Quodammodo.
his meaning is, that he did bear the Sacrament of his body.

But then peradventure they will say again, Objection.
that if it were so, Christ did no more then another man is able to do. For any
man is able to bear the signs of his own body.

It is true, Answer.
that any man is able to bear his own sign, but we speak here of a
sacrament which brings with it self, the efficacy, nature, virtue, and
strength of the thing that it is a Sacrament of. For which properties, it
takes the name of the thing it self, which can not be said of the bare sign
of a man's body. Therefore, all that the papists are able to bring here for to
^asill the eyes of the simple and ignorant people, is mere sophistication and
iuggling.

Yet I am in doubt that they will reply and say: If a Sacrament does bring
with it self, Objection*
the nature, efficacy, virtue, and strength of the thing that it is a
Sacrament of, being, because of those properties, called by the name of the
thing it self: what needs Christ to eat the Sacrament of his own body,
whose nature, property, and virtue is, to work and bring life? Answer.
Was not Christ the life it self? Chrysostom writing upon the blessed
Evangelist Saint Matthewe, Chrisost. in. Mattheum.
does say: That Christ him self did communicate: that is to say, eat and
drink of the mystical bread and wine, for to make his Apostles to receive the
mysteries without any manner fear or dread of conscience. For before, when he
spoke of the eating of his flesh, and of the drinkyng of his blood, many being
offended with that, forsook him and went away. Left then the same should
happen now, he did eat and drink with them of those visible creatures, of
the which he did say through grace, (as Epiphanius writes) This is my body,
Epiphanius contra Haereses lib. 3. Tom. 2.
and this is my blood.

Besides this, they will not deny that baptism is a Sacrament wherein the
worthy receauers, are renewed by the holy ghost, do receive free remission of
their sins, and are made the children of God. Note.
Was not christ, that new Adam, whom all we that seek to be renewed, Romans 6.
must put on. And unto whom the holy Ghost was not given by measure? Was not
he, that unspotted Lamb, 1. Peter. 2.
in whose mouth no guile was found? was not he the true and natural son of
God? John. 20.
What needed he then to be baptized? Had not he abundantly, and of his own
nature, Note.
all those things that are given unto us in baptism? And yet did he with the
Publicanes and Sinners, Math. 3.
come to John Baptiste, for to be baptized of him, in the water of Iordane.

Why Christ would be baptized.
Therefore, as he was baptized for to sanctify our baptism; and for to certify
us, that we should al be baptized most truly and most effectuously, in his
baptism that he was baptized withal in his passion, Roma. 6. Hebre. 10.
which was his death and bloodshedding, whereby we are purged from all our
sins: So, besides the cause alleged before of Saint Chrysostom, he would
communicate with us: that is to say, eat and drink of the mystical bread,
The second cause why christ would Communicate with us.
and of the mystical wine, for to signify unto us, since that he was not only
partaker with us of the common meats and drinks, but also of the holy
mysteries, which he himself had instituted and ordained: that we are in
deed, flesh of his flesh, Ephe. 5.
and bone of his bones, and that therefore we need not to fear or to doubt,
if we continue still his true members unto the end, feedyng in those mysteries,
which he him self would be partaker of, upon his flesh and blood, through
a lively faith: but that we shall be partakers with him both in bodies and
souls, of the glory and joys of his heavenly kingdom.

Now as touching the second absurdity, I know that for the auoydyng of it,
they will flee to the common refuge: that is to say, unto the omnipotency of
God, which (as I said) will help them no further than their doctrine does
agree with the holy Scriptures, which testify unto us, that the body of
Christ is in all things like unto ours, Hebre. 2.
(sin only being excepted.)

The.xx. Chapter. Against the carnal presence of Christ in the Sacrament.
THE Papists will harp still upon these few words, that our savior Christ
spoke in his last supper, Mark. 14. Math. 26. The Papists are like the Arians.
when he said: This is my body, resemblyng in this point the Arians, which
when it was proved unto them by many strong Scriptures, that Christ our
Savior is coequall with the father in substance, in Godhead, and power, would
always have their refuge to the few words, that Christ our Savior spoke of
his humanity, saying, Pater mayor me est. The Father is greater then I, John.
14.
having always in their mouths, that since Christ had spoken it, it must
needs be so, unless we would make him a liar.

Shall we not find the like in our transubstantiatours, which will have the
body of Christ at the beck and commandment of every iugglyng popish Priest,
whenever he pronounces these few words: Hoc est corpus meum: This is my
body: And, this is my blood, with a full intent to consecrate, to be really and
substantially in the Sacrament, under the fourmes of bread and wine, the
substance of them, being really changed and turned into the very substance
of the body and blood of the Lord? For, if ye bring never so many places of
the scriptures, Heb. 10. Hebre. 1. Math. 26.24.16. Mark 16. Acts. 2. Acts.
3. Collos. 3. Hebre. 8.
which do witness unto us, that our Savior christ touching his manhood, is
set down on the right hand of his Father for ever, until his enemies be
made his footstool. And that the heavens must hold him, until all things be
restored again, that God has spoken by the mouth of all his prophets since
the world began, and that till then, we ought not to look for any corporal
presence of his: whereby it follows, that the doctrine of them, that will have
his true and natural body and blood, to be really present under the accidents
of bread and wine, cannot be true, straight ways they cry out in a rage,
saying: Be not these Christ's words? This is my body: The tragical exclamation
of ye papists.
This is my blood: has he not spoken them? will ye make him a liar, and a
desembler, or one that speaks one thing, and means another? With many such
like tragical exclamations and outcries, do they fill the ears of the simple
and ignorant hearers: Note.
as though the whole difference does consist in this: whether Christ has
spoken these words or not, or whether he must be a lier, and dissembler: If
they have any other meaning, then they seem to have outwardlye at the first
blushe, not being conferred with other textes of the holy scriptures.

We do confess, that these are Christ's words, and that he has spoken them
with his own holy mouth. But what then? have I not already proved by
innumerable textes of the Scriptures, that they must be taken otherwise then
they sound outwardly? and that being taken without trope and figure, they can
not stand with the rest of the scriptures, which teach and testify in so many
places that Christ our savior, can no more be here upon the earth, touching
his manhood, until the last day, when he shall visibly as he was seen to go
up, Acts. 1.
come again to judge the quick and the dead?

But go too: put the case that little or nothing has been said yet, touching
this matter. They say, yea, they uphold and maintain even with fire and
sword, that the bread and wine are transubstantiated, and really changed into
the very substance of the body and blood of Christ, so that there remains
no more bread and wine, after that the Priest has once gaped and blown upon
them, and spoken the words, but only the outward appearaunce and accidents
of them.

Note.
Is not this to say, yea, and also most blasphemously to affirm, maintain,
and uphold that the precious body and blood of Christ, have their being,
substance, and beginning of the corruptible substance of bread and wine?
Mark this ye Papists.
For, whenever one substance is turned into another, the second substance
that the first is turned into, has his beginning, substance, and being of the
first: yea, it has of it his original and ofspryng: as for example: Exodus 7.
When Moses rod was turned into a Serpent, whereof had that Serpent his
beginning, substance, and being? whereof had he his original and offspring? or
was he before that the same miraculous transubstantiation and change was made?
All men can not deny, but that the same Serpent had his beginning, substance,
and being, and also his original and offspring of Moses rod, and that it was
not before that the same miraculous transubstantiation or change was made.

The like may we say of the waters of Egypt, Exodus 7.
that were turned into blood, and of the dust that was turned into lice. For,
neither the blood nor the lyce, were before that the same miraculous tournyng
was wrought and done, and as they began then, so had they their being and
substance, of those things or substaunces that were turned into them.

Again, when our Savior Christ did in Cana of Galilee turn water into wine,
John. 2.
the same wine had his beginning of the substance of the water, and was not
before that the water was miraculously turned into it. If then they will stiffly
maintain, that the substance of bread and wine are really turned into the
substance of the body and blood of christ, they shall be feign to confess
that the same body and blood that they have in their Sacrament, have their
beginning, substance, and being, and also their original and ofspryng, of the
corruptible and insensible creatures of bread and wine: and that tha^ the same
body and blood, do begin to be, or to have their being, when by the
almighty operation or working of the words, those corruptible and insensible
creatures, be really and substauncially changed into them.

But the true and natural body of Christ had his beginning, original, and
ofspryng in the blessed virgins womb, of whom he took his undefiled
substance, Hebr. 1.
is now glorified, and is set on the right hand of the father, but a body of
their own invention and making, which is as often made and shaped a new, as
they do pronounce the words of consecration (as they call them) upon the
creatures of bread and wine, cum intention consecrandi: That is, with a full
purpose and intent to consecrate.

An other shift of the papists.
Some of them, to avoid this inconvenience, are wont to say, that the
substance of bread and wine, is not turned in to the substance of the body
and blood of christ, but that the substance of the visible creatures of bread
and wine, do vanishe away, geuyng place unto the substance of the body and
blood of Christ. If it were so, then would not our Savior Jesus Christ, have
said: This is my body, but rather: in this is my body, or, under the
accidents of bread and wine, is my body and blood.

Again, that which they do, could not be called transubstantiation, which
is a real chaungyng of one substance that is extant, into another substance
that is not extant: but some other name should they be compelled to give unto
their monstrous iugglyng, and excantation, contrary to the minds and writings
of their own scholedoctours. For, Johannes Scotus, otherwise called Duns,
showing from whence this doctrine of Transubstantiation did come, writes after
this manner.

It seems that men are chiefly moved to embrace or receive this sentence,
Johan. Scotus sup. sen. did. 2.
because that we must hold of the Sacraments, as the holy Church of Rome
does hold: but the holy Church of Rome does hold, that the bread is
transubstantiated or really changed into the body of Christ, and the wins into
his blood. Likewise, Gabriell Biell writing upon the Canon; after that he had
showed that it was uncertain how the body of Christ was in the sacrament,
whether it was by the conversion or turnyng of the visible creatures of bread
and wine into it, or by some other mean, does say plainly these words.

But because that we must hold of the Sacraments, as the holy Church of Rome
does hold: Gabriel Biel sup. canone Missae. lect. 40
since that it has decreed and determined that the bread is transubstantiated
or really changed into the body of Christ: therefore this opinion is received
of all the Catholics, that there remains no substance, but that it is
truly and really changed, transubstantiated, and turned into the body of the
Lord.

Transubstantiation came from Rome.
Two things do we here learn by the way. First, that this monstrous doctrine
of transubstantiation did come from Rome, the great Grandame of all
abominable errors, heresies and abuses: for this doctrine of theirs came
never out of the word of God, Sup. canon^ lect. 40.
for so says he himself: (I mean Gabriel biell) that all this their
transubstantiation, of substaunces of bread and wine, Non inuenitur expressum
in canone bibliae: That is to say, it is not found expressed (says he) in
the Canon of the Bible.

And as for the antiquity of this doctrine, The papists themselves say that
their transubstantion is not found in the word of god. Cut^er. Tons. de
Eucharistia. lib. 1. page 46.
it is plainly set forth by their own doctor how old it is. For Tonstall
says, of the manner and mean how this might be (whether by
transubstantiation, or otherwise) perhaps it had been better to leave every man
that would be curious, to his own conjecture, sicut liberum fuit ante
concilium Lateranum: as before the counsel of Laterane it was left at
liberty. Thus we see how ancient it is, never heard of in all the world,
until their late counsel of Laterane, holden in Rome, under Pope Innocentius
the third, Anno. 1215. Transubsta^tiation was never hard of in ye church for
the space of.1215. years after Christ. The age of the papists new
transubstantiation is.357. years. Genesis 4. Iocl. ^.
in the year of our Lord. 1215. in the time of king John, king of England,
and never before. So for the space of.xij. hundred and.xv. years, the Church
of God was able to stand well without it. So the great antiquity of their
transubstantiation is but three hundred fifty and seven.

Therefore, all men may see how much credit we ought to give unto it, and
again, how worthy a thing it is, that for it, so many notable learned, and
other godly men and women, should thus cruelly be put to death, and murdered,
to the great decay of true religion throughout al realms, whose innocent blood
cries vengeance in the ears of god, against those wicked papists, and also
against the maiestrates that were the Popes butchers and hangmen. Wherefore I
say, turn and repent with all speed, and ask mercy in Jesus Christ our
savior, that your blooddy hands may be made clean by his blood, and so
washed from your sins.

Secondly, we learn by the sayings of these holy doctors of theirs, that
they that hold opinion, that the substance of bread and wine is not really
changed, but vanishes away, for to give place unto the substance of the body
and blood of Christ, do hold against the decrees and canons of the holy
mother, the Church of Rome, which does hold that the bread and wine are
transubstantiated, really changed and turned into the substance of the body
and blood of Christ, the outward appearaunce and accidents of them only
remaining. And therefore, will they, nyll they, even in spite of their smoothe
shaven faces, they shall be feign to confess, if not with their mouths, at
least in their consciences, that their Christ that they have in their Masses,
The Christ that the papists have in their Mass, is made of bread and wine.
Revel. 17.
and in their boxes, and in their Sacrament, is a bready Christ: that is to
say, a Christ made of bread, and which has a body of the substance of bread
and wine, wherewith they have made all nations to commit most detestable
idolatry, and to fall away from the true Messiah and Christ, whose true and
natural body has his substance, not of the corruptible substance of bread
and wine, but of the substance of the blessed virgin Marie his mother, and now
being glorified and immortal, Coloss. 3. Hebr. 10.
is on the right hand of the majesty on high: where, by the mighty operation
of his eternal spirit, we do feed upon his flesh and blood through faith as
long as we continue true lively members of his body: but most specially, when
we do worthily receive his holy mysteries, which he him self has instituted
for a perpetual remembrance of his death and passion.

The.xxj. Chapter. The wicked does neither eat nor drink the body and blood
of Christ.
IF these words: This is my body, should be taken as they sound, whereby
such transubstantiation must needs ensue and follow, that no bread and wine
should remain but only the body and blood of Christ, covered with the
accidents of bread and wine: all the ungodly and unfaithful hypocrites that
receive the Sacrament, should eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood,
and so should have everlasting life, as it has been said before: yea; they
should dwell in Chrst, and Christ in them. John. ^.
For, he says: He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in
me, and I in him.

But it is most sure that the unfaithful hypocrites do not dwell in Christ,
The wicked eat not the body of Christ.
nor Christ in them, except he would have Christ and the devil to dwell
both together in one place: which thing can not be says Saint Paul to the
Corinthians: 1. Cor. 10.
Therefore I may conclude, that they do neither eat his flesh, nor drink his
blood. For as Saint Augustine says: Hoc est, ^rgo manducare illam escam, and
illum potum bibere, in christo manner, and illum manentem in se habere: August.
in Ioh. tract. 26.
That is to say: This is to eat that meat, and to drink that drink, to
dwell in Christ, and to have Christ dwell in him: Again, in the same place he
says: Ac per hoc qui non manet in christo et in quo non manet christus: In
tract. 26.
proculdubio nec manducat spiritualiter carnem eius: nec bibit sanguinem eius,
licet carnaliter and visibiliter premat dentibus Sacramentum corporis and
sanguinis christi: And therefore, he that dwells not in Christ, and in whom
christ dwells not, without doubt, does not eat spiritually his flesh, nor
drink his blood, though he does carnally and visibly press with his teeth the
sacrament of the body and blood of Christ: Augu. de ciui^. dei. lib. 21. cap.
25.
And in another place: he does show (says he) what it is to eat his flesh,
and drink his blood: not sacramentally, but in very deed, that is: so to
dwell in Christ, that Christ may also dwell in him. For, he says this, as
if he should say: he that dwells not in me, and in who^ I dwell not, let him
not say or think, that he eats my flesh or drinks my blood. And out of
the Sentences of Prosper, he does allege these words: Ex lib. senten.
Prosperi.
he that does disagree from Christ, does neither eat his flesh, nor drink
his blood, although he does every day receive indifferently the Sacrament of
so high a thing, to the condempnation of his own presumptuousnes. Again he
says: Discipuli manducabant panem domini: Judas panem domini contra dominum,
In Ioh. trac^t. 59.
illi vitam, ille paenam: The disciples did eat the bread which is the Lord:
but Judas did eat bread of the Lord, against the Lord: they unto life, he
unto death. Again, if any do disagree from Christ, the ungodly and
unfaithful hipocrites do disagree from him. Ex lib. sene^. Prosperi.
Therefore, if these words of Saint Augustine be true, they do neither eat
his flesh, nor yet drink his blood, though they do every day receive
indifferently the Sacrament of so high a thing, to their own condemnation and
utter castyng away of their own souls.

Whereby I may also conclude, that there is no such transubstantiation, as they
do falsely imagine: but that there remains both bread and wine, whereupon the
ungodly hypocrites do feed: only the godly and faithful being most
effectuously made partakers of the precious body and blood of Christ, which (as
Saint Ambrose says) is the food of the saints only: so that who soever
eats of it, Ambro. de Benedict. Patri. cap. 6.
he shall not dye the death of a sinner. For it shall be made unto him, remission
of sins. So likewise, Saint Origene says most plainly against these
fellows, these words: Origene. in Matthew. cap. 15.
Est verus cibus, quem nemo malus potest edere: Etenim s^ malus posse^ edere
corpus Domini, non scriberetur: Qui edit hunc panem, viue^ in aeternum: The
body of Christ is the true food, which no evil man can eat: for if the evil
man could eat the body of our Lord, it should not be written: He that
eats this bread, Hieronimi in Ieremiam. Hieronimi in Esaiam. ca. 66.
shall live for ever. Saint Hierome also says, Haeretici non manducant corpus
domini, nec bibunt sanguinem suum. The wicked heretics do not eat the body
of the Lord, nor drink his blood: And again he says, All that love
pleasure more then God, De consecra. distinct. 2. cap. qui discordat, et ibidem
in cap. quid est. What great absurdities do come of the doctrine of
transubstantiation. De consecra. distinct. 2. qui been.
eat not the flesh of Jesus Christ, nor drink his blood. Thus you see
plainly proved, that the wicked do not receive nor eat the body and blood of
Christ, although they eat the Sacramental Sacrament never so often.

Again, if their doctrine were true: that is to say, if the bread and wine
were really and substantially the body and blood of Christ, then should the
Mice, Rattes, and other vermin that eat their sacramental bread, eat also
the body of Christ, which thing some of them are not ashamed to confess and
say: Si dicatur, quod Mus sumat corpus christi, non est magnum inconueniens. If
it be said, that a Mouse receaueth the body of Christ, it is no great
inconvenience. And Alexander of Hales says also, being a great doctor of
the Papists transubstantiation: Si Canis, Alexan. Halen par. 4. quae. 45.
memb. 1.
vel Porcus deglutiret hostiam consecratam integram: non video, quare corpus
Christi non simul traijceretur in ventrem Canis, vel Porci: If a Dog or a
Pigge should happen to swallow down the whole host being consecrate: The
like ye may read in William Perin, in his book of his 3. sermons preached in
the hospital of S. Antho. in London. The Christ of the papists is eaten up
with Mice and Rattes. Hebr. 10.1. Coloss. 3. Phil. 3.
I see no reason, but the body of Christ may pass withal into the belly of
the Dog or of the Pigge.

But others of them considering the great absurdities of it, do say, that when
Mice, or other like vermin do approach or come nie unto it, the body of Christ
does flee up straight into heaven, the old substance coming again
miraculously unto the accide^tes. Belike their fained Christ has not so much
power as a poor Cat or Mouse has, which being but a poor creature of our
savior Christ (who^ we do worship and feed upon, above in heaven on the right
hand of the father) does with his sent only, fraie away Mice and Rattes, so
that they dare not come where he is, much less, that they should venture
upon him and eat him up, as they do their false Christ, or else make him to
find his legs, or wings, for to be out of their reach, and claws.
Likewise, when they burn their molded God, if their doctrine were true, The
papists do burn their Christ.
they could not choose, but that they must burn also the body of Christ,
except they will say that the substance of the ashes is made of mere
accidents.

But I know that they will say, that as soon as the body of Christ does see
the fire come, it flies straight ways up into heaven, making the old
substance by his almighty power to come to his accidents again. Who can
choose but laugh at these papists. Math 4. Ephe. 4.
Who would not deride and laugh to scorn this vain doctrine of theirs? Is
Christ now of less ability and power, then he was before his resurrection or
risyng again? What Mice, what Dogs, what Pigges, what Rattes, what Cattes,
what heat, what fire, what water, what bityng, what chewyng with teeth, what
devils, what tyrauntes were not obedient unto his divine power, Hebr. 2.
when he was conversant among men, being subject to all manner of infirmities
that we are subject unto (sin only excepted?) And shall he now that he has
all power given unto him, Math. 2^. The papists make Christ more weak and
fearful then the vlle vermin and other creatures (...).
both in heaven and in earth, be feign to give place, not only to fire and
water, but also to little poor seely Mice, which fear the Cat, and dare not
presume to approach neigh her, no, not as nigh as he may have the sent of the
cat? And is christ of less power, that they dare come nigh to eat him up, or
make him flee into heaven as soon as he sees them coming? or, is Christ of
less power then water which can quench fire? or of less power then the
Sun that dries up water? O blasphemous Papists, enemies to Christ's body
and Passion, robbers clean of his divine might and power, if thus we should
follow your doctrine, Psalm. 53.
we shall at last clean deny God, and say with you in our hearts, Non est
Deus; There is no God at all.

The.xxij. Chapter. The true exposition of these worde^ (hoc est corpus meum)
and that Sacraments are called by those names whereof they are Sacraments.
I Will now come to the true exposition of these words: The true exposition
of these words: This is my body.
This is my body. First and foremost, it is to be noted and marked, that the
sacraments are most commonly called by the names of those things that they be
sacraments of. Which thing may easyly be proved, both by the scriptures, and
also by the aucthorities of the ancient fathers of the old catholic Church.

Genesis 17.
When the Lord our God did institute and ordeyne circumcision, he did say: And
my covenant shall be in your flesh. Here he calls the sign of the covenant,
by the name of the covenant it self. The Testament or covenant was: I will
be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee. And unto this was circumcision
added, as a sign or seal of the covenant, being called by the name of the
very thing it self that it did signify and represent.

Again, the Paschall Lamb was called Transitus domini: that is to say: Exodus
12.
the Passover of the Lord. Yet the lamb, which was but a brute beast,
appointed for the belly, was not the Passover of the Lord, but only a sign or
seal of it. For, the Passover, or pass by of the Lord was, when he went by
the houses of the Israelites, and slew all the first borne of Egypt, not one of
all the Israelites that believed his servant Moses, and did as he commanded
them, being either harmed or hurt. Of this exceeding great benefit, and of
their deliverance out of Egypt, was the Paschall Lamb a memorial or sign,
and that it might the better print in their minds, what God has done for
them, it was called by the name of the thing that it did signify or represent.
For God him self does attribute unto it his own name, 2. Sam. 7.
saying by his prophet Nathan unto David: Shall thou build me a house for to
dwell in? who, since I brought the Israelites out of Egypt, never dwelled in
house, but in tents and Tabernacles? It is most evidently plain, that he
speaks there of the arc of the Testament: for, as he does not dwell in
Temples or houses that be made with hands: so did he not dwell in Tents or
Pauilions. Esai. 66. Acts. 7.
For why? the heavens are his seat, and the earth his foot stool. Who shall
build him a house?

Again, 1. Sam. 4. Psalm. 78.
it is called the power and glory of God, as when the Psalmiste says:
Suamque potentian captiuitati, suum decus hostili exposuit manui. That is to
say: And he has delivered up his power, into captivity, and his worship or
glory into the hands of his enemies. Leuit. 16.
The sacrifices also, that were offered for sins were called sins. And
therefore it is written: And the priests shall eat the sins of my people.
For this cause was our Savior Christ himself, Hebr. 7.9.10.
who is the true and only sacrifice for sin, prefigurated before, and
signified by all the sacrifices of the old law, 2. Cor. 5.
called sin, as when saint Paul says: him, that knew no sin, God did
make sin for us, that through him, we should be made the righteousness of God
in him.

By these and many other like textes, which I need not now to rehearse, any
man may easily perceive, that it is the common phrase of the holy scriptures,
to call the sacraments by the names of the things whereof they be
Sacraments, that so they may the more lively, and with greater efficacy,
print in the minds of men, Why the sacraments be called by the names of the
things whereof they be sacraments.
the things that they do signify: And also for to certify us, that if we
receive them worthily, we shall most effectuously be made partakers of the
things that they be Sacraments of.

This manner of speaking then, as being well known of the Apostles: (for why?
they were wont and accustomed to it from their youth) our savior Christ did
use at his last Supper, when he did institute and ordeyne the Sacrament of his
body and blood. Therefore, they that say that our savior christ should be an
unwise Testament maker, if he should have used then tropes and figures, or
such obscure and dark manner of speaking: will not perceive that his Testament
was made long before that, with plain and manifest words, and that here he
did but institute and ordain the sacrament of it, as a most infallible and
sure seal of all his heavenly promises, and of the incorruptible inheritance
that he has purchased and bequeathed unto us: The sacrament is not the
testament of Christ, but a seal or sign of it.
wherein he did use the same phrase and manner of speaking that the holy ghost
had used before, in the institution of all sacraments, which was then so
common, that it was impossible that the apostles should be ignorant in it:
And though they had been ignorant, yet Christ our Savior should have
delivered them from all doubt, when speaking of the Cup, Matthew. 26.
he did add immediately these words: I say unto you, I will not drink
henceforth, of this fruict of the vine tree, until that day, when I shall
drink it new with you in my fathers kingdom, declaring thereby that the same
that was in the Cup, which before, (for the causes above rehearsed) he had
called his blood, was wine, even the fruicte of the vine tree. I report me
unto you, whether the blood of Christ, I mean his true and natural blood, be
the fruict of the vine tree, or not.

Cyprian ad Caecilium. lib. ^. Epist. 3.
Therefore Saint Ciprian says: Quomodo autem de creatura vitis nouum vinum
cum Christo, in regno patris bibemus, si in sacrificio dei patris, and Christi,
vinum non offerimus? That is to say, how shall we drink new wine of the
creature of the Uine, with Christ, in the kingdom of the father, if in the
sacrifice of the father, and of Christ, we do offer no wine? As then the same
that was in the cup, through our savior Christ had said of it: This is my
blood, was still by his own confession the fruit of the vine tree: even so,
the same, whereof he had said: This is my body, Theo. dialo. 1.
was bread still. For, as Theodoretus says: He that had called his body
wheat and bread, and him self a Uine, did afterward honor the bread and
wine, with the names of his body and blood, not chaungyng the nature, but
addyng grace unto the nature. For these causes, the blessed apostle Paul, 1.
Cor. 10. 1. Cor. 11. Exodus 7. John. 2.
did not stick to call it bread, not once, nor twice, but five times, in his
Epistle to the Corinthians. As for the example of Moses rod being turned
into a serpent, or of the water, being changed into wine, and such other
like, which they be wont to allege for to blind the simple and ignorant
people withal, how much it serves or makes for them, it has been already
sufficiently declared a little before.

Now then, since that it has been already proved, that the apostles could not
doubt of our Savior Christ's words, which he spoke at his last Supper, when
he did institute his Sacrament, because that they were accustomed even from
their tender youth to such phrases, and manner of speakynges: I will also
show, that the ancient fathers did understand and expound these words, as
we do both understand, and expound them. Tertul. contr. Martio. lib. 1.
First, these are Tertullians words: The lord did not reprove bread,
wherewith he does represent his body. Ye shall understand that the Heretic
Martion, against whom this father wrote, did reprove all the creatures of God
as naught: Note.
Which heresy, Tertullian did confute stoutly, by many strong arguments and
reasons: and among all other, he does gather an argument of the institution of
the Lords supper, as if he should have said: If the creatures were naught,
Christ would not represent his body with bread, which no man can deny to be
a creature: but Christ does represent his body with bread: 1. Tim. 4.
Ergo, the bread is not naught, but a good creature of God, to be used with
thanks geuyng. But how soever the matter goes, Tertullian does plainly
affirm here, that Christ does represent his body with bread.

And unto him does S. Hierome agree, Hieroni. in Matthew. cap. 26.
saying: He takes bread, which comfort the heart of man, that as
Melchisedech had done in the figure of him, when he did bring forth bread and
wine, so he should represent the verity of his body and blood. No man will
say: that the thing that does represent, and the thing that is represented,
be all one, except, it be the papists, as Doctor Harding, Cope Marshall, and
Shakestockes, I would say Shackelocke, Columela.
who goes about by Columellas words to prove, as Winchester did, such a
thing, but if the saying of that profane writer should take place in this
matter it should follow that the bread should but represent it self, and none
other thing, as Columella will have, Vt Villicus semper se representet, That
the Bailife of husbandry should always represent himself, which is no more
in our english, but that he should be always present. We are not wont to
say that a king does represent himself or his own person: But of a Lord or
of a judge that sits in judgment, we say commonly that the same Lord or
judge does represent the kings person, not as a plaier that does represent
an Emperor or a king in a stage or footplaie, but because of the kings
authority and power that is given unto him.

Even so in the Sacrament, we say with the ancient Fathers, that the bread
does represent the body of Christ, The sacraments are not bare signs.
not as a bare naked figure or sign (which thing all the rablement of popish
papists do most slanderously lay to our charge) but because, that being
duly ministered and worthily received, it brings with it self the nature,
property, virtue and grace of the body of christ, Ambro. de sacramen. lib. 6.
cap. 1.
as Ambrose does testify with these words. Thou do receive the Sacrament
for a similitude, but thou do obtain the virtue and grace of the true
nature: And because that thou do receive bread, thou art in the same food
made partaker of the divine substance. These be the causes, wherefore we say
with the old Fathers of the ancient catholic Church, that the bread does
represent the body of Christ. A similitude.
But as it needs not that a king be really or personally present, for to have
his authority or power to take place among his faithful and obedient
subjects: so is it nothing necessary that we should have the natural body
of Christ really present under the forms of bread and wine. For, without it:
that is to say, though it be sittyng still according to the Scriptures,
Coloss. 3. Hebr. 10.
on the right hand of the father, we have by the virtue of his institution,
and the mighty workyng of his spirit, there in the Sacrament, the very
property, virtue, and grace of the natural flesh and blood of christ, most
effectuously ministered unto us, to the everlasting comfort and nourishment both
of our souls and bodies.

The same ancient writer and father, Tertul. contr. Martio. lib. 4.
I mean Tertullian, in his fourth book against Martion, writes after this
manner: Christ taking bread and distributyng it, did make it his body, saying,
Hoc est corpus meum, hoc est figura corporis mei. This is my body: that is to
say, the figure of my body. And unto him will I join Saint Augustine, that
all men may see, what shameful liars Doctor harding and other the papists
are, who are not ashamed to say, that none of all the ancient fathers,
neither before, nor sense, did expound these words of christ, as Tertullian
did expound them in that place. August. in prol. in 3. psalm.
The words of Saint Augustine are these: Adhibuit ad conuiuium: in quo
corporis and sanguinis sui figuram discipulis commendauit and tradidit. And he
did admit or receive him unto the banquet: wherein he did comme^de and deliver
unto his disciples, the figure of his body. And in another place he says
again: August. contr. Adimantum. cap. 22.
So the blood is the soul, as the Rock was Christ, and yet the apostle
says not, the rock did signify Christ, but the Rock was Christ: So may I
expound that this precepte or commandment, 1. Cor. 10.
was given in a sign. Non dubitauit Dominus dicere: hoc est corpus meum cum
daret signum corporis sui. For, the Lord did not doubt or stick to say:
This is my body, when he did give the sign of his body. In their own
distinctions they have these words: De consecratione distinction. 2. Hoc est
quod.
Dicitur corpus christi, sed improprie, vt sit sunsus, vocatur corpus christi,
id est, significat corpus christi. That is to say in english: it is called
the body of Christ, (meaning the Sacrament) but improperly, as the meaning of
it may be thus, it is called the body of christ: that is to say, it does
signify the body of Christ.

These sayings need no exposition at all: For they are so plain, that the
very children in the street be able to understand them, and also to perceive
and epsy out the shameful leasinges of our disguised papists, who care not
what they say, so that they may seem to say some what for to deceive the
simple and ignorant people withal: and for to mainteyne their great
graundfather Antechristes kingdom of proud Rome. The Mark whereat the
Papists shoot. Acts. 12.
For, ye must understand, that this is the only mark that they shoot at all
the pack of them, that they may set up them selves as gods, and bring all men's
heads under their girdles.

And no doctrine (they think) will serve better for that purpose, than this
gross and Capharnaiticall doctrine of transubstantiation, John. 4.
and of the corporal presence of Christ's body in the sacrament. For, who
would not stand in fear of them, and reverence them as gods, that can with
five words make Christ both God and man, of a piece of bread whenever they
list? And therefore it is written in a book of theirs, these words: Stella
Clericorum.
O how honorable, how worshipful and excellent is the dignity of priests
(if they will live priestlike) in whose hands (as it were in the virgins
womb) the son of God is incarnated or takes flesh. And then by and by
after, it follows: Iste qui creauit me, dedit mihi creare se, qui creauit me
sine me, creatur mediaente me, cum ergo tante dignitatis fit sacerdos: quod
creator fit sui creatoris and totius creature* ipsum perdere, vel damnare,
inconueniens est. That is to say in English: He that made me, gave me power
to make him: and he that made me without me, is made by the means of me:
Seeing then that a Priest is of so great dignity, that he is the maker of his
maker, and of every creature: to destroy or to condemn him, it is not
convenient: even the like you may read in another book of theirs, Acts. 12.
these words of proud Herod: Sacerdos est altior Regibus, foelicior angelis,
and creator sui creatoris. A Priest is higher in authority then Kings:
Sermo. discipu. Sermo. 112. Papists seeks by transubstantiation to set up
their pride and glory.
happier or more blessed then angels: and a creator of his creator. To be
short, all men may see now at this present, that all their study and seeking
is, to advance their own pride and glory: and to exalte them selves above all
princes and kings of the earth: Which is a property of antichriste, and of
all the impes of his kingdom. But leauyng the trial of this thing unto other
men, that have any eyes to see: I will return again to my matter.

Our Popecatholiques perceauyng these aucthorities that I have now aleaged out
of Tertullian, out of Augustine, and out of their own distinctions, to be so
plain, that any child is able to pick out the english of them: do be stir
them selves, that at the least, they may cast some miste before the eyes of the
unlearned and simple people. Objection.
The sign (say they) and the figure, be taken for the thing that is
represented and signified by them: yea, they are the very things it self, as
it appears by the words of the angel, who after that he had showed unto the
Sheepheardes that Christ our Savior was borne, Luke. 2.
did say immediately: and take this for a sign, ye shall find the child
swadled, and laid in a Manger. Was not Christ there, both the sign, and the
very thing it self that was signified by the sign? Again, Simeon speaking of
him, says plainly these words: Luke. 2.
This child shall be a sign, which shall be spoken against. Here again do we
see, that the sign and the thing signified by it, are both one. Moreover, the
blessed Apostle does call Christ the very image of his fathers substance,
Hebr. ^.
and yet all men will confess that Christ our savior is one with the father
in substance. Whereby it follows, that Christ is the image or figure of the
thing that he is himself. After the same manner ought the fathers to be
understood, when they call the sacrament, a sign, or a figure of the body
and blood of Christ.

This is the miste, that our papisticall doctors, do daily endeavor them
selves, Answer.
to cast before the eyes of the ignorant and unlearned: which, through the
help of him that is the true son of righteousness, shall soon be driven
away: that all men that will, may see the cheerful and comfortable light of
the truth. As for the first place that they have aleaged, and do aleadge
daily: it makes nothing at all for them. For, the angel does not say: Nota.
And ye shall find the sign of a child swadled and laid up in a Manger: but
the very words are these: Luke. 2.
And for a sign, ye shall find the child swadled and laid up in a Manger.
Whereby any man may perceive, that Christ being newly borne, was not appointed
of the angel, for to be a sign of him self. For, that needed not, but for to
be a sign and token yt the words, which he had spoken unto the sheepheardes
were true. No man will say, I trow, that christ, and the words that the angel
spoke then unto the sheepheardes, were alone thing. Let any man read the place
well, and mark diligently the circumstaunces of it, and he shall find it to
be, as I say.

We have almost the like manner of speaking in Esaie, Esai. 7.
where the prophet speaking unto Achas, does say: And therefore, the Lord
shall give you a token himself: Behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a
son. etc. Shall we say now, that the virgin Marie, with her son, was a
token or sign of her self, and not rather a token and sign, that the words
of the Prophet, which he spoke then unto Achas in the name of the Lord, were
most true, and that they should in their time be fulfilled and performed?

Now, whereas they do bring forth the saying of Simeon, truly they declare
therein, their deuilishe and malicious heart, and also their most wicked intent,
whereby they go about to peruerte all the Scriptures that come into their
hands.

For in that place, this word, sign, is not taken for a thing, that does
signify or represent another thing, what this word Sign does signify in
this place of Luke 2. The place of Simeone expounded.
but for a mark that men are wont customably to shoot at. For the meaning of
Simeon was, that Christ with his doctrine, should be as a mark that all the
world should shoot at: that is to say, that both he and his Gospel should
be withstanded and resisted of all the unfaithful worldlinges upon the earth,
which would bend them selves against the Lord, and against his anointed,
Psalm. 2.
our Savior Jesus Christ, and the glad or joyful tidinges of his heavenly
kingdom, as Bows he customably bent against a mark. Therefore the Jews that
were at Rome, Acts. 28.
did say unto Paul: we have heard of this sect, that every where it is spoken
against. These few words that the Jews did speak unto Paul, ought to serve
us for a sufficient exposition of Simeons saying, for thereby we do learn,
that the meaning of the old father, was none other, but that the religion of
Christ and his Gospel should be spoken against. Do not now all men see, how
well to the purpose they do aleadge the scriptures, and that all that they
seek, is how they may deceive and blind men, and keep them in error still,
Wisd. 2.
that their pride, pomp, and glory may continue unto the worlds end?

But let us see what help they have by the place that they recite out of the
Hebrews. Therefore (say they) it is written that christ is the figure of the
fathers substance. What could be spoken more plainly? All christians in the
world will confess, that Christ is one in substance with the father. Hebr. 1.
Does it not follow then, that Christ our savior is the figure of that thing,
that he is him self? I beseech thee good reader, take the pains to read the
whole place, as it lies with the circumstaunces and all, and then shall ye
soon perceive how much it helps them, in the mainteyning of their shameful
error. For, there they shall learn, that whereas God in times past diversely
and many ways spoke unto the fathers by the prophets: Hebr. 1.
he did in these last days speak unto us by his son. It is not unknown to
them that read the Scriptures, that the spirit of Christ was in the
prophets, 1. Pet. 1.
and that by him God spoke unto the fathers.

How shall we then understand this place to the Hebrews, where he says, that
God did in these last days, spoke unto us by his son, since that he did
before speak unto the fathers by him? It is to be understood and marked,
that it is said, that God did speak unto the fathers by his son, How the
place of Paul must be understood.
because that the spirit of Christ was in all the prophets, by whom he spoke
unto the fathers: but in these latter days, God did speak unto us by his
son, being incarnated: that is to say, being made man, and having taken upon
him a mortal body in the virgins womb. As then he did speak unto us by his
son, being made man, and having taken our frail nature upon him: so his
son, I mean our savior Christ, being man: that is to say, touching his
manhood, and not touching his Godheade, is the image or figure of his
substance. For the image or figure of a thing, must be visible and apparaunt
to the eye, else it can not be called an image or a figure. But the godhead or
divine substance of Christ, could not be seen no more than the divine
substance of the father: therefore, he could not touching his Godhead or
divine substance, be the image or figure of his fathers substance, but only
touching his humanity and manhood. As he him self does testify, saying: He
that sees me, John. 12.
sees the father.

And it ought to seem no strangeness that we say, that Christ touching his
humanity or manhood, is the image or figure of the father. For, if the first
Adam, which notwithstanding that he was created in the estate of innocence,
could fall, Genesis 1. 1. Pet. 2. Hebr. 4.
and break the commandment that was given unto him, was called the image of
God: how much more ought the second Adam, in whose mouth no guile was found,
and which could not sin, to be called the image of the fathers substance?
yea, John. 3. Coloss. 3. 1. Pet. 1.
the holy scriptures do testify of us, that when we be regenerated or borne a
new, we are the image of God: And shall not he, by whose spirit and word, we
are begotten a new and regenerated, be most lively and most effectuously the
image of the fathers substance? Thus then may we conclude, that as God did in
these last days, speak unto us by his son, being made man, or having taken
upon him a mortal body: so his son being man, or touching his manhood, is
the image of his divine substance. But no man will say, that Christ touching
his humanity or manhood is one with the father in substance (for that were
to affirm that the father is a creature) Therefore, the argument that they
make upon this te^te of Paul, affirmyng that Christ is the figure of a
thing, that he is him self, is not worth a blewe button.

And though they would maintain still, that this place must be understood of
his diuitie and Godhead, yet should they win nothing by it. For, the Greek
has not, the figure or image of his substance (if they would go to the
rigor of the letter) but the image or figure of his person* And taking it so*
I should agree with the Council of Nice, wherein it was decreed that in the
blessed Trinity, there is but one substance, which the Greeks call Vsia,
Vsia.
and three persons, which they call Hypostases. Hipostases.
We do grant then after this interpretation, that Christ, touching his
divinity or Godhead, is the image of the person of the father: But we will in
no wise grant, that the person of the father, and the person of the son be
all one. For, that were a plain heresy, which ought in no wise to be
suffered in the church of Christ. Let them turn themselves which way soever
they will, yet this place will help them nothing, no more then the places
above rehearsed: But that they shall be feign to confess Mawgrie their shaven
crowns, that the ancient fathers have expounded these words: This is my
body, and this is my blood, as we do now expound them.

But how many places out of the Doctors were I able to bring, for to prove
that the Sacraments are called by the names of the things whereof they be
Sacraments? Thus does the blessed Martyr S. Ciprian write: Cyprianus de
vnctio. Chrismatis.
Dedit itaque Dominus noster in mensa in qua vltimum cum Apostolis participauit
conniuium proprijs manibus panem and vinum: in cruce vero manibus militum
corpus tradidit vulnerandum: vt in Apostolis saecretius impressa sincera
veritas and vera sincaeritas exponeret gentibus quomodo vinum and panis caro
esset and sanguis. Et quibus rationibus causae effectibus conuenirent: and
diuersa nomina vel species ad vnam reducerentur essentia^: and significantia
and significata eisdem vocabulis censerentur. That is to say in english: The
Lord at his last supper which he kept with his Apostles, did with his own
hands give bread and wine: and upon the Cross, he did with the hands of the
soldiers, deliver his body to be wounded: that the sincere verity, and the
true sincerity being secretly printed in the Apostles, should declare or
expound unto the gentiles, how the bread and wine, is blood and flesh, and by
what means the causes do agree with the effects: And how diverse kinds and
names should be reduced or brought to one essence: And the things that
signify, and the things that be signified, called by one name.

Saint Augustine, August. super Leuit. cap. 17. quest. 57.
besides that place that I have already alleged out of his Epistle that he did
write to Bonifacius, does in his book of Questions upon Leuiticus, say these
words: Solet autem res quae significat, eiu^ rei nomine quam significat
nuncupari, sicut scriptum est, septem spicae septem anni sunt. Non enim dixit,
septem annos significa^t. Et septem boues septem anni sunt: and multa
huiusmodi. Huic est quod dictum est, Petra erat Christus, non enim dixit petra
significat Christum: sed tanquaem hoc esset, quod vtique per substantiam non
hoc erat, sed per significationem. Sic and sanguis, quoniam propter vitalem
quandam corpulentiam animam significat, in sacramentis anima dictus est. In
english it is to say: The thing that does signify, is wont to be called by
the name of the thing that it does signify. Therefore, it is written, And the
seven ears of corn, are seven years, and not the seven ears of corn do
signify or betoken seven years. And the seven kyne are seven years: And many
such like places. And thereof it comes that it was said, And the Rock was
Christ, he said not, the Rock did betoken or signify Christ: as though it
had been that thing in substance, which was only in signification. And
because that the blood by reason of a certain lively substance, does
signify and betoken the soul, therefore in the Sacraments the blood is
called the soul.

But the words that have been alleged before, out of his epistle to
Bonifacius, August. ad Bonifacium. Epist. 23.
make the matter most plain. Therefore, I will think it no labor lost to
repeat them again as they lie in Latin first: Si enim Sacramenta quandam
similitudinem* earum rerum, quarum Sacramenta sunt non haberent, omnino
sacramenta non essent. Ex hac autem similitudine plaerunque etiam ipsarum rerum
nomina accipiunt, Sicut ergo, secundum quendam modum, Sacramentum corporis
Christi, corpus Christi est: Sacramentum sanguinis Christi, sanguis Christi
est, ita Sacramentum fidei, fides est. If the Sacraments (says he) had not
some certain similitude or likeness of the things whereof they be
Sacraments, they should be no Sacraments: and of this similitude, many times
they have the names of those things them selves. As then, the Sacrament of the
body of Christ, is after a certain manner, the body of Christ, and the
Sacrament of his blood, after a certain manner his blood: So, the Sacrament of
faith, is faith. All these aucthorities; are of them selves plain enough, and
need no further exposition.

Therefore, since that I have sufficiently proved, both by the holy Scriptures,
and also by the aucthorities of the ancient fathers, that the Sacraments are
called by the names of the things whereof they be Sacraments, I will be so
bold to conclude, that Christ our savior did at his last Supper, call bread
his body, and the wine his blood, because that they were by his holy
institution, made the sacraments of his body and blood. Theo. dialo. 1.
And unto this does Theodoretus agree, as it has been declared before, when
he says: He that did call his body, wheat and bread, and himself a vine, does
honor the bread and wine with the name of his body and blood, not chau^ging
the nature, but addyng grace unto the nature. Christo. ad Caesarium.
S. Chrysostom has even the like words: whereby we may also gather, that the
bread and wine being consecrated, that is to say, being applied to that holy
use that God has instituted and ordained, Bishop Iuell.
(for that is the true consecration, as one very well said, consecratio tota
actio Christi est, whatsoever the papists can prate and scoulds to the
contrary) be called the body and blood of Christ, because, that being duly
ministered and worthily received, they bring with them selves the grace, virtue,
and property of his most precious flesh and blood, whose nature and property
is, to bring immortality and life everlasting: that is to say, to viui^^e and
quicken all faithful beleuers, both in souls and bodies.

And this does S. Ambrose mean, Ambr. lib. 6. cap. 1.
when he says: Thou do receive the Sacrament in a similitude, but thou
obteynest the grace and virtue of the true and natural body of Christ, and also
of his blood, and that eating the bread as we ought to do: we are fed unto
immortality, which is a property of the divine substance. Cypria. de coena
Dom*
This also does saint Cyprian mean, when he writes on this manner: The same
bread that the Lord did reach forth unto his disciples, being changed, not
in outward appearaunce, but in nature, was by the almighty power of God made
flesh.

Which words, notwithstanding that they be aleaged of the papists, for to
mainteyne their butcherly and gross doctri^e of transubstantiation withal,
have none other meaning, but that the bread, remaining bread still as it was
before, and as it does appear outwardly unto the eye, the nature of it is
clean altered and changed. Mark this well.
For, whereas the property and nature of the bread is, to feed the body only,
and to mainteyne or continue the life of it, being applied to that holy use,
that Christ has instituted and ordained in his holy mysteries, it does feed
both the souls and bodies unto immortality and life everlasting, so yt by it,
not only our souls do receive a life that never shall have end: Irene.
aduersus Here. lib. 4. cap. 24.
but also our bodies are made partakers of uncorruption, as Ireneus does
testify, saying: As ye bread which is of the earth, after that the name of god
is called upon over it, or receiving the name or calling of god, is no more
common bread, but the bread of thanks geuyng, consistyng of two things, that
is to say, of the heavenly, and earthly: so our bodies receauyng the bread of
thanks giving, are no more corruptible, having a hope of resurrection. Who
would not say, that the nature and property of the bread, is wonderfully
altered and changed? August. in Ioh. tract. 80.
The like does Saint Augustine write of the water of baptism, saying: Vnde
ista tanta virtus aquae, vt corpus tangat and cor abluat, nisi faciente verbo?
Whence comes this so great virtue of the water to touch the body, and wash
the soul, but by workyng of the word? here is a wonderful alteration and
change.

How the nature of water is changed in baptism.
The property and nature of the water is, to wash away the filthiness of our
bodies, to quench our thirste, and to serve us in other things, that parteine
to this mortal life, to moist the ground, and to make it fruictfull: but
being rightly ministered, and worthily received in the Sacrament of baptism, it
washes away the filthiness of the soul, and makes the inward man clean
from all sins, through the working spirit of God, and yet it remains water
still, no part of the substance thereof being changed: so ought we to
understand of the sacramental bread and wine. For, though being duly
ministered and worthily received, they have the nature, property, and grace, of
the precious flesh and blood of Christ, yet (as Theodoretus says) they
remain still in their former substance, Theo. dialo. 2.
shape and figure. Whereunto the old writer Emisenus does agree, Emisenus de
consecr. did. 2.
affirmyng plainly, that the corruptible creatures of bread and wine, are by
the consecration or word, and secret power of the invisible priest, so
changed and turned, as we be changed in baptism: where, though we be renewed
by the holy ghost, and made new creatures, yet we remain still the same in
substance that we were before: And so with the blessed Martyr Ciprian, he
calls the visible creatures of bread and wine, the body and blood of Christ,
because of the excellent nature, virtue, property, and grace of his most
precious flesh and blood, that they do receive, by the mighty word and secret
power of the invisible Priest, who is our Savior Jesus Christ him self.
Hebr. 7.
For this excellent property, I say, virtue, and grace, that the creature of
bread being rightly ministered and worthily received, does obtain by the
almighty power of God.

The blessed Martyr saint Ciprian, with the other ancient fathers, Note this.
do say, that the bread is made flesh, Else, if we should take his words
so grossly, as our papists do, we should be feign to confess that the
blessed body of Christ, being made of bread, should have his beginning,
original, and ofspryng of the corruptible creature of bread, as I have
sufficiently proved already before. Wherefore Saint Ambrose says: Ambr. de.
Sacramen. lib. 4. cap. 4.
Sunt quae erant, and in alium mutantur: in substance they are (meaning the
Sacrament) the same they were before, but in accident or quality, they are
turned into another thing, for before it was common meats. For man's table,
now is turned to be meat for the Lords table, and in another place he
says: Ambr. de his qui initiantur misterijs. ca. 9.
Ante consecrationem alia species nominatur, post consecrationem corpus christi
significatur: before the consecration, it is named by another kind, but after
consecration it does signify the body of Christ. Chrisost. ad. populu^
Antiochaenu^. Ho. 60
Saint Chrysostom agreeyng herewith, says: Si incorporei essemus. etc. If
we were bodilesse, god would give us these things bare and bodylesse, but for
as much as we have souls fastened unto our bodies, therefore God gives us
things spiritual, under things visible. Saint Augustine to put all out of
doubt, that we eat not grossly nor drink verily or carnally, the body and
blood of Christ, as the Papiste affirms, August. in Psalm. 98.
says these words: Non hoc corpus quod videt^s manducaturi estis, and
bibiturs illud sanguinem quem fusuri sunt qui me cruci^igent, Sacramentum
aliquod vobis commendaui. That is to say: Ye shall not eat this body that ye
s^e me to have, nor yet shall ye drink that blod which they shall shed that
crucify me, it is a sacrament that I give or deliver unto you, therefore he
^aide in his trac^es upon John. Ioh. tract. 26.
Aliud est sacramentum, aliud res sacramenti. The sacrament is one thing, and
the thing of the sacrament is another. Wherefore he gives this lesson to all,
saying, Contra. Maximinum. lib. 22.
In sacramentis videndum est, no quid sint, sed quid significent. In the
sacraments, we may not look what they are, but what they do signify.

De consecra. distinct. 2. qui manducat.
Now all men may see, how shamefully the papists do belie us, saying, and
writing, that we do make of the Sacrament but a bare figure and sign. For this
is our faith and belief, that if a man does truly examine himself, that is to
say, ponder, weigh, and consider with his own mind, whether he acknowledges
him self to be a sinner or not: what it is to examine him self.
and whether he has an inward grief, and an unfeigned repentance or sorrow
for his sins: whether he has forgiven from the bottom of his heart all his
enemies, and reconciled him self unto them that he has offended: whether he
be determined to restore again unto his neighbor, all that he has taken away
from him wrongfully, by any manner of means: whether he be minded for the love
that he bears unto God, to live afterward virtuously according to his holy
commandments, forsaking sin and the world: but above all things, whether
he has a true faith in the mercy of God, and in the name of his son Jesus
Christ: and whether he believes steadfastly that Jesus Christ is his only
savior, To examine our selves, stands in two points, ^idz. faith, and
repentance.
redeemer, intercessour, advocate, and mediator betwixt God and him: finally,
whether he has a desire to live and dye in the only doctrine of Christ,
forsaking all other false and erroneous doctrines, with all kind of deuillishe
superstition and idolatry, and so eat of this bread, and drink of this cup:
our faith I say and belief is, that such a man does feed most effectuously
upon the body and blood of Christ our only savior: who they be that feed
effectuously upon the body and blood of Christ.
and yet it needs not therefore, that his natural body and blood, be really
present under the forms of bread and wine.

For, as in the holy Sacrament of baptism, if it be duly ministered, and
worthily taken, we receive the holy ghost, by whom we are renewed or made new
creatures, we obtain free remission and forgiveness of our sins, and are
apparelled with Christ, whom we do put on there, and yet no man will say that
the water is any of these things, or that it is turned into them: So in the
holy mysteries, when we come worthily unto them, we are most wholsomly fed with
the precious body and blood of our savior Christ: yet if we should say that
it could not be done, unless the bread and wine were transubstantiated into
the very body and blood of Christ, or except his body and blood be there really
present, under the forms of bread and wine, we might most justly be likened
unto the Iewishe ruler and governor, which thought, that except Christ
should come in his own person, John. 4.
his son could not be healed. For, christ our savior, is able by the virtue
of his holy institution, and by the mighty workyng of his eternal spirit, to
do all these things, as he sits on the right hand of his father. 1.
Peter. 3.


And for the objections that some make out of Chrysostom, where he says:
Chrisost. de Eucharistia. Objection.
do thou see bread? do thou see wine? do they avoid beneath, as other
meats do? God forbid, think not so, for as wax (if it be put into the fire)
it is made like the fire, no substance remainyng, nothing is left: so here
also think thou that the mysteries be consumed by the substance of the body:
^unswere.
they are easyly answered, and yet our papists think by these words of
Chrysostom, that they have the conquest, because he says, that we see no
bread nor wine, but (as wax in the fire) they be consumed to nothing: so that
no substance remains. If they had rehearsed no more, but the very next
sentence that follows in Chrysostom (which craftyly and deuillishly they
leave out) the meaning of the Doctor would easyly have appeared, which words
that follow are these: Wherefore (says he) when you come to these mysteries, do
not think that you receive by a man, the body of Christ, but that with
tongues ye receive fire by the Angels Seraphin. Think that the blood of
salvation flows out of the pure and godly side of Christ, and so coming to
it, receive it with pure lips, casting down your eyes, liftyng up your
minds, mournyng privily without speech, and rejoicing in our hearts.

Now, if the papists will gather of the words by them recited, that there is
neither bread nor wine in the Sacrament, then we may as well gather of the words
that follow, that there is neither Priest, nor Christ's body: For, as in the
former sentence, Chrysostom says, that we may not think that we see bread
and wine: so in the second sentence he says, that we may not think that we
receive the body of Christ of the priests hands.

Now if upon the second sentence (the papists will say) it can not be truly
gathered, that in the holy communion there is not the body of Christ ministered
by the Priest: then must they confess also, that it can not be well and truly
gathered upon the first sentence, that there is no bread nor wine. But all
these things be together in the holy Communion, Christ him self spiritually
eaten and drunken, and norishyng the right believers, the bread and wine as a
sacrament declaryng the same, and the priest as a minister thereof: wherefore,
Chrysostom meant not absolutely, to deny that there is bread and wine, or to
deny utterly the Priest and the body of Christ to be there: But his intent
was, to draw our minds up toward heaven, that we should not consider so much
the bread, wine, Priest, and body of Christ, as we should consider his
divinity and holy spirit given unto us to our eternal salvation. And
therefore in the same place, he uses so many times these words: Note.
Think, and Think not, willing us by these words, that we should not fix or
set, our thoughts and minds upon, bread, wine, Priest, nor Christ's body: but
to lift up our hearts higher unto his spirit and divinity, without the
which his body avails nothing, as he says him self: It is the spirit
that gives life, John. 6.
the flesh avails nothing. The like phrase of speech he uses of the water
of baptism, and although Christ was but once crucified, yet would Chrysostom
have us to think, that we see him daiely whipped and scourged before our eyes,
and his body hangyng upon the Cross, and the Spear thruste into his side,
and his blood to flow out of his glorious side into our mouths, after which
manner S. Paul says, that Christ was painted and crucified before our eyes.
These phrases of speech Chrysostom used most of any aucthour.

Objection.
And now to their second objection, out of Crisostome that the papists make:
Chrisost. ad populu^ Antio. Hom. 2.
which is this, Elias (says he) when he was taken up into heaven, did leave
his cloak behind him, but our savior Christ, when he ascended up into heaven,
did both carry up his flesh with him, and did also leave it here behind him:
Answer.
It is easy to be answered. For, as he did carry up our flesh, so he did leave
his flesh here behind him, which we are our selves. Ephe. 5.
For, as S. Paul says: We are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his
bones: And truly as it ought to be unto us a singular comfort* that the most
infallible scripture does certify us, that we are members of his body, flesh
of his flesh, and bones of his bones: so it ought to be unto us, the greatest
rejoicing in the world, that he is in our flesh ascended up into heaven.

And as for that they aleadge out of S. John, where he says: Except ye eat
the flesh of the son of man, John. 6.
and drink his blood, ye have no life in you: Again, my flesh is meat in
deed, and my blood is drink in deed: Nicolaus Lyra in Psalm. 110.
Lyra their own doctor shall answer this place, and them to: where he says:
Haec verba nihil direct pertine^t ad sacramentale^, vel corporale^
manducationem. Nam hoc verbu^ dictum fuit, antequam Sacrame^tum Eucharistiae
esset institutum. Ex illa igitur litera de sacrame^tali co^munione non potest
fieri argumentum efficax. These words of Christ in the.vj. chapter of S. John,
directly pertain nothing to the sacrame^tall, or corporal eating. For these
words were spoken long before the sacrament was ordained. Therefore of this
place there can be made no good sufficient argument, touching the sacrame^tall
Communion.

Saint Augustine says upon these words of of John: There must be declared
(says he) the manner how to discern a proper speech from a figurative:
August. de doctri. Christi. lib. 3.
wherein must be observed this rule, that if the thing which is spoken, be to
the furtheraunce of charity, then it is a proper speech and no figure. So
that if it be a commandment, that forbids any evil or wicked act, or
commands any good or beneficial thing, then it is no figure. But if it
command any ill or wicked thing, or forbid any thing that is good or
beneficial, then it is a figurative speech. Now this saying of Christ
(Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood, you shall
have no life in you) seems to command an heinous and a wicked thing,
therefore it is a figure, commaundyng us to be partakers of Christ's Passion,
keepyng in our minds, to our great comfort and profit, De catech. rudib.
cap. 26. cont. aduersar. legis and prophet. lib. 2. cap. 9.
that his flesh was crucified and wounded for us. The like he has in other
places.

Thus one that has but half an eye, may easily understand and see the gr^sse
opinion of our papists.

The.xxiij. Chapter. The godly in the old law, did eat and drink the same
flesh and blood of Christ, that we do now in the new Testament.
The fathers in the old Testament did eat christ's flesh, as well as we in the
new.
OUR forefathers in the old Testament did eat him as verily and truly in
their sacraments, as we do in ours, to the eternal salvation of all their
souls that did faithfully believe in the promised seed, Jesus Christ.
Therefore S. Paul said, they did all eat of the same spiritual meat, 1. Cor.
10.
and did all drink the same spiritual drink (for they drank of the
spiritual rock that followed them: and the rock was Christ:) So we may easily
perceive that they did eat the same meat that we do, because the substance
of theirs and our Sacraments are all one.

August. in Ioh. tract. 26.
So Saint Augustine plainly affirms in these words: Sacramenta illa fuerunt
in signis diuersa, in rebus quae significabantur paria. Their Sacraments were
in outward tokens diverse, but in the things tokened, all one with ours.
Likewise Leo says: Leo de Natiui. Dom. Sermon. 3.
Mysteria pro temporum ratione variata sunt: quum fides, qua viuimus, nulla
fuerit aetate diuersa: The sacraments are altered according to the diversity
of the times: But the faith, whereby we live, Contr. Faustu^. lib. 19. cap. 14.
in all ages: was ever one. To conclude, saint Augustine shows: that their
Sacraments of the old law were promises of such things, as should
afterward be accomplished: Our sacraments of the new Law, are tokens, that
the same promises be already accomplished. The same Saint Augustine in
another place answers to a certain question, In Ioh. tract. 50.
as this. Quomodo in coelum manum mittam, vt ibi sedentem teneam? (He says)
Fidem mitte and tenuisti, How shall I reach my hand into heaven, that I shall
hold him sittyng there? Reach out thy faith, Ambr. in Lue. lib. 6. cap. 8.
and thou hold him. Saint Ambrose, agreeyng hereto, says: Fide tangitur,
fide videtur, non tangitur corpore, non oculis comprehenditur. He is touched by
faith, he is seen by faith, Augustine. Epist. 84.
he is not touched with body, nor comprehended or seen with eyes. Saint
Augustine says. Habet fides oculos suos. Barnarde medita. cap. 6.
Faith has her eyes, and Barnarde says: Visio anime intellectus est. The
seeing of the soul is understanding.

Therefore, I am sure none will say that the fathers in the old law did eat
christ in their sacrament butcherly, as the papists affirm, How Christ is in
ye bread^ in the receauer, and in heaven.
and yet you see by these aucthorities, that the substance of their sacraments
and ours are al one: wherefore, learn this lesson, that Christ is in the bread,
figuratively, he is in the faithful and worthy receauer spiritually, and that
he is in heaven corporally, Coloss. 3. 1 Pet. 3. Hebre. 7. Phil. 3.
sittyng on the right hand of God his father, to make daily intercession for
us: Let us now lift up the eyes of our faith into heaven, and rejoice that our
flesh is ascended up thither.

The.xxiiij. Chapter. What comfort we have by Christ's ascension into heaven.
WE are surely taught that by his ascendyng up, The comfor^ that we have by the
ascension of Christ into heaven.
he has opened heaven unto us, which by Adams fall was shut up unto all
flesh, and that since* he is entered into Heaven with our flesh, Galat. 4.
Romans 8.
as it were in our name or behalf, we do in a manner (as S. Paul does
testify) sit with him in the heavenly seats, Faith receaueth, hope
possesses, life confirms. 2. Peter. 1.
being already in full possession of heaven, in him that is our head: For we
have received it by faith, possessed it by hope, and are therein confirmed by
holiness of life.

Secondly, we do behold his divine and godly power, wherein does consist all
our might, virtue, and strength, and all our reioycyng against hell. Romans 3.
For, ascending up into heaven, he has led captivity captive: Ephe. 4.
and having spoiled his enemies, he has enriched, Ephe. 1.
and does daily enriche his people with heavenly richesse, preseruyng and
defending his Church, with the mighty strength of his arm, against the
malicious and cruel tyrants of Satan the devil, Exodus 7. 1. Reg. 22. Job.
1. Matthew. 8. 2. Cor. 12. Deuteronomy. 13. Romans 5. 2. Cor. 12. James. 2.
and of all the mighty rulers of darkness, whom he does in despite of their
hearts, bridle and keep in, that they can do no more than he suffers them,
and appoints them to do, for the setting forth of his own glory, for the
trial of his elect, and edifiyng of his congregation and Church.

Thirdly, we learn by his ascending up into heaven, that we ought not to seek
for him here in the earth, nor upon the earth, nor about the earth, Ambro. in
Luc. 24. Coloss. 3. Ephe. 1. 1. Peter. 3. H^br. 1. Ioh. 4. Matthew. 25.
as S. Ambrose writes, but in heaven above, where he sits on the right
hand of the father, and that therefore we can do him no greater honor and
service, than to worship him in spirit and truth, bestowing for his sake
and love, upon his poor needy members, all that we could find in our
hearts to bestow upon him, if he were still here upon the earth conuersaunt
among us: And therefore, to put us in remembrance of the true service that he
does require at our hands, Mark. 14.
he says: Ye shall have the poor with you always, and whenever ye will,
ye may do them good, but me ye shall not have always.

Coloss. 3. 1. Cor. 7. Romans 12.13. Acts. 1.
We learn also by it, that we should in no wise set our minds upon this
transitory world, since that our head has forsaken it, and has taken away
his corporal presence from it, but that we should go and walk through it as
pilgrims and strangers, 1. Peter. 2. Phil. 3.
having always our conversation above in heaven, where he sits on the right
hand of his father, and where we shall have with him, Hebr. 1^. 2. Cor. 5.
a permanent or everlasting City, of a most strong and sure buildyng, and of
such a foundation that it can never be shaken nor removed. Matthew. 7.


The error of ye Jews.
Whereby the shameful error both of the Jews, and also of those that followed
them, is quite overthrown: which did think that the Messiah should tarry and
reign here beneath in the earth with his elect and chosen, for by his
ascension up in to heaven, Ioh. 18.
he did sufficiently declare unto us, that his kingdom is not of this world,
but that it is heavenly and eternal.

But this ought to be most comfortable of all, that by his ascendyng up, 1.
Ioh. 2. Hebre. 7.
we are assured to have a most mighty intercessour, and aduocat with the
father. For, since that he does continually appear before the face of God for
us, we ought not to doubt, Galat. 3.
but that he is our intercessour advocate and mediator. Therefore, Romans ^.
Hebr. 4.
we need to fear no manner of thing, whether it be in heaven or in earth, if
we have a steadfast confidence and trust in him. Ioh. 10. Phil. 2. Ioh. 1. Ioh.
10. Ioh. 16. Phil. 2. Matthew. 3. Ioh. 12. Romans 8. Ioh. 16. Ioh. 14. Ephe 5.
Ephe. 1^. Ioh. 10. Romans 5. Ephe. 5. Ioh 1. Hebr. 2. Hebre. 4.
For, since that he is true God, without doubt he is almighty. Since that he is
of one substance and power with the father, all that his father has, is his
Since that he has been to the father obedient, unto the very death of the
Cross, and that he is his well-beloved son, we have no occasion to fear that
his father, will say him naie of any thing, that we ask of him in his name.

On the other side, since that Christ is our brother, flesh of our flesh, and
bone of our bones, and also our head: without al doubt, he does love us, he
has pity and compassion upon us: we ought not therefore to think that he
will forsake his own flesh, or that he will suffer his dear and well-beloved
spouse to perish. For, he has therefore put on our flesh, and has taken
upon him all our infirmities, being temped in all things like unto us, but yet
without sin, thereby to assure us, that we have a Bishop, that knows our
infirmities and miseries, and that can have compassion upon us, and that
whatsoever does happen or chance to be done unto us, being his lively
members, he will impute it to be done unto himself, as it does most plainly
appear by the words that he spoke unto Saul, Acts. 9. Ephe. 5.
who persecuted his Church: and that also, as head of the whole body, he is
ready to deliver his members from all miseries and calamities, as he himself
was delivered.

But here will I bring in the comfortable scriptures, that do certify us, that
we have in the court of heaven, such a mighty freende, Matthew. 2^.
which having all power given unto him, both in heaven and in earth, does
always appear before the face of the great and eternal God, Hebre. 7.
which ought to be unto us a marvelous assurance and comfort against all
temptations and peryls. These be the words of the blessed Apostle S. Paul: It
is Christ which is dead, Rom: 8.
yea rather which is risen again: which is also on the right hand of God, and
makes intercession for us. Hebre. 7.
Again: This man, because he endures for ever, has an everlasting
priesthood, wherefore, he is able also to save them fully or perfectly, that
come unto god by him, everliving, for to make intercession for them. And in the
same epistle: christ (says he) is not entered in to the holy places that are
made with hands, Hebre. 9.
which are but similitudes of true things: but is entered into very heaven,
for to appear now in the sight of God for us. Does not the blessed Evangelist
S. John say also: My little children, 1. Ioh. 2.
these things write I unto you, that ye sin not. Yet if any man sin, we
have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ, which is righteous.

These Scriptures do sufficiently teach us, that we have such a friend,
intercessour, and advocate in the heavenly court, that nothing can be denied
unto him of the father. Yea, he himself which can not lie, speaks these
most sweet and comfortable words unto us all: Uerely, verily I say unto you,
Ioh. 16.
whatsoever you shall ask the father in my name, he will give it unto you.
Having then so many notable sentences and testimonies of the infallible word
of God, whereby we are assured, that the only begotten son of God is our
advocate and mediator, and that he does now appear before the face of the
father, for to make intercession for us.

The.xxv. Chapter. Aganst praiyng, and intercession to Saints.
WHat need have we, to fly unto dead creatures, I mean unto dead Saints,
for to make them our advocates and intercesours: Since that we have not one
only syllable in all the whole Scriptures, that bids us so to do* Again:
Where have we any promise in the book of God, that we shall have access unto
God by them: or that we shall the rather obtain our petition, prayers, and
requests, by their intercessions and mediations? Romans 14.
whatsoever says the apostle is not of faith, is sin: But this praiyng unto
dead saints, that they should make intercession unto God for us, is not of
faith, (for why? it has no ground at all in Gods word.) Therefore we may well
conclude, that it is an abominable sin. And therefore Saint Augustine
says full well: August. in Psalm. 108.
Non est iusta oration: nisi per Christum: Oration autem que non fit per
Christum: non solum non potest delere peccatum: sed etiam ipsa fit in peccatum:
there is no just or right prayer: but that that is made by Christ: that prayer
that is not made unto God by Christ, not only, does not put away sin, but
also is turned into sin. And no marvel: for what greater blasphemy can
there be in the world, then to rob the only begotten son of God of his
glory, and to give it unto dead creatures? but as the glory of Christ does
consist in this, Acts. 4^
that he is our omnisufficient Savior (for none other name under heaven is
there given unto men whereby they must be saved): so it does consist in this,
that he is an omnisufficient and most perfect mediator, able to obtain at his
fathers hand, all manner of things, that are necessary for the salvation both
of our bodies and souls. They therefore, that seek any other mediators
besides him, do rob him of his glory, and so commit a most detestable
sacrilege. Is it then marvel, that the more that they pray after this
manner, the more the wrath of God is kindeled against them?

Again, in what case must they needs stand, that seek other ways for to
come unto God, and unto the seat of his mercy, than he himself has appointed
in his sacred word? But his heavenly and eternal wisdom says unto us, that
he is the way, Ioh. 14.
the truth, and the life, and that none comes unto the father but by him. It
can not be then, but that they must be far out of the way, that seek to come
unto God by any other mean or way, then by Christ, and that in steed of
coming unto God, they go the plain dunstable high way unto the devil: and
that most deseruingly, since that they will not go that plain and sure way that
God him self appointed unto them, Esai. 30^
saying: This is the way, walk in the same.

Why do they not, since that they will always seem to be such folowers of the
ancient fathers of the primitive church, print in their minds, Ambr. de Isaac
et anima.
that golden saying of Saint Ambrose, where he says on this manner: Christ is
our mouth whereby we speak unto the father: our eye, wherewith we see the
father: our right hand, whereby we offer our selves unto the father, without
whose intercession, neither we nor all the saints, have ought to do with God.
Do they not learn by the words of this ancient writer and father of the
Church, that if we will speak unto the father, Christ must be our mouth? If
we will see the father, he must be our eye? Or if we will offer our selves unto
the father, he must be our right hand? It is so far of, that he should
appoint any of the saints, to be either our mouth, our eye, or our right
hand, that rather he does boldly affirm, that except Christ does make
intercession, all the saints have nothing to do with god. For why? Saint Paul
says: That as there is but one God of all, so there is but one mediator
betwixt God and man. These be his words: 2. Tim. 2.
For there is one God, and one mediator betwixt God and man, which is that man
Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all men.

Here we do both see and learn, that as there is but one God, so there is but
one mediator betwixt God and men, which is our savior Jesus Christ the only
begotten son of God, Why Christ our savior was man.
who was made man, for to set God and man at one, and for to make atonement
betwixt them. For, when we will join two things together, which do differ, or
be of contrary natures, there must be some third thing, that does approach and
hold of the nature of them both: or else there can be none atonement, no
agreement, nor true conjunction betwixt them, specially, if the natures be
repugnaunt and contrary one unto another. But what agreement can there be
betwixt God and man? look what agreement there can be, between consuming fire,
and thorns, between light and darkness, between righteousness and
unrighteousness, between blessyng and cursyng, Ephe. 2. Psalm. 51. Job. 14.
between death and life, Paradise, and Hell: even the same can be betwixt God
and man, if we do consider man in his corrupted nature.

Therefore it was most necessary, that we should have a mediator for to make
this agreement and conjunction, which mediator should be partaker of both
the natures, but yet without sin, Hebr. 4. August. in Hom. de ouibus, non
mediat. homo preter deitatem, non mediator deus preter humanitatem. None can be
mediator betwixt god and man, but God only.
and which should be both perfect God and perfect man, for to make this
conjunction, and alliance betwixt God and man. But there is no such, saving
only our savior Jesus Christ. Therefore it does necessarily follow, that none
other can be our mediator, advocate, and intercessour, but he alone. Which
thing has been sufficiently proved already, by the words that have been
aleaged now, out of Saint Paul. For they signify as much as if he should
have said after this manner: As there is but one God, which nevertheless is
sufficient for all creatures, as one only Sun serves for all the whole
world: so there is but one mediator, which is Jesus Christ, who alone has
paid our ransom, and is meet for this office.

The same thing does that blessed Evangelist saint John mean, 1. John. 2.
when he says that we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ, which
is righteous. Upon which place, S. Augustine writes on this wise: August. in
epi. Ioh. tract. ^.
He being such a man did not say: ye have an advocate with the father: but if
any man does sin, we have (says he) an advocate with the father. He said
not, ye have me for your advocate. But, brethren, we have an advocate with the
father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the satisfaction for our sins.
Hoc qui tenuit, haeresim non fecit, hoc qui tenuit, schisma non fecit: He that
holds this, committed no heresy: he that has holden this, has committed no
schism.

These are Saint Augustines words: whereby we may gather, that it is neither
heresy, nor schism, to cleave unto Christ alone, as unto an omnisufficient
mediator, advocate and intercessour, as our Popecatholikes do make it now,
persecutyng them with fire and sword that will have none other mediator nor
intercessour, but him only whom the Scriptures and word of God does appointe.

The.xxvj. Chapter. Christ is both our mediator of salvation, and also of
intercession.
Objection.
NOW ye shall have the tricks of the deuilles sophistry. We do not deny,
say they, but that Christ is the only mediator betwixt God and man. But
how ought this to be understood? Christ is only the mediator of
redemption (say they) for it is he only, that has redeemed us, and by his
death and bloodshedding has made atonement between god and us: but the
blessed virgin Marie, and other saints in heaven are our mediators of
intercession.

Answer.
I would feign know of them, where they learn this in the holy Scriptures and
word of God. I am most sure, that as they cannot find in all the Scriptures,
that we ought to pray unto the dead saints: So shall they find, that Christ
is there appointed to be our advocate and intercessour, even after his glorious
resurrection and ascension, when he had already performed all manner of things
that parteine to our salvation, and to the redemption of all mankind. For, S.
Paul says: Romans 8.
It is Christ which is dead, yea rather which is risen again, which is
also on the right hand of God, and makes intercession for us. And to the
Hebrews he says plainly: that Christ our sovereign Bishop and high priest,
Heb. 7.
lives for ever, for to make intercession for us. Else what should his
continual appearyng before the face of God for us (whereof he speaks in the
ninth Chapter of this same epistle) profit or avail unto us? Hebre. 9. ^.
John. 2.
Again, Saint John the Euangeliste, who did write his Epistles a great while
after Christ's ascension: when our atonement was already made, and our peace
fully purchased, does send us to none other advocate, but only to Jesus christ
the righteous.

Augusti. cont. Parmeniani lib. 2. cap. 8.
He says not there in that place: If any of you do sin, ye shall have me, who
am the dear beloved disciple of Christ, and did sleep upon his breast, to be
your advocate unto the virgin Marie his mother, whom he did commit unto me, and
which did love me so well, John. 19.
that she took me for her son. Again, he does not say: Get you to the virgin
Marie, or to my fellows the Apostles: Hebr. 11. John. 17.
or to the Patriarchs and Prophets* that be already dead, and in glory with
God, but putting him self in the number of sinners, Iho^ puts him self in
the number of ^ynners.
he says: If we have sinned, we have an advocate with the father, Jesus
Christ the righteous.

He had not forgotten the words of his master, which he him self had set
forth by writing. For, Jesus Christ did not say: All that ye shall ask my
father, in the name of my mother, or of the Patriarchs and Prophets, or of
mine Apostles and Disciples, it shall be given unto you: but he says,
Whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my name, John. 16.
it shall be given unto you. And S. Paul does not only testify unto us, that he
did in the time of his flesh, offer up prayers and supplications, with strong
crying and tears, and that he was heard: but also he does write (as it has
been alredie aleaged) that he is on the right hand^ of God, Hebre. 5.
where he does incessantly make intercession for us. 1. Tim. 2.
Moreover, where S. Paul does say* that there is one mediator of God and men,
which is that man Jesus Christ, has he not a respect unto the prayers that he
had spoken of before: For, after that he had said that we must pray for all
men, for a confirmation of that saying, he adds by and by; that there is one
God, and one mediator.

And none otherwise does S. Augustine expound it, Augusti. cont. Parmeniani
lib. 2. Cap. 8.
when he says: Christian men do pray one for another in their prayers: But he
for whom no man does pray, but he for all men, is the only and true mediator.
Paul the Apostle, although he were a chief member under the head, yet because
that he was a member of the body of Christ, and did know that the high and
true priest of the Church was entered, not into the holy places that be made
with hands, which were but similitudes of true things: but into very heaven,
he does also commend himself, unto the prayers of the faithful. Paulus non
facit se mediator^m inter populum, and deum: sed rogat, vt prose or^nt inuicem
omnia membra corporis Christi: Paul makes not himself a mediator between
God and the people: but requires, that they pray all, one for a another, being
all the members of the body of Christ: because that the members are careful
one for another, and if one suffers, 1. Cor. 12.
they do all suffer with it. And set the mutual prayers of all the members,
that be yet here laboring upon the earth, ascend up unto the head, which is
gone before into heaven: In whom is the satisfaction for our sins. For, if
Paul were mediator, the other Apostles also should be mediators, and so
there should be many mediators. Neither could the reason of Paul stand,
where he says: For, there is one God, one mediator of God and men, that man
Jesus Christ: in whom we are also one, if we keep the unity of faith in the
bond of peace. Haec Augustinus. etc. And in another place, August, in Psalm. ^4.
he says these words: At, vero sacerdotem si requiras, super caelos est:
interpellat pro te qui in terra mortuus est prote. But if thou seek for the
Priest, he is above in heaven, where he makes intercession for thee, which
upon the earth died for thee.

Here any man may see, if he will see at least, how substantial their
distinction is, and what ground it has in the scriptures and word of God.
Besides all this, I might reason against them, The right understanding of this
word intercession.
upon the right understanding of this word, Intercession, which among the
Latins signifies nothing else, but the letting of a matter yt it goes not
forwards. When we say then, that Christ makes intercession for us, our
meaning is, that that he does by the merits of his death, passion, and
bloodshedding, let or stop the wrath and vengeance of God, that it be^ not
powered upon us for our filthy sins and offenses. Again we say, that he
makes intercession for us, when he suffers not the ears of the father to be
stopped unto our prayers, but causes them to be heard and accepted. And it is
a manner of speaking, Read the hystories of Titus Liuias for it.
borrowed of the ancient Romans. For, when the Consules and Senators of Rome,
went about to make any decree or law, that did seem to be prejudicial and
hurtful unto the common weal, then the officers of the people, called
Tribunes, were wont to let that decree or law that it should not go
forwards, and thereof did come, intercessio Tribunorum, that is to say: a let
or prohibition of the Tribunes, that some matter might not go forwards.

Even so: that almighty and most righteous God, the father of savior Jesus
Christ, has every day, and every hour* a most just occasion by reason of our
detestable enormities, to destroy us both bodies and souls, and by his
determinate decree and sentence, to condemn us, to the everlasting
punishments of hell fire. 1. John. 2. Hebr. 7.
But we have in the Senate house of heaven, a most mighty advocate, which does
continually appear before the face of God for us, that so he may by his
omnisufficient intercession, stop this determinate decree and sentence of that
righteous judge, that it do not proceed and go forward against us.

But what if any man besides the Tribunes, had taken upon him, or presumed in
the old Senate house of Rome, to prohibit, let, or stop any decree or law
that the Consules and Senators went about to make, should not he have been
taken as a traitor, because that he had contrary to the order of the common
weal, presumptuously taken that thing upon him, that did only apperteine to
the office of the Tribunes? And shall we say, that they, that do attribute
the office of mediation or intercession unto dead Saints (who if they were
alive, Acts. ^. Acts. 14. 1. Cor. 1. Revel* 22.
would rent their clothes, and shapely reprove them, if they should see such
things to be done unto them) which office does only pertain to our Savior
Christ Jesus, are not guilty of high treason against God, who has appointed
in his holy and sacred word, his only begotten son, to be the
omnisufficient mediator betwixt him and us?

But gentle reader, mark well their words and doctrine, we confess and
acknowledge (say they) we have but one mediator of salvation, Behold the
blasphemy of the papists by their own doctrine.
but we have many mediators of intercession, if Christ be only (as you
confess he is) mediator of salvation, wherefore then do you thus call upon
the blessed virgin, Christ's mother: Salua omnes, qui te glorificant? Save thou
al them that glorify thee. Here you intrude upon christ's office, and against
your own doctrine; make her a mediator, not of intercession, but also of
salvation. Why say you this in your Ports book, A mediator. A traitor.
and in your massing books of T. Becket: Tu per Thomae sanguinem, quem pro te
impendit. Fac nos Christ scandere, quo Thomas ascendit: For the blood of
Thomas, which he for thee did spend: grant us (Christ) to clymbe, where
Thomas did ascend^. Here you see, not only intercession, but also salvation in
the blood of Thomas. Therefore, to show that the saints are saluatours,
Antoninus.
and our ways to heaven, Antoninus says, in his time, where S. Paul and Freer
Dominicke were painted together, the manner was, under the image of S. Paul to
write these words: Per hunc itur ad Christum: we may come to christ, by and
through this Saint: but under the image of Freer Dominicke, they wrote this:
Sed magis per istum: yet much rather by this Saint: whereby was meant that
Dominickes authority and office, was better able to save men before God, then
Saint Paul's.

Thus you may see by a taste as it were, all the rest of their doings, for
that, that they do, is nothing but to blind the poor ignorant people,
whereby they may lead them whersoeuer they list: thus they have God and Christ
Jesus in their mouths and prayers, Math. 7. Math. 15. Titus. 1.
only to be a cloak for them, as it was to the Pharisees, which Christ reproved
sharply: and as S. Paul says: They profess God in word, but deny him in
their doings: these papists are like to the Rat catchers, The Papiste like to
Rat catchers.
for they will take good bread, cheese, and butter, and within will put arsnecke
and poyso^: the good bread and butter, is nothing else* but to alure them to
eat the secret and hidden poison, In nomine Domine incipit omne malum.
to their destruction: so the papists in the beginning of all their prayers,
they say: Omnipote^s and sempeterne deus: and at the latter end of their
prayers, they say: Per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum: but between the
beginning and endyng, there is set in, the merits, passions, sufferinges,
intercessions, and mediations of saints, that through the^, their sufferinges,
bloodsheddynges, merits and holiness, we should obtain heaven and life
everlasting, to our salvation: if these be not murderers and poysoners of
christen souls, that under the pre^ence (as you have before heard, of Gods
name and Christ's) judge you. A proverb.
Therefore the proverb in them may be verified, Sub melle, iacet venenum: under
honey, is hid poison. But now to other obiectio^s of theirs, I must prepare my
self.

Objection.
They will now reply and say, that in the common weal of Rome, there were
many Tribunes, which were all intercessours, that is to say, which had all
power and authority to let such decrees and laws that they thought to be
hurtful unto the commons: why should it not be so in heaven? might we not
have there many intercessours also? Answer.
In deed, in the common weal of Rome, such an order was taken, that as many
Tribunes might be had, as it was thought good and convenient for the time. But
it is otherwise in the heavenly court. 1. Tim. 2.
For, there it has been appointed by him that is the highest ruler of all,
that we should have but one intercessour, advocate, and mediator of God and
men, which is our savior Jesus Christ, who alone, is able both to stop
the wrath and vengeance of God, that it should not proceed against us, and
also to obtain at his hands, all manner of things that be necessary for our
salvation: so that he needs no companions, nor fellows for to assiste him, as
the Tribunes did in the city of Rome. Whereby we may well conclude, that this
distinction, which our papists do make, comes of none other, but of Satan
the deuell, who does all that he can, for to minishe the glory of Christ.

And that all men may the better perceive that it is so, ye shall understand,
The distinction that the old idolater^ did make.
that the old ancient idolaters, did use the like distinction, for to
maintain their false gods. For, when they were compelled both by the
scriptures, and also by strong arguments and reasons, to confess, that there
was but one God: Then would they say, it is true in deed that there is but
one God of creation: that is to say, which has created heaven and earth: but
not of governance. For, (say they) there be many Gods of governance. For
some govern the air, some the earth, some the sea. etc. We may see then,
that this is an old trick of the devils Sophistry, which does still
maintain mightily with fire and sword, by his accustomed ministers, and
valiant champions, our masters of the clergy. Which though it be
sufficiently detected already, and so answered, that any child in the
street, may easily spy out their crafty, and subtle iuggelyng, and their
deuillishe conueighaunce, in the peruertyng of the holy scriptures, and sacred
word of God: yet for the further enarmyng of the simple and ignoraunte people,
whom they do most easily deceive, with their gaie painted words, and
holielike vtteraunce (as you have heard a little before) I will by the help of
God, and assistau^ce of his holy spirit, answer shortly the chiefeste and
most principal arguments, that they make commonly for to maintain (yea,
against the manifest scriptures of God) the intercession, or meditaion of
Saints.

The.xxvij. Chapter. The principal arguments that the Papists allege for
praiyng to saints: Answered.
First, when we do allege this text of S. Paul: 1. Tim. 2.
For, there is one God, and one mediator of God and men, that man Jesus
Christ, to prove thereby, that as there is but one God of all, so there is but
one mediator between God and us. Besides the before alleged, and confuted
distinction, they be wont to say, Objection.
that in this place, one, is not taken, for only. And therefore, that their
doctrine may have a better show of a truth, they allege Moses, who
speaking of the creation of the world, Genesis 1.
writes on this manner: And so of the euenyng and morning, was made one day.
Here, say they, vnus, one, does not signify one, only, but first: For,
afterward, sire other days are named. So likewise, when saint Paul does
write that there is one Mediator of God and men, ^. Tim. 2.
which is Jesus Christ, his meaning is not, that he only is a Mediator, and
that there is none other but he: But his meaning is, that our savior Christ,
is the first, or chief Mediator.

Answer.
If they could as well prove by the scriptures, that GOD has ordained other
mediators besides Christ, as Moses did prove, that God did create, and make
many days: then would I confess, that in this place of the Apostle, one, must
be taken for first. But until they have proved unto me, that God has
appoincted, and ordained some second, third, or fourth Mediators, and
advocates between him and us, I will in nowise receive their exposition but
will say and believe still, that by this word ( one) saint Paul does
understand, one only. For, ^. Tim. 2.
with as good a reason, when saint Paul says in the same self sentence:
There is one God, the Idolaters might ^^uille and say (if we should allege
that place against them, for to prove that there is but one God) that this
word: Note.
vnus, one, is not there taken for one only, but for first, or chiefest. The
like also might they do, if we should bring in, the saying of Moses, Deuteronomy.
^.
where he says: Audi Israel, Dominus deus tuus, Dominus vnus est: that is to
say. Hear, O Israel, the lord thy God, is one Lord. And truly the
aunciente Idolaters of Rome, when the Christians did bring in both Moses and
Paul against them, they would answer, as our Papisticall Hardonians, and
Louanistes do now, that is to say: that both Moses and saint Paul, did not
by this word ( one) understand alone, or only, but first, or chief.

Might not, when S. Paul says in an other place: there is one faith, Ephe. 4.
Hemerobaptistes.
one baptism, etc. Might not I say, the Hemerobaptistes, who Epiphanius does
speak of, use the like cauillation for to defend their Sacrilegious Baptism,
wherewith they Baptized them selves every day, to the utter prophanyng of the
holy Baptism, which Christ our savior has appoincted, to be received of
every man, once for ever? They might have said (if any man had gone about, to
reprove their heretical doings) by these words of the Apostle, Saint Paul
did mean there, by this word ( one) not one only, but the first, or chief
Baptism, and so should have eluded or mocked away all that could be alleged
against them.

Again, Objection. Luke 24. Ioh. 20.
they do allege that which is written, both in Luke and John, that is to
say: how Marie Magdalene did come unto the Sepulcher, upon one of the Sabbath
days. There, say they, one, is taken, not for one only, but for the first:
so that upon one of the Sabbothes, is as much, as if one should say, on the
first day after the Sabbath. Why may it not be so taken in Paul? Answer.
Forsoothe I do confess and grant, that both in Luke and John, this word,
vnus, one, is taken for first, Mark this well.
but it is by reason of a Genitive case, that both the Evangelists do add
unto it, that is to say: Sabbati, or Sabbatorum, but saint Paul uses no
such manner of speaking, but says plainly: 1. Tim. ^.
vnus deus, vnus mediator dei and hominum, Jesus Christus, that is to say:
There is one God, and one Mediator of God and men, that man Jesus Christ. He
says not that our Savior Jesus Christ, is one of the Mediators: but that,
as there is one God, so there is one Mediator of God and men, which is the
only begotten son of God, our Savior Jesus Christ.

And verily, if we look narowly upon their sayings, and doctrines, we shall
find that they will not only have more Mediators, Christ is not the chief
mediator by the papists doctrine.
and Advocates, then christ: but also, that christ our savior is not the
first, or chief Mediator, but that he is only next after the first. For as,
vno Sabbatorum, in one of the Sabbothes, does signify the first, or next day
after the Sabbath: so after their opinion, vnus mediator, shall be as much as
next after an other: And so Christ shall not be the first Mediator between
God and men, but next after the first: what a detestable blasphemy is this,
against the only begotten son of God?

As for the words of the Euangeliste saint John, where he says, ^. John.
2. Objection.
that we have an Advocate with the father, they say plainly, that we can not
prove by them, that Christ is our Mediator, and Advocate only. For, say
they, as it were a foolish argument, to reason on this manner: Saint Peter is
an Apostle, Ergo saint James is none; so, were it a fond reason, if we
should say: Christ is our Mediator: Ergo, the virgin Marie, and the
saints, be not our Advocates and Mediators.

Answer.
Now let us see, how abominably they do peruerte the scriptures, and word
of God. Saint John says not, Christ is our Advocate: ^. John. 2.
but we have an Advocate with the father. They say, that our reasons and
arguments are foolish: but I will show, that theirs are most childishe.
Were it a good argument to say: We have a Queen of England, that is to say,
Elizabeth the first: Ergo, such a one is Queen? All the world does see,
that such consequences, and conclusions were naught* even so, to say: we have
an advocate with the father; Jesus Christ the righteous: Ergo, the virgin
Marie, and the Saints, be our advocates, is a very naughty and foolish
argument. For, the conclusion, or consequence of it, can in nowise be good.

Now, to say: Saint Peter is an Apostle, Ergo, saint James is none, that
were against all reason, sith that we are certified by the scriptures, and
word of God, that saint James is as well an Apostle, as saint Peter is. But
where have they in all the whole body of the Bible, that the virgin Marie,
and other Saints, are appoincted to be our Mediators, and Advocates?

Yea, say they again, it ought to be no marvel, if we do attribute that
unto the virgin Marie, Objection.
and other Saints, which does parteine only unto Christ. For, we find
in the scriptures, that one thing is attributed both to God, and unto the
creatures, though it be not after one manner and sort, as when our savior
Christ does say, John. 8. Matthew. 5.
in the Gospel of John: I am the light of the world, yet notwithstanding, in
the Gospel of Matthewe, he says also to his Apostles: Ye are the light of
the world: Again, saint Paul writes these words: Other foundation can no
man lay, then that which is laid, 1. Cor. 3.
which is Jesus Christ, here he does appoinct Christ, to be the only
foundation of the Christian faith, and of all godly doctrine, Ephe. 2^.
and yet in an other place he says: Ye are citizens with the Saints, and of
the household of God, and are builte upon the foundation of the Prophets, and
Apostles. And in the Apocalipse of John, Revel. 21.
we read that the wall of the new city, has twelve foundations, and in
them, the names of the twelve Apostles. Here do we see (say they) that Christ
is called the light of the world, and yet notwithstanding, the Apostles are
called the light of the world also. Likewise, we see, that christ is called
the foundation, and yet notwithstanding, the Apostles are called foundations
also: why should not then the virgin Marie, and the saints be called
Advocates, Mediators, and intercessours, as well as our Savior Christ,
though, it be not after one sort and manner? Why ought men to be offended, if
following the phrase of the scriptures, we do attribute unto the blessed
virgin Marie, and unto the other Saints, the office of mediation, and
intercession?

As for the first, Answer.
it is to be understood, that our heavenly father, and his son Christ
Jesus our Lord, have many times of their special grace, communicated, or
given that name unto men, that did not properly pertain unto them, not for to
say, that they were so in very deed, and of their own nature, but by reason
of some office and dignity, that God did put them in: also to the end that
they should have their office in greater estimation, as it does manifestely
appear, by the example of Christ, and of his Apostles, which they do
commonly allege. For, our savior Christ is the true and natural light of the
world: but the Apostles are the light of the world, why the apostles were
called light.
only by the denomination, or communication, that is to say: the Apostles
were not called the light, but only because that they were lightened, and
delivered from darkness, by the light of our savior Christ. And for this
cause the holy Apostle does call the Christians, light, when he says: Ye
were in times paste darkness, Ephe. 5.
but now ye are light in the Lord. Now, our savior Christ lighteneth no man,
but only to this end, that he should shine unto other with good works, as he
him self sufficiently declares, Matthew. 5.
saying: Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your father which is in heaven.

Also, Christ does give this name to his Apostles, because of the office that
he called them unto, which was the preaching of his holy Gospel, and of the
word of God, which in the scriptures is called light. After the same manner,
Magistrates, Kings and rulers, Psalm. 119. Iere. 20. Iere. 23. Exodus 7. Ioh. 19.
are in the Scriptures called gods, not because they are so in deed, or that
such a name does properlye pertain unto them: but because of the dignity,
that GOD has placed them in, and also to the end, that the subictes should
have their princes, in greater reverence, being obedient unto them, as unto
God. But when god does take away this office from them, he does also take
away the name. In like manner now, the apostles are no more light: For, they be
no more in place, where they can shine unto men by good works, they be no more
in the office of preaching. I would feign that these great learned doctors
should show me a place in all the scriptures, wherein the wisdom of the
Father, our savior Christ, or the angels and apostles did ever give, either
unto the virgin Marye, or unto any of the saints, the name or office of
mediator, intercessour* and advocate: then would I say, that their
distinction might take place, but no such place can they show, though they
should break their hearts.

As for the place that they do aleadge out of the Epistle to the Ephesians, it
is plain enough and needs no exposition at all. For if we look narowly upon
the words of Saint Paul, we shall find, that he does not say, Ye are built
upon the Prophets and Apostles: Ephe. 2*
but are builte upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. The Apostles
then and Prophets, were not the foundation, but they had all one foundation,
which is our Savior Jesus Christ, upon whom, as upon a sure and strong
rock, they both builded the Church of God. Revel. 22.
And in the Revelation of John, by the twelve foundations, wherein the names of
the Apostles are written, are all the Sermons that the twelve Apostles did make
unto the twelve tribes of Israel to be understood. And they be called
foundations, because that by them Christ our savior, who is the only
foundation of the Church of GOD, 1. Cor. 3. Ephe. 2.
was preached unto them: because, I say that by them, the true and only
foundation, which is our savior Christ, was laid. Saint John does not say,
that the Apostles are foundations: but that their names be written in the
foundations: Whereby it appears plainly enough, that all that our Louanian
papists go about, is to paruerte the true sayings and meaning of the sacred
scriptures and word of God. Yea though it were so, that they could prone by
the places, by them alleged, that the Apostles were called foundations, yet it
would help them nothing: For, as it has been said already before, we do
not find in all the whole body of the Scriptures, that either God, our savior
Christ, or his Apostles, did ever call the Saints, intercessours, advocates,
or mediators between God and men.

Therefore I say again, that we need no such distinctions as they do make,
to the utter blasphemyng of the only begotten Son of God, our savior Jesus
Christ, whom I do steadfastly believe, to be the only mediator between God
and us, as the Scriptures do plainly testify unto us in every place.

Some there be among them, which being compelled by the Scriptures, Obiecttion.
to confess that our Savior Christ is the only mediator between God and
men, are wont to replye on this manner, and to say: that although christ our
savior, is an omnisufficient mediator between God and man, yet we must have
some intercessours, advocates, and mediators between him and us. For, how
durst we else, being sinners, come before his presence, or direct our prayers
unto him? Is it not written that God hears not sinners? John. 9.
Moreover, when we have a matter before any earthly Prince, must we not have
mediators for to bring us unto his person: The similitude that our papists
do bring for to maintain their idolatry.
And also to speak and entreat for us? Who of us all durst be so bold to
come unto an earthly king, without such means? that is to say: not being
brought to him, either by some of his Counsel, or by some of his Chaumber, or
else by some of his Lords or Gentlemen? How dare we then to be so bold, to
come without intercessours, advocates, and mediators, unto him that is King of
all Kings, Prince of all Princes, and Lord of all Lords? In comparison of
whom, all the Princes of the world are nothing. But who can be more meet, for
to bring us unto him, and also for to speak and entreat for us, then the
blessed virgin Marie his mother, then his holy Apostles and Martyrs, which
have all shed their blood for the maintenance of his truth. 1. Reg. 2.
Do we not read that Adoniah did send Bethsabe unto Solomon her son, for
to entreat for him? Again, when Absalon was fled, 2. Sam. 14.
by reason of the shameful murder that he had committed, was not he
reconciled again unto King David his father, by the means of Ioab, the chief
Captain of the Kings army, and by the wise talk of a woman of Thecua? Be
not these sufficient examples, for to prove that we ought not to come unto
Christ, who is such a mighty king, and whom we offend so many ways,
without intercessours, advocates, and mediators?

Answer.
These be the gaie painted reasons, wherewith they dasell the eyes of the
ignorant people. Which seem at the first to be of some importance and
weight, but if they be duly examined and tried with the touchestone of Gods
word, they shall be found to be mere deceytes. But, or I proceed any further,
What is the chief mark that the papists do shoot at.
I will show what their intent is* and that the chief and principal mark that
they shoot at, is, to make themselves intercessours, advocates, and mediators
betwixt the saints and us. For, if we be once brought into that belief, that
we may not come unto Christ, nor direct our prayers unto him, except we have
the Saints for our mediators, advocates, and intercessours: we shall also
at length suffer our selves to be persuaded, that we are not worthy to pray
our selves unto the saints, but that we must have Monks, Freers, Nonnes, and
Priests for to be mediators betwixt them and us. And for this cause (as we
see daiely by experience) does the poor simple, and ignorant people, bring
Gold and Silver unto them, even as they that have any thing to do in the
Law, be wont to offer gifts and presents unto Lawyers, for to have their
matter to be discussed and heard.

Whereby we may know and see, The covetousness of priests, is the mother of
all idolatry.
what the offpryng and original of the invocation of Saints is. And that the
covetousness of Priests, is the mother and Nurce of all Idolatry and
superstition. I do not deny but that we have a commandment to pray one for
a another, whiles we are yet in this life, 1. Tim. 2.
but yet we ought not to make marchaundise of our prayers, or to think that
they can have any effect, Matthew. 23. 1. Tim. 6.
but only by the intercession of our Savior Jesus Christ, or that we must
direct them to any other, but to him only, for to have them offered unto the
father. For, we have neither commandment nor example in all the Scriptures,
that we should direct our prayers unto dead Saints. For, it might be, that
we should call upon many, whom, we know not whether they be Saints or not,
or whether they be in Heaven, or in Hell. But we are sure that our Savior
Christ is in heaven.

Again, although we were never so sure that they be in Heaven, August. de
spiri. and anima. cap. 29.
yet can no man tell, whether they know what we do here in this world or not:
whether they hear us, and be able to help us or not. Esai. 63.
For, we learn rather the contrary in the Scriptures then otherwise. But he
whom we ought to direct our prayers unto, must have all these properties, yea,
we must be assured and certified in our consciences, that he has them: What
properties must be in him that we must pray unto.
else we shall never be quiet in our minds. First, he must be of power and
ableness to help and aid us: I mean, to grant us our petition and request.
For what should it avail unto us to pray unto one, that were not able to
help and aid us. Secondly, he must be willing to help, aid, and Ioh. 14.
Hebre. 7.


Truly, I would feign know of them, why we should be more afraied to come
unto Christ, then unto any other. Is there any that is mightier, and wiser, or
more bounteous, and merciful then he is? He bids all come to him, that be
heavy laden, Matthew. 11.
and he will refreshe them, and ease them: Shall one sins let us to come unto
him? Yes forsoothe, say they. For, it is written, Objection.
that God hears not sinners: But Christ is true and natural God, John. 9.
Ergo, sith that we are sinners, he will not hear us, except we have some
intercessours and mediators, to speak, and entreat for us.

Because that they have always in their mouths, Answer.
this saying of the blind man, whom being thus borne, Christ had made to see,
I would wish all men, to mark diligently, all the circumstaunces of the
place, The place of the ninth of John expounded.
out of the which they allege this saying: for, there they shall see, that the
Scribes and Pharisees, went about to persuade the poor blind man, whom our
savior Christ had made to see, that Christ was a despiser of God, and of his
holy Laws and ordinances, and that therefore he was not of God. This poor
seely soul then, in the defense of our Savior Christ, did bring in this
saying: God hears not sinners. As if he should have said: if he that has
healed me, were such an ungodly person, as ye would make him: that is to
say, a despiser of God, and of his holy statutes and ordinances, then would
not God have heard him: but GOD did hear him, and did make me, who was borne
blind from my mothers womb, to see by the means of him: therefore, he is no
such abominable sinner as ye would make him.

Whereby we may gather, that there be two manner of sinners: Two manner of
sinners.
some there be, that be obstinate sinners, which do most ungodly despise,
both God and his works, and also contemn his laws, and statutes: of such
does the blind man speak in that place. For, in deed, God will not hear
them that have his sacred word, his holy institutions and ordinances in a
contempt: and daily deliteth more and more in filthy wickedness and sin.
Some again there be, that sin of frailenesse, but yet they do not abide
obstinately in their sins: they fear and dread God, they have his laws,
ordinances, and institutions in reverence: Therefore* when so ever they flee
unto the Lord with true repentance, vnfe^ned confession of their sins, and
amendment of life, taking hold by faith upon his mercy, declared unto us in
his son Jesus Christ: they are heard by and by, and received into the favor
of God, and into the number of his children. We have the Publicane for an
example, Luke 18.
which without all doubt, when he did pray, was an abominable sinner. But
because that his prayer did proceed from a true repentaunt heart, though he
had then no mediator at all, he was heard, and went home again being
justified, as the truth himself does testify.

Luk 15.
Again, the prodigal son, when he should come home again to his father,
whom he had offended so many ways, whose substance he had wasted amongst
whores and harlots: he did not come to any of his fathers friends, desiryng
them to make intercession for him, neither went he to his eldest brother, whom
he knew to be in great favor with his father, but did straightway come to
his father, saying: Father I have sinned against heaven, and in thy sight, and
am no more worthy to be called thy son. Was he put back, because of his
abominable offenses that he had committed against his father? No such thing
do we find in the Scriptures, but rather, as soon as his father saw him, he
had compassion on him, he ran and fell on his neck, Luke 23.
and kissed him: what shall we say of the thief that hong on a Cross by
Christ, was he not all laden with sins, when he said unto Christ, Lord
remember me, Matthew. 27.
when thou come into thy kingdom? yet his detestable murders and robberies
notwithstanding, he was heard: Christ our Savior, making him a faithful
promise that he should be with him that day in Paradise.

These examples do sufficiently teach us, that we ought not to be afraid by
reason of our sins, to come unto our Savior Christ, but rather, that we
ought by reason of them, to seek most earnestly unto him, who does call
sinners unto him saying: Matthew. 11. Matthew. 9.
Come unto me, all ye that labor and are laden, and I will refreshe you.
Does not he say himself, that he came not for the righteous, but for the
sinners sake: that he ^ame not for them that were whole, but for them that
were sick? They that go about to pluck us away from him, are like unto the
Scribes and Pharisees, Luke 1^.
which were offended, and did grudge and murmr because that Christ kept
company with sinners and Publicanes. And they that be afraid or ashamed to
come unto him, are like unto those sick persons that be afraid to come unto
the Phisician, or ashamed to show unto him their disease and sickness. John.
13.
They are also like unto Peter, who was ashamed that Christ should wash his
feet, though it was so, that without it, he could have no part in his
kingdom: or which did bid him to depart from him, saying: Lord go from
me, for, I am a sinful man, whereas he should rather have desired him, Luke
^.
and besought him, to tarry still in his company, that so he might have been
delivered from his sins, which did then press his conscience, and made him
to be in such a fear.

Let us have still before our eyes, the poor seely woman that had the
blooddie flixe, Matthew. ^. Mark. 5.
which did spend all her substance upon Physicians, and yet she could not be
helped, but rather her disease did wax worse and worse, till she came to our
Savior Christ, the true Physician both of souls and bodies. Chrysostom,
Chrisost. de muliere Cananee. Hom. 12.
speaking of the woman of Cananee, writes on this manner: Tell me, O woman,
since that thou art a wicked and a sinful woman how durst thou go unto him? I
know, says she, what I do. Behold the wisdom of the woman, she prays
not unto James, she does not entreat John, she goes not unto Peter, she did
not get her self to the company of the Apostles, she sought for no mediator,
but for all these things, she took penance for her companion, which did
fulfill the room and place of an advocate, and she did go to the high
fountain.

Again, if thou will pray or entreat man, thou do ask what he does, In
eadem Homilia.
and it is told thee that he is a sleep, or that he has no leisure, or
peradventure the servant shall disdain to make thee an answer: But to God,
we have no need of these things: but wheresoever thou art, and do call
upon him, he hears thee. There is no need of a porter, of a mediator, or
minister: say only: Lord have mercy upon me. And in another place: Chrisost.
Ho. de perfectu Euangeli^.
We have no need of Advocates with God (says he) nor of any runnyng or
gadding about, for to speak fair unto other. For, although thou be alone, and
without an advocate, and pray unto God by thy self, thou shall obtain thy
peticions.

There does this holy doctor and father bring in, the example of the woman of
Cananee, for to prove that we shall sooner be heard, when we pray our selves,
then when other do pray for us. Hereunto may I add the saying of saint
Augustine, which is this: Non enim ad creaturam iubemur tendere, vt efficiamur
beati, August. de libero arbitrio lib. 3. cap. 21.
sed ad ipsum creatorem, de quo si aliud, quam oportet ac sese res habet, nobis
persuadetur perniciosissimo errore decipimur. That is to say: We are not
commanded to go unto the creatures, that we may be blessed, or obtain
blesfulnes: but unto the creator, of whom, if we be otherwise persuaded then
the matter is, or then it behooves, we are deceived with a most pernicious
error. These words do plainly declare unto us, that if we will be blessed*
that is to say: if we will be justified before God, and obtain free remission
of our sins, we must not go to any creatures, but unto the Creator himself:
and that if we be made otherwise to believe of him, then it is, we are in a
pernicious error. But are we not made to believe otherwise of him then it is,
when we are taught that he is unmerciful, and that he will not hear us,
though his son makes intercession for us, except we have other advocates
and intercessours besides him? Uerely, if we do believe it, or seek to come
unto him by any other means, then by his only begotten son Jesus Christ our
Savior, we are wrapped in a most pernicious error. For, leauyng the sure way
that God himself has appointed unto us, Ioh. 14. Acts. 5.
for to come unto him, and unto the seat of his mercy, we follow the
perilous way of our own inventions and dreams. ^^re. 4.
If this be not to go out of the way, I can not tell, what it is to go out of
the way.

But now let us come to the examples that they do bring, for to prove their
goodly similitude withal. Adoniah, say they, did send Bethsabe unto her son
Solomon for to entreat for him: 1. Reg. 2.
may we not likewise desire the blessed virgin Marie, to pray unto her son
Jesus Christ for us? Forsoothe if Adoniah had a brotherly heart toward his
brother Solomon, he should not have needed to send Bethsabe unto him: but he
might have gone himself, and been welcome. All that he went about, was by some
traiterous mean, to put down his brother from the crown, that he might make
him self king. It is no marueyle then, that he durst not come him self to his
brother Solomon: since that he had conceived such treason against him. But
what was the end of this mediation? Bethsabe did not so soon speak for him,
but Solomon did straight ways command to strike of his head. Use that
example who will for me, it is not very wholesome for the neck.

As for Absalon, it is no marvel that he did seek to be reconciled by the
means of Ioab. 2. Sam. 14.
For; he knew that his fathers wrath, and indignation against him, was not
yet pacified: but we being justified by faith, are at peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5.
which died for us, when we were yet sinners: much more then, seeing we are
reconciled, and have by the means of him received the atonement, Romans 8.
we shall be preserved by his life. We need not then in all our trouble and
affliction, to flee unto any other, then unto him that has made this
atonement. Moreover, though Ioab did obtain, that the kings son should be
brought home again: Yet was there still such rancour in David's heart, that he
would not see him in two or three years after. Ezech. 18.
But we have a promise, that when soever we repent our selves of our sins,
from the bottom of our hearts, our sins shall be put out of remembrance, they
shall be no more thought upon.

Sith then, that the graunde captain of the Lords armies, who is our
savior Jesus Christ, which has foughten that good fight, has made so sure
an attonemente betwixt his father and us: we will hold our selves unto him
only, as unto an omnisufficient mediator between God and us: who, least we
should for conscience of sin, be afraied to come boldly unto him, does
most louyngly and mercifully, call us all unto him, Matthew. 11.
saying: Come unto me all ye that labor and are laden, and I will refreshe you.

Now, will I come to the similitude it self. If we have (say they) any matter
to an earthly king or prince of the world, The similitude of the papists is
discussed.
we may not come to his person without means: some of his lords or gentlemen
must bring us unto him, and also speak and entreat for us: in like manner,
we may not come to God, or to his only begotten son Jesus Christ our
Lord, without mediators, intercessors, and advocates: And what should these
be but the blessed virgin Marie, and the holy Saints of heaven? First,
they do great wrong and injury unto God, when they do liken him unto an
earthly prince or tyrant of the world: For, the causes why we may not come
unto the princes, and rulers of earth, when soever we would, without mediators
or means, can not be found in him, nor yet in him son Jesus Christ our
Lord: And therefore this similitude, can help their matter nothing at all.

The princes, and rulers of the earth, if they be good, and lovers of equity
and justice, they have many enemies that do daiely conspire their death. And
therefore, is not lawful for every man that would, for to come bluntly unto
them, least under a pretensed matter, they should be traitorously murdered
and slain. Again, if they be cruel and blooddie tyrauntes, they be always
in fear of them selves, and will scarcely suffer their lords and peers, to
come unto them without searchyng whether they have any weapons about them,
or not: much less that any poor man, should have any access unto them, for
to declare his suite. But no such thing can there be found in our heavenly
king and lord, For, dwelling in heaven above, he laugheth all his enemies to
scorn, and has them all that rise against him, Psalm. 2.
and against his anointed our savior Jesus Christ, in plain derision.
Again, he is so far from all crudelitie and tyranny, that he does most
louyngly call all poor wretched sinners unto him, Matthew. 11. Luke 14.
being ready at all times, to ease them of the heavy burden of their sins.

But let us grant that there is some earthly king, that is without all fear
of treason, and which is so benign and gentle, that he will suffer al men
that will, to come unto him, and to declare boldly their suites unto him: yet
can not he hear all matters and suites at once. And therefore all men may not
come to him when they would, but must be brought or let in, by them that know
when the prince is at leisure to hear their causes: Else he should be
ouercharged with the multitude of suitors: But the Lord our God is able to
hear all men's matters at once, though they call upon him all in one instant,
Matt. 6. Psalm. 13^.
or minute of an hour. Yea, he knows what they need, before they ask, or
make any petition or prayer unto him. Also the prince is a mortal man, and
occupies a local place, and can not be in all places at once, to hear the
peoples suites and matters, and therefore it is needful for them to have
soliciters, and mean makers to the king, by his officers, to have their
matters heard and discussed. But GOD our heavenly king, 2. Chro. 2. Esai. 66.
Iere. 23. Psalm. 139. Acts. 7.
is in all places at one time, and hears all their matters, and as we have
said, knows all their needs, before they make their peticion.

All these things being well considered, it is easy to perceive, that their
similitude is not worth a rushe, to pike ones teethe, for to establishe their
Idolatrous invocation of dead Saints. I do now remember a goodly saying of
saint Ambrose, which serves very well for this purpose. Amb. in epist. ad.
Romans ca. 1.
They (says he) being ashamed that they have neglected God, are wont to use
a very poor excuse, saying: that they may by them come unto God, as we come
unto a king by his capitaines and lords. But go to: is there any man so mad,
or which forgets his welfare so much, that he will give the honor of the
king, unto any captain or lord? Sith that if any be found to go about any
such matter, they are by the law condemned as traitors? And these folks do
not think them selves guilty, if they give the honor of the name of God unto
a creature, and if leauyng the Lord, they worship their fellow servants, as
though there were some greater thing, that could be reserved to God. For, we
do therefore come unto the king by his Lords, because forsoothe that the king
is a man, and knows not, unto whom he may commit the common weal: But,
Hebre. 4. Psalm. 14. Psalm. 139.
for to get the favor of God, from whom nothing is hidden (for, he knows all
men's merits) we have no need of a mediator, or intreatour, but of a devout
mind.

But now will I bring in a similitude, which has a sure foundation, The
similitude of the papists, is overthrown by another.
and ground in the holy Scriptures, and sacred word of God, which shall
quite overthrow theirs. For, why? It is only grounded upon the imaginations,
and dreams of their own heads. What, if there were a king benign, gentle,
merciful, and bounteous, that he would make an act, or proclamation, whereby
he should exhort his subjects, that if any among the^ had any matter or suite,
they should all boldly without mediators, or means come unto him, promising
that he would hear them, and deliver them from their troubles and adversities,
and from the hands of them that do oppress them: would not al men by that
act or proclamation, take a wonderful boldness to come unto the king him
self? Who, except he were stark mad, or did mistrust the kings
proclamation, would seek for any mediators or means, for to have access unto
so bounteous a prince?

But we have a most sure act, and proclamation, which is enacted, and made in
that most holy, glorious, and sacred counsel of the blessed trinity, Matthew.
11.
whereby we are exhorted, bidden, and commanded to come boldly unto him, who
alone is able to heal all our infirmities, and to deliver us from all
troubles, and adversities, be they never so great, and our enemies never so
mighty. First, the father does set forth this comfortable Proclamation unto
us, saying: Call upon me in the day of trouble, Psalm. 50.
so will I hear thee, and thou shall glorify me. Here we are not only
exhorted, bidden, and commanded to call upon God in the day of trouble, but
also we have a promise, that if we do it, we shall be heard and delivered: who
then being in trouble, would not come boldly unto God, and call upon him with
a good, and sure confidence, sith that it is his blessed will, pleasure,
biddyng, and commandment (whereunto he has added so comfortable a promise)
that we should do so?

In the Prophet Jeremy he, cries out, saying: Ye shall call upon me, Iere.
2^.
and I shall hear you, being then so louynglie called, let us come unto the
seat of his mercy, with a steadfast trust and hope, Hebr. 4. James. ^.
that we shall be heard. But whom I pray you would not that sweet Proclamation,
which his only begotten son, our savior Jesus Christ, does make unto all
repentaunte sinners, encourage exceedyngly? Come unto me (says he) all ye
that labor, Matthew. 11.
and are laden, and I shall refresh you. John. 16.
And in an other place: Uerely, verily, I say unto you, what soever ye shall
ask my father in my name, he will give it you. Does not the eternal, and
heavenly wisdom of the father speak these words? Even he which can not
lie, which can not deny him self? why should we then be afraied to come unto
him? Or what need have we to seek for any Mediators, Hebre. 7.
advocates, or intercessours, for to make any intercession for us, sith that
he does call us so gently unto him, bindyng him self, and his promises with an
oath, which can never be broken?

Also the holy ghost, John. 15.
who proceedyng from them both, is the third person in the blessed Trinity,
does set forth unto us a very comfortable edicte, or proclamation, when he
says by the mouth of the holy Prophet David: The Lord is nigh unto all
them, Psalm. 34. Psalm. 144.
that call upon him in truth. And in an other place: who soever calls upon
the name of the Lord, he shall be saved: Joel. 2. Romans 10.
Here have we the most sure, and infallible proclamations of the father, of
the son, and of the holy ghost, whereby we are most louyngly and
mercifully called, unto the mercy seat of almighty God, and also assured
that we shall be heard, when soever we do call upon him in faith, through
our only mediator and advocate, Jesus Christ our Lord. Is it not then a
manifest sign and token, that we do not steadfastly believe the promises of
GOD, nor trust in his mercy, James. 4.
whereof we are assured in his truth, when we do direct our prayers to any
other then unto him, Romans 10.
or when we seek for other means to come unto him, then he him self has
appoincted in his holy Scriptures? Read all the whole body of the scriptures
throughout, from the one end to the other, and ye shall not find, that ever
the Patriarchs, Prophets, or Apostles, did pray to any other Mediator,
Intercessour, or Advocate, but only unto God a lone. For, there is no other
Mediator that can be found, and appoincted unto us, besides that blessed
seed of Abraham, our savior Christ Jesus. Genesis 22.


For, Objection.
whereas they do allege, that it is read in the scriptures, that the
Aungelles do some time pray for the elect people of God, and also that they
do offer our prayers before the Lord: Answer.
That same makes nothing for their purpose, except they could prove, that the
Saints be ministryng spirits, sent to minister for their sakes, which
shall be heirs of Salvation, Hebr. 1.
or that they be appoincted to wait upon us, as the Angels are, Psalm. 91.
which have a charge given them over us, to keep us in all our ways: yea, and
also to encampe round about them that fear the Lord. Psalm. 34.
And this ministry and office of theirs, because that they be immortal,
shall continue as long as there be any men abidyng here upon the earth: that
is to say, until the number of the children of God be fulfilled: But as for
the saints, it goes otherwise with them. For, as they are bound, whiles
they be yet in this life, to do those things that pertain to their vocation,
according to the office that God has called them unto: So when they have once
performed their course, and are at rest with God, they have no more to do with
the living: their ministry and office is at an end, and if they make any
prayer unto GOD, Revel. 6.
it is, that their blood may be avenged on them that dwell on the earth,
desiryng that the number of their fellows and brethren may be fulfilled and
that the glorious kingdom of God being come, they may receive their glorified
bodies, Matthew. 6.
which now lie in the earth, till the general resurrection of all flesh. I
do not doubt but that they do wish us good, Luke 16.
and are very desirous to have us in their blessed fellowship, for as much as
they are members of the same body that we are of. Hebre. 11.


But to say, that they know our necessities, or that they hear our
particular vows and prayers, and offer them unto god: It is a mere invention
of men. For we have not one only jot in holy Scriptures, that does certify
us of it. And as touching their goodly shift, which being wholly destitute of
the scriptures and word of God, they use commonly, saying: That the dead
saints, The shi^tes of the foolish papists.
do see and behold in the brightness of the divine countenance of God, that
shines upon them as it were in a bright glass, all the necessities,
conflictes, and troubles of men: because that it is only grounded upon the
vain fantasy of worldly wisdom, it ought not to take place, in such a
weighty matter as this is.

But they are also wont to allege a place out of the Revelation, for to prove
that the saints do know, all that is done here in this world, Revel. 14.
because that the Apostle says there: And they followed the Lamb, wheresouer
he goes. These words say they, do sufficiently declare, that the Saints
are every where with the Lamb: If they be every where with him, then do they
know all things. And hereunto be they wont to add the saying of saint
Hierome, who expoundyng these words, Hieroni. cont. Vigilantiu^.
says on this manner: If the Saints do follow our Lord every where, and he
is every where, and in all places: then we must believe, that they that are
with our Lord, be every where also: not locally, but by a celeritie or
quickenesse that they have, to perceive that which God will have them to
know.

As touching the place that they do aleadge out of the revelation of John:
Answer.
it serves nothing for their purpose. For, the hundredth four and forty
thousands, that follow the Lamb wheresouer he goes, do signify all true
faithful christians which follow Christ: that is to say, which do frame
their living and conversation after his example: and do endeavor themselves in
all their doings to follow his holy and blessed commandments, 1. Pet. ^. 1.
Pet. 1. Coloss. 3.
mortifiyng their bodies, and offering them a lively sacrifice unto almighty
God, the father of our savior Jesus Christ. Romans 12.
But we must mark that saying of Saint Hierome at the end of his
exposition, he does add, that the saints are in all places, not locally, but
by a celeritie or swiftnes that they have, Note.
to understand and perceive that, which God will have them to know: Now do I
deny that it is the will and pleasure of God, to show unto the dead Saints,
what is done here in this world. And ^yll they have proved by the Scriptures,
that God will have the dead saints to know all that is done here amongst us,
I will by the grace of god abide still in the same opinion: But I know that
they shall never be able to do it.

Saint Augustine shall answer Hierome and them both: when he says these
words: August. de spiritu and anima. cap. 26.
Vbi siquidem sunt spiritus defu^^^^rum, vbi non vident neque audiunt, quae
aguntur an revenium iuist^ vita hominibus, ita tamen est eis cura de viuis,
quanquam quid agant omnino nesciant, quemadmodum nobis cura est de mortuis,
quamui^ quid agant vtique nesciamu: That is to say in english: the souls of
the dead are there, where they do neither see, neither hear, what is dooen or
happens to men in this life, such care is with them for the living, that
they are utterly ignorant what they do (here in the earth) as our care is for
the dead, which know not what they do: whose words are very plain, and
need no exposition at all.

But put the case they could prove that the saints knowing our necessities,
do pray for us, yet it should not follow, that we ought to pray to them, or
to make them our intercessours and advocates, since that we have no such
commandment in the scriptures, nor yet is there any example, either of the
Patriarchs, Prophets, or the Apostles of our Savior Jesus Christ. Zach. 1.
Revel. 8.
The Scriptures do certify us, in certain places, that the Angels do pray
for the elect people of GOD, and that they do also offer our prayers unto him:
yet ought we in no wise to pray unto them. For why? they can do nothing but
that, that God commands them to do: yea nothing will they do, without his
commandment.

Therefore, if we will have them to aid and assiste us, we must direct our
prayers, unto god alone, desiring and beseching his divine majesty that he
vouchesafe to command his holy Angels to aid and succor us in all our
necessities and troubles. And then the blessed Angels, having a commandment
or commission of God, for to do it, will most gladly and most diligently
assiste and help us, but we may not desire God, to comaunde the dead Saints
to do the same: because that they be not appointed and ordained thereto, as
the angels are. The dead saints have performed their course. For, unto men it
is not given of God, to help one another, but only in this life present,
whiles they be yet in this transitory world, which thing saint Paul does
well declare, saying:

Galat. 6.
Whiles we have time, let us do good to all men. Ye see, that Saint Paul
says, dum tempus habemus, whiles we have time: as if he should say, GOD
has appointed none other time unto us, for to help one another, but only
this present life. James. 5.
Saint James says also: pray one for another: that ye may be saved.
Whereby God does command us two things. The one is, that we should pray
one for another, that is to say, Mark this well.
that we should pray for them that pray for us: Therefore if the saints
should pray for us, we should also be bound to pray for them, but to say
that we must pray for the dead Saints, it is to do the Saints great
injury and wrong. For, it is written in their own Canon laws, Iniuriam facit
Martyri, qui orat pro Martyr: That is to say, he does wrong unto a Martyr
that prays for a Martyr. Secondly, we are commanded to pray one for another,
that we may be saved: that is to say, whiles we are yet in the way of
salvation, that we may come to our ways end. It appears by this, that it
is not the will of God that we should pray one for another, but only whiles
we are in this world, that so we may exercise the works of charity, whiles
we have time as it is said before. An other place do they allege out of
Jeremy, Objection.
which is this.

Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, Iere. 15.
yet have I no heart to this people. Why, say they, should Jeremiah speak so
of the dead, except be knew that they did make intercession for the living? I
may a great deal better reason after this manner: Answer.
Since that neither Moses nor Samuel did pray for the people of Israel, it
appears that there was then no intercessour of the dead. For, who of all the
Saints should have taken thought for the people, if Moses did not, who in
this thing did exceed and pass all men, whiles he did live? Therefore, thus I
say, I might make my argument against them: In the extreme necessity of the
people, Moses did make no intercession for them. It is most likely the^, that
none at al did make intercession for them, since that Moses did pass all men
in humanity, gentleness, and mercy.

The meaning of the Prophet then is this: What was the meaning of the prophet.
that God was so offended with the people, that he would not spare them,
though Moses and Samuel, whose prayers he was want to hear above all other,
should make intercession for them. The like in a manner have we in the Prophet
Ezechiell, Ezech. 14.
where the Lord speaks on this manner: If Noah, Daniell, and Job were in the
City, as truly as I live, they shall deliver neither sons nor daughters,
but save their own souls in their righteousness. As if he should say:
though Noah, Daniell, and Job were then alive again, they should not deliver
their own sons and daughters, but should save only their own lives in
their righteousness: my wrath and indignation is so kindeled against that
stiffenecked people.

And so the before alleged place of Jeremiah ought to be understood. For, the
words are as much, as if he should say: Though Moses and Samuel were now
alive, and should stand before me, making intercession for this people, as
they were wont to do, yet would I not for their sakes withdraw my plagues
from this wicked and froward generation: I would not hear them, nor give
ear unto their prayers, but would in my fury utterly destroy this
rebellious and stiffenecked people. Read and mark diligently the
circumstaunces of both places, and ye shall find that it is the true sense and
meaning of them.

As for the place that they do bring out of Genesis, saying: that Jacob does
pray, Genesis 48.
that his name, and the name of his forefathers, Abraham and Isaac may he
called upon his posterity: It helps their matter nothing at all. What was
the meaning of the Patriarche.
For, the meaning of the holy Patriarche is not, that his posterity should
call upon him, or upon his forefathers, Abraham and Isaac, for help and
succor, but that his posterity might be named after him, and also after
Abraham and Isaac: thereby to declare that the coueuaunt that God had made with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, did parteine unto them. And therefore, whenever
the faithful Israelites did make their prayers unto God, they did always
beseech him, to remember his servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, puttyng him
in remembrance of the couenaunte wherein he had promised, that he would for
Abraham, Isaac, and Iacbos sake, show mercy and favor unto them. But how
little they dystruste in the merits and intercessions of their forefathers, it
is easy to see, in the prophet Esaias, for there the whole Church cries out,
Esai. 63.
saying: Abraham knows us not, neither is Israel acquainted with us: But
thou lord art our father and redeemer. Therefore be at one with us again for
thy Servants sake, that are of the generation of thine heritage.

To be short, whenever they did name in their prayers, their forefathers,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, it was not for any help that they looked to have at
their hands, but for to put God in remembrance of the covenant that he had
made with them, and with their posterity for ever. But now that we have our
Savior Jesus Christ, in whose blood the covenant is both established and
sealed up: In whose name should we set forth or offer up our prayers unto God,
but in his only? Moreover, that same manner of phrase that Jacob did use, is
often times found in the scriptures, Esai. 4.
as when Esaias says: Then shall seven women take hold of one man, and say,
we will lay all our meat and clothyng together in commune. Tantum nomen tuum
innocetur super nos: Only that thy name may be called upon us that is to say,
only let us be called thy wives, or after thy name, that yet it may be said,
that we are such a man's wives.

They be also wont to bring in, Objection.
the dream of Judas Machabeus, which is made mention of in the Machabees,
where it is written that Judas Machabeus did show unto his Soldiers, 2. Match.
1^.
that he had seen in a dream Onias and Jeremiah, holdyng up their hands
toward heaven, and praiyng for the people. Does not this say they, prove
sufficiently, that the dead saints do pray for us? Answer.
First, I do answer that the book, out of the which this place is alleged,
is not authentike nor yet Canonical, as Saint Hierome proves. All men may
see, what authority that book ought to have in things that perteine to our
salvation. 2. Match. 2.
For, first of all, they cannot deny but that it is an abridgement of five
books that one Jason Cireneus had written, which whether he was a Jew or a
gentile, no man is able to tell. For, the book was set out and written in the
Greek tongue and not in the Hebrewe. Moreover, wha^ the holy ghost does set
forth any thing unto us, for an infallible doctrine, ^. Match. 15.
or an undoubted truth, he is not wont to use any excuse, It were stark
madness to ground my doctrine upon a dream.
as the author of this book does. Last of al, what wisdom were it, to
ground any doctrine parteinyng unto the faith, upon a dream? did he not
think also in his sleep, that Jeremy did deliver him a golden swoorde? yet
when he awoke, he had no such thing. I might therefore conclude, that as
Jeremiah did deliver him a golden swoorde: so he with Onias did pray for the
people. But Jeremiah did deliver him no swoorde in deed, but only in a dream.
Whereby it follows, that the prayng of Onias and of Jeremiah was dreamishe
also.

But let us grant that it was so, as Judas Machabeus did dream: yet we do
not read, that Judas Machabeus and his host, did by and by direct their
prayers unto them, or that they did desire them to pray and make intercession
for the hoastes of the Israelites, which should within a while join in
battle with the hoastes of the enemies: But we read that they al prayed with
their Captain unto God, The prayer of Judas Machabeus.
saying: O lord, thou that did send thine Angel in the time of Ezechiah,
king of Judah, and in the host of Sennacherib did slay, an hundred fourscore
and five thousands, send now also thy good Angel before us (O Lord of
Heavens) in the fearefulnes and dread of thy mighty arm, that they which come
against thy holy people to blaspheme them, may be afraid. Here may we see,
that Judas Machabeus, notwithstanding his gaie dream, did trust only in the
Lord, unto whom only, his prayers he directed, and not unto Oniah, nor yet
unto Jeremiah, following in this, the example of all the holy Patriarchs and
Prophets that were before him.

They do so abhominably wreast all the other places of the Scriptures, which
they be wont to allege for the mainteinyng of their Idolatrous invocation of
Saints, that a man will be ashamed to stand in the confutyng of them. The
(...) refuge of the papists.
All their refuge at length, is, that the saints were heard whiles they were
alive. For it is written: Our Fathers called upon thee, and were helped: Psalm.
22.
they trusted in thee, and were not confounded. If say they, they were heard,
when they were yet compassed about with infirmities, how much more are th^^
now heard, being in glory with God?

How much better did the blessed Apostle Saint James reason, Answer.
James. 5.
when he did say, Helias was a man mortal, even as we are, and he prayed in
his prayer, that it might not rain, and it rained not on the earth by the
space of three years and six months? And he prayed again, and the heavens
gave rain. Do we not rather learn by their example, to pray boldly unto
God, though we be compassed about with infirmity as they were, then otherwise?
The holy prophet David, does not say that the fathers were heard, because
that they prayed to any of the Patriarchs that were before them, but because
that they prayed unto God, and trusted in him. The same self lesson does James
give unto us. James. 5.
Let us therefore* follow their examples, Number. 11. Esai. 50. Esai. 59.
and we shall be heard as they were. As the arm of God is not shortened since:
so his mercy is not waxen less. He is as ready now, to hear them that call
upon him in truth and verity, Hebre. 9.
as he was then. Have we not besides all this, a mediator and an advocate, that
appears continually in the sight of God for us? It is impossible then, but
that we shall be heard whenever we call faithfully upon our heavenly Father,
through our only Mediator and Advocate, Jesus Christ our Lord.

The.xxviij. Chapter. How and wherein we ought to honor the Saints.
Now, when they have nothing to say for their inuocations to dead saints,
being convinced by the holy scriptures, they cry out and say: behold these
new preachers dishonors, defaceth, spoileth, and makes none account of the
holy, and blessed saints in heaven: and especially they dishonor the blessed
virgin Marie, the sweet mother of Christ Jesus, to whom was more grace
given, then to any other creature; and makes no more of her, then of another
woman. etc. Belie us not, ye papists, for we give to them that honor as we
are commanded in the holy scriptures to give them. And therefore saint
Cyrill says very truly: Cyrill cont. Iulianu^. lib. 6.
At sanctos Martyrs neque deos esse dicimus, neque adorare consueuimus:
laudamus autem eos potius summis honoribus, quod pro veritate straenue
certarunt, and fidei synceritatem seruarunt: that is to say in English: But
neither we say that the holy Martyrs are Gods, neither have we used to
worship or honor them: but we rather praise them with great reverence, for
that they have striued earnestly for the truth, and have kept the sincerity
of the faith of Christ. August. de vera religio. cap. 55.
And Saint Augustine shows also, how we must honor them, saying:
Honorandi ergosunt propter imitationem, non adorandi propter religionem: The
saints are to be reverenced and worshipped for imitation, (that is, to
follow their godly doings and conversation) and not to honor them for any
religion (to make them our Gods or advocates, and to have our confidence in
them) this kind of honor we give to the saints, and none other.

And whereas you say, there was more grace given to Marie, then to any other
creature, because she was the mother of Christ: Matthew. 12. Romans 8. Galat. 4.
You may also learn in the book of God, to be the child of God, is a
great deal greater grace, then to be the mother of Christ. Therefore saint
Augustine says: Beatior ergo Maria fuit, August. de sancta virgini. cap. 3.
Percipiendo fidem Christi, quam concipiendo carne Christi. Materna
propinquitas nihil Mari^ profuisse^, nisi faelicius Christum cord, quam carne
gestasset: Marie was more blessed, in that she received the faith of Christ,
then in that she conceived the flesh of Christ. Motherly kindrede could have
do Marie no good, unless she had borne Christ, more blessedly in her heart,
then she bare him in her flesh. And in an other place he says: August. in
Ioh. ^^ct. 10.
Matter mea, quam appellastis faelicem, inde felix est, qui^ verbum dei
custodiuit: non quia in illa verbum caro factum est: My mother, whom ye have
called blessed, therefore is blessed, because she has kept the word of God:
not because the word in her was made flesh. Luke 11. Epipha. lib. 3. Haetes.
59. cont. Collyzidian.
Therefore Epiphanius says: Christ said unto his mother, woman, what have I
to do with thee? My hour is not yet come. Lest any man should think our
Lady was of greater excellency, he called her woman: as it were, prophesiyng
of the kinds and sects of heresies that were to come in the world: lest any
man having to great opinion of that holy Saint, should fall into this
heresy, and into the dotage of the same. For in deed the whole matter is but
a mockery, and an old wives tale, and sothely to say, nothing else, Origin i^
Luc. Hom. 25.
but the handelyng of an heresy. Therefore Origene says: Si mensuram
transcenderit charitatis, and qui diligit, and qui diligitur, in peccato est:
If love pass the measure of charity, as well he that loves, as also he that
is loved, is in sin. The said Epyphanius says further: Epipha. lib. 3.
Haeres. 59.
Let no man eat (says he) of this error touching saint Marie, for though
the tree be fair, yet is not this fruit to be eaten. Although Marie be
beautiful, and holy, and honorable, yet is not she to be adoured. But these
women, worshippyng Saint Marie, renew again the Sacrifice of wine, mingled
in the honor of the Gods Fortuna, and prepare a table for the devil, and
not for God, as it is written in the Scriptures: they are fed with the meat
of wickedness. Iere. 44.
And again, their women boult flower: and their children gather sticks to
make fine cakes, in the honor of the Queen of heaven. Therefore, let such
women be rebuked by the Prophet Hieremie, and let them no more trouble the
world. And let them not say, we worship the Queen of heaven. Thus he applied
the words of the Prophet, unto the virgin Marie, being Idolatrously abused
by the heretics called Collyridiani, as she and other Saints are by the
Papists abused now in these days. Collyridiani, were heretics.


This shall now suffice for to prove, that Christ our Savior touching his
manhood which he did take of us, is, and shall be unto the worlds end in
heaven, Hebre. 10. Colloss. 3.
on the right hand of the father, that is to say, in felicity, joy, and
glory, being exalted above the heavens, August. de agone christ* and de fide
and symbolo. Matthew. 28. Phil. 2.
made lord over all creatures, both in heaven and in earth, and having
received a name, that passes all the glory, that man can report? And that as
heaven must hold him, unto the time of the restitution of all things, that
God has spoken, by the mouth of his holy Prophets since the world began
(being nevertheless here among us, Acts. 3.
touching his divinity and godheade, and feedyng us by his eternal spirit,
and by the verity of his holy institution and ordinance, Matthew. 2^.
with the heavenly food of his precious body and blood): so he does appear
always in the sight of God for us, being an omnisufficiente intercessour,
Hebr. 9. 1. Tim. 2. Romans 8. 1. Ioh. 2. Hebr. 7.
advocate, and mediator betwixt God and man, so that we need not, to go
unto any other, for to make intercession for us, sith that God in his holy
scripture and word, does appoincte him to be our only intercessour,
advocate, and mediator, and none other.

The.xxix. Chapter. Of Christ's coming to judgment, in the last day.
And he shall come down to judge both the quick and the dead. Acts. 1. August
ad Darda. Epi. 57. Matthew. 25. 1 Thessalonians. 4. John. 5. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
WHO, in the time appoincted of his father, shall come to judge both the quick
and the dead, even as he was seen to go up, (the Angels testifiyng the same):
that is to say, in the same shape, form, figure, and substance, that he
took of us in the virgins womb, of whom he took his undefiled substance,
and that, being glorified, and endued with immortality, he did carry up into
heaven: He shall come, I say, in his majesty, accompanied with all the holy
Angels, descendyng from heaven with a shoute, and voice of the Archaungell,
and trompe of God. And the dead in Christ, shall arise first, then we which
shall live (even we which shall remain) shall be caught up with them in the
clouds, to meet the Lord in the air. There be many, even among the old
aunciente writers, that by the quick, do understand those, that do live in
glory with Christ: The opinion of many touching ye quick and the dead.
and by the dead, do understand those, that being dead in sin, be also
dead unto God. For, say they, it is not to be thought, that any shall be
found alive: sith that the Apostle does say, that it is appointed unto all
men, Hebre. 9.
that they should once die. But it appears most manifestly, both by the
words of our savior, and also by the words of the Apostle saint Paul,
that at the same present time and hour, that the son of God shall come, for
to judge all flesh, some shall be found alive. For, Christ^ our savior
says: Matthew. 24. Luke 17. Genesis 6.7. Genesis 19.
that as the time of Noe and of Sodom was, so shall the coming of the son
of man be. But who would say that none were alive, when the floode did
suddenly ouerwhelme all the whole face of the earth? Or when GOD did rain fire
and Brimstone, upon the inhabiters of Sodom and Gomorra? If any man would
say so, the plain and manifest scriptures, should reprove him a liar.

Sith then, the coming of our eternal and everlasting judge, How the saying
of S. Paul ought to be understood.
shall be as the time of Noe and of Sodom was, it is to be believed, that we
shall not all sleep. How then shall the saying of the Apostle be fulfilled,
where he does both say, and write, that it is appoincted unto all men, that
they shall once dye? Uerely, the holy Apostle does sufficiently declare him
self, Hebre. 9. 1. Cor. 15.
when he says: Behold, I show you a mystery, we shall not all sleep, but
we shall all be changed, and that in a momente, and in the twinckelyng of an
eye, at the sound of the last Trompe. For, the Trompe shall blow, and the
dead shall arise incorruptible, and we shall be changed: for, this
corruptible, must put on incorruptible, and this mortal must put on
immortality. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
This sudden change and alteration shall be unto us which shall live (even
which shall remain) in steed of death. For, that which in us is
corruptible, shall put on uncorruption, and that which is mortal, shall put
on immortality.

To be short, this transitory life, shall in a moment, and in the twincklyng
of an eye, be changed into a most blessedfull life, which never shall have
end. And of this, have we a most euidente and plain example, Genesis 5. 2. Reg.
2.
both in Enoch, and Elias, which were taken up quick. The true meaning then
of this article (which seems to be taken out of the sermon that Peter made
unto Cornelius: Acts. 10. 2. Tim. 4.
And out of the solemn protestation, that saint Paul uses to his disciple
Timothy) is, that Christ's our Savior shall come again at the last day, The
true meaning of this article*
in his glorified manhood that he took of us, and that he shall judge both
them that he shall find alive here in the earth, and also the dead, I mean,
all those that sleep in their graves, until the general resurrection of all
flesh. John. 5.
For, the father has committed all judgment unto the son, John. 5.
that all men should honor the son, even as the father. Which truly ought
to be very comfortable unto us all, 1. John. 4. John. 20. Luke 21.
and to put away all vain fear from the unquiet and troubled consciences of
the Christians.

For, sith that he shall come to judge us, who of the father is appoincted to
be the Savior and redeemer of all them that put their whole trust and
confidence in him, Romans 2. Hebre. 10. John 3.
seeking only to be saved by the merits of his death, passion, and
bloudsheddyng: how can it be that he should condemn us? 1. John. 2. Romans 8. 1.
Tim. 2.
Shall he that is our advocate, intercessour, and mediator, give sentence
against us? Jesus Christ yester day, and to day, and the same continues for
ever. Hebre. 13.
If he continues still Jesus Christ, what other thing can be do, Matthew. 1.
but save his people? As the Angel most truly testified of him. Therefore,
when soever in the extreme agony and conflicte of our consciences; 1. Peter. 5.
our mortal enemy Satan, does lay before our eyes, that dreadful day of
judgment, Esai. 7. Matthew. 1. Acts. 4. Phil. 2.
for to drive us to desperation: let us boldly appeal from Christ being
judge, to Christ being Jesus: that is to say, a Savior of his people.

Let us always have in our minds and hearts, these godly sayings of saint
Paul: who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? Romans 8. 2. Tim. 2.
It is GOD that justifies, who then shall condemn? It is Christ which is
dead, yea rather, which is risen again: which is also on the right hand
of God, John. 10.
and makes intercession for us. We are in his hand, no man, none can take us
out, because he is stronger then all. Are we not, Ephe. 5.
as many, as be grafted in him by a lively faith, flesh of his flesh, bones
of his bones? Are we not his members, and he our head? How could it be then,
that being our head, he should cast us away? Ephe 5. Coloss. 1.
Are not these saint Paul's words: The husband is the head of the wife,
even as Christ is the head of the congregation, and the same is the Savior
of the body? Galat. 5.
Let us then endeavor our selves by a lively faith, workyng through charity,
to be the body of Christ, and so may we be sure, that he will come to
save, and not to condemn us, Romans 8. Galat. 2.
for there is no condemnation, to them that are in Christ Jesus, which walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit. For why? He is a savior of his
body.

But how can the coming of Christ unto judgment (will some body say) be
comfortable unto us: Objection.
sith that we must give account of every idle word, Matthew. 12.
that ever we speak in all our life time? Or sith he will reward every man
according to his deeds? Does not saint Paul say, that we must all
appear before the judgment seat of Christ, Romans 14. 2. Cor. 5.
that every man may receive the works of his body, according to that which
he has dooen, Romans 2. 1. Cor. 4.
whether it be to good, or evil? Yea, at that day the very thoughts and
secrets of men's hearts shall be judged: who then can rejoice, at the coming
of so dreadful a day?

Uerely, these sayings are most true, and also most dreadful, and ought to
move us to live in the fear of God, Answer.
and to abstain, not only from evil deeds, but also from evil words, and
thoughts. They ought also to put us in remembrance, how much bound we are,
unto the mercy and goodness of almighty God, Romans 5^
which, when we were his enemies, fightyng under the banner of Satan the
devil, against him and al his holy laws and ordinances, did so love us, that
he did give his only begotten son for us, John. 3.
making him our righteousness, wisdom, 1. Cor. 1.
sainctification, and redemption. Why should then these grievous sayings be
dreadful unto us? Is it not written: At what time soever a sinner does
repent him of his sin, Ezech. 1^.
from the bottom of his heart, I will put his wickedness out of my
remembrance, so that it shall no more be thought upon? If our wickedness
shall be put out of remembrance, so that they shall no more be thought upon:
how shall they be laid to our charge at the day of judgment? Is not,
besides all this; 1. Cor. 1.
Christ's righteousness, our righteousness? His wisdom, our wisdom? His
holiness, our holiness? His innocence and redemption, our innocence and
redemption. Does not Paul write* That there is no condempnation to them that
are in Christ Jesus? Romans ^. Romans 5.
These are more over the words of our Savior Christ: He that hears my
words, and believes in him that has sent me, Ioh. 5.
has life everlasting he shall not come into judgment, but is passed from
death to life.

What shall we say then? Sall not the faithful believers come into judgment?
Objection.
Is it not written: that we must all appear before the judgment seat of
Christ? Answer.
It is most sure that we shall all appear, before the judgment seat of our
savior Christ. How the faithful shall appear in judgment.
But, as some do come to the Sessions, or Assizes there, for to receive their
judgment and condemnation, some, for to give evidence against them, and to
asist the judge in his office: so shall it be in the last judgment. For, the
reprobate, unfaithful and merciless shall come thither for to receive their
deserved condemnation: James. 2. Matthew. 25.
And the faithful with the blessed Angels, for to adsiste their judge Christ,
as he himself does witness, saying unto his Apostles: When the son of man
that sit in the seat of his majesty, Matthew. 19. Luk 22.
ye which follow me, shall sit also upon twelve seats, and judge the twelve
Tribes of Israel. 1. Cor. 6. VVild. 3.
And saint Paul says these words: Do ye not know that the Saints shall
judge the world? Know ye not how we shall judge the Angels? This is
conclusion ought we to mark, and also to believe, that through a lively faith
in our Savior Christ, Romans 4. Galat. 3. Ephe. 2.
we are justified: that is to say, we are counted just and righteous before
God, so that our sins, shall no more be imputed unto us, nor laid to our
chardge.

Genesis 25.
For, as Jacob having not of him self deserved the right of the first borne,
The mystery of Jacobs putting on of his brothers apparel. Ambro. de Jacob and
vita beata. lib. 2.
did put on the apparel of his brother, and also his Goune, which had a
sweet odor and smell, and so under the title and name or person of an other,
did come to his father, that he might to his own commodity and profit
receive the blessyng: even so, we are hidden under the precious pureness of
our eldest brother, Jesus Christ our savior, that we may in the sight of god
receive the testimony and reward of righteousness, I mean that sweet and
comfortable blessyng, that David ^oth speak of saying: Psalm. 32. Romans 4.
Blessed are they, whose unrighteousness are forgeuen, and whose sins are
covered: blessed is the man to whom the Lord i^puteth no sin. And as for our
good deeds, Matthew. 5. James. 2. Galat. 5. Esai. 64.
that do proceed and come of that iustifiyng faith, which can no more be
without good works, then the Sun can be without light, or fire without
heat* although in them selves they be most imperfect: yet in our savior
Christ they are most perfect. Romans 10.
For Christ is the perfection, performyng, or fulfilling of the law for a
justification unto all them that believe.

Sith then that we shall through faith in our savior Jesus Christ be
justified, that is to say, counted just and righteous before GOD, so that our
sins shall no more be laid to our chardge^, nor imputed unto us: Since
again, that the vnperfection or insufficiency of our good works, Romans 5.
shall be clean taken away by the perfect and omnisufficient obedience of our
Savior Jesus Christ, Matt. 5. Galat. 3. Romans ^.
who has fulfilled the law for us all, and delivered us from the curse and
malediction of it: why should those grievous sentences be dreadful unto us.

The.xxx. Chapter. To whom the sharp Sentences of the Scriptures are terrible.
THere be three manner of people, unto whom these sayings ought to be very
dreadful. For, they shall most extremely and with all rigor be executed upon
them. John. ^.
These are the infidels or unfaithful. For, it is written: he that does not
believe, is judged and condemned already: because that he did not believe in
the name of the only begotten son of God. And under them I do comprehend
all the Godless Epicures of this wicked world, Matthew. 6. Psalm 14. Psalm. 53.
VVild. 2. Eccle. 5. 1. Cor. 15. Luke 12. Romans 2.
which do think that there is no God living, as though there were neither
heaven, neither hell. For as S. Paul says unto them that are rebellious and
disobeye the truth, and follow iniquity, shall come indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguishe, upon the soul of every man that does evil.

The second sort that ought to fear these sharp and grievous sentences of
the Scriptures are the merciless generation. James. ^.
as S. James writes, there shall be judgment without mercy unto him, that
shows no mercy. And for this cause our Savior Christ, shall say unto them
that shall be on his left hand: Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting
fire, which is prepared for the devil and his Angels. Matthew. 25. Luke 13.
Matthew. 7. Psalm. 6.
For, I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I thirsted, and ye gave me
no drink: I was harbourlesse, and ye lodged me not: I was naked, and ye
clothed me not: I was sick and in prisone, and ye visited me not. Then shall
they say unto him: when saw we thee an hungered, or thirst, or a stranger,
or naked, or sick, or in prisone, and did not minister unto thee? And he
shall answer and say: verily I say unto you, in as much as ye did it not
to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me. All these shall go into
everlasting fire and pains of Hell.

1. John. 3. James. 2.
This now is to be understood of them, that will have no pity and compassion
upon their poor needy brethren, but suffer them most unmercifully to perish
for lack of succor at their hands. Luke 16.
They that are such, I mean they that stop their ears at the clamours and
cries of their poor needy brethren: Prou. 21. Tobi. 4. Eccle. 4. Eccle. 13.
Eccle. 14. Luke 14. Luke 16.
they themselves shall cry, and shall not be heard: they shall cry and crave
for mercy, but no mercy shall be granted them. No less rigor doubtelesse
shall be used against them, if for a small offense; they will be reue^ged to the
uttermost. For as the scripture testifies, he that seeks vengeance, shall
find vengeance of the Lord, who shall surely keep unto him his sins.
Eccle. 28.
Which thing Christ our Savior teaches us by a a lively parable or
similitude, when he brings in the king that does call his (...) and accounte,
Matthew. 12.
and unto whom one was brought that did owe him ten thousand talente^,
which he forgave him ^^ite, because that he^ had besought him. But this man
was full of mischief, and would not show the like mercy unto his fellow
servant, that did owe him but an hundred pence: and therefore his lord was
angry, and delivered him unto the Iailers till he had paid the vttermoste
farthing. Even so shall my heavenly father do unto you (does our Savior
Christ conclude) except ye do from the bottom of your hearts forgive your
brethren their trespasses.

seek to be saved and justified by their own works and merits, and which
being ignorant of the righteousness of god, Romans 10.
do go about to set up their own righteousness: and so will in no wise be
subject to the righteousness, that is available before God. They doubtelesse,
shall be called to a strayte rekcnyng and accounte. For why? all they that are
such, do remain still under the curse of the Law, as saint Paul writes,
saying: Galat. 3.
As many as be of works, that is to say: as many as go about to be justified
by the works of the law, are under the curse. For, it is written: Cursed be
every man that continues not in all things that are written in the book of
the law, to do them. Being then under the curse and malediction of God,
because that they did most unthankfully refuse the merciful mean, that he
had of his mere goodness appointed unto them for to be justified by: they
must needs run into everlasting condemnation. Does not the truth himself
say: Luke 17.
that though we did all that he commands us, yet we are unprofitable
servants? But who in all the world, is able to do the tenth part of that
which God does require of us, and with that perfection as he will have it to
be done? not one man living in the world. What are we then, but a thousand
times worse then unprofitable servants?

They therefore, that go about to be justified by their own beggarly works,
and stinking righteousness, which before God is as the filthy cloutes of a
menstru^us woman, Esai. 64.
are most worthy to find Christ (whom they will make but a patched and an
vnperfeate Savior) a most rigorous and extreme judge: whereas, if mistrustyng
our own righteousness, merits, and doings, we do flee and appeal to the
only mercy of God, Romans 4.
taking a sure hold thereupon through faith in our savior Christ, and sa^yng
unfeignedly with David and Job: O Lord enter not into judgment with thy
servants, Psalm.143.
for in thy sight shall no man living be justified: If I would justify my
self, Job. 9.
my own mouth shall condemn me: if I would be perfect, Job. 14.
he should judge me wicked: Lo, though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, and
I will reprove my ways in his sight: it is so far of, that we ought to fear
the day of judgment, and coming of our heavenly and eternal judge, or that
those grievous sentences and saynges ought to be dreadful unto us, that rather
our savior and judge bids us to look up, Luke 21. Job. 13. 1. John. 4.
John. 20. Romans 8.
and lift up our heads, assuryng us, that then our salvation is at hand.

Yea, that we might be the more certain of it, he promises that al his
coming, he will send his Aungelles, with a great voice of a Trumpe, Matthew.
24. Revel. 1. 1. Cor. 15. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
and that they shall gather together his chosen, and predestined children,
from the four winds, and from the one end of the world, to the other. Where
soever we shall be then, I mean, when our Savior and judge shall come,
whether it be in the bowelles of the earth, or any where else, here in this
vale of misery, we may be sure, that we shall be gathered together unto
him, there for to receive our full and perfect salvation, both in body and
soul. 1. Peter. 5. James. 4.
Let us not therefore suffer our enemy Satan, to drive us to any desperation,
by puttyng us in remembrance of the dreadful day of judgment: But rather
in the conflict, and agony of our consciences, let us have always before the
eyes of our faith (besides the goodly, and comfortable sayings, 2. Tim. 1.
Matthew. 1. Luke 2. Phil. 3. 1. Tim. 1. 1. Tim. 2.
that have been brought in already) that Christ shall not only come as a
judge, but as a most benign, and merciful savior of his people. And
therefore saint Paul does write, that from heaven, we look for a
Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile bodies, that
they may be fashioned like unto his glorious body.

Luke 21. 1 Peter. 4. Ephe. 4. 2. Peter. 3. Matthew. 24. 2 Peter. 3. Revel. 3.
Revel. 14: Matthew. 25.
In the mean while, let us take heed to our selves, that our hearts be not
overcome with surfettyng, and drunkenness, least that day do come upon us
unawares. For it shall come as a snare, on al them that sit upon the face of
the earth. Therefore, we have need to watch, and pray, that we may be
ready when he comes, and that we may stand before him, having and vsyng
the weapons that fainct Paul ministereth unto us, whiles we are here, warryng
against the fiery darts of the devil, our enemy, where he says: Ephe. 6.
Take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to resist in the
evil day, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
and having finished all things, stand fast, and your loins girde about
with verity, and having on the breaste plate of righteousness, and your feet
shodde with the preparation of the Gospel of peace. 1. John. 5. 1. Peter. 5.
Above all, take the shield of faith, wherewith ye may quench all the fiery
darts of the wicked. And take the helmet of salvation, Hebre. 4.
and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God, and pray all
ways, with all manner of prayer, and supplication in the spirit, and watch
thereunto with all perseueraunce, and supplication for all saints. Coloss. 4.
And in an other place he says: Ephe. 5.
Take heed therefore, that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise,
redeemyng the time: For the days are evil. 1. Cor. 6.
Be ye not drunk with wine, wherein is excess: but be ye fulfilled with the
spirit, Coloss. 3.
speaking unto your selves in Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual songs, syngyng,
and making melody to the lord in your hearts. What is signified by Psalms by
Hym-es, and by songs.
By Psalms he vndestandeth complaints to God, narrations, and expostulations:
by Hymns, he properly contains, thanks giuyng: by songs, he also
contains, praises and thanks giuyng* but not so largely and amply, as Hymns
do.

So now we are alive, 1 Thessalonians 3. Romans 8. Matthew. 16. Matthew. 7. 1. Cor. 10.
if we stand fast in the lord, says saint Paul, and no damnation, nor
troubles, nor yet the gates of hell shall not prevail against us, because we
are builded upon the sure rock and stone.

The. xxxi. Chapter. The subtle means that Satan uses, to bring us into
security.
IN any wise let us give no ears, to the liyng doctrines of Satan the
Devil, A special caveat or warnyng. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2. Peter. ^.
who does all y^ ever he can, for to bring us into a carnal security, and to
make us believe, that the same day is not yet at hand. And that he might the
better bring this his purpose to pass, he did cause his idle brained Monks
and Friars to write (and that without any ground, or foundation of Gods
word) of the signs, and tokens that shall come before that day, 1. Tim. ^.
wherein they follow only, the vain imaginations, and dreams of their own
heads. Therefore, we ought in this poinct, to give no credit unto them, but
to content our selves with the infallible word of GOD, wherein Christ our
Savior does sufficiently teach us, what signs and tokens shall come before
that dreadful day, which we see all to be come to pass already: so that
we ought to look for none other, every day, and every hour, but that the
same day shall come suddenly upon us all.

Matthew. 24.
For first, where as our Savior says: That there shall be signs in the Sun,
Luke 21.
in the Moon, and in the Stars, and that in the earth, the people shall be in
such perplexity, that they shall not tell which way to turn them selves:
Do we not see all these things to be f^lfilled already. What signs there
have been in the Sun, in the Moon, and in the Stars, since the ascendyng
up of our Savior Christ, and even in these our days, it is not unknown unto
them that read the histories. Again, in what perplexity, all the world is
now at this present day and time, so that no man almost can tell, which way
to turn him self, we do see it, even with our own eyes.

Yea, will some man reply, we have not yet seen the sun to be darckened,
Objection.
nor the Moon to lose her light, nor the stars to fall down from heaven,
which things must all come to pass before that day, Luke 21.
as our savior Christ him self does testify. Elyas and Enoche be not yet
come, which are prophesied to come again before that latter day of
judgment: therefore we need not yet to look for it.

Answer.
It is not unknown, that many, both of the ancient and also of the latter
writers, which in these our days, have written upon the scriptures and word
of God, do expound this place. The Sun shall be darckened, and the Moon
shall lose her light. Matthew. 24.

How the words of Christ are taken of many.

What the same does signify.


etc. Of our Savior Jesus Christ him self, of his Church, and of the
ministers thereof. For, as the natural Sun is darckened with the clouds
that do arise from the waters, and from the earth: so our Savior Christ,
which is the true son of righteousness, is wonderfully darckened with the
mistes and clouds of men's traditions and dreams* so that many times, his
comfortable light is clean taken away, from the eyes of our souls, What the
Moon does signify.
and consciences. By the Moon they do understand the Church. For, as the
Moon does naturally receive her light of the Sun: so all the light, all the
true wisdom and understanding, Revel. 6.
or heavenly knowledge that the Church has, it has it of our Savior Christ:
and as if the Sun be dackened, the Moon of necessity must lose her light:
So when the cheerful light of the true son of righteousness is taken away
by men's inventions, and superstitious doctrine, and Popish traditions, without
all doubt, the Church must utterly lose her light, it must needs be
without all heavenly understanding, and knowledge, it must needs be in horrible
darckenesse, and in the shadow of death.

After their exposition, it is said that the Stars do fall from heaven,
What the stars do signify. Revel. 6. Daniel. 12.
when the ministers of Gods word, which ought to shine in the Church,
both with life and doctrine, as the Stars do shine in the Elemente, do
fall from the Go^pell, and true word of God, unto men's inventions, and
dreams, and unto earthly doctrines of the deuilishe Papists, either for hope
of worldely honor, promotion, dignity, or else for shame, as Doctor Hardyng
now does, and others of his side: Or else for fear of any trouble,
persecution, or loss of livings. For, if according to the letter, the
natural Stars should fall from heaven, no man should be left alive,
against the coming of our Savior Christ, sith, that according to the
excellent doctrine of Astronomy, every Star is bigger then the whole earth,
and so the Scriptures that say, that as the day of Noe, Matthew. 24.
and of Sodom was, so shall the coming of the son of man be, could not be
verified.

If we should follow this exposition, which is both learned, and also most
godly, are not all these things fulfilled already? Is not our savior
Christ, which is the true son of righteousness, utterly taken away by the
hypocritical, and superstitious doctrine of that Antichriste of Rome? Is not
the Church altogether deprived of the light of Gods word, being overwhelmed
with the thick darckenesse of beggarly Traditions, and Popish dreams? What
should we say of them, that ought as Stars to shine in the church of
Christ? Are they not in a manner fallen all from the heavenly doctrine of Gods
word, and his Gospel, into the vain phancies of corrupted and earthly men?
We may be sure then, that the day is at hand.

Chrisost. in Matthaeu^.
But go to: Let us take it as Chrysostom does expound it, which writes that
it is said, that the Sun shall be darkened, the Moon shall lose her light,
and the Stars shall fall down from heaven: because that the coming of
Christ shall be so glorious and so bright, that in comparison of it, the light
of the Sun, of the Moon, and of the Stars shall be but darkness, that
is to say, the Sun then, the Moon, and the Stars, shall be as though they
were not at all. As when the Sun is up, which is the most excellent light,
although the Moon, and the Stars do remain still in the element, yet are
they not seen, but are even as though they were all falled down from heaven.

The true meaning of the darkning of the sun, moon, and stars. Esai.
13.24.34 Iere. 15. Ezech. 32. Amos. 8. Joel. 2.3. Mich. 3. Luke 23. Revel. 6.
It is also most plain and evident, that by the darknyng of the Sun, of the
Moon, and of the Stars, the great, and horrible vengeance of GOD is
signified, as we read in Esaias, Jeremy, Ezechiell, Amos, Joel and Micheas, the
Prophets. For, when god pours his vengeance upon the earth, it seems unto
them that are touched with it, and that are in perplexity and trouble, that
all the whole world is in the like case, and that the Sun is darkened, the
Moon has lost her light, the Stars be fallen down from heaven, that the
earth does quake and tremble under them: To be short, they think that all
things go to ruin with them, not because that it is so in deed, but
because that they be pressed with no less agony and anguishe, then if those
things should chance and come to pass. By such manner of speaking then, our
Savior did signify the great perplexity and anguishe of them, whom God
shall pour his vengeance upon at that day of judgment, for their
rebellious disobedience against his holy and sacred word.

How so ever we take these words, we can not excuse our selves, but that these
things are fulfilled daiely. For we see, even before our eyes, in what
perplexity the enemies of God are, for the most part of them: How they fall
into plain desperation and madness, being in that case, that they think
hourly, that hell shall swalowe them up quick. Therefore, let us not flatter
our selves, Eccle. 5. Matthew 24. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2. Peter. 3. Revel. 3.16. Hebre.
10. Matthew. 11.
or defer from time to time to repent and amend our lives: For the Lord
shall come as a theif, even when we look less for him.

As for the coming of Elias and Enoch, we may content our selves, with the
saying of our Savior Christ, touching the matter. For when he had spoken many
things, in the commendation of Ihon the Baptist, he did add for a conclusion:
And if ye will receive, the same is Elias which should come: Meaning thereby,
that Ihon the Baptist was the same Elias, that Malachy the Prophet did speak
of, which should come before the day of the Lord, Malach. 3.
as the Angel does declare unto Zaharie, Luke 1.
saying: And he shall go before the lord, in the spirit and power of Elias,
to make the people ready for him.

But Satan the devil, that he might persuade the Jews that our savior
Christ was not the Messiah, did by the Phariseis and Scribes, blow abroad
among the people, that Elias must come in person, and that therefore, sith
he was not come, Christ our Savior was not true Messiah. For this cause did
the Apostles ask Christ, why the Scribes said that Elias must come first?
Matthew. 17.
Unto whom he answered, that Elias was come already, whereby they
understood, that he spoke unto them of Ihon the Baptiste.

Even so now at this present, to make the world to live in a security, 2.
Cor. 11.
the devil goes about by his false Prophets, to make men believe, that Elias
and Enoch must come in person before the second coming of Christ our
Savior. And all this does he to the intent, that as long as we see that they
be not come personally, we should think still, that the Lord does defer
his coming, and so begin to smite our fellows and to eat and drink with the
dronken, Matthew. 24.
that we may be rewarded with the Hypocrites, where shall be weeping, and
gnashyng of teethe.

It is without all doubt, that Enoch and Elias be come already, not in
person, but in spirit. For, how many has the Lord our God, Enoch and Elias
be come already.
stirred up, and sent in these our days, in the spirit, and power of Elias,
and of Enoch, for to reprove the Idolatry, and Superstition, hypocrisy, and
wickedness of the world? Revel. 11:
These are the two faithful witnesses, whom mention is made of, in the
Revelation of saint Ihon, by the which small number, the faithful, and
earnest preachers of Gods word, are understood. First, because that they
be inspired, and moved with the same zealous spirit, that Elias and Enoch were
inspired withal. Secondly, because that they are but a small number, in
comparison of the adversaries, and yet sufficient for to reprove, and condemn
the world of iniquity, and unfaithfulness. Matthew. 18. Hebre. 6.
For, in the mouth of two or three witnesses, all things shall be established.

Let not then this erroneous and pernicious doctrine of Satan, touching the
personal and corporal coming of Elias and Enoch, seduce and deceive us. For
there be many Eliasses and Enoches in the world already, which ought to be unto
us a plain certificat that the day of the Lord is at hand. And if we had
none other tokens and signs, yet the words of our Savior Christ ought to
suffice us, where he says: As the time of Noe and of Sodom was, Matthew. 24.
Luke 17.
so shall the coming of the son of man be.

This one saying ought to put us out of al doubt, for what tyranny, Genesis 6.
Genesis 18.
oppression, and cruelty, what pride, what excess in all things, what fraud
deceit, sweryng forsweryng, usury, extortion, brybery, hordome unlawful
marriages, putting away of lawful wives, buggerie, daunsynges, breakyng of the
Sabathe days, disobedience to fathers and mothers, speaking evil of them that
are in authority, 2. Tim. 2.
dronkerds, glottons, and epicures, Idolaters, ungodliness, security and
carelesnes, railers upon the preachers, not regardyng their doctrine, was used
then, that is not now used in all parts of the world? read ye the
Scriptures, and ye shall find, that all the abominable vices, Genesis 6.^. Genesis
18.19.
wherefore God did in times past, drown the world, and also rain fire and
Brimstone upon the cities of Sodom and Gomorra, do reign now in all places,
and yet not punished.

As for Antichriste who they say must come before that day, it is without
all doubt that he is already in the world. For, Antechrist.
what worse Antichriste can we have, then either Mahomet is, or the Pope of
Rome, which is yet a thousand times worse then Mahomet is? As for false
Christ's, all Churches and Aulters are full of them. False christ's.
Again there were never so many false Prophets in the world, False prophets.
as are now at this present time, which seek al manner means that can be
sought, now by erroneous papistical doctrines, now by false and counterfeited
miracles to deceive even the very elect, Matthew. 24. Mark. 13.
if it were possible by any mean.

These things being well considered, let us beware that we be none of those
mockers which do walk after their own lusts, 2. Peter. 3. 2. Tim. 3. Jude. 1.
1. Tim. 4.
and say, where is the promise of his coming? For since the fathers died, all
things continue in the same estate, wherein they were at the beginning. For as
saint Peter says, the Lord is not slack to fulfill his promise, as some
men count it slackenesse, 2. Peter. 3. Hebre. 10. Romans 2. 2. Peter. 3. 1. Tim.
2. Ezech. 18. 1 Thessalonians. 5. Matthew. 24. Revel. 3.
but is pacient to us ward and would have no man lost but would receive all
men to repentance. Nevertheless the day of the Lord will come as a thief in
the night. Wherefore seeing that we look for such things, let us be diligent
that we may be found of him in peace, without spot and undefiled, and suppose
that the long sufferyng of the Lord, is salvation. But of that day neither
the Angels, nor yet the son of man does know, but only our father which is
in heaven. Matthew. 24. Mark. 13. Luke 17.


And therefore I do greatly merueile at that mad toye of the Anabaptists,
which dare so presumptiously affirm that the Lord shall come this day or
that day, Christ as touching his manhood, is ignorant of the latter day.
sith that our Savior Christ, in that he is man or touching his manhood
knows not of it: but touching his Godhead, he knows all things that the
father does. Also, we ought to be ware of all dreams and fantasies of men
which weerie themselves and others in searching out curiously the time, that
the lord shall apeare, alledgyng for themselves a vain prophecy, and most
falsely ascribed to Elias, that two thousand year before the Law, two
thousand year under the law, and two thousand year after the Law, the
world shall endure, and no longer: let us not think that any mortal and
sinful man, is able to tell precisely the day or time that he shall come, or
at how many years end he shall come to judgment.

Acts. 1.
The Apostles themselves being tickeled with vain curiosity, would feign have
known it. But says our Savior Christ unto them, it is not for you to know
the times, or the seasons, which the father has put in his own power. If it
had been necessary that we should have known it, our heavenly teacher and
master, would not have hidden it from us. But since that he has hidden it, nor
would in any wise reveal it unto us, it is a plain token, that it is not
necessary for us to know it. Romans 12. Prou. 25. Eccle. 3.
Leauyng then such vain and curious enquiryng of things that pertain nothing
unto us, let us endeavor our selves to know those things, that God will have
us to know, that we may in all things frame our living and conversation
according to the blessed will of our heavenly father, Romans 12. Ephe. 5. 1 Thessalonians. 4. Romans 2. Matthew. 25.
and so be found acceptable, nor be ashamed when he shall render unto every
man according to his works. Uerely there is no time of sluggardenesse left
unto us.

We see that the same departing, that the blessed Apostle Saint Paul does
speak of, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
is come to pass already. For, how many nations and people be fallen away
from the Empire of Rome? or rather, is there any Empire of Rome at all? Again,
how many kingdoms, Lands, and Countries have utterly forsaken the highest
Emperor of all, I mean Jesus Christ our only savior, with his Gospel.

The.xxxij. Chapter. The Pope is Antichriste, and that man of sin, which
shall be (...) before Christ's coming to judgment.
Moreover, is not the man of sin, the son of perdition opened already, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
and exalted above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, sittyng as
GOD, in the temple of God, and showing himself as God? For (...) the doings
of the fleshely Idol of Rome, and ye shall find that he is the same man of
sin, the same son of perdition, and adversary. For why? In his decrees and
laws, in his beggarly statutes and traditions, he does exalte himself above
all the holy Laws and ordinances of almighty god, and above the Testament of
the holy one of Israel, which is confirmed and sealed up, with the most
precious blood of the only begotten Son of God our Savior Jesus Christ: but
him shall the Lord consume with the breath of his Nosethrilles, that is the
spirit of his mouth, Psalm. 28.
and also destroy with the appearyng of his coming.

For a taste, you shall see out of their own books, whether the Pope of Rome
be that son of perdition, that does exalte himself above God or no.
Franciscus Zarabella says: the Pope does what him lists, Franciscus
Zarabella.
yea, though it be unlawful: and is more then a God. Pope Nicolas says: It
is well known that the Pope, Distict. 96. Satis euide^ter. Extraua. Ioha^. 22.
cum inter in Glossa. Impress. Lugduni. Anno: 1555. Council. Trid. sub Paulo. 3.
De electi. cap. licet.
of the godly prince Constantine, was called God, to believe, that our Lord
God the Pope might not decree as he decreed: it were a mattter of heresy.
Again, their late Chapter at Trident, one Cornelius Bishop of Bitonto in an
oration openly pronounced these words: Papa lux venit in mundum: The Pope is
the light, that is come into the world: but men have loved darkness more
then light. Again, Panormitane says these words: Christ, and the Pope make
one Consistory, and keep one Court: and, sin only excepted, the Pope can
do, whatsoever God himself can do. Again, in their Council holden at
Laterane in Rome, one Simon Begnius, the Bishop of Modrusia, says thus unto
Pope Leo: Conci. Leteran Session. 6. page 601.
Ecce venit Leo de Tribu Judah, radix David. etc. Te Leobeatissime Saluatorem
expectauimus. etc. Behold, the Lion is come of the Tribe of Judah, the root of
David. etc. O most blessed Leo, we have looked for thee to be our Savior.
Again, the Pope suffered the Ambassadors of Sicilia to lie prostrate on the
ground, and thus to cry unto him, as if it had been unto Christ. Qui tollis
peccata mundi, Paulus Aemilius. lib. 7.
misereri nostri: Qui t^llis peecata mundi, dona nobis pacem: O thou (holy
Pope) that take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us: Thou
that take away the sins of the world, give us peace.

Wherefore we may say of him as Saint Gregory writes of antichriste:
Grego. in Job. cap 34 lib. 25. cap. 14.
Cum sit damnatus homo, and nequaquam spiritus, Deum se esse mentitur: Where as
he is a damned man, and not a spirit, by liyng, he faineth himself to be God:
Anselmus also says: Anselmus in. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Simulabit se religiosum, vt sub specie decipiat pietatis: I mo se deum esse
dicet: and se adorari faciet: atque regna caelorum promitet: That is,
Antichriste shall feign himself to be holy, that he may deceive men under the
color of holiness, Yea, and he shall call him self God: and shall cause
himself to be worshipped: and shall promise the kingdom of heaven. Therefore,
to end, Eusebius de praeparat. lib. 7.
Eusebius says: Hoc est argumentum, eos. odisse Deum, quod velint seipsos
appellari deos: This is a token that they hate God, For that they will have
themselves called by the name of god.

In the mean season lest we do perish among them, that receive not the love
of the truth, unto whom, God of his righteous judgment sends strong
delusion, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
that they should believe lies, and so be damned, because they believe not the
truth, but have pleasure in unrighteousness. Let us stick fast unto the Gospel
of our savior Christ, and unto the wholesome doctrine of the holy Ghost, which
is the power of God to salvation to all them that believe. Romans 1.


The.xxxiij. Chapter. The strength and operation of the holy Ghost workyng in
us.
I believe in the holy ghost.
WHom, I do also believe to be the Lord and geuer of life, to proceed from the
Father and the Son, and to be of one substance with them both, being true
and natural God, without beginning, and without endyng: by whom the Father
woorketh all things in the Son, by whom he does create, move, maintain,
viuifie, and quicken all creatures, by whom he does call and draw unto him
his elect and chosen, renueth them into a new life, 1. Cor. 12.
justifies, and sanctifies them enricheth them with many and sundry gifts,
and also strengthens them til they come to their perfect salvation, who
dwelling in us, Romans 8. Acts. 2.
does with his light illuminate our minds, that we may learn and know
perfectly what treasour of gods bounteous mercifulness we do possess and
enjoy in Christ. 2. Cor. 3.
So that we may by good right, call him the keye, wherewith all the riches of
the heavenly kingdom is opened unto us, and the eye wherewith we do see and
behold them.

And for this cause he is called now, Ephe. 1. Romans 5. John. 16.
the earnest penye and Scale, because that he does seal up in our minds and
consciences, the certitude or certainty of Gods promises. Now the master and
teacher of truth, the aucthour of light, the well and fountain of wisdom,
knowledge and understanding. This is he that does pourge and cleanse us from
all filthiness, 1. John. 1. 1. Peter. 3. 1. Cor. 6. Romans 8. Psalm. 51.
and ouersprinckleth us with his sanctitude and holiness, that we may be made
the worthy temples of almighty God. This is he, that with his effectual
wateryng, does make us fruictfull unto righteousness, Psalm. 1. Matthew. 5. 1.
Peter. 2. John. 7.
for to bring forth aboundauntly the fruictes of our faith, that our heavenly
father may be glorified through our good works, conversation, and outward
living. For, the which cause, he is many times called water, as in these
places of the prophet: All ye that are a thirst, come unto the waters. Again,
I will power water upon him that is a thirste, Esai. 55. Esai. 44. John. 7.
and Rivers upon the dry land. Whereunto the saying of Christ does agree,
where he bids them that be a thirste to come unto him, and to drink of the
waters of life. Although he be other whiles so called, for the efficacy,
strength, power, and virtue that he has to pourge and make clean, where the
Lord promises in Ezechiell, Ezech. 36. Matthew. 3. Acts. 1.
to wash his people with clean waters. The same is he, that consumes and
burns away the inordinate lusts and concupiscenses of our flesh, kyndelyng
our hearts with the divine love of GOD, and of heavenly things, wherefore he
is called by God right fire. Finally, this is he that by his inspiration does
make us wholly to live unto God, Ephe. 4.
so that we be no more led by our own sensuality, but follow only his
motion, and guidyng. Therefore is it said of Barnarde very well: Barnard. in
die Petecost. Sermo. 2.
Quid bonus in nobis spiritus operatur? monet, mouet, and docet: monet
memoriam: mouet voluntatem, docet: rationem: That is to say, what good does
the spirit or holy Ghost in us? he does, warn, move, and teach: he does
warn our remembrance, he does move our wills, and teach our reason.

Therefore, if there be any goodness in us, it is the fruicte of his grace and
virtue. But all our gifts without him, are mere darkness of the mind, and
wicked perverseness of the heart. And as I do believe, that all the gifts
and benefits that we do receive of God, through his only begotten son our
savior Jesus Christ, are by this holy spirit printed, graven, and sealed up in
our hearts and minds: so do I believe that all the Canonical books of the
old and new Testament, were written and set forth unto us, only by his
divine inspiration, 2. Peter. 1. The doctrine contained in the old and new
Testament, is sufficient unto salvation. 2. Tim. 3.
and that the doctrine that is contained in them, without all other, is
sufficient unto Salvation, as the blessed Apostle does testify, saying:
Continue in the things that thou have learned, which also were committed unto
thee, seeing thou know of whom thou have learned them, and for as much also,
as thou haste known the holy Scriptures of a child, which be able to make
thee wise unto Salvation, through the faith which is in Christ Jesus. For, all
scripture given by inspiration of God, is profitable to teach, to improve to
amend, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, and ready unto all good works.

Whereunto Chrysostom does agree, saying: what soever is required unto
salvation, Chrisost. in 22. cap. Matthew. Hom. 41. Hom. 1. in Epist. ad Titu^.
all the same shall ye find in the holy scriptures. And in an other place: He
has at his time (says he) reueiled, and opened his word, by the preaching
that is committed unto me. And this is the preaching: the Gospel does
contain all things, both present, and to come: honor, godliness, In Matthew.
22. cap. Hom. 4.
faith: to be short, he has comprehended all things, in the word of his
preaching. Again he says: what so ever is required for our salvation, is
already contained in the holy scriptures, he that is ignoraunte, shall find
there what he may learn: he that is stubborn and a sinner, may find there
scourges of the judgment to come, he that is troubled, may find there
joys, and promises of everlasting life, through the beholding of which, he
may be stirred to good works. Saint Augustine says: August. ad Fratres in
Here.
read the holy scriptures, wherein ye shall find fully, what is to be
followed, and what to be avoided. Athanasius also says: the holy scriptures
(says he) being inspired from God, Athana. cont. Gentiles.
are sufficient to all instruction of the truth. Lyra, one of the Popes own
doctors, has these words: Lyra in vlti. cap. proverb.
Like as in a merchauntes ship, are carried diverse things, necessary for
man's life: So in the holy scriptures, are contained all things, needful to
our salvation.

Who so ever then does affirm and say, that the doctrine of the holy
ghost, which is contained in the canonical books of the old and new
Testamente, is not sufficient unto salvation, and that besides it, we have
need of men's traditions, and doctrines, as though without them, we could not
have in the sacred book of God, a sufficient instruction in things that
pertain to life everlasting: Galat. 1.
Or who soever says and affirms, that this holy spirit does teach, and
set for the any other word or doctrine, then is contained in the sacred books
of God: I dare boldly affirm, that the same man is not lead with the same
holy spirit, who is the lord and giver of life, and who proceeding from the
father and the son, John. 1^.
should lead us into all truth, and bring into our remembraunces, whatsoever
Christ our Savior, the heavenly wisdom of the father has taught and set
forth, for the salvation of mankind: but with the spirit of error, I mean,
with the spirit of satan the devil, who, to the vttermoste of his power,
causes men to contemn, despise, and set at naught, the holy
commandments of almighty God, Ezech. 13. Matthew. 15.
that they may set up their own traditions, and dreams, and all under the
title, name, and color of the holy ghost.

Wherefore, it is most needful and necessary, that we have always before
our eyes, the saying of the blessed Euangeliste saint Ihon, 1. John. 4.
Chrisost. de sancto and adorando spiritu.
where he says: Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit, but prove the
spirits, whether they be of God or not. Also S. Chrisost. says, agreeyng
with the same: Many (says he) do boast of the holy ghost, but they that do
utter and set out their own phancies and dreams, do pretend him in vain:
for as Christ does witness, that he speaks not of him self, but out of the
law and the Prophets: Si quid prae^er Euangelium sub titulo spiritus
obtrudatur, ne credamus. Quia sicut Christus legis and Prophetarum impletio
est, ita est spiritus Euangelij: If any thing be brought unto us, under the
name of the holy ghost (says he) besides the Gospel, let us not believe it:
For as Christ is the fulfillyng of the law and the prophets: so is the holy
ghost, the fulfillyng of the Gospel.

For without that spirit, 2 Peter. 1. Matthew. 11. Revel. 3. Acts. 16. John. 6.
Esai. 54.
we have neither ears to hear, nor eyes to see, it is that spirit that
opens, and no man shuts: The same shuts, and no man opens: The same
spirit opened the sick woman's heart, that she should give ear to Paul, and
in respect of this spirit, the Prophet says: Erunt omnes docti a Deo: They
shall be all taught of God. Who so ever besides does not believe, that the
doctrine of the holy ghost, contained in the old, and new Testament, is
sufficient unto salvation: Lodo^^tus citatur ab illyrico, in Norma Concilij.
Albertus Pigghius controuer. 3. de ecclesia. Martin. Kemnitius, in examine
Council. Trident. page 32. Pigghius H^^rar. lib 3. ca. 3. ^ol. (...) 3. All
these are the papists sayings.
But regards it as vile, and of no force, nor yet authority, but calls,
names, and reports it, with these words, and such like blasphemy: dead
ynke: a liuelesse matter: a dumb judge, that can not speak: a black Gospel:
Inken divinity: a nose of ware: Does deny this article of our belief: I
believe in the holy ghost, that is to say: he does deny the holy ghost, to
be true and natural God, sith that any insufficiency, or vnperfection is
found in his doctrine.

For, why? It is the property of God to do all things, with most consummate
perfection. Whereby it does follow, that he which does any thing with
vnperfection, is no true and natural GOD. They therefore, that deny the
doctrine of the holy ghost, and also do despise, mock, scorn, and speak
irreverently of it: contained in the old, and new Testament, not to be perfect
or sufficient to salvation, are plain Macedonians. For they deny the holy
ghost, to be true and natural God. And all they that follow this opinion and
doctrine, not contentyng them selves with the most true and infallible word
of God, John. 10. Ephe. 5. 2. Peter. 1.
which is set forth unto us by the holy ghost, are not the true Church, and
spouse of Christ. For, the true Church and spouse of Christ, as it is borne
of new, not of mortal seed, Ephe. ^.
but of immortal, by the word of God, which lives and lasts for ever: so
is it builded upon the sure foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ
Jesus himself being the chief corner stone.

Wherefore, To beleeu^ God, as God, ^^ God. Hebre. 11.
we must learn first of all to believe God, secondly, to believe him as God:
thirdly, to believe in God: we must believe GOD, that is to say, that he is
creator of all things, and that he is omnipotente. We must believe God, as
God: that is, we must believe him, as he has declared and opened him self in
his holy and sacred scriptures unto us: To believe in God, that is, to put our
whole trust, confidence, and affiaunce only in him, Psalm. 50. We must believe
in, Gods power, Gods providence, Gods goodness, Gods mercy.
and to call unto, and upon him, in all our troubles, miseries, and
adversities, and upon none other: And also, constauntly and assuredly to believe
in him, that by his power, he susteineth us: by his providence, he governs
us: by his goodness, nourishes us: and by his mercy, saves us, and indueth
us with all kind of blessings. So that we must believe in none, but in God
the father, that loves us: in God the son, that redemeth us: and in God the
holy ghost, that sanctifies us, although three in persons, yet one in
essence, and Godhead. August. in Ioh. tract. 29.
Saint Agustine therefore says: Credimus Paulo, non credimus in Paulum:
credimus Petro, non credimus in Petrum: We believe (says he) Paul, but we
believe not in Paul: we believe Peter, but we believe not in Peter.

The.xxxiiij. Chapter. What is the true Church of God, and where it is.
THis then shall be my belief, touching the true Catholic and universal
Church. I believe the Catholic Church. 1. Peter. 1. Ephe. 2.
All they that are begotten of new, with the immortal seed of Gods word,
and are builded upon the foundation of the prophets and Apostles, having
Christ for their chief corner stone, by whose only spirit and word they are
guided and ruled, in what country or nation under the heavens so ever then be,
are the true church of Christ, we may also define and set forth the Church
after this manner: What the true Church of Christ is.
The Church of Christ is the holy congregation of the faithful, which by a
true and lively faith, are united and incorporated in our savior Christ,
whose members they are. Ephe. 5.
And because that savior Christ is the true son of God, all his members by
him, Ephe. 5.
are the sons of God. Jesus Christ is the head, and the true Christians are
his body. He is the Bridegroom, John. 15. Matthew. 1.
and the faithful are his spouses, which he does cleanse with his blood,
geuyng health and salvation unto his body, and saving his people from their
sins.

This Church is affixed or bound to no several place, but wheresoever two or
three, Matthew. 18. The Church is bound to no several place.
are gathered in the name of the Lord, I mean of our savior Christ, there
the true Church is. They therefore that do aligate and bind, the true
Catholic Church, to this place or that place, as though it could be no where
else, as our Papists do, are in this thing greatly deceived. For, though the
whole world were so over whelmed with Idolatry and superstition, that there
should seem to be no Church at all, yet God has always his elect and chosen
in one corner or other, although they be unknown unto the world.

Yea many times the faithful congregation is unknown unto the true and
faithful servants of God, as we may see by the example of Elias the
Prophet, ^. Reg. 19. Romans 11.
who complained that he was left alone: But the Lord made him an answer,
that he had seven thousands left in Israel, which had not bowed their knees
unto Baall. Who would not then have thought, that the Church had been at that
time in Israel or in Samaria, where four hundredth and fifty false Prophets
were continually, which did feed at Iesabelles boorde, or that there had been
no Church at all? yet we see that God had even at that time his flock, which
he did preserve and keep unto himself, although they were scattered abroad,
and not scarcely known of the true and faithful Prophets of God.

Hylarius cont. Auxentium.
Therefore, it were good to have always before our eyes, the goodly saying of
Hilary, which writes on this manner: One thing (says he) I warn you of,
beware of Antichriste. It is not well, that ye have such a pleasure in the
walls: It is not well, that ye honor and reverence the Church of God in
houses and buildings: It is not well, that under the color of them, ye do
bring in the name of peace. Is it to be doubted that antichriste shall sit in
them? The Mountains, the Woods, the Lakes, the Prisons, and mierie Doungeons
are more sure for me. For, the Prophets remainyng in them, or being let down
into them, did there prophecy.

This then is my belief, that although the true preaching of Gods word, The
outward tokens of the true Catholic Church.
and the right ministration of the sacraments, according to the Lords
institution and ordinance, are the most infallible tokens and signs whereby
the true Church of God is known here upon the earth: yet many and sundry
times, by the righteous judgment of almighty God, our sins and wickedness
deseruyng the same, these signs and tokens are so taken away, that it is
impossible for the world to know, where this true Church of God is. And yet
notwithstanding, God has still his flock in one place or other, he has still
his elect and chosen, whom he does preserve and keep in the midst of this
perverse and crooked generation, which contenting themselves with the heavenly
doctrine of the holy ghost, which is contained in the canonical books of the
old and new Testament,

The.xxxv. Chapter. Christ is the head of his Church, and not the Pope.
I DO acknowledge none other head then our Savior Christ, Ephe. 1.
as it is written, that God has made him, above al things the head of the
congregation, which is his body, and the fullness of him, that fills all in
all things. Whereby all the faithful do gather, Who can be the head of the
Church.
that he only can be the head of the Church, whose body the Church is: But
the Church is the body of Christ only: therefore Christ only can be the
head of the Church. Coloss. 1.
Again, in a another place it is written: And he is the head of the body of the
congregation, which is the beginning and first begotten of the dead: but who
is the beginning and first begotten of the dead, saving only our savior
Christ? We may well say then, that he only is the head of the Church. Ephe. 1.
Moreover, saint Paul says: that as the husband is the head of the wife: so
Christ is the head of the Church, being the savior of the body.

These words are plain, and do manifestly declare, that he only which is
the savior of the body, An Argument.
can be the head of the congregation and Church: but it pertains only to
christ, to be the savior of his body: Therefore, Christ only can be the head
of the faithful congregation and Church. Moreover, who would not judge that
woman to be an aduoutresse, that had two heads, that is to say: two
husbands? All men would count that woman to be a most filthy and stinkyng
harlot. Hieroni. ad Damasu^.
Saint Hierome therefore says these words: Ego nullum primum, nisi Christum,
sequens, beatitudini tuae, idest, Cathedrae Petri communione conso^ior: I
followyng no first, nor chief man, but only Christ, am joined as a fellow
in communion unto the blessed: that is to say, to Peter's chair? Mark here,
S. Hierome says: he knows, no first, no chief head, no not the Pope him
self, but only Christ. Again, he says not, I am bound to thy
commandments, but I am joined as a fellow, Grego. lib. 4. Epist. 30.
in communion unto the blessedness. Saint Gregory also says: Quid tu
Christo vniuersalis ecclesiae capiti in extremi iudicij responsurus es examine,
qui cuncta eius membra tibimet conaris vniuersalis appellationae supponere?
What answer will thou make unto Christ, the head of the universal Church,
when thou shall be examined at the last judgment, that thus go about, by
the name of universal bishop, to make all his members subject unto thee?
Saint Chrysostom, to pull down the pride of such as will exalte them
selves, above their head Christ, says: whosoever desires primacie in earth,
in heaven he shall find confusion: Neither shall he be accounted among the
servants of Christ, that will once entreat of primacie.

What shall we say then, of that whorishe Church, that besides Christ the
only head, Church of Rome is an whore.
and husband of the faithful congregation, does acknowledge that
Antichriste of Rome to be her head, preferryng his laws, decrees, statutes
and durtie traditions, before the wholesome doctrine of our Savior Christ? As
for the arguments that the Popes dearlynges are wont to bring in, for to prove
their fleshly Idol to be the supreme head of the Church: they are so
childishe, that I marvel that they be not ashamed to allege them.

First, Matthew. 16. Arguments of papists, whereby they go about to prove the
supremacy of the Pope.
for a foundation of their doctrine, they bring these words of Christ: Thou
art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my church: And I will give to
thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Does not Christ promise here
plainly (say they) that he will both build his Church upon Peter, and also
give him the keys of the kingdom of heaven? Again, be not these the words
of Christ: Thou art Simon, the son of Jonas, John. 1.
thou shalt be called Cephas? Here may we see, that Christ did appoinct
Peter, whose successors, all the holy Popes and Bishops of Rome are, to be
the supreme head of his congregation and Church. Not that ye should be
heads of his Church.
For, what should be his meaning else, when he says: And thou shall be called
Cephas? Did not he also say, that he would build his Church upon him? In deed
I may say of you, Answer. Barnarde. Sermon. 78.
as Barnarde says: Successores omnes cupiunt esse, imitatores pauci: Every
one couetteth to be successors (of the Apostles) but few are followers (of
them.)

The.xxxvj. Chapter. All the Apostles had equal power, to bind and to loose,
with Peter, and the keys were equally delivered to them all.
BEcause no man shall think, that this our doctrine, is a new found doctrine
(as the enemies of all truth, are wont liyngly to call it, I will bring
certain aucthorities of the faithful Fathers of the ancient Catholic
Church, which shall make this matter so plain, that any man, except he will
obstinately be blind still, shall be able to epsy out all their knauerie.

First, I will bring Saint Cyprian, upon these words: And I will give thee
the keys of the kingdom of heaven, who writes after this manner: Cyprian de
simplicitate Praelator^.
In the person of one man, the Lord did give the keys unto all the Apostles,
for to signify the unity of them all. For, truly the other Apostles were
even the same that Peter was, they were endued with like fellowship of honor
and power, but he did begin with unity: that is to say, with one, that
thereby it might be signified, that there is but one Church of Christ: we
learn by this, that the keys were given to all the Apostles, as well as unto
Peter.

Origin in Matthew. tract. 1.
Saint Origene says: Hoc dictum, tibi dabo claues regni coelorum, caeteris
quoque commune est. Et quae sequuntur, velut ad Petru^ dicta, sunt omniae
communia: This saying, to thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven,
is common to the rest of the Apostles: and the words that follow, as spoken
unto Peter, are common unto all.

Saint Hierome also says: Dices, super Petrum fundatur ecclesia: Hieroni.
cont. Iouinia. lib. 1.
licet ad ipsum in alio loco super omnes Apostolos fiat, and cuncti clauis
regni caelorum accipiant, and ex aequo super eos ecclesiae fortitud^ solidetur:
Ye will say, the Church is founded upon Peter. Notwithstanding, in an other
place, the same thing is done upon all the Apostles: and all receive the keys
of the kingdom of heaven: and the strength of the Church is founded equally
upon them all.

Ambro. de dignitate Sacerdotali. ca. 2.
Saint Ambrose to the same purpose says: Our Lord said unto Peter, Feed
my sheep. Which sheep and flock, not only blessed Peter then received, but
he receives the same together with us: And all we have received the same
together with him.

Saint Augustine has these words: Cum Petro dicitur, omnibus dicitur,
August. de ago. Christia. cap. 30.
amas me? Pasce oues meas: These words of christ, love thou me? Feed my
sheep: when they are spoken unto Peter, they are spoken unto all Priests, or
Ministers.

Beda, plainly says these words: Potestas ligandi, and soluendi quamuis soli
Petro a domino data videatur, Beda in Homi. in Euang. que^ ane dicunt.
tamen absque vlla dubietate noscendum est, quod and caeteris Apostolis datae
est: The power of bindyng and loosyng, notwithstanding, it seem to be given
only unto Peter, yet without all doubt, we must understand, that it was
given also to the rest of the Apostles.

Saint Augustine says, August. in John. tract. 50.
Petrus quando accepit claues, ecclesiam sanctam significauit: Peter when he
received the keys, signified the holy Church. Therefore (says he) when they
were all asked, In tract. 124.
Peter alone does make an answer, and it is said unto him: And I will give
thee the keys of heaven, as though he alone had received authority to bind,
and to loose: whereas he had spoken that for them all, and received this (as
bearyng in him self, the person of unity) with them all.

The meaning is this: when our Savior Christ did ask his Apostles, Matthew. 16.
whom they thought him to be? Peter alone did make answer, which did serve
for them all. For, though one alone had answered, yet Christ took it, as if
they had all answered, like to a Jury of twelve men, one makes answer for
all, and the Judge accepts it, as though every one had spoken. An example.
And as the answer of one, did serve for them al: so the promise that was
made unto one, was made unto them all. Which thing is most true. For, look
what he did promise to one, the same does he perform unto them all, saying
these words: John. 20.
As my father has sent me, so do I send you. And when he had spoken these
words, he did blow upon the^, saying: Receive the holy ghost, whose sins
soever, ye do forgive, shall be forgiven unto him: and whose sins soever ye
do retain, they shall be retained unto him. Which does plainly agree with the
words, that he speaks unto them in the.xviij. Chapter of Saint Matthewe.
But I think it expediente, Matthew. 18.
and necessary for the instruction of the unlearned and ignoraunte people, to
show what our savior does understand by the keys.

And here will I bring nothing of mine own, What Christ means by the keys.
Chrisost. in Matthew. 23. cap. Hom. 44. Tertul. cont. Marcionem. lib. 4.
but Chrysostom, an ancient writer of the Greek church: shall discuss all
the whole matter. The keye (says he) is the knowledge of the word of the
scriptures, whereby the gate of the truth is opened unto men. And the kepers
of the keys, are the ministers, unto whom, charge is given to expound and
declare the scriptures. Saint Tertulian also says: Quam clauem habebant
doctores, nisi interpretationem legis? What key had the doctors of the law,
saving the exposition of the law? Saint Hierome also has these words:
Hieroni. in Esaiam. lib. 6. cap. 24.
Duces ecclesiae habent claues scientiae, vt aperiant scripturas creditis sibi
populis. Vnde praecipitur, vt magistri aperiant, and discipuli ingrediantur:
The capitaines of the Church, have the keys of knowledge, to open the
scriptures unto the people to them committed. Therefore, commandment is
given, that the Masters should open, and the Scholars should enter. Saint
Ambrose says: Remittuntur peccata per dei verbum, Ambro. de Cayn and Abel.
lib. 2.
cuius levites est interpres: Sins be forgiven by the word of God, the
expounder whereof is the priest. Saint Augustine agreyng with them all, says:
Claues est dicenda, qua ad fidem pectorum dura reserantur: August. de Sanct.
Ho. 27.
That ought to be called the keye, wherewith the hardness of men's hearts is
opened unto faith,

Here may we see, that all the true preachers of Gods word, Who be the
kepers of the keys of gods kingdom.
are the kepers of those keys, and not the Bishop of Rome only: for of him
Christ's words may be verified, when he says: Ye have taken away the
keys of the kingdom of heaven: Luke 11.
and neither do you enter your selves, nor will you suffer others that would
enter. Of the Popes keys, it is well said of Veselus: Veselus subditis and
superio.
Claues Pape, and praelatorum non aperiunt regnum dei, sed claudunt potius: The
Popes, and the prelates keys, do not open the kingdom of God, but rather
shut it. It was said generally unto them all, Go ye into the universal
world; Mark. 16.
and preach the Gospel unto every creature: he that believes, and is
Baptized, shall be saved: and he that believes not, shall be condemned.

In these few words of our Savior Christ, two things are to be
considered, and marked. First, we do learn by them, Two things are to be
marked in Christ's words.
that the keys of the kingdom of heaven: that is to say, the preaching of
the Gospel, is committed unto them all: I mean, unto all the Apostles, and
not to one more then an other. What it is to loose. Acts. 3. Romans 1. Romans 4.
Secondly, we learn by them, that to loose, is none other thing, but to
certify by Gods word, the consciences of the true beleuers, that their
sins are freely forgiven, through faith in our Savior Christ Jesus. Which
thing being done by the true and faithful ministers of the Church here upon
the earth, takes no less effect in all true repentaunte sinners, then if it
were dooen in heaven, in the sacred counsel of the holy and blessed Trinity.
And for this cause does Christ our savior say: What soever ye loose here
upon the earth, Matthew. 18.
is loosed in heaven.

Therefore, saint Hierome accords herewith, saying: Quaecunque solueritis
super terram, Hieroni. in Esaiam. lib. 6. cap. 14.
erunt soluta and in caelo. Soluant autem eos Apostoli sermon dei, and
testimonijs scripturarum, and exhortatione virtutum: What soever things ye
loose upon earth, they shall be loosed in heaven: but the Apostles loose them
by the word of God, and by the testimonies of the scriptures, and by
exhortation unto virtue. Saint Augustine also says: Now are you clean,
August. in Ioh* tract. 80.
because of the word that I have spoken unto you. Quare non ait, mundi estis
propter Baptismum, quo loti estis? Nisi quia and in aqua verbum mundat: non
quia dicitur, sed quia creditur: Wherefore says he not, you are clean
because of the baptism wherewith ye are washed? Saving that even in the water,
it is the word that makes clean: Not because it is spoken, but because it is
believed. Again he says: Fides nostra est clauis regni coelorum: August. in
John. tract. 39^.
Our faith is the key of the kingdom of heaven. Ambrose says these words:
Remittuntur peccaeta per verbum dei, Ambros.
cuius levites est interpres: Sins be forgiven, by the word of God, the
expounder whereof, is the Leuite, or Priest.

Therefore, S. Paul calls it, Verbum reconciliationis, the word whereby we
be reconciled to God. 2. Cor. 5.
Again, he called it, Potentia dei ad salutem, omni credenti: The power of God
unto salvation, Romans 1*
to every one that does believe.

And on the contrary part, to bind here upon the earth, it is none other
thing, What it is to bind.
but to certify by the same word, the unfaithful sinners, which will give
no ears unto the glad tidings of the kingdom of heaven: their sins are
still in remembrance before God, unto everlasting condemnation, because they
will not believe on the name of the only begotten son of God. And this being
duly and rightly dooen, according to the institution and ordinance of Christ
our savior, is of no less efficacy and strength, then if the father, the
son, and the holy ghost had dooen it, as the heavenly wisdom of the
father does testify in the self same place, saying: Matthew. 18.
What so ever ye shall bind here upon earth, shall be bound in heaven.

If it parteineth only to the Bishop of Rome, who most liyngly does boaste
himself to be the successor of Peter, to preach the free remission of
sins, unto the true repentaunt sinners, and eternal condemnation unto the
unrepentant and unfaithful: then has he alone the keys of the kingdom of
heaven: but any child may learn, by the words of our savior Christ, that
this office does parteine generally unto all the faithful preachers and
ministers of Gods word.

Saint Augustines words therefore are plain: Si autem in Petro non esset
ecclesiae misterium, August. in Ioh. tract. 50.
non ei diceret Dominus, tibi dab^ claues, si autem hoc Petro dictum est, non
habet ecclesia, si autem ecclesia habet, quando claues accepit, ecclesiam to^am
designauit: If in Peter, were not a mystery of the Church, the Lord would
not have said to him, I will give to thee, the keys of the kingdom of
Heaven: If this were spoken only unto Peter, the Church then has them not,
if the Church has them, then when Peter received the keys, he signified the
whole church. Saint Ciprian also says: Cyprian de simplicitate Praelatorum.
Christus eandem dedit Apostolis omnibus potestatem: Christ gave to all his
Apostles like power.

We may then right well conclude, that this saying of Christ: And I will
give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Matthew. 16.
etc. Does make nothing for the mainteinaunce of the Popes supremacy: no more
then the saying that goes before, where it is said: Thou art Peter, and upon
this Rock I will build my Chuche. August. in Io. tract. 124.
For as Saint Augustine writes: I deo quippe ait dominus: super hanc petram
edificabo ecclesiam meam: quia dixerat Petrus, tu es Christus filius Dei viui.
Super hanc ergo inquit Petram quam confessus es: edificabo ecclesiam meam.
Petra enim erat Christus: super quod fundamentum etiam ipse edificatus est
Petrus. Fundamentum quippe aliud nemo potest ponere: paerter id quod positum
est: quod est christus Jesus: Therefore the lord did say: (Thou art Peter) and
upon this Rock will I build my Church, because that Peter had said; thou
art Christ the son of the living GOD. Therefore (says he) upon this Rock
that thou have confessed, 1. Cor. 10. Ephe. ^. 1. Cor. 3.
I will build my Church. And the Rock was Christ: upon which foundation,
Peter also is builded. For, none other foundation can any man lay, besides
that which is laid already, which is our Savior Jesus Christ.

Again, August. de verbis domi. Sermon. 13.
in a another place he says these words: Tues ergo (inquit) Petrus: and super
hanc petram quam confessuses: super hanc petram quam cognouisti dicens: Tu es
Christus filius dei viui: edificabo ecclesiam meam. Super meipsum, filium dei
viui: edificabo ecclesiam meam. Super me edificabo te: non me super te. Nam
volentes homines edificari super homines, dicebant: Ego quidem sum Pauli: Ego
autem Appollo: Ego vero Caephe, ipse est Petrus. Et alij qui nolebant edificari
super Petrum, sed super petram: Ego autem sum Christi: Thou art Peter (says
he) and upon this Rock which thou have confessed: and upon this Rock, whom
thou have acknowledged, saying: thou art Christ the son of the living God, I
will build my Church. Upon my self* being the son of the living God, I will
build my Church: I will build thee upon me, not me upon thee. When men
would build upon men, they did say: I hold of Paul: I hold of Apollo: I
hold of Cephas, which is Peter. 1. Cor. 1.
And other which would not be builded upon Peter, but upon the Rock: 1. Cor.
10.
said, I am Christ's. Which very words also Bid has, as it were verbatim,
word for word, writing upon the Corinthians. Beda in Cor. 1.
Saint Ambrose says likewise: Dicit Dominus ad Petrum: Ambr. ad Ephe. cap. 2.
Super istam petram edificabo ecclesiam^ meam: hoc est, in hac catholicae fidei
confessione, statuo fideles ad vitam.

The Lord said to Peter: Upon this Rock will I build my Church: that is,
in this confession of the catholic faith, I appointe all the faithful to
live. Hieroni. super Matthew. cap. 16.
Saint Hierome has these words: Secundum autem metaphoram petrae, recte
dicitur ei edificabo ecclesiam meam super te: That is, by a metaphorical
speech of the Rock, it is well said to Peter: I will build my Church upon
thee.

These holy Fathers of the ancient catholic Church, do manifestly prove by
the scriptures, that the Rock which the true Church is builded upon, is our
Savior Christ him self, the son of the living God. Here might I bring
Chrysostom, Cirill, Chrisost. Sermon. 21. de Pente. Cyrill dialog. de Trinitate.
lib 4. Hylary de Trinit. lib. 6. John. 1.
Hilarie, which all by the rock that the Church is builded upon, do
understand, a strong and steadfast faith in our Savior Christ, and a true
confessyng of his name: but I have already alleged them.

Now will I come to the other saying of Christ, where he says unto Peter:
Thou art Simon the Son of Jonas, and thou shalt be called Cephas, which
(says the Euangeliste) is by interpretation, a Stone. If all the Popes of
Rome then, with all their smoth shaven faced greacelinges, should affirm unto
me, that this word, Cephas, does betoken a head, I would account them as
accursed. Ye may see how they are not ashamed, to wreast the Scriptures, and
to give them a clean contrary interpretation, that so they may maintain and
uphold still their usurped supremacy and power. The holy ghost says: that,
Cephas, by interpretation, is a ^tone: The Bishop of Rome says, that Cephas,
does beto^^n and signify a head: and therefore, sith that he is the
successor of Peter, he ought to be the supreme head of the church.

Whether of these two ought we to believe? If an angel from heaven, (...). 1.
should preach any other Gospel unto us, then we have received already, S.
Paul bids us to count it accursed. Cursed be they then, ^^^istes are ^^rsed
by gods word.
that dare expound the scriptures otherwise then the holy Ghost has
expounded them: yea, everlasting damnation hangs over their heads, in what
estimation soever they be in this wicked world: though the world I say, do
esteem them as Gods, yet before the living God and his son Christ our
Lord, are they accursed.

Objection.
Why? will these good fellows say, is not Peter always named first, whenever
the apostles are rehearsed by name? does not this sufficiently declare, that he
is appointed of God to be the supreme head of his Church.

Answer.
I answer again, that if to be named first, does purchase or get any
pre-eminence, then Caesar must be preferred before God, sith that Christ the
wisdom of the father does name him first, Matthew. 22.
when he says: Render unto Caesar that parteineth unto Caesar: and unto God,
that parteineth unto God. Might I not by the same reason, prove that the
virgin Marie is inferior unto all the Apostles, Acts. 1.
sith that in the Acts, Luke does rehearse and name her last? but that will
they never grant, since that they will have her to be the Queen of heaven,
the mother of mercy. etc.

Howbeit, where they say that he is always named first, it sounds like a
lie, 1. Corin. 9.
for in the Epistle to the Corinthians, he is named last, and also in the
Epistle to the Galathians, he is named after, I mean, where Saint Paul does
prove, by many arguments, Gala. 2.
that he is nothing inferior unto him. But it appears most manifestly, that
Peter was in no higher authority then the other Apostles, since that being
sent of them, unto Samaria with John, Peter no higher in authority then the
other Apostles. Acts. 8. Gala. 2.
he does obey. Yea, when Paul did rebuke him to his face, because that he
walked not uprightly, he did give place unto him. It is most plain and
manifest then, that the blessed Apostle Saint Peter, never acknowledged such
supremacy, as the Antichriste of Rome does most tyrannously usurp now a
days: much less, that he would have set forth him self for the supreme
head of the universal Church of Christ.

The.xxxvij. Chapter. The true Church of Christ is but as a witness to the
word of God, addyng nothing to it: nor taking ought from it.
THerefore we conclude, that the true catholic Church, The true Church is
contented with the only word of god.
does acknowledge none other head, but only our Savior Christ, contentyng
it self, with his holy word, addyng nothing unto it, nor taking ought away
from it. For, since that the faithful congregation, being inspired with the
same spirit that they were inspired withal, The Church does allow the
Scriptures as a witness. Luke. 14. John. 15.
which did leave the scriptures unto us by writing, does but as a witness,
receive, aucthorize, and allow the books of the old and new Testament,
according to the saying of our savior, where he says: And ye shall be
witnesses unto me of these things: it is not to be thought, that the
faithful will ever pass the bounds and limittes of true witness bearyng, or
that they will add any thing unto the known truth, which they bear
witness unto, or take any thing away from it. Else might they most
deseruyngly, Matthew. 27. Ephe. 5. The Church aloweth the scriptures, as a
subject.
be numbered among those that did bear false witness against Christ.

Again, sith that the faithful congregation is subject to Christ, and that
the Scriptures that be contained in the Canonical books of the old and new
Testament, are his letters pattents, and the Sacraments his seals: verylie
the true Church of Christ, will in no wise alter the Scriptures, nor change
any thing in the ordinances and laws that parteine to the sacraments. A
similitude.
For, as if a subject knowing the letters of his Prince, and also his Seal,
should because that he knows them well, and aloweth them to be his, presume
and take upon him to counterfeict his princes letters or seal, he should be no
true subject, but a felone and traitor: even so if the Church, because that
she knows the Scriptures of the old and new Testament, to be the true and
infallible word of her Lord and Savior, and the Sacraments to be his
seals, should presume or take upon her, to alter Gods word, I mean the
Scriptures that be contained in the Canonical books of the old and new
Testament, or to counterfeict the Scaramentes: that is to say, to minister them
otherwise then her Lord and master, has instituted and appointed in his
word, she ought not to be called the true Church, but the most traitorous
harlot of Antichriste.

What ought we then to judge of the whorishe Church of the malignant, which
does not only acknowledge an other head besides Christ, but also does most
ungodly, presume and take upon her to alter and change the holy and sacred
Scriptures, and to peruerte the right use of the Sacraments? Shall the Sheep,
John. 10.
because they know the voice of their shephearde, presume to alter and change
it, or take upon them to allow the voice of a stranger, and to set it forth
for the voice of the true shephearde? Moreover, it is not unknown, that the
true Church, Revel. 21. The property of a true wife.
is the spouse and wife of the Lamb: but it is not the property of any true
and faithful wife, when her husbands Testament is made, and confirmed or
allowed, to add any thing to it, or to alter and change any thing in it,
though she knows never so much, and aloweth it to be her husbands Testament.

Sith then, that the scriptures and word of God contained in the canonical
books of the old and new Testament, are even the Testament of the only
begotten Son of God our Savior Jesus Christ, who is the only head and
husband of the true catholic Church: without all doubt, the faithful
congregation will never presume to add any thing to it, or to alter and
change any thing, that is contained or comprehended in it. Galat. 3.
For, since that, though it be but a man's Testament, yet if it be once allowed,
no man ought to despise it, or to add any thing to it: How much more ought we
to take heed that we add nothing to the everlasting testament of the only
begotten son of God, or that we change nothing that is contained and
comprehended in it?

Besides all this, Foolish sayings.
it were a foolish thing, to say, that the son is able to beget his father
or his mother: it is even as folishe a thing to say, that the Church, which
is begotten a new by the word, 1. Peter. 1.
and has all the authority that she has, from the word of the living God,
is able to aucthorize or allow any manner of doctrine which is not Gods word,
for Gods word: or that she is able to make, laws, decrees and statutes, at
her own pleasure, and after her own fantasy, and afterward to set them
forth for the infallible word of God. For, if the Church can make or fourge
a new word, then can she beget her self of new. Who s^eth not that it were
one of the greatest follies in the world, to say or affirm any such thing?

Therefore, to put al men out of doubt, ye shall understand, that as the Sun
is clear and bright, An excellent similitude.
not because that men do judge it to be so, but rather men do judge it to be
so because it is so in deed, and can judge of it none otherwise: even so the
holy Scriptures, contained in the canonical books of the old and new
Testament, are the infallible word of the living God, not because that the
Church does judge and allow it to be so, but rather the true catholic
Church, does judge and allow it to be so, because that it is so in deed, and
can judge of it none otherwise, no more then the clear and bright eyes can
judge of the light and brightness of the Sun: of the which the blind can
give no judgment, even as the unfaithful and reprobate can give no judgment
of the word of God, nor yet allow it.

Whereby we may then conclude, that the certitude, verity, and
infalliblenesse of Gods word, Whereof the certitude of Gods word does depend.
does not depend or hang upon the opinion and judgment of men, but that it
does altogether depend of the holy spirit of God, which by his own force,
virtue, and strength does verify it, and constrains the faithful to allow
and receive it: as the bright and clear beams of the Sun, A similitude.
John. 10.
do compel the eyes to confess that the Sun is clear and bright. For the
sheep of our Savior christ do both hear and understand the voice of their
shephearde, and not the voice of a stranger. And all the Prophets have
prophesied and taught, and the apostles also have been verified and aucthorized
by the virtue of him that spoke in the^: so that all the whole world could not
withstand it.

It is now easy to see, that the true catholic Church of God, though she
knows which is the true word of god, and which is not, and that by the
inspiration of the same holy spirit, that they were inspired withal, which
did leave unto us by writing, the holy and sacred Scriptures that be contained
in the old and new testament, I mean, the canonical books of them both:
Chrisost. in Genesis. Ho. 2.
for as Saint Chrysostom says: Ergo, suam erga homines amicitiam innouare
volens, quas^ long absentibus literas mittit, conciliaturus sibi vniuersam
hominum naturam: Therefore, god mindyng to renew his favor toward man, sent
(his holy Scriptures as it were) his letters, thereby to reconcile to him
self all mankind* Ireneus says: Apostoli tunc euangelium praeconiauerunt.
Postea vero per dei voluntatem, Ireneus. lib. 3. cap. 1.
illud in scripturis nobis tradiderunt, fundamentum, and columnam fidei nostrae
futurum: Then the Apostles preached the Gospel, and afterward by Gods will,
they delivered the same to us in writing, to be a foundation, and a pillar unto
our faith.

But here to speak of the Papists objections how that the Church was before
the word, it shall be superfluous, to waste paper and Ink, The word was before
the Church was.
in so fruictlesse a question. For we say generally, the word was before the
church, for Moses wrote the word of God that he spoke to Adam of the seed to
come: So says Saint Paul: Hebre. 1.
God spoke, in old times many ways, and in sundry sorts unto the fathers.
Chrisost. in Gene. Hom* 2.
And saint Chrysostom says: God the creator of mankind, from the beginning
spoke unto men by him self, in his own person. We speak not so precisely,
and nicely of Gods word written in Paper: For so it is a creature corruptible,
and shall consume and perish, as other corruptible creatures do.

But the word of God, which we speak of, endures for ever. Esai. 40.
Hieroni. in^ Job. cap. 27.
Saint Hierome thereto agreyng, says these words: Quomodo aeternae erunt
scripturae diuinae, si mundus certo fine est terminandus? Verum est quidem,
quod librorum pelliculae cum ipsis literis abolandae sunt. Sod, quia subiungit
dominus, verba mea vero no^ praeteribunt, proculdubio, quod illi^ apicibus
pollicetur, erit aeternu^. That is to say in english thus: How shall the holy
scriptures be everlasting, seeing the world shall have an end? True it is,
that the Parchement or leaves of the books, with the letters and all, shall be
abolished. But forasmuch as our Lord adds, my words shall never pass:
doubtless, the things that are promised by the same letters, shall last for
ever.

The.xxxviij. Chapter. The true Church is known by the word of God.
SO that the word of GOD enduring for ever, is it that the holy catholic and
true Church is known by, and ever has been. Therefore saint Augustine says:
August. in Psalm. 57.
Exore veritatis ecclesiam agnos^o participem veritatis: By the mouth of the
truth, I know the church, that is partaker of the truth. And again he
says: August. de vnitate. eccle. cap. 1.
I would the Church should be showed, not by the decrees of men, but by the
heavenly oracles or words of God: We must seek the Church, in the words
of Christ, August cont. Cr^^co. G^am. lib. 1 cap 33. Be vnitate ecclesiae. cap.
16.
which is the truth, and best knows his own body: The holy Scripture
shows us the Church, without doubtyng: In the holy scriptures, the Church
is plainly known: We must know the Church by the holy Canonical
scriptures, as we know the head.

Chrisost. in Mat. Ho. 49.
Saint Chrysostom also says: Nullo modo cognoscitu^r, quae sit vera
ecclesia, nisi tantu^modo per scripturas: It is not any ways known, which is
the true Church of Christ, but only by the scriptures. August. de Vnitate
eccle. cap. 3.
S. Augustine says: Non audiamus, haec dico, haec dicis: sed audiamus, haec
dicit dominus. Ibi quaeramus ecclesiam: ibi discutiamus causam nostram: Let us
not hear these words, this say I, this say thou: But let us hear these
words, thus says the Lord: In eodem capi.
There let us seek the Church: there let us discuss our cause. I will not
have the holy Church, to be showed by man's judgment, but by Gods word.
Saint Ambrose also does say these words: Ambro. Hexameron. lib. 4. cap. 8.
Ecclesia fulget, non suo, sed Christi lumine: The Church shines (or is
known) not by her own light, but by the light of Christ, which is, by the
word of God.

These testimonies, of the godly fathers of the Catholic Church, do flatly
declare, that the Church is known only by the word of God, and not by man's
decrees nor statutes, therefore, the true Church does not take upon her, to
add any thing unto it, or to take ought away from it, she does not presume to
forge new articles of our faith, and to set forth news laws and decrees
for Gods holy word, but she contenteth her self, with the word, laws,
and ordinances of her true husband, and head, Jesus Christ.

Ephe. 5.
Therefore, that whorishe church of Rome, which most presumpteously, forgeth
daiely new laws and Articles of our faith: setting forth even with fire and
sword, the fond doctrines and inventions of men, for the true and infallible
word of the living GOD, Behold proud Lucifer of Rome.
mainteinyng openly, that their Church is above the word of GOD, and that it
is of more force and greater authority, for these are their own words, set
out in their own books. A doctrina Romanae ecclesia, and Romani pontificis,
sacra scriptura robur trahit, and authoritatem: The holy scripture takes
strength, and authority of the doctrine of the Romain Church, and of the
Bishop of Rome. Again, Syluester pri^rias, cont. Lutherum.
in the same book, he says (I mean Siluester Prierias, master of the Popes
palaice:) Indulgentiae authoritatae scripturae non innotuere nobis: sed
authoritate Romanae ecclesiae, Romano^umque pontificum, quae mayor est:
Pardones are not known to us by the authority of the Scriptures, but by the
authority of the Roman Church, and of the Bishops of Rome, which is
greater, then the authority of the scriptures. These I say boldly, can in
nowise be the true spouse of our savior Jesus Christ, but the abominable,
and stinckyng harlotte of Antichriste. They have always in their mouths, this
saying of saint Augustine, August. cont. Epistola^ fundament. cap. 5.
non crederem Euangeli^, nisi me ecclesiae catholicae authoritas commoueret. I
would not believe the Gospel, except the authority of the Catholic Church
moved me. These few words have they tossed to and fro, to press out of them,
that is not in them, and would seem to go about, to prove the creature,
above the creator that made all things. But as S. Augustine says, he
believed the Gospel, because of the Church, August. in psalm. 57.
so likewise he has said: Exore veritatis ecclesiam agnosco participem
veritatis: By the mouth of the truth, I know the church, that is partaker
of the truth. But whereas they would seem to go about, to prove by
Augustines words, that the Church is above the word of God, The cause that
moved S. August. to say he would not believe the gospel without ye church.
their folly herein is easily espied, if we consider the cause, that moved
Augustine so to speak. The Manichees, would needs go about, to prove, and
make men to believe, that the Epistle of Fundame^tus, was of as good
authority, as the Epistles of Paul, Peter, James, or Ihon. And that their
Manicheus was the Apostle of Christ.

Augustine answers them and says, he can not be so easily persuaded by
the same reason, to receive the Epistle of Manicheus, as the Epistles of Peter,
and Paul. etc. He gives a reason why, for because (says he) in receiuyng of
them, they had the authority, testimony, and commendation of the Catholic
Church: but Fundamentus Epistle has no authority, nor testimony, but only
of the Manichees them selves, which were openly shut out from the Church,
which by no means can be in equal authority with the authority of the
Church: So if we mark Augustines words well, we shall easily perceive,
that he makes not the Church judge of the scriptures, nor yet grants any
authority to the church over the scriptures, but only as witnesses, and
testimonies, which be the true canonical scriptures, from the Apochriphes,
and counterfecte Scriptures, as this Epistle of the Manichees.

And that this is the true meaning of saint Augustine, one of their own
doctors, and a Papiste for his life, says upon these words of saint
Augustine before recited, ^erson. lib. de spirituali vita anima lectione. 2.
Errare cos qui ijs them Augustini verbis abutuntur ad probandum, quod Papae,
vel co^cilium, vel ecclesia, possit immutare quae ab Euangelistis, and
Apostolis sunt tradita: That is to say, they do err, which use the same
words of saint Augustine, to prove, that the Pope, or Counsel, or the
church, may alter or change, what so ever have been delivered by the
Evangelists, and Apostles. No^ we may not gather hereupon, that the
authority of the church, is greater then the authority of the scriptures,
because that there be many found, which do take the holy scriptures for
authentical, as moved by the authority of the Church. In deed to them, the
Church seems better, then the holy scriptures: but they be far otherwise
of them selves.

Else Moses should by the same reason, be of greater authority then Christ,
because that many believed in Christ, moved by the authority of the scripture
of Moses, as Christ says: If you would believe Moses, ye would believe me
also. We read in John thus: And of that city, many of the Samaritans believed
in Christ, John. 4.
upon the word of the woman, which bare witness and said: For he told me
all things that I have done. According unto this argument, the authority of
the sinful woman, was more then of Christ, and so it was in deed at the
first, of more reputation with the people of the city, to whom Christ was
yet unknown. But of it self it was not so, nor afterward, when they hearing
the doctrine of salvation of Christ him self, they said unto the woman: Now
we do not believe, because of thy words, for we have heard and known, that
this is verily the savior of the world. John. 1.
Saint Ihon showed Christ unto the people, yet he was not greater then
Christ. In saint Peter, we do read in this wise: 1. Peter. 3.
Likewise, ye women also, be subject unto your husbands, that they also
which do not believe the word, may be won without the word, through
the conversation of the woman. etc. Ergo, whereas the unfaithful husband is
stirred unto the faith of Christ, by the regard of the conversation of his
wife, which he sees is honest, chaste, faithful, and obediente, whereas he
could not be moved by the preaching of the Gospel, may we gather that the
conversation of the woman is better, or greater then the Gospel? In deed so
it appears, but it is to him which is still unfaithful, not unto him which
does acknowedge the truth of the Gospel, and the authority of God.

The Church had in times paste, great estimation of holy conversation,
whereby many were brought unto the faith of Christ, and the authority of the
church did them good. But yet it was not of it self, better then the truth of
the Gospel.

The.xxxlx. Chapter. Of the office and authority of the Church, and how i^
may err, and how it cannot err.
THE Church we grant (as part we touched before) has three offices, The true
Church has three offices as touching the word of God.
touching the word of God. The first and formoste of them is: that as a
witness, she keeps the holy books of the Canonical scriptures: But
thereby it can not be proved, that it is lefull for her to peruerte or alter
any thing in the said holy books. First (...).
As public and private writings, are committed to Scriueners, or Notaries,
to be laid up, and kept of them: And yet none will say, he may alter any
thing of those writings.

The second office is, Second office.
to preach and publishe the words committed unto it by God: Matthew. 28.
but it may publishe nothing, but what is taught by the word to them
delivered: as a common crier, who although he publishe the decrees of Princes,
and Magistrates, yet he is not above the decrees of Princes, and Magistrates:
but his whole office is, faithfully to pronounce all things, as he has
received them of the Prince, addyng nothing to it, nor taking ought away.

Third office.
The third office is, sith that she is endued with the spirit of God, it must
therefore discern and try the sincere and incorrupt books of holy
scriptures, from the counterfecte, and Apochriphas. So, many can descerne the
true and proper writings of Plato, and Aristotle: So we can descerne, God,
from the devil, and yet are we not to be compted equal with God: much less
can we think that we do excel him. Now, we have said somewhat of the office
of the Church, I will also declare the whole authority that she has, by the
word of GOD.

The aucthotie of the true church, does consist in four^ things.
The authority then of the true Church of our Savior Christ, does most
chiefly consiste in four things. First, this true and faithful Church, has
authority to choose, and ordei^ne ministers, as we learn by the example of
the Apostles, and of the Churches that be spoken of in the book of the Acts:
Acts. 6.
but this must be done, according to the rules, and canons of the Apostles: If
they be blameless, the husband of one wife, Tim. 3. Titus 1.
vigilante, sober, and apt to teach. etc.

Secondly, it has authority to teach, by the lawful ministers, Hebre. 5.
Acts. 6.
according to the rule and Cannons of the Apostles. And these ministers ought
to teach, and set forth none other thing, 2. Cor. 11.
then they have received of the Lord, having always before their eyes, the
saying of Christ our Savior: Docete eos obseruare quaecunque precepi vobis:
Teach them to keep and observe all things, Matthew. 28.
what soever I command you: And the same it is that we call, Potestatem
clauium: The power of the keys, which (as it has been sufficientlye declared
before) consists, in preaching free remission of sins unto the faithful
and true repentaunte sinners, 2. Cor. 2. Matthew. 18.
and eternal condemnation unto the unfaithful and vnrepentaunte. Which
thing, if it be duly dooen, according to the institution and ordinance of
our Savior Christ, takes no less effect, then if it were done in heaven.
And under this do we comprehend, the authority that the church has to
excommunicate open sinners, 1. Cor. 5. 2. Cor. 2.
and to receive them again, if they show true tokens of repentance, and of
amendeme^t of life.

Thirdely, the true and faithful Church has authority to minister the
sacraments, by the ministers thereunto lawfully

Fourthly, and last of all, it has full authority and power to examine the
doctrines, and to try the spirits, whether 1. Cor. 14. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 1. John.
4. Acts. 15.
and let other judge. Again, Prove all things, and hold that which is good.
Saint Ihon says: Dearly beloved, try the spirits, whether they be of
God, or not. But this trial must be done, with the touchestone of Gods
word, which with the holy ghost ought to be the chief president in all
Sinodes, and Counsels.

So saint Augustine says against Maximinus, August. cont* Maxim. lib. 3.
cap. 14.
these words: Now, neither ought I to allege the Counsel of Nice, nor
thou the counsel of Ariminum, to take aduau^tage thereby, for I am not bound
to the authority of the one, nor thou restrained to the determination of the
other. Sed scripturarum authoritatibus, non quorumque proprijs, sed vtrisque
communibus, testibus res cumre, causa cum causa, ratio cum ratione concertet:
But by the aucthorities of the Scriptures (not peculiar witnesses unto either
of us, but common, and indifferent unto us both) let one matter with an other,
cause with cause, and reason co^tende with reason. Hieroni. in Epist. ad Ephe.
lib. 3. cap. 5.
Saint Hierome therefore says: Omni studio legende nobis sunt scripturae,
and in lege domini meditandum die ac nocte. vt probati trapezite sciamus: the
scriptures are to be read of us with all diligence, and to meditate day and
night in the law of the lord, that we may become perfect exchaungers: to
know the false counterfecte doctrine, from the true doctrine of Christ.
Origin in Episto. ad Romans lib. 10. cap. 16.
Saint Origene also has these words: Sensus nofiri and enarrationes, sine
scripturis testibus non fidem habet: Our judgment and expositions, without
witness of the holy scripres, have no credit. Thus we may plainly see,
that all our matters must be tried by the Canonical books of the holy
Scriptures.

When the Church can not err.
So far forth does the authority of the true Church extend, which as it
can not err, as long as she takes gods word and the holy ghost for her guide:
so as soon as she forsakes Gods word, When the Church can and does err.
and the guidyng of the holy ghost, she falls into all kind of errors,
and at length does become the Synagogue of Satan, the Church of the
malignaunt, and the stinckyng ha^lot of antichriste. The whole universal
Church does never fall away from God.
Howbeit, the whole universal Church, does never so fall away from the truth
of Gods word, but that God does always preserve unto him self a
certain number, which will never agree nor consent unto ungodliness, and
from whom the spirit of truth is not taken away. And because that these be
unknown of the world, as they that lack the outward tokens and signs of
the true Church of Christ, Marks of the true Church.
which are the preaching of Gods word, and the ministration of the
sacraments and the use of true discipline, according to the institution and
ordinances of the Lord, are commonly called the invisible Church, Why it is
called the invisible Church. John. 10.
not because that men are invisible, which thing can not be as long as they
be here conuersaunt upon the earth, but because that they be only known and
seen of God, who knows only who be his, and who be not. ^. Tim. 2.


And this faithful congregation, whether it has the outward signs of the
true Church of Christ, or not, as long as it bears about this body of
sin, 2. Cor. 5. Ephe. 2.
is subject to many infirmities, but for Christ's sake they are not imputed,
for when it is said, that it is without spot or wrinkle, that is to be
understood, by imputation through Jesus Christ our savior: And therefore it
is called the glorious congregation. Eph^. 5.
And I do also believe with saint Augustine, August. de
that this catholic Church, is the Barn floor of the Lord, and that in
it, until the day of judgment, fi^e ad Petru^. cap. 43.
Chafe shall be mixed still with the Wheat: My meaning is this, that in the
Church, both good and badde; true beleuers and hypocrites, are contained
together in the fellowship of the sacraments, and that it shall be so unto the
worlds end. Which thing we do learn by the parable of the good seed,
Matthew. 1^.
and of the Darnell, and of the Net that is cast into the Sea, and which
does draw of all kind of fishes unto the shore.

But we must in the mean while, beware that we do not, because of the Chafe,
We must not divide our selves from the Church, because the wicked are among us.
The opinion of the Anabaptists.
Darnell, and rotten fishes, severe and divide our selves from the Church, as
the wicked Anabaptists do, which for every triflyng matter do divide them
selves from the Church, though the word of God be never so finely nor
sincerely preached, and the Sacraments most rightly ministered, according to
the institution and ordinance of the Lord.

Why do we not rather follow the godly counsel of the blessed Martyr of God,
Cyprian de simplicitat^ praelatoru^.
S. Cyprian, that he gives unto us? Although (says he) Darnel and Tares, are
seen to be in the church, yet our faith and charity ought not to be let,
that because we do see Tares and Darnell to be in the Church, we should
therefore forsake the Church: but rather we ought to endeavor our selves that we
may be good corn, that when the good corn is gathered into the Garners of the
Lord, Matthew. 3.
we may receive a reward of our labor and work. 2. Tim. 2.
Also, in a great house there be many vessels, not only of Gold and Silver,
but also treene vessels, and earthen vessels, and some to honor, and some to
dishonor. Let us give diligence, and labor as much as it lies in us, that
we may be a vessel of Gold or of silver.

And truly, this doctrine is most necessary to be marked, and also to be
followed. For, as all the benefits that God does of his mere mercy and
goodness, grant unto his Church, do parteine unto all, because the
Communion and fellowship that is betwixt the members of Christ's body: So
without this Communion and fellowship of the saints, Communion of saints.
there is no remission or forgiveness of sins, but eternal and everlasting
condemnation. For, how could it be, that they should enjoy the privilege of
the true members of Christ, that do by a self willl, divide themselves from
his body, as the Papists do now in these days? Should not that branch
deserve to be dried up, John. 15.
and to be cast into the fire, that would wilfully divide it self from the
true vine?

The.xl. Chapter. Our offenses and sins are forgeuen us, by faith, through
Christ, and not by our works and merits.
ALso my belief is, that in this church, sins are freely forgeuen through
faith in the mercy of God, The forgeuenes of sins.
obtained and purchased unto us, by the merits of the death, passion, and
bloodsheddyng of our savior Jesus Christ, wihout any of our own deservings or
merits, or without any matter of satisfaction that we be able to make, though
we were able to live as long as ever any man did live upon the earth. For if
any amends could have been made for sins, or if any justification could
have been gotten by the works of the law, Galat. 2.
Christ needed not to have dyed. And therefore the lord said right well: I am
he, Esai. 43.
I am he that takes away thy wickedness, and that for mine own sake, and
thy sins will I remember no more.

Here have we a promise that God will put away our wickedness and sins, not
for our deseruinges or merits, but for his own sake: that is to say, of his
free mercy and goodness, as says saint Paul: Iustificamur gratis ex gratia
ipsius: We be justified freely of his grace. Romans 3.
Again, we judge that a man is justified by faith, without the works of the
law. And for this cause, his only begotten son our savior, was by the
angel, called Jesus, Matthew. 1.
because that he should save his people from their sins.

If our good works, merits and deseruinges, could save us from our sins,
why should they not be called by that name? For, Acts. 4.
there is none other name under heaven given unto us, whereby we must or can be
saved. Therefore, I do think it most convenient and meet that we say with
Barnarde: Barnarde sup^^ canti. Ser. 61.
Meritum meum, miserationes domini. Non sum ego inops meriti, quam diuille non
est inops miserationum. Si miserationes eius multe, multis ego sum in meritis.
Hoc totum est hominis meritum, si totam spem suam ponat in domino: That is to
say: My merit is the mercy of God. So long as god is not poor of mercy, so
long cannot I be poor of merits. If his mercies be great, then am I great in
merits. This is the whole merit of man, if he put his whole affiaunce and
trust in the Lord. I marvel much of the papists and meritmongers, that are
so bold to set up their own righteousness and merits.

But before we seem to speak any thing to their objections, Whence this word
iustificare has been borrowed, and what it signifies.
I think it best to declare in what signification this word to justify, ought
to be taken. This word, iustificare, to justify, has been of S. Paul,
borrowed of the common use of the law: for in judgment, to justify a man, it
is to assoyle or quite him of the crime that is laid to his charge, or that he
is accused of, and to pronounce him righteous, just, innocent, and guiltless.

After the same manner, when we say that God does justify us, our meaning is,
that God does assoyle and quite us of all crimes, offenses and trespasses,
that can be laid to our charge, or that we can be accused of, and that he
does pronounce us just and righteous in his sight: that is to say, that
first he does pardone and forgive us our sins, he covers them, and does
in no wise impute them unto us, but imputes unto us righteousness, not our
own, which is none at all, but the righteousness of his Son our Savior, and
so through his righteousness, does both save us, and make us blessed, so does
the Apostle expound this our justification, Romans 4^*
saying: As David does set forth the blessedfulnes of the man, unto whom God
imputes righteousness without works, where he says: Blessed are those,
whose iniquities are forgeuen, and whose sins are cou^red. Psalm. 32.
Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes no sin.

As for the places of saint James; James. 2. Objection.
where he says: Was not our father Abraham justified through works, when he
offered Isaac his son upon the altar? And a little after: ye see then, how
that of works a man is justified, and not of faith only. It makes little
for their purpose, if it be well considered. We read that Abraham believed the
Lord, Answer. Genesis 15.
and it was accounted unto him for righteousness, which text is of Paul
alleged after this sort: Romans 4.
If Abraham were justified by works, he has wherein to rejoice or glory,
but not with God, for what says the Scripture: Abraham believed God, and it
was imputed unto him for righteousness. Whereby the Apostle proves strongly,
that Abraham was justified by faith. But this that saint James does speak
of, which is the offering of Isaac, was done thirty years after that the
scriptures did pronounce. Abraham justified, or that his faith was compted
unto him for rigteousnesse. Uerely, sith that fifteen years before that Isaac
was borne, Abraham's faith was imputed unto him for righteousness, it was
impossible that he should be justified by the offryng of his son Isaac,
which was, as I said before, thirty years after. That that the Apostle goes
about here, is only to show, that the faith which Abraham was justified by,
was no idle or dead faith, but such a faith as made him obedient unto God,
as it is plainly set forth to the Hebrews. Hebre. 11.


Therefore, if the circumstaunces be considered, there is no repugnaunce or
co^trarietie in the doctrine of the Apostles at all. For, what contrariety or
repugnaunce could there be in their doctrine, sith that they were both led
by one spirit? Therefore, we shall mark that the holy Apostle saint Paul,
in his Epistle to the Romans, and to the Galathians, did dispute and reason
against them which did attribute justification to works. Note this diligently.
But saint James did write against them which did utterly contempne, and
despise good works.

And therefore, Paul shows the causes of our justification: James shows
theffectes and fruits of the same. Paul declares how we are justified: James
declares how we are known to be justified. Paul excludes works, as not
the cause of our justification: James approves works, as effects proceedyng
of the same. Paul denies that any good works, can be in them that be not
justified: James affirms that they which be justified, ca^ in no wise be
without good works.

But ye shall hear what S. Augustine says, touching this matter: August. in
lib. 83. questionu^. question. 76.
Non sunt co^trariae duoru^ apostoloru^ sententiae, Pauli, and Iacobi: cum
dicit Paulus, iustificari homine^ sine operibus: and Iacobus dicit, inane^ esse
fide^ sine operibus. Quia Paulus loquitur de operibus, quae fide^ praecedunt:
Iacobus de ijs, quae fidem sequntur. That is to say in english: The saying of
the two Apostles, Paul, and James, are not contrary, whereas Paul says, a man
is justified without works: and James says, faith without works, is in
vain. For, Paul speaks of the works that go before faith: James speaks
of the works that follow after faith.

Thomas of Aquine also says: I acobus hic loquitur de operibus sequentibus
fidem: Thomas de Aquino, in Epist. Iacobi. cap. 5.
quae dicuntur iustificare, non secundum quod iustificare dicitur iustitiae
infusio: sed secundum quod dicitur iustitie exercitatio, vel ostentio, vel
consummatio. Res enim dicitur fieri, quando perficitur, vel innotescit: James
in this place, speaks of such works, as follow faith: which works are
said to justify, not as justification is the procuryng of righteousness: but
in that it is an exercise, or a showing, or a perfectyng of righteousness. For
we say a thing is done, when it is perfected, or known to be done.

So that we may easily see, that the offering up of Isaac, is a testimony of
the faith and righteousness of Abraham, he could not be justified by it, but
rather it was thereby declared, that he was justified already. So that this
obedience of his to the word of God, Romans 4.
did only manifest and show, that he was, when he believed Gods promises,
made righteous before God, through the same faith and belief. That was the
meaning of David, Psalm. 51*
when he says: That thou may be justified in thy words, and overcome, when
thou art judged: that is to say, that thou may be declared just, and thy
goodness and truth appear, This word, iustificare, is taken of S. Paul in one
sense, and of S. James in another.
in performyng thy promises, when man either curiously, or arrogauntly would
judge thy works.

Therefore this word, iustificare, to justify, is not taken of saint Paul
in that signfication that saint James takes it in: for, of Paul it is taken
for to deliver from sin, and for to impute rightousnesse: But James does
take it, for to declare and show one just, and righteous. Saint Paul does
speak of a lively faith, which can no more be without good works, then the
Sun can be without light, or fire without heat: But saint James does
speak of an idell faith, which may be in the reprobate, James. 2.
yea, in the devil himself, as the Apostle writes in the same place. I might
bring many plac^s of Scripture, wherein the excellency of faith is highly
set forth, but one or two shall suffice, at this time.

Acts. 13.
In the acts, we have these words out of S. Paul's sermon that he made to the
Jews at Antiochia, a city of Pisidia: Be it known unto you therefore,
brethren, that through this man is preached unto you, the forgiveness of
sins. And that from all things, from which ye could not be justified, by
the law of Moises, by him every one that believes, is justified. These words
are plain, and need no exposition at all, for all we see, that he takes
away altogether justification, from the law of Moises, and does attribute it
unto faith in our Savior Jesus Christ.

But to the Romans, he makes the matter more plain, when he says: Romans 3.
They have all sinned, and are destitute, or void of the glory of God. But
they are justified freely, by his grace, through the redemption, that is in
Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth, to be a purchaser of mercy, through
faith in his blood. Mark here. First he says, they have all sinned* and that
they are deprived of the glory of GOD, by which words he shows openly
before our eyes, the miserable estate, that mankind was in. Secondly he
shows, how, and by what means, Ephe. 2.
we are delivered from it: I mean from that damnable estate, that we are in,
by our own nature, and first birthe, when he says, they are justified freely
by his grace. Now if we be justified freely, by the grace of God, where are
our works, merits, or deseruinges become? For if any works, deservings, or
merits, do go before our justification, how can it be said, that we are
justified freely, by the grace of God our heavenly father. Ephe. 2.
Therefore, he says in an other place: By grace are ye saved through faith,
and that not of your selves: it is the gift of God, not of works, least any
man should boast him self. Revel. 22.
S. Ihon says: Blessed are they that have washed their roabes (not in their
own merits but) in the blood of the Lamb. Again, I will give the thristie to
drink of the well of life (not for his deserts but) for nothing.

Saint Ambrose an holy father says. As there be no sins so detestable that
can keep of the gift of grace, Ambro. de vocatio. Gent. lib. 1. cap. 5.
so there can be no works so excellent, that unto them, by the judgment of
retribution or recompense, the same should be due, which is freely given and
granted. For, the redemption of the blood of Christ should wax vile, and the
mercy of God, be feign to give place to the prerogative of men's works, if
justification, which is done or wrought by grace, were due unto the merits
that go before, so that it should not be the free gift of the giver, but the
reward or hire of the worker.

What plainer words can there be spoken: therefore Job says: Job. 9.
if a man will dispute with God, he is not able to answer him one, for a
thousand, and therefore he said: Verebar omnia opera mea. I stood in doubt
and was afraid of all my works. Although I were perfect, yet my soul shall
not know it: if I would justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me,
and Esai says: all our righteousness is like a menstrous cloth of a woman.
Esai. 64.
Therefore, al our doctrine is grounded upon the words of Christ: when ye have
done all, say that ye be unprofitable servant, Luke 17.
and therefore have deserved nothing.

Saint Origene therefore says: Say ye that ye be unprofitable servants.
Origin in Matthew. tract. ^.
For, notwithstanding we have done all things that are commanded, yet have we
done no good thing. For if our doings were good in deed, then were we not
unprofitable: But any good deed of ours is called good, not rightly, or duly,
but by abuse of speech.

So Saint Augustine says: August. in Psalm. 94. August. Epist. 52. ad
Macedon. Romans 5.
if God would deal with us according to that we have deserved, he should
find nothing, but that he might condemn. Again he says, what be the
merits of any men? For Christ that came, not with his due reward, but with
his grace, that was not due, found all men sinners, being himself only free
from sin, and a deliverer of sinners. And again in a another place he has
these words: Opera manuum mearum non commendo. August. in Psalm. 137.
Timeo enim, ne cum inspexeris, plura inuenias peccata, quam merita: Lord I
commend not the works of my hands: For, I am afraid, least, when thou shall
behold them, thou shall find mo sins, then good deservings. So says
saint Hierome. Si consideremus nostra merita desperandum est: Hieroni: in
Esai. cap. 64.
If we behold our own merits, we must be driven to desperation. Origene also
affirms the same saying: Origin ad Romans lib. 4. cap. 4.
Ego vix mihi persuadeo, vllum opus esse posse, quod ex debito remunerationem
deposcat: I do scarcely believe, that there can be any work, that may of
duty require reward. Again he says: Origin ad Romans lib. 9. cap. 10.
Quia omniae conclusae sunt sub peccata, nunc non in meritis, sed in
misericordia dei salus humana consistit. For as much as all men are shut up,
and cloased under sin, now the salvation of man stands, Barnard. super
cant. Sermon. 67.
not in man's merits, but in Gods mercy. Barnarde says: Non est quo gratia
intret: vbi iam meritum occupauit: That is: There is no means for grace to
enter, where merit does keep place.

Walden. cont. Wiclesium.
Waldensis one of the Popes own Doctors, says these words: Quid dignum
facimus, vt participes caelestibus fieri inuencamur? Apost^lo dicen^e,
existimo, quod non sunt condignae passiones huius temporis ad futuram gloriam,
Romans 8.
quae reuelabitur in nobis: Reputo igitur saniorem Theologum, fideliorem
catholicam, and scripturis sanctis magis concordem, qui ^al^ meritum
simpliciter abnegat. That is to say: what worthy thing do we, that we may be
faunde in the fellowship of the heavenly spirits? the Apostle says, I judge
that the afflictions of this time are not worthy of that glory, that shall be
reueiled in us: Therefore I take him to be the sou^der divine, the faithfuller
catholic, and more agreeable to the holy scriptures, that utterly denies all
such kind of merit.

These testimonies are plain against all the meritmongers of Rome, and Louane.
Let us take heed therefore, of their dangerous and heriticall doctrine,
least, while we go about, to stablishe our own righteousness, Romans 10.
being ignorant of the righteousness of God, and have not submitted our
selves to the righteousness of God. And thereby shall heap to our selves
wrath in the day of trouble. For Christ, says Saint Paul: is the end of
the Law, for righteousness unto every one that believes.

The.xlj. Chapter. Faith only justifies us before God.
YET these Papists and Iusti^iaries, will say still, Objection.
that although we find in holy scripture, that faith justifies, Romans 8.
Papists do call us Solifidians.
yet we find not: quod so^^fides iustificat, that faith only justifies, so
that this word only, or alone has been newly added by heretics, who^ they
do commonly call Solifidians.

These iooly fellows do nothing but seek a knotte in a Rushe, Answer.
as the proverb is, for although we have not, expressie this word, This
word, (gratis) is of as great force as this word (^ola.) Romans 3.
(sola) only or alone, yet have we many other words that are equiuolent or
equivalent, that is, of the same importance and force. For, when the holy
ghost says: that we are justified freely by the grace of God through the
redemption, which is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a
purchaser of mercy, through faith in his blood: does he not exclude al manner
of works, deseruinges, or merits from our justification, attributyng it only
unto faith* whereby we do apprehende and take hold on the grace and mercy of
God, 1. Peter. 1. Romans 3.
so surely fealed up unto us with the blood of that immaculat lamb, our
Savior Jesus Christ? in the self same Chapter he says again: we conclude
that a man is justified, by faith, without the works of the law. Who does
not see, that he does here also put away all manner of things from our
justification, faith only excepted?

But the Papists in this point, are like unto the Arians, which because those
words* (^omo^fias and consubstantialis, Papists like to Arian heretics.
be not found in the Scriptures, will in no wise admit nor allow them,
although the things signified by them, are most infalliblie and certainly
contained and set out in the book of God. And therefore the Apostle writing to
Titus says: Titus. 3.
Not by the works of righteousness which we had done, but according to his
mercy he saved us, Ephe. 2.
that we being justified by his grace should be made heirs, according to the
hope of eternal life. Again he says: God has saved us, and called us with
an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose
and grace, which was given unto us through Jesus Christ, The purpose of god,
does exclude all ^^erites from the justification of man.
before the world was. Truly, whersoeuer this purpose of God is, their
works, merits, and deseruinges, can take no place in the justification or
salvation of man. Whereby we may gather, that by the free mercy and goodness of
God, apprehended and taken hold upon by faith, we are delivered from
everlasting damnation, Romans 8. Gala^. 4.
and made fellow heirs, with his son Jesus Christ, our Savior, whose
righteousness he does impute unto us, making v^heires of his eternal and
everlasting kingdom of heaven. All these things (I say, and believe) do we
obtain only by faith, without any merits going before.

Let us see now, what the holy learned Fathers of the Church, so many hundred
years ago, have taught us thereof. Saint Ambrose says: Iustificati sun^
gratis, quia nihil operantes, neque vicem reddentes, Ambro. in Epist. ad Romans
cap. 4.
sola fide iustificati sunt dono de^: They are justified freely because workyng
nothing, nor making any recompense, they are justified through faith only, by
the gift of God. Again in the same place, these be his words: Sic decretum
dicit a deo, Eodem loco.
vt, cessante lege, solam fidem gratia dei posceret ad ^alutem: This was Gods
determination, that the law being at an end, the grace of God should require
faith only unto salvation. In Epist. ad Romans cap. 9.
Again: Sola fides posita est ad salutem: Only faith is laid, or appointed
unto salvation. Theodoretus says. Non vllis operibus nostris, Theo. de
cura^dis graecoru^ affectibus. lib. 7.
sed per solam fidem mystica bona consequuti sumu^* Not by any works of ours,
but by only faith we have gotten the mistical good things. S. Basile says:
Haec est nostra integra, and perfecta gloriatio in deo, Basil de humilitate.
quando propriae iustitiae nos inopes agnoscimus: Sola autem fide in christum
iustificati: This is our full and perfect rejoicing in God, when we acknowledge
that we are void of any our own righteousness, and are justified by only
faith in Christ. Nazianzenus. Origin in Epi. ad Romans cap. 3. lib. 3.
Nazianzenus says: Credere solum est iusticia: Only beleeuyng, is
righteousness.

Origene also says these words* where now is thy boastyng? it is shut out.
Paul says, that the justification of only faith is sufficient: So that a man
only beleuyng may be justified, although he have done no good works at all.
Hesychi in Leuiti. lib. 4.
Hesichius also says: The grace of God is given only of mercy, and favor:
Et fide comprehenditur sola: And is embraced and received by only faith.
Chrisost. in Epist. ad Galat. cap. 3.
Saint Chrysostom says: Illi dicebant, qui sola ^ide nititur, execrabilis
est: hic contra demonstrat, eum, qui sola fide nititur, benedictum esse: They
said, who so stayed himself by only faith, is accursed: Contrariwise, Saint
Paul proves, that who so staieth himself, Hieroni. in Epist. ad Romans cap. 10.
by only faith, he is blessed. Hierome also has these words, ignorantes,
(speaking of the Pharisees) quod sola fide iustificat deus, and se ex operibus
legis, quam nunquam custodierunt iustos esse putantes. They not knowing that
God justifies only by faith, and supposyng themselves to be just by the
works of the law, which they never observed, they would not submit
themselves unto the remission of sins, least they should seem to have been
sinners.

Saint Hilarie has these words: in Mathewe, and upon this text: Hylari.
canon^ nono, in Man.
R^mittuntur tibi peccata tua: thy sins are forgeuen thee: and writes on
this manner: Mo^et scribas, remissum ab homine peccatum: hominem enim tantum, in
christo Jesus co^tuebantur, and remissum ab eo, quod lex laxare non poterat.
Fides enim sola iustificat: That is to say: It moves the Scribes, that sin
was forgiven by man. For they did only behold man in Christ Jesus, and that
to be forgeuen of him, which the law could not release. For faith only does
justify. This is the herisie that we teach, according to the holy scriptures,
and learned fathers of the catholic Church.

But they object again, Obiecttion*
that good works deserve: because it shall be rewarded, for (say they) S. John
says: their works follow after them: Revel. 14. Matthew. 10.
And Christ says to his disciples, he that gives a Cup of cold water to
any of these little ones for my ^ake, 1. Cor. 15.
shall not loose his reward: And saint Paul says: your work shall not be
in vain in the Lord: Christ says again: Rejoice and be glad, Matthew. 5.
for your reward is great in heaven: and ^^ the Hebrews it is said: Hebre.
6.
God, is not unrighteous that he should forget our labor.

Answer.
We grant good works have their reward: But the same reward stands in
mercy and favor, and not in duty. Therefore we say: considering the
weakness, and sinful corruption of our nature, there can be no works in us
so pure, and perfect, that we may thereby of right, and of duty deserve
everlasting life. For God has a kingdom and an inheritance for children: and
not a reward for bound servants and slaves. Therefore Gregory Nanzianzene
says: if thou he a bound servant or a ^laue, Gregor. Nazi. de sancto
baptisma^e.
then fear the whip. If thou be a hirelyng then look only for thy reward:
but over and besides this, if thou be a child, then reverence (God) as thy
father. Do well because it is good to obeie thy Father. Yea and although thou
shall have nothing else, yet even this shall be thy reward, that thou have been
obedient to thy father. Therefore we must say, (says christ) when we have
done whatsoever I command you, Luke 17.
say ye, we are unprofitable servants.

Hylar. in psalm. ^18.
Hilarie, to this purpose has these words: If we fast once (says he) we
think we have satisfied. If out of the barnes of our householde store, we
give somewhat to the poor, we believe, we have fulfilled the measure of
righteousness. But the Prophet hops all of God, and trusts of his mercy.
Saint Basile also says: Basil in psalm. 32.
He that trusts not to his own good deeds, nor hops to be justified by
his works, has the only hope of his salvation, the mercies of God.
Augustine therefore said very well: August. confession. 10.
Qui diligit aliud preter te: Minus diligit te: O God, he the less loves
thee, that loves any other thing, besides thee.

But before we declare, how good deeds are rewarded. Let us see what good
works these are, that the Papists do so much talk of, shall be rewarded,
or that deserves everlasting life. Good works of the papists.
First, they teach unto the pleople, that are ignoraunte, to hear Mass
every day deuoutely, to lie prostrat^ before dead Images, to mumble out a
number of prayers unto Saints, to go on Pilgrimages, to build up
Chaunteries, and Churches, and to cause Trentalles of Masses, and Diriges, and
other trumperie to be said for the dead. Item to give largely of their
substance, and gooddes, to idell Priests, Monks, Friars and Nonnes, to give
money, gold, silver and silk, to make crosses, chalices, coapes, vestementes,
and other like plaierly garments, to furnishe out the stinckyng Masses, to
say our Ladies Psalter, to pray upon Beads, to use, observe, and keep
Pharisaicall fastings, with the Popish idle holy days, and solemn
feasts: and to receive holy bread, holy water, holy palm, holy ashes,
and holy fire, holy cream, holy candelles, and holy oil. etc. These are
the good works, and best works that they have set forth to be done of all
people, and who soever speaks against those works, they are taken for
enemies to GOD, and as rank heretics, but all those good works of the
papists, are not required, Esai. 1.
nor yet commanded of God, to be dooen: therefore, they do rather deserve
the name of sin, and of detestable abomination before God, then of good
works.

The true good works, are void of all superstition, they are alligated or
bound, Good works that god does require of us.
neither to place, nor to the persons, nor to time, for they are as certain
fruits of our whole life, testifiyng of the goodness of our heart, and
expressyng the nature of our heavenly father: 1. Peter. 2. Matthew. 5.
which, not only of the faithful, but of the very infidelles are rekened, and
taken for good works, and minister occasion unto them, to glorify our father
which is in heaven. Galat. 5.
The works of faith, workyng through Charity and love, are good works. For
GOD does work them in us, and by us, them does our savior Christ set out,
saying: Matthew. 25*
I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me
drink: I was naked, and ye clothed me: I was harbourlesse, and ye harbored
me: I was sick, and in prison, and ye visited me.

The Apostle also, does sufficiently teach us, what be the good works that
God does require of us, Galat. 5.
but what should I allege one or two textes, sith all the whole Scriptures
do euerywhere, exhort us still unto good works: what those good works are, S.
Paul does declare, when he says: We are the workmanship of god, Ephe. 2.
created in christ Jesus, unto those good works, that God has prepared for us
to walk in. If any man should ask me now, what be those good works, that
he has prepared for us to walk in? I would answer, that all those works
that God does bid and command us in his holy and sacred word, are those
good works, that he has prepared for us, for to walk in. And those, I say,
and believe, ought only to be called good works, and none other.

And therefore, these good works and deeds shall be rewarded or crowned, Why
God does crown his gifts in us. August in Psalm. 109.
because that GOD of his mere mercy, has bound him self thereto by his
promises, whereunto does saint Augustine agree, saying: Fidelis dominus, qui
se nobis debitorem fecit, non aliquid a nobis accipiendo, sed omnia nobis
promittendo: That is to say: The Lord is faithful, who has made him self a
debtor unto us, not by receauyng any thing of us, August. in Psalm. 32.
but by promisyng unto us all things. Again he says: Non dicimus deo: Domine
read quod accepisti: sed read quod promisisti: We do not say to God (says
he) O Lord, give thou that thou have received (of me): but give thou me that
thou have promised.

Here we learn, how God is become debtor unto us, and has bound himself, ^.
Cor. 4.
to crown or reward our good works, not by receiuyng any thing of us (for
what have we, that we have not received: Romans 11.
and if we have received, why do we boast and glory, as though we had not
received? Again: who gave him first, and he shall be recompensed?) But by his
faithful promises, which he has made unto his elect, and chosen people.

And again saint Augustine says: Da veniam Apostole, propria tua non noui,
August. in quinquagintis Hom. Ho. 14.
nisi mala. Da veniam Apostole, dicimus, quia tu docuisti: cum ergo deus
coronat merita tua, nihil coronat nisi dona sua: That is, pardon us oh Apostle
(says he) I know nothing of thine own, but evil. Pardone us, oh Apostle,
we say so, because thou haste taught us: Therefore, when he crowns thy
merits, he crowns nothing but his own gifts. And in another place he has
these words: Coronaturus est in nobis, non merita nostra, August in psalm. 98.
psalm. 70. August. in Psalm. 107.
sed dona sua: God does crown in us; not our merits, but his gifts. Again
he says: Hoo solum dico, hoc rog^* hoc cupio, opera manuum ^uarum n^
daspicias: Opus (...) vide* non meum. Nam si meum videris, damnas, Si t^^m
videri^, (...). Nam and quecunque mihi sunt opera bona, abs te sunt: This only
I say, this I pray, this I covet, despise not the works of thine hands: See
thine own work in me, and not mine. For, if thou seeste mine, thou do
condemn. If thou seeste thine own, thou crowneste. For, all the good works
that I have, they are of thee. And therefore it was not without a cause, that
Barnarde said, that his merit, is the mercy of the Lord, which place we
have before alleged: Barnard. super cant. Sermon. 61.
Here we may see that God does only reward or crown in us, that which is
his own: so he does condemn all that he finds to be our own.

Therefore, I would that men, puttyng a side all wilfulnes, would once consider
with them selves, that the majesty of GOD, has need of none of us, nor of
any thing we have: but rather does give us all things aboundauntly, 1. Tim. 6.
to enjoy them. What good work then can we do, whereby we may profit him
in any thing, or do him any good? Bonorum meorum non eges. Thou haste no need
of my gooddes (says David) what merit I pray you, Psalm. 16.
can be in that work, whereof no profit comes to God? Or rather, whereof
the whole profit (if there be any) does redounde upon our selves? He that is
righteous, and does good works, he does it not for any commodity that God
shall have thereby (for what commodity can God have by any thing that we can
do?) But for his own commodity, as he which is wicked, and does wickedly,
hurts himself, and not God. He that has the health of his body, A similitude.
and does by good diet, keep and preserve it, does he therefore deserve any
reward at the Physicians hands? I think not. For, he does it not for the
Physicians profit, but for his own.

After the same sort, he that by the gift of God, has obtained the health of
his soul, and by his grace does the things that belong to the preservation
of the same, shall we say that he does deserve any reward at Gods hands,
because that he is made such by his gift, and does now through his help,
aid, and assistaunce, keep the same grace, for his only profit and
commodity, either by earnest belief, or by unfeigned love, or by assured hope,
or by well doing, and patience in adversity and trouble.

Who needs with a reward, to be stirred up to drink, when he is thirsty,
A reward never stirs up the godly to seek for righteousness.
or to eat, when he is hungerie? Neither need men, if they hungered and
thristed for righteousness (as they ought to do) a reward to stir them up
to it. A mother uses not to be entised with rewards, to give suck, to feed
and care for her own child, that it perish not. Wherefore, Gods promises
are necessary to men, Gods promises very ne^ssary to us all.
because by reason of sin, they have waxen cold from a vehement affection
and zeal toward godly and holy works. Therefore God does crown his
gifts in us, so all things remain safe and sound to the glory God.

Now, where all things ought to be attributed unto the grace of God, what is
left for the merits of men? For, where grace is, there is no place left for
merit, if we do consider a right the nature, and property of merit (for the
name of merit ought to be abolished) the nature of merit is, that thereby a
just proportion and equal consideration, What the nature of merit is.
ought to be between that which is given, and that which is taken: But
between the good things which we look for, and those things, which we
either suffer or do, there is no proportion, or equality. For so says S.
Paul, the passions, and afflictions of this life, Romans 8.
are not worthy of the glory to come. etc. Merit has joined unto it, debt,
as Paul says: Unto him that works, reward is rendered, according to debte,
and is not imputed according to grace, Romans 3.
which he says, is eternal life.

Unto the nature of merit there is required, that that which is given,
perteine unto the giver, and be not due unto him which receives it: but
works are not of our selves, for they are the gift of God, Phil. 2. Ephe. 2.
August. in psalm. 32.
which works in us. Augustine affirmyng this, says: Ab illo habemus
quicquid illi offerimus, and ex illo fit quicquid boni sumus. Whatsoever we
offer to God, we^ have it from him, and whenever we be good, it is made and
done of him.

But let our good works be examined after the straightnes of Gods judgment.
The imperfection of our ^w^ works.
Who is so ignorant of man's imperfection, that will not acknowledge, that we
ought rather to fear punishment, for the defaultes that be in them, then
look for any reward, or boast I can not tell of what merits? Is it for
naught think ye, Esai. 64.
that the holy prophet does liken our righteousness to so filthy a thing, that
any man will abhor to look on it? August. lib. 9. confessione.
Therefore saint Augustine says: Ve vniuersae iustitie nostre, si remota
misericordia indicetur: That is, woe be to all our righteousness, if it be
judged, mercy being taken away, or set a side. Barnarde also says: what can
al our righteousness be before God? Barnard. in Sermon. omniu^ sanctoru^. 1. Esai.
64.
shall it not according to the prophet, be counted as a filthy blooddy cloute?
And if it be straightly judged, shall not all our righteousness be found
unrighteous, and having less then it ought to have? What shall then become of
our sins, if our righteousness, can not answer by it self? Therefore criyng
earnestly with the prophet, Enter not into judgment, Psalm. 14.3.
O lord, with thy servant, for in thy sight no man living shall be justified:
let us with all humility, have our recourse unto mercy, which alone is able
to save our souls.

What manner of merit is this, which cannot abide the censure of Gods
judgment, nor be delivered from condemnation, but through mercy only?
Wherefore learn this, what soever is attributed to works, that same is dooen
by reason of faith which is annexed unto them. A similitude.
Wherefore, as in a wall, we have a consideration unto the foundation, and in
the fruits of trees, to the roots: so whatsoever seems at the first sight
to be adscribed to works, is to be assigned to faith, as unto the mother of
al good works. Mark this well.
For whenever the scripture seems to attribute justification either unto
hope, or unto charity, or unto works, those places are so to be
understood, that justification is there taught, not by the causes, but by the
effects.

So says Augustine upon the Psalms: August* in psalm. 31*
Laudo super edificationem operis: sed video fidei fundamentum. Laudo fructum
boni operis: sed in fide agnosco radicem, vbi fides non erat: bonum opus non
erat, bonum opus enim intentio facit: intentionem fides dirigit: That is, I
praise the buildyng of good works: but I see the foundation is of faith. I
praise the fruict of good works: but I acknowledge the root in faith. Where
faith is not, good works are not: the intention makes a good work: but yet
faith directs that intention.

Let us therefore, rather to confess our sins with the Publicane, Luke 18.
then to glory and boaste of our merits with the Pharisee. Such are our
merits, that the confession and acknowledgyng of our sins, ought to be
preferred before the numbryng of them, to obtain life. For all our works must
be utterly excluded, and stand a part, that ( Grace) may appear free: the (
Promise) simple: and that ( Faith) may stand alone. For the law condemns
us: words do not avail us: but faith in Christ only justifies us. For a
man may make this argument, A sylogisme.
which is invincible: All that we can do with god, is only by Christ: John.
15.
our works and merits be not Christ: Ergo, our works and merits can do
nothing with GOD. Therefore since it is so clear, let us acknowledge our
sickness, which is sin, let us open it by repentance, and flee by faith to
Christ which is our only physician and health of our souls, Matthew. 9.
let us all by faith only make our profit of him, and not of our works and
merits. John. 7. August. in tract. 33.
For as Augustine (speaks of the woman that was taken in aduoutrie, and
brought to him, when her accusers were all gone) he says, Relicti sunt duo:
misera, and misericordia: There are two left (says he) mercy, and misery.
And therefore God pardoned her in his Christ. For Christ says to her: Go,
sin no more, as though Christ would say (says Augustine in the same
place) Deleui, quod commisisti: obserua, quod precipi: vt inuenias quod
promisi: That is, I have taken away thy sins, that thou have committed: do
and observe that I command thee: that thou may find that I have promised
thee. Therefore I believe that Christ only is the lamb of God that takes
away all our sins. John. 1.


Objection.
Here may one object and say, If God only forgeueth sins, what means this,
that we read: Whose sins soever ye forgive, John. 20.
they be forgeuen them: and whose sins soever ye do withholde, they shall be
withholden: is it not plain, that not God only, but the Apostles also do
forgive sin? I answer. Answer.
There be three manner of powers to forgive sins. The first is, the same
which belongs unto God only: for it is proved by the prophets words: Three
manner of powers to forgive sin. Esai. 43.
I am he, I am he my self which d^e wipe away thy wickedness for mine own
sake. The second is the ministers, when they declare gods grace to the
penitent, and that all their sins are done away only by ^zech. 18. Luke 5.
and contrariwise, to preach and pronounce malediction and wrath upon the
unrepentant, therefore saint Hierome says:

The Bishops or Priests, neither binds the innocente, nor loses the
guilty: Hieroni. in Matthew. cap. 16.
but according to his office, when he has heard the diversity of sins (as
in public offenses) he knows who ought to be bound, who ought to be
loosed. Also Peter Lumbard says: Senten. 4. distinct. 18. nec ideo.
God has given to priests, power to bind and to loose: that is to say, to
declare unto men, that the penitents be either bound, or loosed. Saint
Augustine has these words: We speak in your ears, August. in psalm. 101.
but how know we what is wrought in your hearts? Howbeit, what soever is
wrought in you: Hieroni. in Matthew. cap. 16.
it is wrought, not by us, but by God. Hierome says: It is not the sentence
or absolution of the Priest, but the life of the penitente, that is accepted
before God. So you see, how the Church forgiueth sinners: that is, it
pronounces mercy unto the repentaunt, and wrath unto the reprobate, and
ungodly: as we have sufficiently declared before, Acts. 3.
when we entreated of the authority of the Church.

And as for their auriculer confession, it is a mere devise, and a Popish
law, Beatus Reuanus in argum. libelli Tertul. de poenitentia. Distinct. 1. de
poenitentia, in Gloss. Petr. S^ten. 4. did. 17. quid ergo*
good for nothing, but to heap Gods wrath and displeasure upon all the
dooers thereof: for their own laws condempneth their doctrine which they
teach, that we can not be forgiven of our sins, unless we number them in a
priests ear, for these are the words in their own distinctions: Saene dici
potest, quod sine confessione oris, and solutione poenae exterioris, peccata
delentur per contritionem, and humilitatem cordis: That is, we may safely say,
that without confession of the mouth, and absolution of the outward pain,
sins be forgiven by the contrition and humility of the heart. Again, De
poenit. did. 1. quidam.
Gratian says: one of their own champions: Antequam sacerdoti ora nostra
ostendamus, id est peccat^ nostra con^iteamur, a lepta peccati mundamur* Before
we open our mouth unto the Priest: that is to say, before we make confession
of our sins, Chrisost. in psalm. 50. Hom. 2. and Hom. de praenit. and
confessione.
the leprosy of our sin is made clean. Saint Chrysostom says: Non dico,
vt confitearis conseruo tuo peccata tua: dicito deo, qui curet ea: I will thee
not to confess thy sins unto the Priest, that is thy fellow servant:
Confess them unto God, that may heal them. Again, Examine thy sins in thy
heart within thee: let this judgment be without witness: let God only see
thee making thy confession.

Matthew. 6.
as Christ says: If you do forgive unto men, your father shall forgive you
yours. And saint Paul says: Forgive one and other, Colo^s. 3.
if any man have a quarrel to an other, even as Christ forgave you, even so
do ye. But as concerning that forgiveness of sins, which is necessary to
our salvation, does depend only upon the grace, mercy, and love of God,
without any our merits or worthiness. And that our sins are clearly taken
away by Christ's death and passion, and that he will cast them into the
bottom of the Sea: or else, remove them as far from him, as the East is from
the Weste, and the North part of the world, from the Southe part of the
same. Psalm. 103.
We must believe this without any doubtyng, or waueryng, tremblyng, or fearyng:
most^ constantly, and assuredly.

The.xlij. Chapter. It is no presumption, to be sure and certain of our
Salvation.
Objection.
HEre the Papists rave, and say: we are presumteous, so to affirm the
certainty of grace and salvation: for (say they) Paul bids, Phil. 3.
and counsaileth us, with fear and tremblyng to work our salvation. I
answer. Answer.
This fear rises in consideration of our own weakness and unworthiness:
not of any distruste or doubt of Gods mercy: Certainty of our salvation.
But rather, the less cause we find, to trust in our selves, the more cause
we have to trust in God.

Now, concerning the assurance or certainty of our salvation, the scriptures
are full. Romans 8.
Saint Paul says: There is no dampnation, to them that be in Christ Jesus:
the spirit of God bears witness to our spirit, that we are the children of
God I know that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor powers, nor
principalities, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor
deapth, nor any creature else, shall be able to remove me from that love, that
God bears toward me, in Christ Jesus our Lord. Job also says: Although he
kill me, Job. 13.
yet will I put my trust in him: Notwithstanding, I will reprove my ways
before his sight. Again, he shall be my salvation. Again, I am sure that my
redeemer lives, and he shall stand the last on the earth, Job. 19.
whom I my self shall see, and my eyes shall behold, and see God in my flesh.
David also says: Psalm. 70.
In thee O Lord have I trusted: I will never be confounded.

Tertulian says: Tertul. cont. Martio. lib. 5.
Vt c^rtum esset, nos esse: fili^s dei, misit spiritum suum in corda nostra
clamantem, Abba pater: That we might be certified, that we be the children of
God, he has sent the holy ghost into our hearts, Cypr. de mortalit. Sermo. 4.
criyng, Abba, father. Saint Cyprian has these words: Et tu dubitas, and
fluctuas? Hoc est deum omnino non n^sse: Hoc est Christum credentium magistrum
peccato incredulitatis offendere* Hoc est, in ecclesia constitutum, fidem in
domo fidei non habere: And do thou stagger, and stand in doubt of thy
Salvation? that were as much, as not to know God: That were as much, as with
the sin of unbelief, to offend Christ the master of beleuers: That were as
much, as being in the Church, Prosper de promiss. and praedictio. dei. par.
1. cap. 16.
in the house of faith, to have no faith. Prosper says: Securi diem iudicij
expectant, quibus in cruce domini gloriantibus mu^dus crucifixus est, and ipsi
mu^do: They, unto whom the world is crucified, and are crucified unto the
world, wait for the day of judgment without fear. Saint Augustine also
says, Praesume, August. de verbis Dorm. Sermon. 28.
non de operatione tua, sed de Christi gratia, gratia enim saluati estis,
inquit Apostolus. Non hic arrogantiae est, sed fides. Praedicare quod
acceperis, non est superbia, sed deuotio: Presume thou, not of thy own
workyng, but of the grace of Christ: for the Apostle says, Ye are saved by
grace. Here therefore is not presumption, but faith. To proclaim that thou
have received, it is no pride, August. in Io. tract. 22.
it is devotion. Again he says: Non mea praesumtione, sed ipsius promissione
in iudicium non venio: It is not of my presumption, but of his promise, that I
shall not come into judgment. Saint Basile also says: Paul boasts, and
presumes of the contempt of his own righteousness. Basil. de humilitate.
Ambro. de Iaco. and vita beat^.
Saint Ambrose plainly says: I will not glory, for that I am a just man:
but for that I am redeemed, therefore will I glory: Not for that I am void of
sin: But for that my sins be forgiven me: I will not glory, for that I
have dooen good to any man, nor for that any man has dooen good unto me: but
for that Christ is my advocate with the father, and for that Christ's blood was
shed for me. To end, saint Barnarde says: What safe rest or surety,
Barn. in canti. cantico. Ser. 61.
can the weak soul find, but in the wounds of our savior? As he is
mightier to save, so dwell I there with safety. etc. I have committed a great
sin: my conscience is troubled: yet shall it not be shaken down: because I
will remember my Lords wounds. For he was wounded for our sins. This is our
presumpteous doctrine that we teach, agreyng to the scriptures, and with the
holy and ancient fathers of the catholic Church.

But their whole Papisticall doctrine, of trust in men's works and merits,
leads directly to the goulfe of desperation, and dampnation: Cypr. de simpli.
praelato.
and therefore saint Cyprian said of them very well and truly: Asserunt
noctem pro die: interitum, pro salute: desperationem, sub obtentu spei:
porfidiem, sub praetextu fidei: Antichristum, sub vocabulo Christi: That is,
they teach us night in steed of day: destruction, in steed of health:
desperation under the color of hope: Infidelity under the pretense of faith:
Antichriste, under the name of Christ.

The.xliij. Chapter. Of free will.
AS touching free will, which is so much extolled of the Pelagian Papists,
that will make us to believe, that we are able to deserve, and that we are of
power and strength as of our selves, to fulfill and keep the laws of God, to
believe and repent, and so consequently, to obtain life and salvation. I say
it is a most detestable heresy, Matthew. 28.
and robbyng of Christ's power* to whom all power is given: and also abolishyng
of his precious death, merits, and goodness toward us, and a robbing of God,
to give to man's will; that is only the gifts of God. As saint James says,
James. 1.
Every good and pefecte gift is from above, and comes down from the father
of light, as it is manifest in all the whole Scriptures to be proved.

For if there were such ability, power and strength in us, and such a
liberty of will as the papists affirm: Why does not all men believe the
gospel, call upon God, repent, pray, confess their sins, do good works,
keep the law, enter into life, receive Christ? keep them selves from evil
thoughts, words, works, sins, sickness, troubles, adversities, famine,
thirste, poverty, and such like? But the Scripture tells us another
doctrine, as some places thereof I will recite: first the Lord says in
Genesis: Genesis ^.
I will henceforth curse the earth no more, for man's sake. For, the imagination
of man's heart is evil, even from the very youth of him.

Again, in Deuteronomie the.L. says: Ye have seen all that the Lord did
before your eyes in the land of Egypt, unto Pharao and unto all his
servants. Deuteronomy. 29.
Thine eyes have seen these great tokens and wonders. And yet unto this day,
has not the Lord given you a heart, that understands: eyes, that see: and
ears that hear. What could Moses say more unless he should call us
blocks and stones? And in Ezechiell the Lord says: A new heart, will I
give you, and a new spirit will I put in you: Eeze. 36. and 11. Psalm. 51.
as for that stony heart, I will take it out of your body, and give you a
fleshely heart. I will give you my spirit among you, and cause you to walk
in my commandments, to keep my laws, and to fulfill them.

This place does teach us sufficiently, that except our stony hearts be
taken away from us, and fleshely (that is to say) obedient hearts given us,
in steed of them, and a new spirit put into us (which should work
obedience toward the Lords commandments) we are able to do nothing: we
can in no wise keep the laws of God, nor yet fulfill them. Jeremy, Iere. 32.
also says by the spirit of God: I will give them one heart and one way,
that they may fear me for ever: for the wealth of them, and of their
children. I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from
me. In another place he says: Iere. 31.
Convert thou me, and I shall be converted: for thou art the Lord my God. And
again he says: O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in his own
power: Iere. 10.
neither is it in man to walk and to direct his steps. Solomon also says:
The kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of waters: Prou.
21.
he turns it whither soever it pleases him* Psalm. 119.
David says: Turn away my eyes from regarding vanity, and quicken me in
thy way: Incline mine heaate unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousness.
Saint John says: A man can receive nothing, John. 3.
except it be given from above: he speaks not there doubtless of the common
gifts of nature but of the special gifts of the holy ghost.

Unto this the words of Christ agree when he says: No man can come unto
me, John. 6.
except it be given him of my father. For this cause, Matthew. 16.
when Peter had said: Thou art Christ the son of the living God: Christ
made this answer unto him again: Blessed art thou Simon the son of Jonas:
for flesh and blood has not opened that unto thee, but my father that is in
heaven. And again: whosoever (says he) does hear and learn of the father,
John. 6.
comes to me, and they shall all be taught of God: This is the work of God,
that ye believe in him whom he has sent.

Saint Paul strongly beats down the vain pride of our freewill men, 1.
Cor. 2.
where he writes on this manner: The natural man, perceives nothing of the
spirit of God. Whereby he does understand, that the natural man, which is
not renewed in Christ, can not perceive the things that be of the spirit of
God. For why? they are but foolishnes unto him. And again he says: Such
trust have we through Christ to Godwarde, 2. Cor. 3.
not that we are sufficient of our selves, to think any thing, as it were of
our selves, but our ableness comes of God.

Now, if we be not able to think a good thought, except^ God does put it in
us: how much more unable be we, either to will or to do any thing that good
is, or acceptable in the sight of God? And in his Epistle to the Philippians he
says: It is god that works in you, Phil. 2.
both the will and the deed, even of his good pleasure. And to the Romans,
he has these words: So then, Romans 9.
it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that
shows mercy. Therefore we will omit many other textes. And believe verily
the words of christ, alowyng and ratifiyng all these places of Scriptures
before recited, when he says: Sine me nihil potestis facere: Without me ye can
do nothing. All these Scriptures do show our unableness, weakness and
imbecilitie, and that we be the servants of sin, until and before we be
regenerated and renewed by the holy ghost, and made new creatures.

What freedom then can we justly boast or brag of? Vbi spiritus domini
(says saint Paul) Ibi libertas. Where the spirit of the Lord is, 2. Cor.
3.
there is liberty and freedom. Again, Si vos filius liberauerit, John. 8.
vere liberi eritis: That is to say, If the son therefore do make you free,
ye shall be free in deed. These sayings do sufficiently declare, What we are
as long as we are without the spirit of god.
that as long as we are void of the spirit of God, and are not set at
liberty by the son, we are naught else, but the bondslaues of Satan the
devil, of sin, and of death. All this does teach us, that of our selves*
we be not able to think a good thought, as of our selves.

Therefore, Saint Augustine does define freewyll after this sort: 2. Cor. 3.
The definition of free will after S. August.
Liberum arbitrium est facultas rationis and voluntatis, qua bonum eligitur
gratia adsistente, malum vero ea desistente: That is to say: free will is a
virtue or power of the reason and will, whereby the good is chosen, when the
grace of God does assiste, and the evil when it is away or is withdrawn.
The meaning is: that by free will, if we have the assistaunce and help of the
grace of God, we are able to choose that which is good: but if the grace of
God be away, or be withdrawn, we can do no more but embrace that which is
evil, and hurtefull to our own souls. Therefore, said Paul very well to
the Corinthians: By the grace of God, 1. Cor. 15.
I am that I am: and his grace which is in me, was not in vain: but I
labored more abundantly then they al: yet not I, but the grace of God which
is with me. And in another place he says: Galat. 2.
thus I live yet, not I now, but Christ lives in me. Always we see, that
all our ablenes, power, strength, freedom and will: comes by the only grace
of God, by wis workyng spirit, through Jesus Christ our savior, and not of
our own selves.

Objection.
Where as they cauaile and say: man has free will, to do good, and a power to
receive the grace of God, alledgyng the place of Ecclesiasticus for their
purpose, Eccle. 15.
where he says: God made man from the beginning, Genesis 1.
and left him in the hand of his counsel, and gave him his commauddementes
and precepts, if thou will, thou shall observe the commandments, and
testify thy good will. Before man, is life and death, good and evil, Iere. 1.
what him likes shall be given him. He has set fire and water before thee,
reach out thy hand unto which thou will.

They do herein show their ignorance, if the matter be waighed: Answer.
for all men know this book is not autenticall nor numbered among the
canonical Scriptures: therefore Saint Hierome says, What this word
Apocrypha is.
it is Apochrypha: That is to say, a thing that is hidden secret or dark,
which has no certain author, or which is not autentike: that is as much to
say, as of authority, or books which were not received by a common consent,
to be read and expounded publicly in the Church: Canon. is a Greek word, and
signifies a rule to do any thing by, or to try any matter, or prove the
spirits by, to lead our lives by.
neither yet served to prove any point of christian religion, save in as much
as they had the consent of other Scriptures canonical to confirm the same, or
rather whereon they were grounded.

But let us grant that it is Canonical, what get they by it? For it makes
nothing for their purpose. For, before we declare, how it makes nothing for
their matter, we must consider of man, what he was before he fell? what he was
after he fell? John. 3.
and what he is, when he is regenerated, and new horn again of the spirit,
by the will of God. If you mark this text well, you shall easily perceive,
that he speaks of man, as he was before his fall, in his first estate of his
creation, and being in his original innocence, and righteousness.

And that does sain^te Augustine say, whose words are these: August. de
can^ico none* cap. 8.
Freewill before the fall, was an upright freewill, before which, fire and
water was laid of God: and the first man did reach his hand to which he
would, he did choose fire, and forsook water. See the righteous judge, the
same, which man being free did choose, he did receive: he would have evil, and
the same did follow him. Cont. fortu. disput. 11.
Again, he says: I say that freewill was in that man, which was created
first. For, he was so made, that nothing could with stand his will if he
would have kept Gods commandments: Lib. de perfect. iusticiae.

In en^heridio^ ad Laur. ca. 30: August. de verbis apost. Sermon. 2.

Look for mo* aucthorities in my book called the poor man's Garden for this
matter.

De eccl. dogm. cap. 32.

Enchirid. ad Lauren. ca. 30.

The fathers speak of man's freewill before the fall, whenever they speak or
write of freewyll in man.

August. ad Valen. Epi. 46.


but after that he had sinned through freewill, he did cast us all, that come
of his stock, into necessity. Again, he has these words: The fault which
followed the sin, and which is the punishemente, has turned liberty into
necessity. Again, Man, vsyng freewill not well, did both loose it, and him
self. And in an other place, he has these words: Verum est magnas arbitrij
liberi vires homo cu^conderetur accepit: sed peccando amisit: It is true says
he) that man when he was made, did receive great strength of freewill, but he
lost it in synnyng. These aucthorities of saint Augustine do sufficiently
declare, how the place that they alleged out of Ecclesiasticus, ought to be
understood: for there doubtless, the wiseman speaks of man, as he was
first created, in the estate of innocence, and not as he was with his
posterity after his fall, whereby as Augustine says: All men have lost
their natural possibility, and ableness, and their natural, or original
innocence. And so ought all the doctors to be understood, when soever they
speak of freewill in man, for they speak of that freewill, that was in Ada^
before his fall. And therefore saint Augustine, when he says Ad Valentinu^.
Si no^ est liberum arbitrium vt mundum iudicat deus? If there be no freewill,
how shall God judge the world? He means there, that God shall judge us all
by his justice, in that freewill that we had in Adam, before his fall (which
some men in his time, did utterly deny any freewill to be in Adam at all) upon
occasion whereof, he said these words, to stay the contentions that then
was. For in an other place, he opens his full mind and judgment, August.
lib. 2. cap. 18. de libero arbitrio, and in lib. 1. Retract.
saying: Cum autem de libera voluntate recte faciendi loquimur, de illa
scilicet in qua homo factus est loquimur: That is: When we speak of freewill,
of doing well, we speak, and mean, of that freewill, in which man was (
first) made ( before his fall.) And hereto saint Hierome agrees, writing
upon Jeremy, when he says these words: Hieroni. in Iere. cap. 23.


And therefore, the heretics be wont to promise felicity, and to open unto
sinners the kingdom of heaven, saying: Thou may follow the majesty of
GOD, and be without sin, sith that thou have received the power and
strength of freewill, and the understanding of the law, whereby thou art able
to obtain what soever thou will. And so the said heretics do deceive the
poor, simple, and ignoraunte persons, and specially women, which being laden
with sins, are led to and fro with every wind of doctrine, deceiuyng by
their flattery, all them that give ears unto them. Here we see that saint
Hierome does call them all heretics, that say, that men be able by their
freewill, to do both good and evil.

They do further object, and say: that if man has not that power of his own
strength, Objection.
to keep the whole law, and perform it, why then are we commanded to keep it
upon pain of dampnation, and if for not keepyng, we shall be punished, then
are we punished wrongfully, and God shall seem to be unrighteous, to give us
a law, and to require performaunce of us of the same, when it is not in our
powers and freedom to observe it as ^e commands. And again, what need so
many exhortations, to turn to him, to believe him, to hear, to repent, to
amend our lives. etc. if we have not a will and power of our selves, to do all this? And again, God saves no man against his will. As to the first, in
that God gives his law unto us to be observed, Answer.
and requires of us due fulfillyng of the same, and for not doing of it, he
will punish us: he is in all this, a just and righteous GOD. And in that we
can not fulfill the law, as it requires, the fault, nor hardness of it to be
kept, is not of God, nor yet of the law it self: for the law of it self, is
easy, and so are all the commandments of GOD, and if any difficulty, or
hardness be in them: it comes not of the nature, and property of the
commandments of God given* unto us: but of the corruption of our own
nature. Therefore s^inct Paul sets forth this in plain words, saying:
What soever the law could not fulfill, in as much as it was weak because of
the flesh, Romans 8.
that same did God perform, sendyng his son in the similitude of sinful
flesh, and by sin dampened sin.

Two things are to be learned in Saint Paul's words. First, Two things to
be learned in s. P^ules sayings.
that it comes not of the law, that men are not able to fulfill it, but of
the imbecilitie and weakness of the flesh. Secondly, we do learn, that
God does by his son Jesus Christ, supply the same that by reason of the
weakness of our flesh, we be not able to fulfill. God therefore is not
unrighteous, to ask the performaunce of his commandments at our hands
(although we can not satisfy it accordyngly) No more, then if I were bound,
to pay one a thousand pounds, A similitude.
which I owe him: though the same man did demand this of me, and I were not
able to satisfy him, or pay him, should he do unjustly to ask me his
thousand pounds? Matthew. 18.
I trow no man will so say. When the king did ask of his servant, the ten
thousand talentes, that he did owe unto him, did he unjustly, or wrongfully?
No certainly.

So then, all the whole law of God, is nothing else but a commandment,
whereby we are commanded and bidden, to pay that unto GOD, that we owe unto
him. For man is bound of duty to love God, Deuteronomy. 6.
with all his heart, with all his soul, and with all his strength: and his
neighbor as his own self. Romans 8.
Therefore saint Paul says: Brethren, we are debttours, but not unto the
flesh. Shall we say then that God is unrighteous, or that he does unjustly,
askyng that thing of us, that we do owe unto him of bound duty? but rather
he does most justly, godly, and righteously, to demand such things of us.

But these freewill papists, are so ignorant, that they understand not to
what end the commandments were given. The law has mo ends then one.
Galat..3.
For they think, that they were given, to no other use but to be performed.
Saint Paul says: the law was given because of transgression, to the intent
that they that would not for fear of God, and love of heavenly things,
refrain from doing of evil, should at the least, for fear of the punishment
of the law, be driven to keep a good order, and to live quietly among them
selves, else they would have killed one an other and no man should have kept his
own, but all things should have gone to havoc.







Fifthly, it was given, that it might serve us for a Scholemaister, for to
bring us unto Christ, who is the end, or performyng Galat. 3.
for to justify all men that do believe. For, when we have once learned, by
the doctrine of the law, that of our selves, Romans 10.
we be not able to escape the dampnation that we do deserve, by the breaking
of the commandments of God, then are we feign to put away all vain
confidence and trust that we had in our own strength, and in our own merits,
and so to fly unto Christ, who was made accursed for us: Galat. 3.
that is, was punished, and slain most opprobriouslie for our sakes, that we
might be delivered from the curse of the law, and so receive the blessing of
Abraham, and the promise of the spirit through faith.

Therefore saint Augustine says: Vtilitas legis est, vt hominem de ^ua
infirmitate conuincat, Epist. 200. a^ Asellicu^.
and gratiae medicinam, quae in Christo est implorare compella^: That is to
say: This is the profit of the law, that it may make man to know his
infirmity, or conuicte him of his weakness, and so compel him to seek for
the salve, and medicine of grace which is in Christ. And again, in an other
place he says: O homo, in praeceptione cognosce, quid debeas agere: in
correptione, August. de correptione and gratia. cap. 3.
cognosce, tuo vitio non habere, in oratione cognosce vnde accipias, quod vis
habere: That is to say, O man, know in the commandments, what thou ought
to do in rebukyng, know that through thy own fault, thou haste it not, and
in prayer know whence thou must receive that thing, Epist. 157. ad Optatu^.
that thou will have. Again, Danda itaque fuerat lex, quae manifestius sibi
ipsum ostenderet hominem: ne superbus animus humanus a seipso se posse esse
iustum putaret: Therefore was the law given, which should more manifestly,
show man in him self, lest he should be pufte up, or high minded, that he
should think him self, as of him self, that he can, or may be righteous or
just. And again he has these words: The law was given for this purpose,
August. i^ psalm. 11^.
that is should make thee, of a high minded person, lowly and humble: and
that it should show unto thee, that thou haste not of thine own strength
unto righteosnesse: that so being poor, bare, and naked, thou should ^^ie
unto grace, and then ^ournyng him self unto God, he says: So do O lord: so
do, O merciful lord, command that thing, that thing that can not be
fulfilled but through thy grace, that when men shall not be able to fulfill it
by their own strength, all mouths may be stopped, and no man should seem
unto himself to be high: Let all men be little ones, humble, and lowly: Let
all the world be subject unto God. Many other places might I bring out of
this Augustine the golden doctor, but these shall now suffice.

As for exhortations, to turn unto the Lord, to hear, to repent,
Commandments and exhortations prove not the liberty of will.
and believe, as it is required in the word of God, argue not a liberty, or
prove thereby, that we have strength of our selves to do all these things,
or that when grace is offered, we have power to receive it of our own
strength: for, rather we are taught thereby, to acknowledge our infirmities
and unableness, and not that we are able, or can do it, as soon as it is
commanded and spoken: except God does work inwardly with his holy spirit
in our hearts, which thing saint Paul declares, Acts. 15.
when he exhorts the faithful to abide and persevere in the grace of God. But
Paul in an other place, shows from whence, that virtue of constancy and
perseueraunce does come: Finally my brethren (says he) be strong in the
Lord. Ephe. 6.
Again, For this cause do I bow my knees, unto the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that he would grant you, according to the riches of his glory, that
ye may be strengthened with might, by the spirit in the inner man, that
Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith. Again he says: Ephe. 4.
Grieve not the holy spirit of God, by whom ye are sealed unto redemption.
But that thing that he requires there, he desires God to grant it to the
Thessalonians, saying: 1 Thessalonians. 1.
Wherefore, we pray always for you, that our GOD make you worthy of your
calling, and fulfill all good purposes of his goodness, and the work of
faith with power, that the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified
in you, and ye in him, through the grace of our lord Jesus Christ. Again, 2.
Cor. ^.
I planted, and Apollo has watered: but it is the lord that gives the
increase. For in the Lord we live, and move, and have our being. Acts. 17.
As we may easily see, in that Christ did say unto the man that was sick of
the palsy: Matthew. 9.
Arise, take up thy bed, and go home. It did not follow, that he had strength
to arise, except Christ our Savior had given it him: but when Christ did
say unto him, arise: he did straight with it give him strength to arise.

Even so, when God does by his Preachers, speak unto them whom he has
chosen already, and does bid and exhort them to arise out of the bed of
sin, straight therewith, he gives them strength to do it. Saint Augustine
agreyng herewith, August. in solutionibus quest. Hyla^i^. quest. 1. and in
Epist. 89.
says: Iubet ergo deus continentiam, and da^continentiam: Iubet per legem,
dat per gratiam: Iubet per literam, dat per spiritum: God does command
continency, and he does give continency: he commands it by the law, he
does give it by grace: he commands it by the letter, he does give it by the
spirit. And therefore he says most excellently in his book of confessio^s:
Libro. 10. confe^sion. ca. 39. August. de spiritu and litera ad Marcel. cap. 19.
Continentiam iubes, da quod iubes, and iube quod vis: Thou commaundest
continency, give that thou commau^dest, and command what thou will. Again,
Lex data est vt gratia quaereretur: gratia data est vt lex impleretur: The law
is given, that grace should be sought: grace is given, that the law should be
fulfilled. Again: Quod been vi^imus, quod raecte intelligimus, deo debemus:
August. de verbis apost. Sermon. 10.
nostrum nihil est nisi p^ccatum quod habemus: That we live well, that we
understand a right, we have it of God: of our selves we have nothing, but
only sin, that is within us. Hieron. super verba christ. Quos dedisti^ mihi.
Again, saint Hierome says: Non dixit, dedi ^is liberi arbitrij potestatem,
vt ipsi se suo labor saluarent: sed ego custodiui eos, ego seruaui: Christ
said not, I have given to them the power of free will, that they by their own
labor, should be saved: but I have kept them, I have reserved them.

These testimonies both of Scriptures and Fathers, do sufficiently declare,
that whatsoever God does requre of us, the same he must work in us, by his
holy spirit. For, of our selves we are able to do no manner of thing that good
is. Therefore says Saint Augustine: August. in psalm. 98.
Homo sibi sufficit ad peccandum, vt iustificetur non sibi sufficit, nisi ab
illo iustificetur qui solus est iustus: Man is able or sufficient of him self
to sin: that he should be justified, he is not able or sufficient of
himself, except he should be justified by him, which only is just. Again
in the same place he says. In codem psalm.
I doneus est homo ad vulnerandum, sed nunquam idoneus est ad sanandum se,
quando vult egrotat, no^ quando vult surgit: Man is apt and meet to wound
himself, but he is not apt and meet to heal him self: when he will he is
sick, not when he will, he does rise.

How this is to be understood, that god saves no man against his will. John.
6.
And where as they say, God will save none against his will, it is true, in
deed. For they are made willing by him before, whom he will and does save,
and whom he made willing, them does he also help, aid, and assist, that they
may do the thing that he has made them willing to do, wherefore Christ said,
No man comes unto me, except my father does draw him. And again, it is
God that works in us both the will, Phil. 2.
and also the deed, according to his good pleasure.

August in enchir. ad Lau.
Saint Augustine says, agreeyng herewith. No man (says he) can believe,
hope, or love, unless he will, but even the self same will to believe, hope
and love, comes not but from God. Again, August. de bono perseue. cap. 13.
Nos volumus: sed deus in nobis operatur velle. Nos operamur: sed deus in nobis
operatur and operari pro bona sua voluntate. Hoc nobis expedit and credere, and
dicere. Hoc est pium: hoc est verum: vt fit humilis, In cap. 6.
and submissa confessio, and detur totum deo. Tutiores viuimus, si totu^ deo
damus: no^ au^t nos illi ex part, and nobis ex part co^mittimus: We will: but
it is God yt works in us to will. We work* but is God that works in us to
work, according to his good pleasure. This is behouefull for us both to
believe, and to speak: This is a godly, this is a true doctrine, that our
confession may be humble and lowly, and that God may have the whole. We live
in more safety, if we give all unto God, rather then if we commit ourselves
partly to our selves, and partly to him.

Grego. in Ezec. Hom. 9.
Saint Gregory says: Ipse aspirando nos preuenit vt velimus: qui adiuuando
subsequitur ne inaniter velimus. He does preuente us with his grace, that we
may be willing: and with his healpyng hand he does follow us, lest we
should will in vain. Saint Barnarde says: Neque enim aut inchoare bonum,
donec a misericordia preueniamur: Barnard Parni. Sermon. 39.
aut agere bonum donec adiunemur a gratia: aut co^summare in bono possumus
donec gloria repleamur. Neither can we begin (says he) any good, until we
be prevented by mercy, or else to do any good, until we be helped by grace,
or else that we can end in goodness, until we be fulfilled or replenished by
glory. Therefore does Saint Augustine call it: Gratia praeueniens,
preuentyng grace.

Thus we may see, that God saves no man, that is unwilling to be saved, or
that does withstand and resist always his blessed will and pleasure: But
before thae he saves any man, he makes that same man, by his grace, to
consent and agree unto his blessed will and pleasure: yea, he does reach
forth his hand unto him, for to pluck him up.

Wherefore, says Fulgentius, Ye see of whom we have this good will,
Fulgentius.
that we must bring unto God, even of himself, and not of us. For, it is he and
none other, that does work it in us, by his holy spirit. Every good work
then, which we do work in God, the same does God work in us. For, all
things are of him, through him, and in him: both our good work, and our good
will then be both of him. Hec Fulgentius.

Note here, that we say not, that man was bereft of his understanding, A
caveat.
his will was not taken from him, and clean changed into a stone or a block,
As concerning earthy and corporal things, man has freewil. Maxentius in 1.
lib. de fide.
yet those gifts were so altered and diminished in him after his fall, that
they were not so excellent, or able to do so much as they were before his
fall, for his knowledge was darkened, and his will was made bound, whereas
before it was free: for now it serves sin, not unwillingly, but willingly:
for it is called will, and not will. Therefore as touching wickedness or sin,
man is not compelled either of God, or the devil, but of his own motion does
evil, and in this behalf has free will to do mischef. But as touching
heavenly things, goodness and virtue, what power it has, we have said
already. For Saint Augustine says: Libero arbitrie male vtens homo, August.
in enchir. cap. 30. Ad Bonit. lib. 3. cap. 8. De verbis ap^. Sermon. 11.
and se perdidit, and arbitrium: Man misusyng his free will, lost him self,
and his will. Again he says: Liberum arbitrium captiuatum, non nisi ad
peccatum valet. Free will once made thrall, avails now nothing but to sin.
Wherefore he cries out as it were, saying: O, malum liberum arbitrium, sine
deo. O, evil is free will, with out God.

Now last of all, The strength of men regenerate, and after what sort they
have free will.
we must consider, whether they which are regenerated, have free will, and
after what sort they have it. In regeneration the mind is inspired with the
holy spirit, to understand and know the secrets and will of God: And the
will is not only changed by Gods spirit, but is made of ability also of her
own accord to be willing, and able to do good. Romans 8.
Except we grant this, we shall deny christian liberty, and shall bring in
the bondage of the law. Jeremy speaks this in the person of God: Iere. 31.
Ezech. 36.
I will put my law in their minds, and write it in their hearts. The Lord
also says in the Gosspell: If the son of God shall make you free, John. ^.
Phil. 1.
ye shall be free in deed. And S. Paul says: Unto you it is given for
Christ, that not only ye should believe in him, but also suffer for his sake.
Phil. 2.
Again, I am persuaded, that he which has begone this good work in you,
will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ. It is God which works in
you both the will and the deed.

Two things to be noted.
Here notwithstanding, two things are to be observed. First, that those that
be regenerated in election, do good, not only passiuely, but also actiuely:
for they be driven of God, to do that which they do. Secondly, we must note
that infirmity and feblenesse remains in them which be regenerated. For
seeing that sin dwells in them, and the flesh (although they be borne a
new) strives against the spirit, Galath. 5.
as long as they live, they do not altogether without combraunce bring that to
pass, which they determined, as is seen by S. Paul when he says: The law
is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under sin, Romans 7.
for I allow not that which I do: For what I would, that do I not: but what I
hate, that do I. Now then it is no more I, that do it, but the sin that
dwells in me: For I know, that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no
good thing, for to will is present with me: but I find no means to perform
that which is good: For, I do not the good thing which I would: but the
evil which I would not, that do I: Now if I do that I would not, it is no
more I that do it, Psalm. 51.
but the sin that dwells in me.

Therefore, weak is our free will, by reason of the dregs of our old Adam,
and the natural corruption of man, stickyng ^ast in us to our lives end.
Howbeit, seeing that the strength of the flesh, and relics of the old man,
be not so strong and of such puissaunce, as utterly to suppress and conquer
the workyng of the spirit, Why the faithful are said to be free.
therefore the faithful are said to be free: yet so that they acknowledge
their infirmity and weakness, without boastyng and braggyng of their
freewill: For the faithful ought always to keep in mind that saying, which
so often S. Augustine repeateth out of the apostle: What have thou that thou
did not receive? 1. Cor. 4.
and if thou have received it, why boastest thou, as though thou receauest it
not?

So we may say truly that the man regenerated, is able to keep the law of
God, in Jesus Christ, and by Jesus Christ: but not of himself. August. in
retract. 19.
For as saint Augustine says: all the commandments of God be fulfilled,
when the sins and faults be not imputed but pardoned. But if they will say,
that a man being separated from Christ, is able to do any good, and keep the
law of God, they are in a great error and heresy. For Christ him self
says: That a tree can bring forth no good fruit, Matthew. 7.
except it be made good first. But no man is good of his own self (as it
has been declared already) Ergo, he can not bring forth good fruit. Again,
Bide in me, and I in you. As the branch can not bear fruit of it self,
John. 15.
except it bide in the vine: no more can ye except you abide in me.

Thus you see by Christ our Saviors own words, that it lies not in man's
power, to bring any good fruit of himself, except he be graft in christ.
For saint Augustine does show what we are without Christ, August. in Ioh.
Hom. 49.
when he says: Let no man flatter himself: for of his own he is a very
Satan, he has that of God only, wherewith he is blessed: For* what have
thou of thine but sin? Take away sin from thee, which is thine own: thy
righteousness is of God. Again he says: August. in Psalm. 70.
A te habeo quicquid bom habeo, quicquid autem mali habeo: a me habeo:
Whatsoever good I have, I have it of thee (O Lord) and whatsoever evil I have,
I have it of my self. He also says: August. lib. d^ praedest Sanctad Boni.
lib. 4^.
De nullo nobis gloriandum est, quia nihil nostrum est, nisi vt homo apud se
prorsus exinanitus, a deo totus pendere discat: That is to say: we ought to
boaste of nothing: For, nothing is our own, saving only that man being of no
reputation with himself, must learn to hang altogether of God.

Therefore we are taught by these testimonies that we ought not to boaste, or
hang upon our selves, and our free will works, as the Pelagian papists teach
us, lest we be strangers from God. August. in psalm. 31.
For so says. S Augustine: Si vis esse alienus a graetia: iacta merita tua.
If thou will be a stranger from grace, boast of thine own merits, or
worthynesse. Let us learn hereby to humble our selves, for that all we are
naught, and gone out of the way, we are all corrupt: there is none that does
good, Psalm. 14.
no not one.

Howbeit no man denies, but that men regenerate, and not regenerate, In
outward things all men have free will. Maxentius. 1. lib. de fide.
have free will in, outward things: for man has his constitution, as other
living creatures have, that he will do one thing, and will not do another, he
may speak or hold his peace, go out of the house or tarry within the doors,
to eat this or that meat, to put on this or that garment. etc. Yea to sin
or to abstain from the gross acts of sin, as murder, adultery,
fornication, false witness bearing, and such like. 1. Cor. 4. James. 1.
etc. Which notwithstanding, we must confess and acknowledge, to be the
gifts of God. And here also the power of God is alwaie to be marked, which
brought to pass, that Balaam could not go thither, Number. 24. Luke 1.
whither he would, neither Zachary returnyng out of the Temple, could speak,
as he had a good will to do.

The Manycheis heresy.
Here are condemned in this behalf the Manichies, who denied that free will was
to a good man the beginning of evil, and also the Pelagians, who affirm that
an evil man has freewyll enough to keep a good commandment, The Pelagians
heresy.
both these are reproved by the holy scriptures, which say against the
Maniches, Genesis 1. Eccle. 15.17.
God made man righteous and good: against the Pelagians If the son of God
shall make you free, you shall be free in deed, and again, without me ye can
do nothing. For* man had lost those excellent benefits, John. 8. John. 15.
that the Lord had given unto him at the first.

So that after his fall: of a wise man, he became a fool: of a just man,
Psalm. 5.13.52. Eccle. 17.
an unjust, of a righteous man, a sinner: of a true man, a liar: of a perfect
man in all things, he became imperfect: of a free man, Osec. 13. Psalm. 116.
Romans 3.5.7. Phil. 2. 1. Cor. 2. John. 8.15. Romans 7. Galat. 5.
he became a bondslaue: of a living man, he became a dead man: of a blessed and
good man, he became a cursed and a wicked: having after that, a will altogether
wicked, which neither could nor would agree unto the will of God: But wholly
unto the will of the devil, the world, the flesh, and sin: which of
himself can do nothing but wickedness, because it is altogether fleshly,
bound, and captive, sold under sin.

Behold now gentle reader, the free will (or that I may better say) the
bound will of man, in the state of this present life. All these doctrines
considered well, I will now draw to an end of this my simple judgment, with
the saying of sain^^ Augustine, the golden candle in gods catholic church,
where he says these words: Yet August. had his darkness. August. de natura
and gratia. cap. 53.
Quid tantum de naturae possibilitate praesumitur? vulnerata, saucia, vexata
perdita est. Vera confessione, non falsa defensione opus habet: What do men so
much presume of the possibility of nature? It is wounded, it is mangled, it
is troubled, it is lost. It behooves us rather truly to confess it, then
falsely to defend it. And in a another place he says: Tutiores viuimus,
August. de bona perseue. cap. 6. and 13.
si totum deo damus: non autem nos illi ex part, and nobis ex part
committimus: We live in more safety, if we give all unto God rather then if we
commit our selves partly to our selves, and partly to him.

In the Counsel holden at Miluente, it was godly decreed, touching this
controversy, Sinodus Mileuent.
and matter: If any man does say (say they) that the grace of God, can be
given by human invocation, or man's calling upon God: And not that the grace
of God it self does work, Esai. 65. Romans 10.
or bring to pass, that God is called upon of us, he does gainesaie Esai the
Prophet, or the Apostle speaking the same: I am found of them that sough^ me
not, and did appear plainly unto them that did not ask for me, or after me.
John. 3. 1. Peter. 1.
What can be more plainly spoken of the unableness of man, before he be
regenerated, or borne a new, by the spirit of God. And being renewed by the
spirit of God, John. 6. James. 1.
he will give them faith to believe, hope to trust, repentance of sins,
amendment of life, and a hatred to all iniquities and sins, that it shall
not reign in them, nor have dominion in them, 1. John. 1. Romans 3.
so that their wickedness, shall never be imputed unto them. And all this will
he do for his son Jesus Christ's sake, our only mediator and advocate, who
came into this world, Matthew. 5.
to fulfill the whole Law for us, for he did fulfill it in deed: we by
imputation. He by merit, we by mercy: he by works, we by grace. Therefore,
wicked are they, Romans 8.
and void of the spirit of God, what soever they be, that will seem to
extol, integra naturalia, of man, so far, as though it were in man's posse,
and esse, to satisfy the whole law: and such are our lubberly Louanistes, and
rebellious Papists, whom God convert, or soon confound, for Jesus Christ's
sake. A good prayer.


The.xliiij. Chapter. Of the general resurrection, both of the godly, and
wicked, at the last day.
The resurrection of the flesh. 1. Cor. 15. Phil. 3.
WHO at his last coming, shall by his almighty power, raise up again our
vile and mortal bodies, and make them conform, and like unto his glorious
body, that is now in heaven, on the right hand of the father. Which, after
the meaning of the scriptures, and of the Articles of our faith, ought to be
understood after this manner: That as the body of Christ, which he took in
the virgins womb, was by his almighty power, raised up again, immortal and
glorious, all infirmities that it was subject unto, being clean put away,
and taken of: So these mortal bodies of ours, even the same, that we took of
the substance of our sinful and mortal mothers, 1. Cor. 15. John 5. John. 11.
shall at the day of the general resurrection of all flesh, be raised up
again, according to the mighty working of the Lord, whereby he is of power
to subdue all things unto him self.

So that we may boldly say with Job. We are sure that our redeemer lives:
Job. 1^.
And that we shall rise out of the earth in the latter day: that we shall be
clothed again with this skin, and see God in our flesh: Esai. 66. Ezech. 37.
Dan. 12. John. 5.11. Acts. 23.24. 2. Cor. 5. 1. Cor. 15. 1 Thessalonians. 4. Phil. 3.
yea, that we our selves shall behold him, not with other, but with the self
same eyes: not with an other, but with the same very bodies, which we carried
from our mothers womb, with the self same bones, which now we have: yet
nevertheless, that, transformed and ^haunged, made of mortal, immortal or
incorruptible, of vile and loathsome, glorious, as ye may read, and prove by
those Scriptures noted in the margin, and many other places besides, where
these things are set forth so plainly, that it were shame for any man to
doubt of the matter.

And there do we learn also, that as the righteous, and faithful shall rise
again, John. 5. Matthew. 25. Revel. 21. Sapi. 5. Matthew. 18. Matthew. 8.13. Esai.
66. Mark. 9. Revel. 21.
unto immortality, glory, and honor: So the unrighteous and reprobate, shall
rise again with their very bodies, unto everlasting shame: and body and
soul, shall go into hell with the devil and his Aungelles, there to abide
euerlastyngly, and to be tormented with him in hell, with fire which never
shall be quenched: where shall be bitter weepyng and gnasshyng of teethe, and
shall be lively touched with the worm which never dies, which is the second
death.

As the glorious risyng again of the righteous and faithful, is called life
everlasting, 3. Reg: 17. 4. Reg. 4.13. Matthew. 9.27. Luke 7. John. 11. John.
5.12. Acts. 9.20.
thereby to signify unto us, that we shall not be raised up at the day of
judgment, for to dye again, as they did, whom Christ, the Prophets, and
Apostles had raised up again: But in one immortal, eternal, and perdurable
life, for evermore to reign euerlastynglie with God, in body and soul.

And therefore, am I well assured* and constantly believe, and doubtyng nothing
at all: Job. 19. John. 3. Romans 8. Galat. 4. Ephe. 2. Romans 4. John. 3.5.6.8.
Revel. 21. 1. Cor. 15. 2. Cor. 5.
knowing, that who soever doubts of his salvation, made by Jesus Christ, he
shall never be saved (as of this matter, we have largely entreated of before,
in the article of forgiveness of sins.) Wherefore, as I am sure and
certain, that Christ is dead and risen again, and doubt it not in any
condition: even so am I sure and certain of my Salvation made by him, and that
infalliblie I shall be saved, and shall go into everlasting life, with the
same body and soul that now I have (being then made immortal and glorious)
and reign with Christ Jesus my only Savior, in his eternal and perdurable
kingdom, 2. Cor. 5. Matthew. 25. 2. Tim. 4. Revel. 1.
that he has prepared for me, and all his elect and predestined, before the
beginning of the world, by his precious death and bloodshedding. To whom
therefore, with the father, and the holy ghost, be all praise, glory, and
honor, world without end. So be it.

Come quickly Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Revel. 22. Vigilius contra Eutichen. lib. 1. Haec est fides, and professio
catholica: quam Apostoli tradiderunts Martyrs roborauerunt: and fideles
hucusque custodiunt.

This is the faith, and catholic profession: which the Apostles have
delivered: the Martyrs have confirmed: and the faithful keep until this day.

Cyprianus ad Cornaelium. lib. 1. Sacerdos Dei Euangelium tenens: and Christi
praecepta custodion^^ occidi potest: non potest vinci.

The Priests of God holding the Gospel: and keepyng the Commandments of
Christ: may well be killed, but conquered they can not be.

A brief Index or Table, of the principal matters contained in this book.
A
A Comfortable mystery. 7. A place of Esai expounded. fol. 10. side. 2. A
papisticall trick. fol. 13. An error of certain fools. fo. 22 A merry story
of the Person of Trumpington. fol. 22. Augustines modesty in writing of
matters of religion. fol. 26.2. A Spiritual conception and birth. fol. 32. A
godly similitude. fol. 37.2. A similitude of the eye. fol. 38. A similitude of
gods mercy and severity. ibid. A place of Zachary expounded. fol. 3. A
short exhortation to magistrates. fol. 58. Against their papistical
reservation. fol. 52. Answer to the objection that is made out of the.1.
Corin. 11. fol. 59.2. A similitude of the Kings broad seal. fol. 60. A
special caveat or warnyng. fol. 104. Arguments of papists whereby they go
about to prove the Popes supremacy. fol. 113* Antichriste. fol. 107.
Authority of the church consists in.iiij. things. fol. 121.2. A note to be
marked diligently. fol. 124.2. A reward never stirs up the Godly to seek
for righteousness. fol. 130.2. A caveat. fol. 140. A great absurdity
granted. fol. 20.2. An other shift of the papists. fol. 65.2. A request of
the author to the reader. fol. 9.2.
B
By the Mass, ye wrath of God comes. fol. 4. By christ's death gods wrath
was pacified. fol. 7. side. 2. Both wicked and Godly had one feelyng of
Christ's death, but to diverse ends. fol. 8.2. By Baptism the Children of the
Christians are brought to Christ. fol. 18.2. Body of Christ is a creature.
fol. 36.2. Blasphemy of the papists by their own doctrine. fol. 47.
Benefits of Christ's death. fol. 4. By the Mass, the wrath of of God is
kindeled. ibid.
C
Christ cannot be offered except he be slain and put to death. fol. 3.2.
Christ is the true purgation of Christians. fol. 13.2 Comfort that they had in
the bosom of Abraham. fol. 19.2. Christ speaks of the water first. fol.
24.2. Christ's body can be but in one place at once. fol. 37.2. Communion
ministered in both kinds in the primitive church fol. 51. Counsel of
Constaunce bolden Anno. 1414. fol. 51. Comfort that we have by christ's
ascension. fol. 79. Christ is not the Chiefest mediator, by the Papists
doctrine. fol. 86.2. Covetousness of priests is the mother of all Idolatry.
fol. 89. Church is bound to no several place. fol. 111.2. Church does
allow the scriptures, as a subject. fol. 117.2. Church known by the word of
God. fol. 119. Church has three offices as touching the word of God. fol.
121. Certainty of our salvation. fol. 132.2. Christ a most wholesome medicine
and salve to al poor sinners. fol. 2. Christ as touching his manhood is
ignorant of the later day. fol. 107.
D
Distinctions that the old Idolaters did make. fol. 85. Definition of
freewill, after S. Augustine. 135.
E
Efficient cause of our salvation. fol. 18. Error of the Jews. fol. 79.2.
Exclamation of the Papists. fol. 64.2. Enoch and Elias are come already. fol.
106. Eutiches heresy. fol. 43.2.
F
Formal cause of our salvation fol. 18. Final cause of our salvation. ibidem.
Faith receives or eats. fol. 54.2. False Christ's. fol. 107. False
Prophets. ibidem. Free will. fol. 134. Fire and sword are the best arguments
that papists use. fol. 45.2.
G
God does govern, rule, and preserve al his creatures. fo. 1. Good works of
the Papists. fol. 128.2. Good works that God does require of us. fol. 129.
Gods promises very necessary to us all. fol. 130.2.
H
How many ways this word hell, is taken in the scrip. fol. 6. How christ went
into the hell of the damned. fol. 6. How we are already in possession of Gods
kingdom. fol. 12. How long we must suffer in purgatory for every sin. f.
12.2. How it is to be understood that the faithful shall not come into
judgment. ibidem. How we are passed from death to life. fol 13. Holy ghost
for many causes is called by sundry names in the scripture. fol. 24.2. How
they that understood not ye fathers, did make plain Idols of the sacraments.
fo. 29. How S. August. and others expound the place of the.8. of the Acts.
fol. 30.2. How christ is the first fruictes of them that sleep. fol. 32. How
we ought to practice the whole life of Christ in our selves. fol. 32. Heresy
of Eutiches is now renewed by the papists. f. 36.2. How the poor ignorant
people are abused. fol. 56. How Christ feeds us with his body and blood. fo.
46. How the mystical bread is abused in the sacrament. fo. 55.2 How the place
of saint Paul must be understood. Heb. 1. fol. 73. Hipostases. fol. 73.2.
Hope possesses. fol. 79. How the saying of S. Paul ought to be understood.
f. 73. How the faithful shall appear in judgment. fol. 101.2. How the words
of christ are taken of many. fol. 104.2. How this is to be understood, God
saves no man against his will. fol. 139.2. How the soul of Christ did
suffer. fol. 5.2.
I
Jesus Christ has taken a pledge of us, and has left us one. fol. 32.2. It
is a monstrous body that the Papists will have in the Sacrament. fol 44. It
were stark madness to ground any doctrine upon a dream. fol. 79.2. In
outward things all men have free will. fol. 104. If the Papists purgatory
should stand, Gods promises must needs be false. fol. 10. John puts
himself in the number of sinners. fol. 83.
L
Life confirms. fol. 79. Last refuge of the Papists. fol. 97.2. Lymbe of
the children that be still borne, or die without baptism. fol. 16.
M
Mediator between God and man, none but God only. fo. 82. Manicheis heresy.
fol. 141.2. Material cause of our salvation. fol. 18. Midwiues ought not to
Baptize. fol. 23*
O
Objections of them that say, that christ's soul did suffer in hell fire.
fol. 5. Opinion of some concerning Christ's going down to hell. fol. 6.2.
Others make none account of the Sacraments. 27. Oil for a sacrament, more fit
for a Sallet. fol. 28. Opinion of many touching the quick and the dead. fol.
99.2. Outward tokens of the true Church. fol. 112. Opinion of the
Anabaptists. fol. 123.
P
Papists purgatory. fol. 10. Pope of greater authority and force, then
Christ the son of God, among the papists. ibid. Papists make Augustine a
liar. fol. 11.2. Papists make Barnarde a liar. ibidem. Phrases of scripture.
23.2. Papists own doctors do condemn them. fol. 26. Papists as unawares
to them selves overthrow their limb. fol. 26.2. Papists like the
Anabaptists. fol. 45.2. Papists maintain Donatistes heresy. fol. 28. Papies
are utter enemies to the almightye power of God. fol. 45.2. Per concomitantiam,
a term of the Papists. fol. 49. Papists make christ to have no wit nor
vndrastandyng what he did or said at his last Supper. fol. 49. Popish Priests
make not the blood of christ, but only when they be at Mass. fol. 49.2.
Papists are blasphemous heretics. fol. 50. Papists do against their own
decrees. fol. 50.2. Papists do make Christ to be very ignorant. fol. 51.
Papists own reasons do quite overthrow their transubstantiation. fol.
52.2. Papists are like the Arians. fol. 64. Papists themselves say that
transubstantiation is not found in the word of God. fol. 66. Papists do
burn their christ fol. 68. Papists make Christ more fearful and weak,
then vile vermin and other creatures. fol. ibidem. Papists like to Rat
catchers fol. 84.2. Peter no higher in aucthority then the other apostles. fo.
117. Papists call us Solifidians. fol. 127. Papists like the Arian
heretics. fol. 64. and. 127. Purpose of God does exclude all merits from
the justification of man. fol. 127.2. Pelagians heresy. fol. 141.2.
R
Right hand of God is taken two manner ways. fol. 35.2. Right understanding of
this word intercession. fol. 83.2.
S
Sacraments are not bare signs. fol. 70.2. Similitudes that our papists do
bring for to maintein their Idolatry. fol. 88.2. Similitude of the papists
discussed. fol. 92. Similitude of the papists, is overthrown by an other. f.
93. Shifts of the foolish papists. fol. 94.2. Spirit of God works our
spiritual regeneration. fol. 24. Signification of baptism. f. 34.
Signification of water in Baptism. fol. ibidem. Strength of man regenerat, and
after what sort they have free will. fol. 140.
T
The means whereby ye death of Christ can be applied unto us. fol. 3.2. The
benefits of Christ's death. fol. 4. The mystery of Jonas fulfilled in
Christ. fol. 7. The breakyng of the Serpents head, what it is. fol. 6. The
meaning of harrowyng hell. fol. 6.2. The foolish imagination of them, that
thinks Christ went to fetch Adam out of hell. ibidem. The spiritual going
down of Christ into hell. fol 8.2. The true purgatory. fol. 9.2. The place of
John expounded. fol. 12. The great cruelty of the papists, against poor
children* that die without baptis. fol. 16. There can be no trespass but in
breakyng Gods commandment. fol. 59. The women of the Israelites were saved by
the inward circumcision. fol. 17.2. Though we have never so strong a faith,
yet ought we not to despise the Sacra. ibid. The chosen among the heathen were
saved without circumcision. fol. 18. Things diligently to be noted and marked.
fol. 20.2. The Euchariste ministered to little infantes. fol 21.2. The manner of
the Iacobites and Greeks. ibid. The manner of the Bohemyans and Morauians. fol.
22. The cause that the fathers did err. fol. 22. The sign and the figure, are
taken many times for the things that they do signify. fol. 30.2. The
fruictes of christ's resurrection. fol. 32. The office of Christ our Savior.
ibidem. The heresy of the Antropomorphites. fol. 35. Tricks of the devils
Sophistry. fol. 35.2. The shameless heresy of the papists. fol. 36.2. The
meaning of this word, the new Testament. fol. 41.2. Their argument brought
upon their own heads. fol. 41.2. The childishe arguments of the papists.
fol. 44.2. The fetch of the Papists. fol. 45.2. The shameful Argument of the
papists. ibid. The papists lie. fol. 46.2 The door being shut, that was in
the night season. f. 46.2 The blasphemy of the Papists. fol. 47. The
ministratio^ or receiuyng of the Sacraments is not indifferent. fol. 54. The
second cause why christ would communicate with us. fol. 63.2. The tragical
exclamation of the papists. fol. 64.2. Transubsta^tiatio^ came from Rome. fol.
65.2. The age of the papists transubstantiation is. 355. fol. 66.
Transubstantiation was never heard of in the Church for the space of 1215.
years after Christ. fol. 66. To examine our selves, stands in two points.
fol. 76.2. The Christ that the papists have in their Mass is made of bread
and wine. fol. 66.2. The Christ of the papists is eaten with Myce and Rattes.
fol. 68. The true exposition of these words, this is my body. f. 68.2. The
Sacrament is not the news Testament of Christ, but a Seal or Sign thereof.
fol. 69.2. The mark wher^at the papists shoot. fol. 71. The place of Simeon
expounded. fol. 72.2. The Fathers in the old Testament, did eat christ's
^lesh, as well as we in the new. fol. 78.2. Two manner of sinners. fo. 90. The
true meaning of this article. fol. 100. The mystery of Jacobs puttyng on of
his brothers apparel. ibidem. To whom these sentences of the Scriptures ought
to be dreadful. fol. 102. The true meaning of the darkenyng of the Sun,
Moon and Stars. fol. 105.2. The doctrine contained in the old and new
Testament is sufficient unto salvation. f. 109.2. To believe, GOD, as God, in
God. fol. 111. Two things are to be marked in christ's words. f. 114.2. The
true Church is contented with the only word of God. fol. 117. This word,
iustificare, is taken of S. Paul in one sense, and of S. James in a another.
fol. 125. The imperfection of our own works. fol. 130.2. Three manner of powers
to forgive sins. fol. 132. Two things to be learned in S. Paul's saying. To.
8. fol. 137. The Law has more ends then one. fol. 137.2. Two things to be
noted. fol. 140.2. The spirit of god works in us our regeneration. fol. 24.
V
Unto whom hell is overcome. fol. 6.2. Uaine opinions of sundry me^. fol. 29.
Vsia. fol. 73.2.
VV
Wherefore Christ was judged and condemned before Pilate. fol. 1.2. What the
Serpent signified. ibidem. Why the Sacrifices of the old Law were offered
often. fol. 2.2. Why Christ was laid in a new grave. fol. 4.2. Why Christ
was laid in a another man's grave. ibidem. What the new grave signified. fol.
7. What was signified by the grave that was he wen out of the stone. ibidem.
What is to be understood when we sai^* Christ barowed hell. fol. ^^2^.
Whereto God had respect in his son our savior. fol. 5.2. What thing caused
Christ to be so heavy before his death. fol. 8. What Abraham's bosom is. fol.
9.2. What we learn by the third of John. fol. 23.2. Wherein the fire of
purgatory does differ from ye fire of hell. 12.2. We are al saved by privilege
fol. ^3. What is the first foundation of our election. fol. 18. What fruicte
their doctrine does bring, that condemn children that dye without baptism.
fol. 19. Without faith, no man can be delivered from condempnation. fol. 20.
What danger it is to refuse to receive the sacraments. f. 20. What we ought to
do, if we should follow the Fathers in all things. fol. 22. Why the spirit
of God is called fire. fol. 24. Why the holy ghost is called water. fol. 24.2.
What certain of the learned called Augustine for his rigor toward infantes
not Baptized. fol. 26.2. What moved Augustine to write as he did of children
not Baptized. fol. 27. Wherein the Anabaptists exceeded. fol. 27. Whereof
Confirmation did come. fol. 27.2. Why the Fathers did magnify the Sacraments
so much. fol. 29. What profit comes to the^ that are persuaded in this
doctrine. fol. 30.2. What many foolish people used to do, in carriyng their
children to Idols. fol. 31. We do part our salvation between Christ's death
and his resurrection. fol. 31.2. What it is to be dead unto sin. fol. 32.2.
What a large doctrine our baptism does preach unto us. fol. 34. What it is
to sit on the right hand of the Father. fol. 35.2. What the Papists must do
if they will have us to believe them. 47.2. What it is to receive the Sacrament
unworthily. fol. 48. Why the papists can not perceive in what parell they be.
fol. 49. Wherein the papists have the Fathers in estimation. fol. 53. Wherein we
must bear with our weak brethren. fol. 53. Why the sacraments were ordained.
fol. 16.2. We do make more then bare signs of the Sacraments. fol. 58.2. What
honor we ought to do to the sacrament. ibid. What we learn of the lords
words in Zachary. fol. 60. Why Christ would be baptized. fol. 63.2. Who can
choose but laugh at the papists. fol. 68. Why the sacraments be called by the
names of the things whereof they be Sacraments. fol. 69. What this word
Signum, does signify in the.2. of Luke f. 72.2. What it is to examine our
selves. fol. 57. and 76.2. Who they be that feed effectuously upon the body
and blood of Christ. fol. 76.2. Why Christ our savior was man. fol. 81.2.
What is the chief mark that the papists shoot at. fol. 89. Why the Apostles
were called light. fol. 87 2 What properties must be in him, that we must pray
unto. fol. 89.2. What was the meaning of the Prophet Jeremy. fo. 96. What is
signified by psalms hymns and songs. fol. 104. What the Sun does signify.
fol. 104.2. What the Moon does signifi^ fol. 105. What the Stars do
signify. ibidem. We must believe in Gods power, Gods providence, Gods
goodness. fol. 111. What the true Church of Christ is. fol. 111.2. Who can
be the head of the Church. fol. 112. Who be the keepers of the keys of
Gods kyngd. fo. 114.2. What it is to loose. ibidem. What it is to bind. fol.
115. Whereof the certitude of gods word does depend. fol. 118.2. When the
Church can not err. fol. 122.2. When the Church can and does err. ibidem.
Whole universal Church does never fall away from God. ibidem. Why it is
called the invisible Church. fol. 122. We must not divide our selves from the
Church because the wicked are among us. fol. 123. Whence this word,
iustificare has been borrowed, and what it signifies. fol. 124. Why God does
crown his gifts in us. fol. 129.2. What the nature of merit is. fol. 130.2.
What we are, as long as we are without the spirit of god. fol. 135. What this
word Apochripha is. fol. 135.2. What this word Cano^ is. ibi. Why the
faithful are said to be free. fol. 141. What thing caused Christ to be so
heavy before his death. fol. 8. What Christ's going down to hell is. fol. 9.
Without faith no man can be delivered from condemnation fol. 20. Whereto the
Papists have brought the order of confirmation. fol. 28.2. What it is to be
crucified to the world. fol. 32. Wherefore the Sacrament was instituted. fol.
56.2. What great absurdities do come of the doctrine of tra^substantiation.
fol. 67.2. What Christ meant by the keys. fol. 114.
FINIS.

