An addition declaratorie to the Bulls, with a searching of the Maze.

Scene and allowed.

Imprinted at London by John Day dwelling over Aldersgate.

THat ye be not deceived, good Readers, for I see it commonly mistaken, I
thought it good to let you know, that ye Bull which is published in Print in
Latin and English, together with the form of Absolution annexed unto it, is
not the same Bull that was set up at the Bishops gate, as many suppose, but an
other. For plain explication of the truth, ye shall understand that there be
two Bulls. The one contains a power and form to pardon, assoyle, and
reconcile all such as would return from the Christian Religion now taught in
England, which they call veresie, and from obeying our Queen and her laws,
which they sclaunderously call schism, to the bosom of the Chirch of Rome
which we may truly call Helles mouth.

The dispensation publishing and employing of this Bull was committed to Doctor
Harding, and to many other severally, not only to relieve those Popish
Patriarchs with the gain of that pardon, but specially to send out those
Archepapistes with that Bull of reconcilement among the Queens ^int subjects
English Papists, as it were capitaines to strike up their drommes to gather
soldiers, offering them great wages that should fight under the Popes banner
for (...) other (...) against our Queen, that is, remission of their sins,
as pure cleanenesse as when they were baptized, restitution to the communion of
the faithful, absolution from all sentences, and from all pains of Purgatory,
and the enjoying of life and kingdom everlasting.

With these Bulls and this proclaiming of wages, they have been gathering of
rebels ever since the year 1567. and have withal given to very many of them
pressed money to be ready in rebellions, that is, certain papers and badges of
sundry forms, some with a figure of Christ crucified, some with five wounds,
and some other.

Since which time, namely in the end of February 1569. when the late
rebellion was ready laid and in hatching, the Popes holiness has decreed an
other Bull, no dout at the special suit, procurement, instance, and
importunate calling on of our English traitors, and among other D. Harding and
the rest that procured the other Bulls.

In this is contained an arrogant, tyrannical, and blasphemous taking to
himself the power, as committed to him from God, to destroy, transpose, and
alter kingdoms at his pleasure, a number of vile and horrible sclanders and
uncomely naminges of our Queen, such as a good subject can hardly hear with
patience, the very effect of a great part of the late rebels proclamation as
it were translated, and finally his lewd presumptuous sentence of her majesty's
depriuatio^, in so spiteful, abhomiable, villainous, and traitorous form as is
not to be rehearsed. This is the Bull that was set up at the Bishops gate.

It seems by all probability, and no dout upon examinations it will so fall
out, that the original of this Bull sealed was among our rebels, and as it
is thought) brought them by Markenfeld or some such other, or delivered them
upon their conference with strangers, and kept close among them ready to be
published, so sone as they should have been able to get into their company such
a head as they desired to set up after our Queen, or such strength as that they
durst auow it. God so prevented them that they never came so (...).

In hope of the success of this Bull, a Pl. etc.
number of Papists, that sometime (...) communicate with us, or at least came
ordinarily to our public prayers, have of late forborne, and by this note
shall ye know many of them.

In hope of the success of this Bull, were (as it is reported) letanies and
praers in Rome for the good speed of our rebels.

In furtherance of the success of this Bull, was the spreading of false news
in Spain, of a great battle in Ireland between Papists and Christians,
wherein an Angel with a Chalice in his hand was reported to have discomfited
many thousands of our Queens subjects, for which there were in Spain
public gratulations, ringing of belles, and triumphings, adorned with ye
greatest prosences there, or rather (as may well be suspected) prayers for our
rebels success, according to the good meaning of the holy league or the
conspiracy of Trent.

In hope of the success of this Bull our Lo^anistes have stayed their hand^
from writing, and stand in suspense (better ^were they did hang in suspense)
and expectation what will become of these mischieues whereof them selves have
been tne Proctors.

In hope of the success of this Bull, a number of Papists have fled of late,
and Co. etc.
some of them with promising or rather threatening by letters a recompensing of
their return of such kindnesses as are showed to their friends in their
absence, have uttered their courage.

This is the Bull that makes so many Papists stand yet so stiffly in not
acknowledging her majesty's just authority. And whatsoever they pretend for
ecclesiastical causes, ye very truth is to be thought that (...) the decree and
publication of this Bull, the most part of the^ esteem not the Queen lawful
Queen of this realm, (...) the Pope has decreed the contrary, who they
think can not err. And (...) dout if an oath were ministered in this ^rme that
they should acknowledge her majesty lawful Queen of this realm,
notwithstanding any sentence that the Pope has given or can give, and that if
he have or shall presume to give any such sentence they esteem it erro^ious
(...) pres^mpt^^us, and will to their power (...), and (...) that shall ^^te^pt
to put any such sentence in execu^^on or affirm it lawful: surely they (...)
likewise refuse such oath, unless they would affirm the Pope to err s^^^fully,
^^^cially, presumptuously, seditiously, trait^rously, and in vilest (...),
which they would never sincerely confess: but in answering the interrogatories
ministered in the book of war^ing they would show themselves as evil
su^iectes in very (...) as they have by some proced^^g, an^ specially by
setting up of this Bull, she^^^ the same warning to be true and re^^^nable.

Because they never came in the rebellion time to possession and ability
(...) up the (...) whom they meant (...) in (...) of the (...), they had not ye
person whom (...) nor the power to (...) it, neither by (...) joining, not by
(...) it seems they did (...) the proclaiming of this great Bull, (...) have
(...) in the (...) some hope left that (...) (...) (...) traitorously (...)
throw this estate, neither is any of them so ^adde to think it a good excuse
for himself, if he should be arrained for traitorous s^^ting up of such a Bull
or paper, to say (...) other intent to bring Papist^s the (...) enemies in
hatred. And so may we well be bold to say, that there is not a Protestant in
England of sufficient (...) and ability to forge such a Bull, that would be
content himself to be hanged drawn and quartered to spite a papist, or that
does think he should spite a papist (...) him self so great a danger.

But the thing being so traitorous and perilous, even in a Protestant so
intending as these pretend, I would feign learn, or rather have it remembered
of them to whom it apper^^yneth, of what (...) it I do not (...) leaving it
vndisclosed when they know it, but of (...) what they can by (...) that other
should not find it or by disswasion (...) an other way. Such are not like to
(...) felonies, treason^ and offe^ders that they know, but they are like unto
those that when a felon or traitor is pursued, do help to hide him, and convey
him into bie corners, and for the felons or traitors easier escape do tell
them that pursue him that he is gone a contrary way or give them contrary
marks to keep them from knowing and attachyng him, or point them to a wrong
person while the very thief or traitor may make shift for him self, yea and
lend him some of their own clothes to disguise him.

The thing is to evident, and thereby the truth of such hiders is the more
suspicious. There are intelligences enough that the effect of the thing it self
was more than a year ago decreed in Rome. The ordinary proceeding of the
pope in like cases, and specially the following of the holy league induces it.
The print is not unknown. The very paper, after it was taken down, falling it
self into the former cre^es and fuldes and sise of the packet wherein it came
over, with a number of other plain evidences, disclose the thing, and whence
it came. Besides the very thing is such that he may well be said to lack
judgment that discerns it not to be ^very Bull. Be not therefore (...) (...)
good subjects: and ye deceivers, beware ye deceive not your selves.

Thus it is evident that such perswaders lack either wit or truth, but I start
^e they are so vain glorious, and stand so much upon undeserved reputation,
that they can be better content to be traitors than to be taken for fools.

But let us call to mind, and gather some ^ute of the old tale of Cassandra
king Pryames daughter of Troy. She having the gift of prophetie by Apollo,
always to give true warnings, had yet this punishment annered, that though she
prophesied truly she should never be believed. So happened it that when subtle
Sinon had persuaded the Troianes under false pretense of Religion, and
specially a dissemblyng show of dedicatio^ to Pallas goddess of wisdom, that
is, under color of wisdom and policy, to break down their walls to
receive the horse that the Grecians had framed and stuffed full of chosen
soldi^rs, Cassandra gave warnyng what treason the horses womb contained. But
by the ordinary and fatal discredit that was laid upon her, and for that (as
Poete^ say) the fates and destinies of Troyes destruction were not remoueable,
she was not believed, the walls were broken ^wne, the horse deuotely received,
and though the armor within gave sound and noise, yet was he unsearched, in
the night Sinon opened the wyndow, the armed men issued out, the City was
fired and destroyed, and all (as the Poets tell) by conduct of Pallas
gooddesse of wisdom and policy.

I will not at this time prosecute the tale of Laocoon, his office of
Priesthood, his spear, the Serpent from sea, his children, nor the rest,
whereof every point and every particle has his apt resemblance for our benefit.

Only this I will say, that it may be that for our sins we have Cassandraes
plague, though truth be told us, it is possibly not believed. The Grecians
then framed a horse. The Papists have now framed a Bull. Their horse was
stuffed full of soldiers lurking ready to be let out to set Tro^e on fire. This
Bull is stuffed with traitorous practices to destroy this realm. Sinon
persuaded them to receive the Tro^an horse without violatyng or searchyng it.
Our Sinons and lewd qual^ers would have the Bull esteemed an other thing, and
take from us the desire to have his belly searched. Their horse with remouyng
shook, and they might hear the very sound of the armor within him. In this
Bull the evidences are plain of open treason, and the very effect of our
rebels proclamation tran^lated sounds within it, and seems as it were out
of the very Bulls belly to roar and tell us that all they were privy to it
that were by any appendance or devise of conjunction or alliance knit to the
late rebellion: as also hard it is to excuse Aeneas and Antenor great Lords of
Pryames house for knowing to much of the Grecians counsel. Cassandra cries
out against the horse, the fates will not let her be believed, Sinon opened the
window, the horse vnladed his treasons. Lay this to our case, I will compare no
more.

The Lord be merciful unto us and preserve our Prince, and country, which
without our Prince can not in all likelihode be preserved. God keep her noble
Cou^sellers, and give grace to all her subjects to stick fast and faithfully
to her, and grant to her Majesty to continue to ^icke fast to true subjects,
and principally that we all by repentance wipe away the sins that are the
impediment why Christian Cassandraes, the Preachers of Gods truth, and good
admonitions, are not believed and followed to our preservation.


