THE NEW GOSPEL, NOT THE TRVE GOSPEL OR, A discovery of the Life and Death,
Doctrine, and Doings of Mr. John Traske, and the effects of all, in his
Followers.

Wherein a mystery of iniquity is briefly disclosed, a Seducer unmarked, and
all warned to beware of Impostors.

As also a Confutation of the uncomfortable error, of Mr. Boy, concerning the
Plague, out of Psalm. 91.

Mat. 24.11. Many false prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many.

By EDW. NORICE.

LONDON, Printed by R. Bishop, for Henry Hood, and are to be sold at his Shop
in St. Dunstans Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1638.

THE NEW GOSPEL, NOT THE TRVE GOSPEL.
AS it was the care of our Lord Jesus Christ the great Shepherd of the Flock,
to forewarne the same in general of all Wolves, and false prophets, that
should arise (especially in the later times) and deceive many: so is it a
subordinate duty and no less needful, when such false prophets do arise in
those times, being espied, to give particular notice of them, and to point (as
it were) with the finger unto them, as St. Paul did of some such like, 2 Timothy
4.15.
This is he, beware of him. The consideration whereof, has moved, and thus
far enboldned me to tender unto public view (with submission unto allowance)
this brief discovery (as but the pointing with the finger) of such a seducing
Impostor, and cunning Deceiver in our own times; I mean Mr. John Traske: A
man well known by common fame, and yet not known according to his manifold
deceits but of a few, turning and winding himself like another Proteus, into
so many forms as that he could not easily be discerned to be the same
individual, but descryed only by his unconstancy to be none other, because
therein he had not his like: this man falling from one error to another, and
pursuing all with equal vehemence, at length fell upon a (...). Heb. 13.9.
new way of Evangelizing; understanding the Gospel, the Kingdom of Christ,
the state of Grace, the nature of Faith, as things utterly abstracted from all
Law, habits of Grace, signs of Faith, and sanctification it self: setting up
a conceited new Creature entire of himself, as free from sin as Jesus Christ,
to whom nothing belongs but joy, tranquillity, and triumph; nor to that
person in whom this new Creature is formed: no, not though he fell into the
foulest sins, and perpetrated the grossest impieties, as murders, or
adulteries, or such like, because these were but acted by the flesh, and not at
all by the new Creature in him: Familisme.
therefore is he never to mourn or grieve for any such thing, but ever to
rejoice, knowing that in this estate no sin shall hurt him, neither is he to
question the favor of God, whatsoever he does; that being far worse than
the sin he commits, but ever to be confident. Into which joyful
condition all are brought only by believing, which faith is not to be tried by
any signs, fruits, or effects, but only by the persuasion it self: and all
this effected, not by any use of the Law in preaching but only the Gospel and
promises, applying the same to all that so do believe, yet not as faith is a
condition of the Covenant, or an instrument of Justification laying hold on
Christ, but only as a qualification in themselves.

Whereupon all such Preachers as made any use of the Law in their teaching, or
gave any signs for trial of faith or grace; motives or means to duties,
rules of obedience, or such like, were presently rejected as Legalists,
Iustitiaries, messengers of Moses, and silly naturalists that understand not
the mystery of the Gospel, They are his own words, page 28.
yea Jews, and worse than Jews, their congregations not true, but pretended
Christian assemblies: thereupon also his followers sequestring themselves to
such as were their own way, with a high disdain of all others, gave
themselves to mirth and jollity, such triumphing and glorying, laughter and
glee, Judges 12.6.
as if it were the only Shibboleth whereby to be discerned from the miserable
Legalists that held mourning and sorrow for sin, care of duties toward God,
and endeavor for sanctification by his Spirit in themselves; some of them
proceeding so far, as disdainfully to ask, R. O. A forge of fancies.
what that sanctification was, we talked so much of, for he knew not what it
meaned; (which we may easily believe) yea and to demand whether God will not
accept of our prayers without the mediation of his Son: and some of them in
the mean time falling into ingemniated adulteries, to the great scandal of the
truth (they seemed to profess) yet not showing the least remorse for the same
themselves, nor others in their behalf, but with this come-off in a merry
manner, that, if a man be in Christ, no sin shall hurt him. I shame to relate
these things, but know them to be true.

Now these are the effects of this man's doctrine, and of his new devised
Gospel, but the way and course he took in venting the same, was this: first
he would in public, The method of a Seducer.
(wheresoever he was admitted to preach) deliver ordinary truths in a plain
way, but with extraordinary show of zeal and affection, thus to gain him
credit, and a good esteem of all; then, if any were taken with him, he would
in private proceed further, and doctrinate them in his mysteries; if they
consented, they were his own; if not, then would he deny what he had said, and
bear them down with scoffs and derision; which course he also took in his
conferences, and disputes, denying, and shifting any thing he had spoken, or
defended, when it came to any public dislike; by which means none or very few
that dealt with him, Ministers or others could escape reproach, so far as the
credit of his tongue extended, or yet of his followers, who therein have showed
themselves (many of them) tam moribus similes, quam voce, magistro, like their
master; in a shameless, and unreasonable manner; a taste whereof both he, and
they not long since yielded: when, at a conference having vented many foul and
erroncous points, and afterward being taxed therewith, they utterly denied
that any such things (though many) were spoken in their hearings, O this very
practice Master Doctor Tailor complains in his Regula vitae, page 63.
which he sithence has yet acknowledged in print; but with such constructions
and new devised interpretations, as were never thought on, nor imagined there,
yea directly against his express Assertions in other places, turning some of
them into ridles, and ambiguous enunciations, like Apollo's Oracles, to make an
evasion, as hereafter (God willing) shall be discovered.

And because in his late Published since his death (as its suspected) by Mr.
Boy.
printed pamphlet, he has not only blended the truth, with his cunning head,
but also blasted the names of all that oppose him with reproach: (especially my
self for that small discovery I made of him) I think fit to forewarne the
Reader concerning the same; (being personal matters) first, that his whole
Epistle to the Reader, (being wholly defamatory) is utterly false, and composed
of mere fictions of his own brain, not only without any evidence, but
against the testimony and certain Yea of Mr. Boy himself his brother in evil.
knowledge of thousands; declaring therein his brazen forehead, and raging
spirit to vent any thing (be it never so untrue) to serve the present turn,
which (were it fit to mention the particulars) might in few words easily be
discovered, the accusations being notoriously false either of them: next, for
his succeeding Apology, wherein he utterly denies that he was ever censured
in the Star Chamber for Iudaisme or any matters of that kind; it is as
impudently false, as the rest: for besides a printed speech now extant of that
learned Bishop Andrews made at his censure in the Star Chamber, the very
Records of that Honorable Court concurring; do both abundantly testify, one
of the principal causes of his censure there to be for Iudaizing in matters of
days and meats; for which, (besides other castigations) he was Mentioned
also by Dr. Sclater in his confutation of him about that time.
stigmatized with the letter I, in the forehead for a lew which he bare to his
last: so that, it is marveilous the man should or could be so shameless, as
utterly to deny (and that in print) that he was ever at all censured in that
Court for Iudaisme or any such errors; unless the Lord did so far leave him
to himself, to discover thereby his impudency, that in his other Assertions
and protestations, he might not be trusted; for who that is wise, will believe
or trust such a one, as has a heart and a forehead, Consulto, and cogitato.
deliberatly to deny that (in terminis) that he well knew himself to be known
in all the land, and to be recorded against him? Wishing therefore those that
have been the favorers, and furtherers of this man and his doctrine all this
while, now to open their eyes, and behold the deceitfulness of the one, Their
own consciences can tell them who they are.
and the danger of the other (being both so manifest) and in stead of their
insolent, and unworthy censures of others, to smite upon the thigh, and judge
themselves for their sinful levity and partiality, in departing so soon from
the truth they had formerly embraced, and entertaining so suddenly an erroneous
man branded in the Church of God, for a fantastic, and great abuser of the
holy Scriptures; also for bezelling, shifting, and concealing the things they
heard him maintain with their ears, and know in their own hearts to be
truly objected against him; being such a way, as no good cause needed, neither
will a good conscience ever use.

And because our Lord referres us much, to the fruits, for the discerning of
false prophets, upon the mention of the former, I think fit to add further
concerning his practice, Mat. 7.16.
what I have heard from the testimony of diverse persons of worth and credit:
that as his doctrines, and opinions tend all to liberty, so his practice
savoured strongly of the same, not Christian liberty allowed to all, but
carnal licentiousness condemned in all that profess the Gospel of Christ,
even the same mentioned by St. Jude, when the grace of God is turned ((...))
into lasciviousness, verse. 4. for so it seemed to be with this man, who in his
ordinary conversation as he professed nothing but mirth and jollity; so in his
private carriage was he as frollike, especially with that sex, in which he
most delighted, toward whom he used such familiarity, with his embracings and
(...). Agreeable to Ovids silthy instructions, and the religion of H. N.
tongue fornications, with such other proffers, as they that were modest,
utterly abhorred his private society, and complained thereof secretly to their
friends as very foul and shameful; and how far any of them, with whom he
was most conversant, shared in these things, themselves can best tell: but what
may not such be drawn unto, as deny any fear of God, in regard of his power,
and justice: that disclaim the Law of God, to be any rule of their lives: that
allow no mourning for the foulest sins: that rest upon a bare persuasion for
all their evidence of faith or grace: that make mirth and joy, the substance of
their religion: that boast how no sin can hurt them, being in Christ: I say
what may not such do, when occasion is offered? flesh and blood will act their
parts, and when the understanding is so corrupt, how can the affections be
pure? the same being wanting to season the one, that should inform the other.

But to leave them, and return again to their leader, besides his other evil
properties, how mutable and unconstant he was in his doings all his life long,
I think not amiss (in part) to discover by the recital of a certain letter
written since the brute of his death, by an honest Citizen of London to his
friend in the Country, and it is thus:

A Letter.
MY love remembered, hoping of your health and welfare in the Lord. T. A.
meeting with me, asked me, if I had seen a book of Mr. Traskes newly printed,
and withal desired me to help you to one, and to write you two or three lines;
which accordingly I have done. Touching the Author Mr. Traske, were it not to
forewarn others to take heed of by-pathes which lead to schism, and herefie, I
should neither write, nor speak of him a word, for that the man is dead, and
gone to give account to the highest Judge. Yet in regard that (though he be
dead) his works still teach, and speak heresies and blasphemies; they may
safely all, both be spoken and written against. As for Mr. Traske, I have well
known the man these full twenty years; at first he was a Schoolmaster (no
University man, only a Latin Scholar) but afterward being cast into prisons
for opinions, he learned and studied the Hebrew and Greek, and got a smattering
thereof, that by Indexes he could do some little matter; but for zeal it was
always in him heady, and violent, that in which way he took, he marched like
Iehu most furiously, making divisions in the Church about London, and drawing
in one Mr. Gr. with him, to maintain four points differing from other
Divines; as namely,

-- 1. That none but such as were converted themselves, could convert others.
-- 2. That one child of God might know another election, as certainly as his
own. -- 3. That Repentance was not only begun, but also finished, before
justifying faith. -- 4. That none that were justified did commit sin.
Having continued teaching these Doctrines a while, he had very many
followers, upon whom he obtruded the observation of the Lords day, after a
Judicial manner, neither to kindle fires nor to dress meats: the which
manner of observation was to him and others an introduction to the observation
of the very Judaicall Sabbath; and was an occasion of stumbling to five or six
of his followers to deny our Lord Jesus Christ, to be the true Messiah: one of
which Mr. Doctor Gouge helped to reduce unto the truth. This Mr. Traske while
he held those former opinions (of which some made such desperate Collections)
was so high blown with erroneous zeal, that he thought, he might be a
second Elias sent to discover Antichrist, and to turn the hearts of the Fathers
to the Children; he thought also, that he could do miracles, and to that end he
sent to King James to have access unto him, to cure him of his Gout; also he
laid hands in an Apostolical manner upon four men, sending them forth to
preach, forasmuch as Antichristianisme is, as hateful to God, as Paganism;
therefore it is no less needful, that men be extraordinarily sent out to
overthrow the one, as well as the other: three of which Apostolical men are
dead, the fourth is yet alive, but has renounced those fooleries. Then after
some long imprisonment, his zeal was so cooled, that he revoked all, and
recanting was set at liberty, and not authorized, but only permitted to preach,
which he not long continuing in, fell to familisticall points, diverse of which,
are inserted in this book, though he turn and wind them to qualify them, for
the dazeling of his unknown Reader, yet the points are truly-the Familists,
and the undeniable consequences of their principles. Now after some progress
in this more worse than heathenish Divinity, Mr. Traske had at last turned
himself to the Iacobites, or semi-separatists in one of whose houses he dyed
(at least the man's wife being that way) from whose house some of that society
carried him to his grave in Lambeth Churchyard, where they cast him in, with
the heels that way that the heads of other men lie, contrary to all men, and
least the Minister should come to bury him, according to the order, they ran
all away, and there left him to be covered by others; some beholding their
carriages thought them to be drunk, which J think also, yet not with wine but
with spiritual giddiness; from which, we have all cause to pray that we may
be delivered. So I commit you to the tuition of our good God, who is able to
keep us blameless, till his blessed appearance. Amen. Amen.

December 27th. 1636. Yours to be commanded, T. S.


What is it to be an ignis fatuus in the Church, and to be carried about, with
every wind of doctrine, if this be not? what more certain evidence can there
be of an unstable spirit, yea of a man drunk with pride and arrogance, than
thus to reele to and fro, from one extremity to another, and never to settle
in the way of truth? yet there is much more of his falsehood and fraud,
discovered in the treatise ensuing; which I therefore lay open, not to trample
on the dead, or to defame an enemy, (both which are equally offensive) but to
warn and inform the living, as well enemies, as friends, of the danger of a
Seducer; who under the vizour, and mask of truth and holiness, has vented
pernicious errors, tending to much looseness, and profaneness, leaving the
same as his Legacy to the Church, and the only doctrine to be received, which
also, too many admire and follow. That Apology, therefore, which was once made
in the same case, and concerning the like persons by a learned Doctor, Doctor
Sclater on 1. These. 1.4. page 15.
I would make bold to use in defense of my self herein, against his present
admirers, might it not seem too sharp a passage. Even, because (says he) his
speech frets like a gangrene, Page 26.
and increases to more ungodliness in that giddy multitude, whose style it
will ever be, to be constant in levitate sua. Such whirligigge, weathercock
brains there are amongst them, so childish in understanding, that they are
whirried about, with every blast of doctrine, etc. a smart lash, (...). Tit.
1.13.
and yet (it seems too well deserved of many, who in such cases ought to be
sharply reproved, that they may be sound in the faith; especially seeing that
they all take such liberty themselves; not so much to reproove, confute, or
dislike, such as dissent from them; as to revile, slander, The very manner of
Brown, and Boy. 2 Samuel 18.18.
and defame their persons and opinions with opprobrious terms, scoffs, and
unworthy imputations; a lively monument whereof he has left at his death (like
an Absoloms pillar) wherein there is graven neither truth, honesty, nor
modesty; Trasks Gospel.
yet admired by many of them as a singular work; (O the power of these
spiritual illusions,) for the refuting whereof I have bestowed some pains in
searching out the quintessense of his mystery, to prevent any further
proceeding of the errors; wherein if the Reader observe a sharper kind of
language, than may be thought expedient, let him consider it is in defense of
the very Gospel of Christ, the state of Grace, the nature of Faith, the way of
Salvation; no small matters; against a cunning Seducer, many selfe-willed, and
selfe-conceited followers, to whom easy and soft handling is contemptible,
whom a still and low voice will not awaken, unless a man cry in their ears,
and Jude 23. (...).
pluck them as brands out of the fire: yet is there nothing but what is
regulated by the truth, and within the bounds of modesty; craving leave also
for this boldness, in mine own behalf, inasmuch as they have bent their
special forces against me, and that more of their mysteries are come to my
knowledge than may to many others, (though better able to deal in this kind)
who also may not have that vacancy from other employments as (unwillingly) I
have at this time, (yet submitting all to approbation, and allowance;)
wherefore hoping of a charitable construction in all, of that which is intended
for the good of all; and that it shall be no just offense to any, that among so
many in the Church (...). 1 Cor. 11.19.
there is one Seducer discovered: I give this encouragement to the Reader; that
he is like no more to be troubled with Traske, and his matters, this being the
laff Act of the Scene, and the man disvested, hoping that all his errors shall
die with him, and that the true Gospel of Christ withal the branches thereof
shall prosper and flourish, with abundance of precious fruits for ever.

Although it be most true which the holy Scriptures testify, that there is but
one Lord, Ephesians. 45. Gal. 3.17. Heb. 13.8.
one Faith, one Baptism, one true Gospel, containing the ancient covenant of
grace in Christ, who is yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever, in
himself, and to his people: yet such has been the audacious cunning of
Satan, and his instruments as to transform themselves into Angels of light,
and ministers of righteousness, to the end, that they may the better vent, and
set abroach another doctrine resembling the true, and another Gospel very like
(but not the same) to that we have received, thereby to beguile and ensnare the
simple; which kind of deceitful workers, as the holy Apostle discryed in his
time, and complained of them, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14.
so have we the like cause in ours, wherein arise some Impostors and Seducers
of like condition. Among which, this Mr. John Traske, may stand for a
principal, who in this time of light, has taken upon him to dictate, and send
abroad his Gospel grounds (as he calls them) into all parts, pretending that
they contain in them a more perfect discovery of the Gospel of Christ than
ever was made before; and a more glorious way of walking by, than any have
found till he discried it. Wherein nevertheless, are couched, and hidden many
very pernicious errors contrary to the truth of the Gospel of Christ, and that
in points fundamental, and of the highest consequence. An advertisement
concerning Traskisme.
A short discovery whereof being formerly published, as an Appendix to another
work, and the same styled (as it deserved) a new Gospel: he has since
labored to vindicate his doctrine from that In his late printed book.
reproach, calling it the true Gospel, and no new Gospel; to which end he
has shuffled up the Scriptures with false senses: put many fair colors upon
some of the points, and utterly falsified the rest with his explanations,
thereby to deceive the simple and credulous: for the unmasking of which (...),
etc. 2 Cor. 11.13.
Iugler with his juglings (being in matters of so high a nature) I have here
discovered the truth of his Assertions, as he has maintained them, not alone
by writing, but by word of mouth, in solemn disputation, and conference had
about the same, and that not his Gospel grounds alone, but in other forms,
delivered under his own hand, that the very quintessence of his errors may be
known.

But before I come to the particulars, I think it not unfit to lay before the
eyes of the Reader these deceits of his in general; the better to discern and
judge of his carriage in the particulars.

1. Whereas he pretends, and solemnly protests in the name of the Highest,
that he maintains none other Doctrine, This is at large in a Letter.
than the same, that is taught by all our Divines, preached in Pulpits, and
defended by writings, etc. yet he has not, nor does allege in any place, any
one Author for the confirmation of what he holds, but more than so, disclaimes
all our teaching as Jewish; our Ministers as Legalists and Messengers of Moses;
our congregations, as but pretended Christian Assemblies: sending out his
dictates under the name of Gospel grounds; his followers also professing, that
they never heard the Gospel before, for if the former be true, how can the
later stand.

2. That he, all along, casts upon me the reproach of a Slanderer, with other
foul invectives, for charging him with such opinions; and yet acknowledges
many of them, in particular to be glorious truths, which he owneth and
defends; as if I had slandered him, with a matter of truth, and done him
wrong in publishing his glorious mysteries, so eager and virulent was his
spirit.

3. That under the pretense of explaining the Assertions, he changes the very
sense of them as they were defended by himself; and runs along with a false
sense never intended; only to cast mists before the eyes of the Reader, that
his errors may not be perceived; like unto a certain fish, Plutarchs moralls:
whose property it is, to stain the water with a black stuff, like ink, to
blind the eyes of the Fishers. His explanations therefore, I take properly to
be derived, ex Plano, from a deceiver, or jugler, that can cast mists, and in
stead of them, will substitute and annexe the true and genuine explication of
the Assertions, as he indeed held, and has elsewhere defended them, insisting
specially upon the discovery of them, the confutation following of it self,
the errors being so foul.

To come then to a scanning of the particulars, and herein to follow, not his
confused order, (done of purpose to disturb the Reader) but the same they were
first delivered in the Advertisment, they are these following.

1. ASSERTION. The Law is a Rule of the flesh, and to walk after the Law, is to
walk after the flesh, Romans 8.12.
Explication.
HIs meaning is, that the very moral Law of God, is a carnal rule, to live
by; according to his common invectives against the same, in stiling it, an
earthly, and a carnal commandment: as also, his application of those words of
the Apostle, to the moral Law, that walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit, Romans 8.1. that is, in his construction, not after the Law, but after
the Gospel, wherein he calls the Law a rule of the flesh, and perverteth the
Scripture to maintain it; for if that be so to be understood, then, by the Law
of God, Romans 7.25.
in the former verse (on which this depends) must be meant, the Gospel, and by
the law of sin the moral Law; so that, the law of the members, the law of
sin, and the moral Law, are all one in his sense; and then must the very Law
it self be sinful, and a Commander of unrighteous things; The height of
Antinomisme.
an enemy to holiness; an opposite to the work of the spirit; and utterly
repugnant to the Gospel (even as it is a rule of obedience,) then must it also
be disclaimed, abandoned, and renounced, as evil and impure, with all the
contents of it, and not in any sense to be taught in the Church; than which,
what can be more blasphemously, and wickedly spoken? or how can the Turkish
Alcoran it self be harder censured? which is the more unexcusable in this
Seducer, in that the holy Apostle was so careful in those very places to
prevent such a construction of his words; first, demanding whether the Law
where sin? which he answers with detestation, Romans 7.7.12.12.14.22. Chap. 8.
7.
God forbid; then, plainly affirming the Law to be holy, and just, and good: a
spiritual doctrine, wherein he delighted as a spiritual man; whereunto the
carnal mind, could not be subject because it is carnal: casting all the
blame, not on the Law, but on the flesh, for any hurt, or evil we have by it,
as not caused by the Law, but occasioned by our own corruption, besides many
other places to that purpose.

Now in the explanation, I refer my self to his book for what I cite all
along.
the Seducer would declare his meaning to be against those only, that sought
life, and righteousness, by the works of the Law; that to such it is a rule of
the flesh, pretending that he was opposed by some of that way; and thereupon
laid down his directions against it: but why does he not name who they were,
that did so? or why does he not handle the point, as other godly men have done?
but thus break out against the Law it self, calling it a rule of the flesh, to
make it vile: but all this is nothing else than mere deceit and collusion;
pretending a cause that never was, in any of them, at whom he aims, no, not
to a thought: upon which false supposition also, it is, that he reproacheth all
other Ministers that make any use of the Law, for Legalists and Iustitiaries,
as if they taught righteousness by works, because they make the Law a rule of
obedience; which is common and (I doubt) wilful calumny, of all his followers,
who know well enough, how far they are from such doctrines, and drifts, whom
they disclaim, and decline.

2. ASSERTION. The Law is not to be preached, to believers, by Gospel
Ministers.
Explication.
HIs meaning is, that the Law is not to be preached at all in the Church of
God, neither to believers, nor unbeleevers, either for repentance or obedience:
and that, his meaning is so, his words declare, which are these; And why may it
not be affirmed, In his confirmation.
that seeing there is no Commission to preach the Law at all, now under the
Gospel: and seeing the Gospel contains the whole mind and will of God; and
that the Apostles did never preach the Law at all: (but as subordinate to the
Gospel) and does enjoyne Timothy to charge some, that they teach no other
Doctrine but the faith, A clause added against the rest.
etc. why may we not say, that the Gospel only is to be preached to all,
as well as to believers? except any can show a larger Commission than Christ
himself, etc. page 50. These words are plain enough; There is no Commission
to preach the Law [at all] the Gospel is [only] to be preached to all:
General and peremptory assertions, without exception; yet nevertheless to
hide his flat Antinomisme, in his explanation he tells us that the Law, as law
is not to be preached to believers; and afterward demands; Who ever denied the
Laws use or excellency to discover sin; convict such as the Gospel shines
not unto; to be a ground for all humane Laws; the very rule of love; a means
to show the greatness of sin; of very plentiful use to believers, etc. One
would think that the same man, could not own, both these assertions at once,
and set them down both in the same Chapter. What? has the Law so many
excellentuses, to believers, and unbeleevers and yet is there no Commission at
all, to preach it? does it contain so many excellent truths, and of that
necessity in the Church; and yet is it no part of the mind and will of God, to
be revealed unto men? Doctor Tailor his Regula vitae, is very useful for all
these points.
how to make all this accord in any good construction, I acknowledge to be past
my skill, or (I suppose) any man's else; for take it according to his first
words: the Law, as Law is not to be preached, but as subordinate to the
Gospel; yet then it must be preached howsoever, and is within the Commission
of a Gospel Minister, which before he denied: either the Seducer wanted wit to
see his own contradictions, or else he was very wicked to speak against the
truth, and his own conscience together: the later is most to be suspected; but
then, they are men to be admired that will see neither of them.

3. ASSERTION. If repentance and faith be wrought only by the Gospel: then
what does the Law work in any man's conversion to God, or conformity to Christ.
Explication.
THis demand, he acknowledges, to be truly inferred by him, upon the
premises of one of his (then) disciples, according to the doctrine he had first
taught him: and yet, lest he should lose his habit of railing, he keeps the
word This is his, Keax.
Slanderer on foot still, although it be the truth under his own hand.
Concerning which point, I will say no more; but if the Law serve to discover
sin, and to convince men (as before he has acknowledged) and that this
discovery, and convincing be necessary to bring men to repentance, (seeing
they cannot repent of what they know not) how then is the Law wholly excluded
from having any hand in the same at all? was it not that, and matter of that
kind, which S. Peter used to convince the Jews withal, Acts 2.37. and is it
not that which discovers unto all men, their own unrighteousness and misery,
that they may seek unto Christ for righteousness and mercy, Romans 3.19. does
not that regulate our love, and so our conformity to Christ, and his
requirings, John 13.34. but these matters of repentance, humiliation for sin,
godly sorrow, sanctification of spirit, fear of God, care of obedience, and
such like, are all in too low a sphere, for his sublimity, and not in the
compass of his mounted speculations; only faith, and joy, are the matters he
is conversant in: the other serve for poor Legalists to feed upon, that know
no better; but it follows.

4. ASSERTION. The law did once discover sin, it does so no more; nor yet for
direction: love herein transcends the law, as far as life, does death.
Explication.
HIs meaning is, that now in time of the Gospel, the Law does neither serve to
discover sin, nor yet to be a rule of obedience; for it was alleged by him,
in way of Answer, to that of the Apostle: By the law is the knowledge of finne,
Romans 3.20. and Chap. 7. 7. to which, he replied that though it did so
heretofore, yet it does not so now, those times, and that use of the Law, are
past and gone, and so out of date; the Gospel now does all without the Law,
which is his spiritual sense and the mystery of his way, but to color the
matter (being foul in appearance) he tells us in his explanation, that the
Sacrifice of Christ does better set forth the odiousness of sin, than the
terrors of the Law: which is no part of the point what does most set out the
odiousness of sin, Ignoratio ele nchis
but what does discover the sins themselves, in their kinds, and several
branches: which must needs be the Law according to the Apostles testimony; the
very definition of sin being [(...)] the transgression of the Law, 1. John 3.4.
then is it to be preached with the Gospel, for repentance.

Concerning the other branch, about the directing use of the Law; to justify
his deny all, he gives us to understand (as if none knew it before) that the
inward principle from which all true obedience proceeds, is love; which inward
grace does far transcend the letter without, as if that were the question,
from what inward principle true obedience proceeded? and not rather, by what
Rule the same is regulated and ordered, which is the Law of God, discovering
good and evil. But his practice in this is, as if a man rejecting all
directions for his way in a journey; should give this for his reason, that the
principle of motion must be in himself, Charitas continet in sese implicit
observationem and impletionem omnium Dei mandatorum. Ames. l. 2. c. 7. medull.
and not in such outward directions: so does this man; but therein it is
mavelous what a difference he makes between love and the law, as if they
were two contraries, or (at least) not of the same kind: when the Scriptures
acknowledge them to be but one, and the same: love being the very sum and
substance of the whole Law, Matthew. 22.40. Gal. 5.14.

But there is yet a more dangerous and suspicious passage following, where he
stands to maintain, that love has no rules, because God is love, who being
infinite, is not to be limited by any law: as if there were no odds, between
the Deity it self, and a created quality in the hearts of men, of which we
speak: which Assertion of his therefore savours strongly of Familisme, who
blasphemously say, H N. In his Evangelium Regni.
that God is manned, and man is Godded, with such like, making no difference
between the essential attributes of the Almighty, and the works and effects,
of his Spirit in men; so this man will admit no rules for love in us, because
God is unlimitted; but to proceed.

5. ASSERTION. The new covenant has no condition at all: faith is not the
condition of the Gospels promises; but only a qualification in us.
Explication.
TO all this, he says nothing, but that the condition required, is freely
promised in the new Covenant it self to be given so, leaving all the rest to
stand as it did, which is, as much as if he had said nothing at all; for the
question was never, whence the power came to perform the condition of the
covenant, but whether there be any at all required to make us partakers of the
same, which by his words, he utterly denies; excluding says by name to beany
condition of the Gospells promises; Fide, justificamur instrumentaliter. Vrs.
page 343.
or any instrument laying hold on Christ, but only a qualification. By which
very ground, he has utterly ungrounded and overthrown the maine foundation of
our justification by faith in Christ; the condition of the covenant of grace,
(in regard of us) and of all the Gospels promises, a most pernicious and
pestilent opinion, directly against the truth of the Gospel, Novum soedus non
antecedentem sed subsequentem conditionem requirit. Ames.
and the doctrine received in the Churches of Christ; and sufficient, (if there
were none other) to discover him to be a Seducer, and his doctrine, not to be
the truth, but a new Gospel of his own devising; for the promises of the
Gospel of Christ pertain only to believers, and that by reason of their faith
in him, as appears by Mark. 16.16. Ioh. 3.36. Romans 10.9. Heb. 3.14. Heb. 4.23.
etc. else might Infidels, and all sorts of wretched and ungodly persons, claim
right unto all the privileges of the Gospel and benefits of the new Covenant
(as far as the faithful themselves) and that so continuing, it follows.

6. ASSERTION. The Gospel was in man's nature before the fall.
Explication.
THis assertion, only he disclaimes, as none of his, no not in any sense,
throwing thereupon his wonted filth into the face of him, that objects it to
him: and yet immediately after he confesses some such words in a letter, but
in another sense, which sense he does not yet declare to clear himself
withal, as (no doubt) the witty man would have done, had he known how. But it
seems he had forgotten how he confessed the words to me himself, at the
conference to this purpose, that, in potentia, it was there; that is, that man's
nature was capable of it, when it should be revealed, a deep speculation and of
as worthy consequence, as true; for if he understand it of nature corrupted,
the Scriptures testify that ((...)) the natural man comprehends not the
things of the spirit; speaking of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 2.14.
until he be enlightened by the spirit of God. But the mystery of the matter,
(it seems) is that he would pursue the Law to the utmost, even into Paradise
it self, and chase it out of the heart of Adam, as that which never had any
lawful being any where; so bitter, was this Antinomian against the holy Law of
God, a fearful mind; but to proceed.

7. ASSERTION. Faith is not to be tried, by any fruits, or effects, but only by
the persuasion it self.
Explication.
THis he confesses to be his own, and explaineth himself in this manner;
that fruits and effects do not infallibly demonstrateth faith to any man's own
soul; but faith only demonstrates them to be the fruits and effects that
attend it self; for how can any know, that faith has such fruits and effects,
but by the word? and how can we know the word is truth but by faith only? thus
he: wherein there is need of an other explanation to expound this; such are the
mazes of this man's mysteries; for first, the question is concerning justifying
faith, whether it has any fruits or effects to be known by? the answer is
given out of an historical faith in believing the truth of the Scriptures: the
former concerns particular assurance of faith and grace; the later, only the
general testimony of the word concerning such things: wherein there is great
difference; for many are persuaded of the truth of the Scriptures, that have no
assurance at all of their own salvation; yea the very Devils, believe and
tremble, Jam. 2.19. the one is not by grace, but by the evidence of truth,
which they cannot withstand, the other is by a special work of the holy
spirit; but here in this reason of his is laid a false supposition for a
ground, viz. that as by a bare persuasion we believe the contents of the
Scriptures to be true; so by a bare persuasion we are assured of the trueness
of our faith and our own salvation. Vide Bucan. de Scriptura, p. 4.
Whereas there are many strong and sufficient arguments and grounds to prove
the truth of the holy Scriptures, besides a bare persuasion or conceit: so
likewise are there many evidences and signs of faith in true believers,
whereby it may be known, and not by a bare persuasion only.

For albeit we grant a certain reflect act, of saving faith in the true
believer, whereby he is oftentimes fully persuaded of his standing in the state
of grace; yet withal, we affirm, that this persuasion is not See righteous
man's assurance by Mr. Rogers fully of this point, page 17.18, etc.
alone, but has certain effects, and concommitants proper to it self, whereby
it may be known and distinguished, or discerned from a groundless presumption
and bare conceit, else may the most carnal persons; yea the vilest men,
persuade themselves (as often they do) of the favor of God, and salvation to
come, when there is no such matter belonging to them; such was the persuasion
of those Jews, that boasted themselves, not only to be the seed of Abraham,
but the children of God: when as our Savior told them plainly, That was lying:
let these beware then.
they were the children of the devil, and proves it by their fruits, Ioh.
8.44. by which fruits also, it may be discerned in others: for which cause also
the Holy Ghost referres us to examination and trial. Examine your selves,
whether ye be in the faith, prove your own selves, (...).
2. Cor. 13.5. alluding (as it were) to the touchstone, and scales; or to the
symptoms of health and sickness in the body, which needed not at all, if a
bare persuasion were enough, being directed against such a supine and overly
confidence, as also is that of St. James, in proving or showing faith by
works, Iam. 2.26.

How dangerous a doctrine then has this man broached in the Church; by teaching
men to rest only upon a bare persuasion of their believing without any further
search, or trial; withal, taxing and bitterly censuring, those Ministers,
that in their teaching urge and require, any signs, fruits, or effects of
faith and grace, in all, that profess themselves to be believers, as he does
in this manner, and in these very terms. They tell them (viz. the people) that
they must take heed they be not deceived, for many are deceived with false
faith, for true; and therefore they must look it be of the right This is
deridingly spoken
kind: and if it be then they tell them, that these, and these signs will
follow; a change of the life, uprightness of heart, and universal obedience
to the commandments of God, and such like, else their faith is but a fancy,
etc. page 29. It seems then he was such a believer himself.
Now, what kind of faith (according to this censure) does this man teach his
disciples to rely upon? but according to his own words, that without either
change of life, uprightness of heart, or conscience of obedience to the will
of God; they may persuade themselves, they are true believers, and in the
assured way of life, and salvation; which doctrine, if it be not most opposite
to the Gospel of Christ, and most pernicious to the souls of men, what is? are
there any carnal wretched people, that will not easily swallow down this
poison? surely if ever there were any Impostors in the Church this was one, but
let all beware how they follow him; yet he goes on.

8. ASSERTION. Faith is the only sign of salvation.
Explication.
THis he thus explaineth, that faith is the only infallible evidence to a
believers own soul of his salvation, which is all he says to it, and that
not very true; for St. John makes love an infallible sign, and evidence to a
man's own soul of salvation. (...).
We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren,
1 Ioh. 3.14. (which place was noted in the margin, but he would not touch it)
and S. Paul makes the sanctification of the spirit, and belief of the truth,
infallible evidences of election and salvation, 2. These. 2.13. but these things
are utterly against his Gospel, and profession both, therefore he medles not
with them.

9. ASSERTION. The new Creature, is only faith in Christ.
Explication.
HIs explanation is, that the new Creature is only the true believer in Christ;
as if the subject, and the habit, the believer, and his faith were all one, and
the very same thing: by such explanations a man may say any thing, which I wish
his disciples to observe, that they may see what gudgions they swallow from
this new Apollo with his riddles.

10. ASSERTION. Regeneration is not to be tried by any other fruits, effects,
or signs, but only by faith, wherein it consists.
Explication.
HErein he quarrels, first, at the citing of the words, as his Gospel grounds;
next that they are changed from whereby it is attained, to wherein it consists;
which are nothing else but shifts and cavills: for the words are expressed
under his own hand, and agree with his former Assertion; that the new creature
is only faith in Christ: and that faith is not to be tried by signs, or
effects, which is the substance of what he here delivers: and in his
explanation he thus discharges himself; that, Regeneration has no infallible
trial for a man's own assurance, but only by the truth of his faith; this is
his meaning, and this not very sound; for is not every saving grace, every
effectual work of the holy spirit, 1 John 4.7. Gal. 5.22, 23, 24.
every fruit of sanctification, proceeding from the word and spirit, converting
the heart, a sign of regeneration, as well as faith, and whereby the trial may
be made, as well as by it? (instance was given in the grace of love, but he
would not see it,) especially seeing he will admit, no signs nor effects in
the trial of faith, but the bare persuasion; for after this way, if a man be
strongly persuaded that he is regenerate, though there be no signs, fruits, or
effects to show it; yet he must rest upon the persuasion, that it is so,
howsoever, because he is so persuaded; but why is he so persuaded, he cannot
tell, neither is he to inquire after it, either in respect of his faith, or his
regeneration; by this way, Ministers might save all their labor in teaching
the people, and only bid them believe they are in Christ, and then they are
regenerate, all under one, but make no trial of either of them, that is
needless, their persuasion is sufficient for both. How unlike is this Seducers
doctrine; yea, how contrary to the Doctrine and Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ, wherein are so many exhortations to duties; so many cautions and
pressing admonitions to search and try, Mat. 6.1. Mat. 7.13. Romans 8.9. 2 Cor.
13.5. Heb. 3.12. Heb. 12.15. Rev. 3.23.
to prove and examine our affections and actions; our faith and our fruits, yea
our very persons, and spirits, lest we deceive our selves with false
imaginations of our own or the illusions of our common enemy: the rest of his
discourse is answered in the seventh Assertion; then to proceed.

11. ASSERTION. Sanctification is not by the spirit in our selves, but only in
Christ; showed in acts, and not in the habits of grace.
Explication.
THis whole assertion, he acknowledges to be his own, without any exception;
wherein, (according to his words) he denies sanctification by the spirit of
God, and all habits of grace; but in what mystical sense; and in what
construction, his explanation will declare; which is thus. Sanctification is
not in our selves, that is, in the flesh, but only as we are in union with
Christ, and by the spirit only, as we understand it of its operations, by
mortification, or quickening these our mortal bodies, yet not so in us as
mingled with uncleanness, but as distinct absolutely from the flesh; as being
an other nature, yea a participation of the Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.3.4.
which though it make up one person, yet is none at all, of the old man, nor of
the old creation, but it is that new Creation, that new heart, and that spirit
of God which is bestowed upon us; Ezekiel. 11.19.
which yields no new habits in the flesh, as if that were changed or renewed,
but is subsisting of it self, that it is of power to manifest it self, by
acts of quickening, and reviving, and enabling this mortal flesh, as the life
of Jesus in it, etc. neither is it the sanctified person that has any habit of
grace in his flesh, but the Lord Jesus dwelling in him, does put forth the
bright beams of his glory, in such virtues, as do best fit the time and place
in which he lives, Romans 8.9. 2 Cor. 1.8, 9.

Here is his mystery, tending as much to the edification of the people, as if
he had read to them a Lecture of Arabic, or cast dust in their eyes to make
them see; for first, he denies sanctification to be by the spirit in ourselves;
then he grants it to be in our selves, but not in the flesh; then it is by the
spirit as we understand it of his operations; yet there are no new habits in
the flesh, as if that were changed at all; but then, that it does quicken our
mortal bodies, and yet not as joined with the flesh, but absolutely distinct
by it self, it sends forth Acts as the life of Jesus in it, wherein he
utterly denies regeneration, sanctification or any change of nature at all in
the sanctified person; who only is sanctified by the presence of Christ in him,
(which he calls his union with Christ) but not by any real work of the spirit
in any faculty of the soul, nor by any change at all wrought in the heart, but
it remains as carnal and sensual, as it was before the spirits entrance: a
strange and monstrous piece of doctrine, See the contrary in, Mark. 9.49. John
3.8. Romans 8.9. 1 Cor. 6.11. 1 Pet. 1.2. 1 These. 5.23.
denying the very Articles of our Christian faith, and one of the chiefest
privileges of a true Christian, which is to be regenerate by the spirit of
God: affirming a man to be sanctified without any grace or goodness, but even
as he was borne in puris naturalibus, and in that state to have Christ living
in him; a pestilent and blasphemous opinion: And that the Reader may see this
to be his positive doctrine, deliberately set down. I think meet to lay before
his eyes, a short tract of this point made by him of purpose, (as it seems) to
doctrinate his disciples withal, wherein the marrow of this Seducers divinity
is disclosed, and it is this that follows.

Its a thing to be considered what the new creature is, A treatise of the old
man and the new.
that new man, that seed of God, which is borne of the spirit: it is not any
renovation of the old man, that which is borne of the flesh, the fallen man,
for that is from beneath, this from above; that is from the earth, this from
heaven; a new creation of nothing; as in the creation of the world: so that the
inward or new man, differ as much from the outward or old, as the godly nature
of Christ does differ from his manly nature; and both these natures together,
make but one person as in him: this is the reason that he which is borne of God
sins not, nor can sin, Note.
for it is a partaking of the godly nature, and such are as perfect as ever
they shall be, (although not in manifestation,) and yet the old man is as
imperfect, as ever it was: for the new creature is not the mutation or change
of the understanding from darkness to light, for then there should no
darkness remain: Sound reasoning a nen perfecto ad nihil.
nor a change of the will from crooked to straight, for then should no
perverseness remain; nor any ordering of the same affections, for so all
disorder were put away; nor yet a change of the memory, for so were the memory
without defect: for, this understanding, will, affections, memory, and the rest
are gifts from heaven, and must of necessity be perfect, without any defect or
superfluity, for our first generation as borne of parents is totally fallen,
and cannot be recovered here: but our regeneration is wholly perfect, and can
never be corrupted, or sin again; for take it in the parts, what is
repentance, or faith, or love, or joy, or any of the rest, are they not the
gifts of God? and are not Gods gifts all perfect and without blemish? But are
they so in us?
These being distinct in our minds, as the divine, and humane natures of Christ
in that one person; we shall not impute Yet David said; I have sinned, Psalm. 51.
our sins to our selves, nor yet our good so confusedly, as in times past:
the flesh or old man shall have no glory of any good is done, nor the spirit or
new man, any shame of the evil or sin, that the flesh commits; it will nt
only enable us to know our own estates, but the holy Scriptures; and we shall
see the vanity, The best writers with vanity and folly, in a ground of faith.
and folly of the most (if not all) writers, who put all the work upon the
change, wrought in this flesh, which can never be changed. So strange a piece
of stuff, as I think need no further opening or confuting to them that have
understanding; but for such as are blinded with partiality, I would propose but
these few Quaeres to consider off, and resolve by Scripture.

1. Whether the Divine and humane natures of Christ, be fit instances in this
case: seeing his divine nature contained the fullness of the Godhead, and his
humane nature was perfect and without spot of sin, Col. 2.9. 1 Pet. 1.19.
especially propounding it (as he does) without exception or difference of
nature or persons, between him and us, as if the case were in manner one, and
the resemblance in all things equal; which may open a gap to many blasphemous
errors, about the union, and the natures themselves.

2. Whether the creation of the world, of nothing, be a resemblance in all
things suitable (as he also makes it) to the work of regeneration? seeing there
was no praeexistent matter at all to work upon, but the very substances were
created: here is matter praeexistent, as the understanding, will, and
affections; only new qualities are created in them from what they had before:
by which means the same faculties are made ((...)) the weapons of
righteousness to God, Romans 6.13.
that were before only the weapons of unrighteousness to sin; and then are
not the faculties themselves for substance sent new from heaven as he dreameth,
but only the old are altered.

3. Whether the flat denial of any mutation, or change in the understanding,
will, and affections, be not a plain denial of regeneration, and
sanctification by the spirit? and if it be; why then does he or they talk at
any time of either of them, as if they granted that they do not, unless it be
to color, and cloak their error with hypocrisy?

4. Whether to hold and affirm, that the understanding will, and affections of
believers are See the contrary to this, 1 Cor. 13.9. ad finem. 2 Cor. 3.18.
Phil. 3.12. 1 These. 3.12, etc.
perfect, as also their faith, love, joy, and other gifts, and that such
themselves, are as perfect here, as ever they shall be; is not directly to
oppose the Scriptures and all truth? yea to contradict himself, who says we
do always grow in faith, and love, and answerable fruits; for that which is
already perfect can have no bettering: or what need have such of the imputed
righteousness of Christ (of which these men talk so much) if they have
perfection of all things in themselves; for to the old man it must not be
applied, and the new man is perfect already: so they overthrow the maine
grounds and Articles of Christian Religion, and put by any need of Christ
himself.

Now the Lord deliver all his people from such pernicious and damnable
opinions; (...) 2 Pet. 2.1.
more exceptions might be taken at this rotten familisticall treatise, but its
irksome to pore on it any further, therefore I pass on.

12. ASSERTION. Believers, when they fall into any sin, be it adultery or
murder are not to mourn or grieve, (for that savours of the flesh) but still
to rejoice, because it is written, rejoice evermore; and that joy is the
special means to bring them out of their sin.
Explication.
HEre is another parcel of worthy doctrine delivered viva voce, at a
conference, and acknowledged (for the words) to be his own, standing out to
maintain them: only he gives us here forsooth, a sense to understand the words
by; which is, that by sorrow and mourning, he intends worldly sorrow and
desperate mourning for sin, that believers are not so to mourn, but to retain
still some hope in Christ; and this he says, was all he affirmed at the
conference, but that his words are perverted, which if it be so, then has he
(doubtless) great wrong done to him; but if it be not so, then is he a great
liar, and Seducer both. Now for the proof of this, not only the witnesses
present can testify, but the passages themselves do show, that we professedly
maintained godly sorrow for sin; but when he with ingeminations denied all
sorrow whatsoever, there was produced against him, first, Eccl. 3.4. there is a
time to mourn: and then that of Peter, who went out and wept bitterly, Luke
22.62. the former he shifted with his wit; to the later he replied, that it
was an instance that fell not out in an age, so that the question was not about
the kind of sorrow, but of sorrowing at all, which he opposed, and we
maintained (but far was it from the thoughts of any of us, to maintain
worldly or desperate sorrow for sin;) then the reason that he gave for his
opinion was, that we are bid to rejoice evermore, 1 These. 5.16. and that joy
will bring a man best out of his sin; this is the substance of what was said
about this point.

Therefore has this man done wickedly in seeking to cast the shame of his
errors upon others, shifting clean from what he maintained to a point of an
other kind; for the coloring of which collusion he falls on, with a long
invective against Ministers in general, What made Saul, Achitophel and Judas
destroy themselves? was it Legal teaching
for pressing so much, humiliation and sorrow for sin, as the cause of so
many self murders, and mischiefs among men, terming them Legalists; and
their congregations pretented Christian Assemblies, yea Jewish and worse than
Jewish Synagogues, with much to that effect. Wherein, if any are faulty I am
not to defend it: the grace of Christ is surely, to be published plainly, Mark.
16.1^. Acts 2.39.
and plentifully to the people; and the threatenings to be seconded with the
promises to work true repentance in the hearts of men; else I believe, a
Minister does but the least part of his message, and the work may prosper
accordingly. But what is that to this Seducer, or how is he to be believed in
this case who denies any use of the Law at all, any terrors or fear of
judgments, any mourning or sorrow for sin, any thing tending to humiliation;
only faith and joy, is that he stands for in a Gospel Minister. Is his
testimony to be received against all Ministers in general without exception?
is Being the way of the false prophet, and false Apostles.
his way to be observed in an extremity of far more dangerous consequence?
for without all mourning and sorrow for sin, what need is there of the
comforts of the Gospel; what applying of Christ at all? who came only to
comfort the mourners, Isai. 61.1, 2, 3. and calls such unto him as travel, and
are heavy laden, Mat. 11.28. yea in the regenerate themselves that fall into
sin, this is required, Psalm. 51.17. and the holy Scriptures commend this unto
the Saints for ever, as that which works repentance to salvation, 2 Cor.
7.10. how sinful then is this man's doctrine, and pernicious to the souls of
men? who denies all sorrowing for the foulest crimes, teaching men to impute it
only to the old man in them, and not to themselves, when they fall into
wickedness: but there is more remaining.

13. ASSERTION. Careless Christians are the choicest believers, because they
depend wholly upon Christ.
Explication.
THis Assertion may be known by his livery, to whom he belongs; even the
careless master we last mentioned; who like himself would have all his
followers to be careless also, and they are his choice believers: who ever
prescribed such rules of looseness, for men to live by, unless it were
Epicurus himself, the chief of Libertines? but it is worse in this man, in
that he seeks to ground them on faith, and the rules of the Gospel; for thus
he tells us; that careless is here taken in a holy sense, belonging only to
those that depend on Christ, because they will not be negligent in the use of
the means: (which clause he says, should have been added to his Assertion)
to which I answer, that the English word careless cannot properly be so taken;
seeing it signifies with us a regardlesse mind, not heeding or esteeming such
or such a matter, and is generally taken in the worst sense; as when we say a
careless man, we intend one that regards not his manner of life; Like Gallio
in the Jews matters. Acts 18.17.
or a careless Christian, one that regards not Christian duties; in which
general sense he takes it, as comprehending all that concerns either soul or
body, this life or the next; in all which, men must be careless, yea in
respect of all sins, and duties, which is to be a wretchlesse person caring for
nothing.

And whereas he sends us to the Scriptures for the warrant of his word, which
forbid al carfulness in any thing, as Phil. 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.7. to that I
answer, that the original word in those places, does not signify all care,
heedfulnesse, or providence in any sense to condemn it; (...). etc.
but only a wringing, perplexing, and distrustful care, proceeding from
unbeleefe, the same that in Mat. 6.31. take no thought; which is not opposed to
carelessness, but to that lawful and provident care, Pro. 6.8. Pro. 10.4.
Phil. 2.12. Heb. 3.12. Heb. 12.15.
commended in the Scriptures, under the name of providence, watchfulnes, heed
taking, and diligence; all which, accompany faith, as concurring with the
promises and providence of God; yet, might an improper word have been borne
withal, did not the rest of this man's rudiments, give just occasion of
suspecting his words, especially being strange and affected.

Concerning his complaint: that his words are not fully expressed; I say they
are so set down, under his own hand, as in the Assertion, which is more than
was at first, (as one of his followers told me) that, being only this;
careless Christians, If he deny this it is but like all the. rest.
are the choicest believers: but to leave this careless counsel, with those
choice believers, and pass on to the next.

14. ASSERTION. To doubt of the favor of God, after sin committed, is worse
than the sin it self.
Explication.
THis Assertion is set down in his own words, and yet he quarrels at it, and
tells us that in some other places these words are inserted [nourished by true
beleevers] which are stolen out to expose his saying to derision: to which I
answer; first, that his Gospel grounds and other assertions, are so full of
variations, and contradictions, that nothing can be alleged out of one place,
without some ground of cavilling from another; which was his cunning to help
out by shifts and evasions, as need required; but what need any man steal,
where there is such store of good stuff as in his rudiments. Secondly, admit
these words, doubtings nourished, etc. yet, does it not help him that condemns
all doubtings in such, simply, without limitation, as being the fruits of
unbeleefe, the greatest sin under the Gospel; for the nourishing of doubtings
does but aggravate what in it self is evil.

To the point them, I say, that although doubtings proceeding from unbeleefe
simply considered, are great evils, and to be striven against, by true
believers: yet in such cases as we speak of; revolts and relapses into foul
and scandalous sins of the same or other kinds, by such as profess themselves
to be believers; there is somewhat more to be considered: for first, as
concerning the fact it self, it is certain the Lord does not favor evil,
but abhor it, though in his own children, 2 Samuel 11.27.

2. For their own parts they may well, in such cases doubt and question their
own sincerity, when their sins are scandalous, and often committed, seeing
there is not faith nor grace sufficient to withstand their lusts, but they live
in them, Romans 6.18. 1 Ioh. 3.9.

3. They may well doubt and question the favor of God toward them, if not in
the main, yet for the present in this particular, of a scandalous sin till it
be repented of, and so forgiven, Psa. 6.1. Psa. 32.3. Psa. 38.3. so that in
such cases, some doubtings are not only lawful, but expedient, and necessary,
our hearts being deceitful; but against all these considerations, utterly to
condemn all doubtings in the case of scandalous sinning, without any limitation
of the sins, or time of continuance in them, as he does, how dangerous a thing
it is? for hereby that may easily come to pass, which the Lord so vehemently
protested against in his people, to swear falsely, to steal, murder, commit
adultery, and such like, and come into the house of God and say they are
delivered, to do such abominations, which are called lying words. Ier. 7.8. as
also that fearful state of the presumptuous sinner described, Deuteronomy: 29.19.
which comes by such flattering and blessing a man's self in his heart, when his
deeds are wicked, ^ide. Psalm. 36.2.
whereunto this man's doctrine tends as the event also has showed in some of
his followers, standing more upon their mirth and confidence than any fear of
sin, or care of obedience, rejecting also all mourning and sorrow for sins
committed, as not agreeing with Christian profession. But there is more
following.

15. ASSERTION. It is as easy to believe remission of sins, as to make
confession of them.
Explication.
ALL is easy to this man, who has found out an easier way to heaven (if we
may believe him) than ever was known before, or is safe to follow now. Its as
easy to believe remission of sins as to make confession of them. But how
does he explain this Oracle? suspecting (it seems) some flaw in the matter,
he has altered the words, True confession, comprehends the other. 1 John 1.9.
and instead of confession, has put in, truly asking forgiveness, thinking
this will hold better, giving his reason, because both are the gifts of God,
truly to believe and truly to ask pardon; but if there be no singular matter in
it, why does he set it out as a Gospel ground and singular rudiment of his
own? unless it be to make simple people believe, that it is as easy for them
to obtain remission of sins, and to be assured of it, as to say; Lord have
mercy upon them, on their death bedds. Which they are too apt unto, without his
directions: but for the point as he would hold it, notwithstanding both those
are the gifts of God, and a like easy for him to effect, yet in regard of our
selves, in whom these gifts must work, I suppose it a far harder matter truly
to apply the promises and to believe that our sins are remitted, than to
confess them, and ask forgiveness of them, because in the former there is
reason, and all, opposing; but in the later, the power of conscience, the sense
of wrath, and fear of danger do all concur with the spirit in that act, in
so much as we may read of some that have truly confessed their sins, and
craved pardon for them, One desines faith to be a wonderful grace.
that yea could not presently believe, nor be assured in their hearts; they
were pardoned, and remitted to them. Ps. 31.10. Psalm. 38.6. Ps. 77.2. Psalm.
88.14. etc. it being a special act of Gods spirit to persuade his people of
their reconciliation, and his love toward them in Christ, therefore, this
conceit of the easiness of faith does seem to be maintained by such as never
had it, nor knew truly, what it is to be truly and comfortably persuaded of the
favor of God, and the pardon of sin, against all the disputes of reason, and
the conscience together. But to hasten.

16. ASSERTION. Christ is involved in every proverb of Solomon.
Explication.
THis Assertion (as he says) needs no explanation at all; only to justify
the truth, we must take this Argument from him.

The wisdom or power of God is involved in every Proverb of Solomon.

Christ is that wisdom and power of God 1 Cor. 1.24. Ergo.

Let the Reader here take notice, that at the conference when this Assertion
was discussed, we propounded this sense to him; that as Christ was the wisdom
of God; so he might be said to be involved in the Proverbs of Solomon, wherein
his wisdom shines. But not as he is a sacrifice for sin, in which sense he
maintained it; but that former he utterly rejected as not sufficient, yet now
he makes it his own and his only Argument, to convince (as he says) the
Accuser. These are the common tricks of this Seducer, for had he rested on the
former sense, we had not at all differd.

Now the ground he then laid was, that to him give all the Prophets witness.
Acts 10.43. John 5.39. but Solomon was a Prophet; Ergo, he is involved in every
Proverb of his: which how well it follows I need not show to them that have
understanding, for neither do the Prophets in every part of their prophesies so
mention Christ; (having many other historical matters inserted for the time)
nor yet Solomon, who though he speak of Christ in the 8. and 9. Chapters etc
yet not in every proverb of his (if in any) in that sense, but of other moral
matters, and wholesome counsels necessary to be known in their place. Why
then this man should produce such a position, not known before, I see not,
unless to persuade his followers of a greater insight he had in the Scriptures
than other men (being most vainglorious) and to carry the palm for a Preacher
of Christ. But it follows.

17. ASSERTION. The 15. Psalm. is only a description of Christ: and the
beatitudes, Mat. 5. only belong to him; and to no man, that ever was or shall
be, because all men are vanity.
Explication.
THe perfections (he says) required in the 15 Psalm. and in all other
Scriptures of like nature, are not, nor shall be found in any man, but by
their union with Christ, for that all men severd from Christ are vanity, for
proof whereof he cites Romans 8.1, 2. and 1 Cor. 1.30 this is his full
explanation, wherein he has also kept his custom of fraud and deceit, as
before, for this sense was then propounded unto him that the 15. Psalm was a
description, not of unregenerate persons, but of believers, and such as in the
phrase of Scripture were styled righteous men, to whom the promises of life
(through Christ) did appertain; There were witnesses enough of this.
but this he utterly rejected with these words, no man, no man, that ever was,
or would be: the like also he affirmed of Psa. 119.1. and Matthew. the 5th. and
now he comes and acquaints us that all our perfections are by our union with
Christ, and without him we are vanity, which is his ground. Is not this to
dally with the word of God, and to mock and abuse his servants? the question
being whether those descriptions belonged to any men in any sense; which he
denied, referring them only unto Christ, which now he seeks to shift off with
an evasion.

But it is to be suspected that in all this, he has a further meaning, than he
is willing to disclose, which is, that Christ (of whom he speaks) is but the
new Creature, or new man in us, who is endued with such perfections, that he is
able of himself, to send forth bright beams of glory, and to act, such acts
of grace in us, as are proper to his nature, in whom are all things perfect,
as well faculties, as gifts; seeing he uses the same phrases (as before) of
union, and perfection, and then is his sense most corrupt, familisticall, and
abominable, for which see what is written on the 11. Assertion. It follows.

18. ASSERTION. The saying of Solomon; Rejoice in the wife of thy youth, is not
meant of a man's wife, but of Christ; because he can satisfy us at all times.
Explication.
THis is a branch of the former Assertion, that Christ is involved in every
Proverb of Solomon, therefore in this place, which he also calls a Proverb;
though (I suppose) unfitly, and explaines himself thus: that no man in the
spirits sense, can rejoice, but by his joy in Christ, and that he alone can
satisfy us, etc. wherein, first, he has altered and perverted the meaning of
the Scripture, and the purpose of the holy Ghost, which is dehorting men from
strange women, to direct them (as a remedy) to the love of their own, He never
cites nor regards any expositors.
and to delight in them; which he turns over into a mystical meaning to
Christ, and so puts by the object intended. Secondly, to color the matter, he
tells us of the ground of our spiritual rejoicing, that it is only by our joy
in Christ; which is collateral, and nothing to the question, because that in
the exhortation; natural, and conjugall affections seasoned with grace, are
required in the husband to his wife: he is to love her, Pro. 5.19. (...).
as his wife, and that with an entire affection, delighting in her, yea erring
in her love as the Text is, to which purpose is that of the Apostle, Ephesians.
5.29.31. all intended to the same duty, which to turn over only to a
spiritual affection, and that unto Christ, is, with familisticall allegories
to abuse and not interpret the Scriptures: yet, thirdly, to justify his
Assertion, in comparing the wife unto Christ; he alleges that, in Mal. 2.14.
where the Covenant it self (as he says) is called the wife of youth, which
how proper it is, and pertinent to the matter, I leave to the learned to judge;
for my part I conceive it to be directly opposite to this his opinion, and his
practice also in his dealing with his own wife, which, (as I have heard) was
none of the best. But for this worthless Assertion, it had not at all been
mentioned, but to show his abuse of Scripture by his interpretations which is
frequent with him, as when he also affirmed, these words: Out of his belly
shall flow Rivers of living water, Ioh. 7.38. to be taken out of those of
Solomon; Drink waters out of thine own Cisterne, Pro. 5.15. all which his
followers take up with admiration, wondering at the sublimity of the man's
understanding: but hear further.

19. ASSERTION. It is too great presumption for any Minister, to undertake the
exposition of any whole book in the Scriptures, because he cannot show how
Christ is involved in every part.
Explication.
AS in wars, besides the maine preparations there are usually appointed some
succors and supplies to be in store, if need require: so has this cunning man
certain succors in his polemicall proceedings to help himself withal; for
whereas he had affirmed (as one of his grounds) that Christ is involved in every
sentence of Scripture, and in every Proverb of Solomon; lest he should be taken
tripping in his expositions, and unable to show what he maintains; he tells
us, that yet perhaps it may not be showed, nor proved in many places, and for
that cause it is a very great presumption to meddle with those places at all,
or to adventure upon the exposition of any whole book in the Bible: by which
means he thinks to stave off, the incroaching of the enemy, and to save (at
least) his credit, at any time, which device and skill he also shows in
defense of most of his Tenants. But if it be so, that no Scriptures may be
handled by Gospel Ministers, save only such, as speak directly and immediately
of Christ, as the great sacrifice for sin; then, a great part of some whole
books in the Bible may not be meddled withal; as of the book of Genesis, of
Samuel, of the Kings and Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah, Ester, Job, most of the
Proverbs, much of the Prophets, and generally all those passages that are
merely hystoricll for that time, and of moral use, of which there is much
every where dispersed, not in the Old restament alone but in the New.

So that according to this man's opinion, a great part of the holy Scriptures
are penned in vain, The Acts most of the Epistle of James, and of the
Revelation.
and might have been spared; for if they tended not to edification, to what
purpose are they? and if they do edify, why may they not be expounded to the
Church? moral directions, rules of obedience, historical narrations,
prophesies of things to come, examples, and such like, have their place and
necessary use in the Church, and are to be opened and unfolded to the people
for edification, for reprehension, for imitation, as necessary dependances on
the mystery of Christ. (...) etc. the whole Scripture is profitable says the
Apostle 2 Timothy 3.16. and if this be so, why is it presumption in any man, to
meddle with all such Scriptures in which the Sacrifice of Christ is not
expressly mentioned? or why is it beyond their line and measure? but that this
Seducer must have a way by himself, and out of one absurdity to conclude
another. It remains.

20. ASSERTION. Every true believer (howsoever it seems) does always grow in
faith and love, and answerable fruits.
Explication.
THe very questioning of the truth of this point makes the man to stamp and
startle: proclayining to all the world, that this truth shall stand, and stare
for ever in the Accusers face, to his shame here, and condemnation hereafter,
without repentance; calling the contrary, no less than blasphemy, with such
other expressions of his well temperd zeal. (...). etc.
But for the matter it self (leaving his rage and choler.) to what purpose
does the Scripture so often inculcate that exhortation of growing in grace, 2.
Peter 3.18. of increasing in knowledge, Colossians 1.10. of increasing in love,
1 Thessalonians. 4.10. of increasing in zeal. Rev. 3.19. and withal so earnestly
dehorting, from all declinings, backslidings, and withdrawings, in faith, Heb.
3.12 in the power of the spirit. 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. in the use of the means, Heb.
10.25. If there be no danger, nor possibility of decreasing, but that of
necessity we do, and must grow in all these things, and the answerable fruits
of them? are all those exhortations in vain? did not Solomon much decline in
his later time from what he was before, 1 Kings 11.4.9. are not the Ephesians
taxed for leaving their first love, Rev. 2.4. and the Sardians for languishing
in grace, Rev. 3.2. why then does this man make such an outcry at the matter?
if it be but questioned whether believers do always grow in faith, and love,
and the answerable fruits? and why did he not annex some answer to these
testimonies of Scripture so direct against his opinion, of which he speaks not
a word. Is his ipse dixit, sufficient to carry all matters?

But yet he pretends notwithstanding some grounds for what he holds in the
general, as that, such are planted by living waters, their root is living, and
Christ does continually water them, their course is as the Sun, and they have
the promise of increasing: which though it does not always appear outwardly,
yet inwardly it is done. To which I therefore answer and that out of the same
resemblances, that neither does every herb, or plant, or tree, continually
thrive or grow, or bear fruit that's so planted: nor yet is the fault in the
influences of heaven, the tree is only blamed. Luke 13.6.
the vigor of the Sun, the sweetness of the rain, or the goodness of the
mould, that they are defective; but there are certain obstructions and evil
affections (as I may call them) in some individualls, that may hinder and stop
the course of nature in them for a time; also there are stemmes of Winter that
keep in their fruits during that season: so is it in these by reason of some
spiritual obstructions and evil affections, that sometimes possess them: as
also a chilling Winter that oftentimes blows over them: their perpetual
growth in grace, and fruitbearing, Cant. 2.11.12.
is often hindered and stopped for a time: though they have still life remaining
in the root, and Christ is the same to them in himself, as ever he was. For
what reason else can be given of the former instances? its certain they did not
grow, but rather decline for a season, yet all those promises belonged to them,
as well as to others. It is replied that then they grow inwardly in unseene
fruits: to which I answer, that neither is that certain, if he mean every
moment of time. For wherein did David grow all the time he lay in his sin? or
Solomon in his state of declining; or any of the rest before mentioned? if it
be said in humility; I answer let that appear: 2 Samuel 24.8. 2 Kings 20.13. 2 Samuel 24.10.
while David was numbering the people (which was nine months, and twenty days
in doing) did he grow in humility, or Hezekiah when he entertained so
vain-gloriously the Babylonish Ambassadors, did he inwardly increase in that
grace? the Text is evident to the contrary in both: for David judged himself
afterward for the pride of his heart, and so did Hezekiah 2. Chron. 32.26. but
hereby was a foundation laid for humility to come, and then they all thrived
more in grace, and in the true knowledge of themselves, As the Eagle when she
has cast her bill. Psalm. 103.5.
as the trees after winter, and the body after healing of some disease, which
is sufficient though they do not always grow, and does abundantly discover
the life of Christ in them, and the power of God, according to the truth of his
promise toward them.

Now what blasphemy is in all this, that the man should make such an outcry at
the matter and threaten damnation without repentance to him that holds such an
opinion, especially he having so notably crossed himself (as he has) in
another position: affirming that a man may be a true believer, and yet for a
time, have neither humility, love, This is his own, he cannot deny it.
trust, or any other grace bud forth in practice. For if a believer does
always grow, in each of these with their answerable fruits: then how can such
be true believers, that have not so much as a bud of any of these in their
practice at all? they are far from fruits that have not so much as buds upon
them. This sentence (I suppose) deserves that heavy censure more justly than
the former, and is far more derogatory to the sufficiency of the grace of
Christ, than that. But its endless to trace this man in his mazes, being so
intricate, and full of contradictions. Therefore I pass on.

21. ASSERTION. No man can say, he does love his brother, till he has laid
down his life for him: neither can we our selves say, we love the brethren,
but we may say of others, that they do. So expounding, 1. John 3.14.
Explication
TO this he says, that no man can truly say he does love his brother, till
he has trial of his own love; neither may believers say, without vain
ostentation, that they do so; but yet they may perceive that others do so, and
that of Saint John, is to be understood in that sense; this is his explanation
whrein he keeps his wonted manner of contradiction. For first he tells us; that
no man can truly say he loves his brother, till he has trial of his love,
(which is by death.) Secondly, that believers cannot say at all (without
ostentation) that they do so, which ostentation is forbidden Romans 3.27. by
which it follows that it is not lawful for any man at all to say he truly
loves his brother, until he be dead, and then (I suppose) he will hardly be
able to say it, that any shall hear him; yet if he could speak so, when he is
dead, it must be vain ostentation too, and so never lawful at all. But why
must it be vain ostentation for a believer (on any occasion) to profess his
love unto the Saints? the Prophet David openly professed it Psalm. 16.3. I
believe without any vain ostentation; so does Saint Paul 2 Cor. 12.15. Phil.
1.8. and so does Peter unto our Lord. John 21.17. and is not taxed with any
vain ostentation in it, may we assure our hearts before God of a good estate
hereby (as Saint John speaks) and yet not mention it to our comfort before men?
(...) etc. 1 Ioh. 3.19.
but why does he not hold the like of faith also: for therein he will have
men to trust, without any signs or fruits, only upon the persuasion it self,
and to profess it. Which savours far more of ostentation than the other, and
is so taxed by St. James, Chap. 2.20. But for that of the Apostle Romans 3.27.
its only intended against all glorying in the sight of God in regard of works
or grace in the case of justification, which is not questioned here, nor ought,
that way. It Is a very vain cavil.

But that conceit, of knowing that others have this love in them, and not our
selves, is beyond all imagination of any reasonable man. For seeing love is a
grace that may be counterfeited (as well as any other,) and that all outward
seemings may be there, and in them; in whom the grace it self is not in truth:
how can any be certainly assured of another sincerity herein; Acts 1.24.
Spoken exclusively. As 1 Kings 8.39.
unless, by an all-seeing knowledge (proper only unto God) I see not neither
do I think was ever maintained, till this paradoxicall man began it, with his
other, strange devises. But this particular (it seems) is a branch of his
former fantasy, that one may know, certainly, another election, by an
ordinary way, and that infallibly. Which point (as I have heard) he pressing on
a time upon another of some rank to ingratiate himself, as knowing his
election. The party, taking him at the advantage, replied; that if I be such a
one, and able so to discern of another; then my judgment, is that M. Thraske
is a fantastical Fellow. So he was caught in his own net.

And thus much of these worthy Assertions, which I have gone over not so much
to satisfy or instruct those that have understanding (the points being so
gross) as to discover his fraud and deceit that seeks to cloak, and cover
them with his mists, that they may not be perceived of any: especially, those
weaklings, which have been transported by him, may no longer take Mercury, for
meat, I mean false and dangerous Doctrine, for true and wholesome food of the
soul. Wherein all may see, how justly he has taxed such for slanderers, and
false accusers that have charged him withholding the forenamed opinions.

Concerning the five Cautions.
UNto the Assertions before rehearsed, there were annexed also (because of the
deceitfulnes of the Seducer) certain Cautions to the Reader, as to beware. 1.
Of his Contradictions in his various Gospel grounds. 2. Of his fallatious
interpretations of Scripture. 3. Of his protestations. 4. Of his riddles. 5. Of
his fawning, and enticing speeches; the discovery whereof has made him to
startle as a malefactor hid in the dark, the light approaching. For as a man
suddenly awakened in a distemper, he falls to railing, and raving at him
that is next him: venting little else than foul language, and lies. Which are
best answered with silence. Yet lest this should be deemed only an evasion. I
answer briefly.

To the first: If the instances there given be not sufficient,

To the second. Let all his writings, and this very book,

To the third, about his protestations,

To the fourth, about his riddles, He has purposely altered his own words.
Else why does he suppress the words I had set down, and substitute others in
their room. But most wickedly, and presumptuoussy has he paralelled, the
high, and holy mysteries of Christ, and his Gospel, with his own deceitful
riddles, justifying the one, by the other.

To the fifth, about his fawning; let all his acquaintance speak what language
he commonly used, till he was provoked; yea, what Crocodiles tears he would
often shed, to gain his prey, and to deceive the simple. But for his
insolency and pride, let his rude, and unseemly demeanor toward his (then)
Sovereign Lord King James: Using the terms of Thou, and Thee 32 times, in one
Letter to him.
his affronting of all men with his private opinions: his lofty and arrogant
speeches of himself: his scornful detractions in this book: yea, the summa
totalis of the man, and the matter, testify, and declare, for had there been
true humility, these things had never been so.

Of his Rule of faith.
COncerning his Rule of faith. Which he has added by way of supplement, to
the end of his book, it shows only that he was sick of pride, and would have
vented some extraordinary matter if he had known what; Wherein are some very
suspicious passages.
for after a long and tedious preamble, promising wonders; he has at last
produced an ordinary, and well known truth. That Christ Jesus is the King,
Priest, and Prophet of his Church. But how to apply this understandingly to all
points of faith whatsoever (as he pretends) to give satisfaction, does not
there appear; neither will it stand with his own enormous Divinity, before
handled. Further, I need not meddle with it.

But for conclusion, I would gladly admonish (if they would be admonished) all
the followers and admirers of this man, before they follow him any further, to
consider striously with themselves these few things, upon the premises.

First, the evil condition, and quality of the man himself, discovered in
diverse enormities of the fou lest nature, as, lying in the highest degree,
railing, scoffing, lasciviousness, audatious perverting of Scripture, levity
and unconstancie, turning from one opinion to another, as the year turned
about, but never settling in the truth. All which are most unbeseeming a man
that took upon him to be the only Patron of the truth, and finder out of the
mystery of the Gospel, the Lord never They are vessels of choice. Acts 9.15.
using such instruments for such purposes.

Secondly, the dangerous nature of the opinions themselves, as, First,
concerning the use of the moral. Law of God, that the same is utterly
abrogated, and made void, by the coming in of the Gospel: Secondly, that
there is no regeneration or sanctification by the spirit of God, nor any habits
of Grace at all: Thirdly, that there is no place for repentance, humiliation,
or sorrow for sin in a believer, but all joy: Fourthly, that there is no
trial of faith or grace by any signs or fruits, but only a resting upon a
bare persuasion: Fifthly, that men must be comforted in their faith, though
they have neither change of life, uprightness of heart, nor conscience of
obedience to the Commandments of God; all which, with their dependants are
very dangerous points to follow.

Thirdly, his manner of maintaining and defending his Assertions, which is,
with evident forcing of the Scriptures, and manifest contradictions with
himself; instance in that about growth in grace. Assertion the 20th. but
chiefly in that of the Law, standing in this manner.

The Law is a rule of the flesh. The Law is not to be preached to believers by
Gospel Ministers. The Law did once discover sin, it does so no more. There
is no commission at all, to preach the Law, now under the Gospel. The Law has
nothing at all to do with believers.
The Law is the very rule of love. The Law is of plentiful use to true
believers. The Law discovers the greatness of sin. The Law is of use to the
lawless and unholy. The Apostles preached the Law as subordinate to the
Gospel. Believers have most of all to do with the Law.
Which how to reconcile is past my skill, or (I suppose) his own, but that he
would very like a Proteus as occasion was offered, and turn in and out for
advantage.

Lastly, that he will admit no difference between pressing of duties, as
fruits of faith, and preaching of justification by works; whereupon he censures
all such Ministers, (as do the former) for Legalists, This is common with his
followers.
and Iustitiaries: a very gross and absurd collection, directly opposite to
the preaching of the very Apostles; for although it be true that neither the
Law, nor duties are to be pressed in a legal way to believers, For which see
Mr. Edward Reinelds of the use of the Law.
yet in an Evangelicall way, they both may and ought, Christ being the ground
of all: which being laid, in all doctrines and exhortations those inferences
flow naturally from the same, and are to be received and obeyed of every
believer; for such was the Apostles method and way, after matters and grounds
of faith, to infer exhortations to duties, and matters of practice, all
flowing from the same root, which is Christ, into whom, John 15.5. Sec. Tit.
3.8.
whosoever is truly ingrafted he will be fruitful through his grace, guided by
the word requiring and importing both, as well faith, as practice; and by this
kind of teaching have those many thousand souls been converted that have
been won unto Christ these many years, and not by the wild, and dangerous
way, devised by this Seducer, according to the points before discovered;
concerning which I may truly say as one said once, of a gainefull, but tempting
calling he was in; that it was a good calling to live by, but perilous to die
by; so is this a pleasant opinion to live by, but pernicious to die by; which I
wish I may not prove to their cost, that follow it to their end; I have heard
of one that much bewailed the same, on his death bed.
to which purpose I have annexed this short admonition, which I wish and desire
may be no otherwise taken, than it is intended, that is Christianly, and
lovingly; which the Lord grant through his grace in Christ, to whom be glory
for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
Ecce autem alterum.
A Short Advertisement concerning Mr. RICE BOY, as a Parallel to the former.
THis Master Boy having published a very judicious piece of work, about
absolute prayer for temporal blessings, styled The Importunate Beggar (which
was fully answered) to show himself an importunate wrangler, he sends forth
his Reply to the said answer, containing a very Rhapsodie of falsities, foolish
retortions, and groundless conceits, full of personal defamations, and
detractions, with little else in it, which therefore to answer again, were to
be like himself, neither needs it. He puts all on a temporary faith.
debile fundamentum fefellit opus.

Only whereas he is pleased by way of Quaere to point out his judgment, in a
matter of some consequence, concerning the meaning of Psalm. 91. as if it
secured all true believers from the Pestilence, (as a branch of his opinion
about temporalls) I am willing thereunto to return, some answer, (if leave may
be given, whereunto I submit) not so much to satisfy a perverse and foolish
man wedded to his own conceits: as to settle and resolve the minds of any
sincere and humble Christians, that are therein doubtful, considering the
uncomfortablenesse of the opinion in this time of visitation: which has sorrow
enough in it self, though it be not furthered by men's errors. Briefly then I
answer.

If it do appear that the promises contained in that Psalm are not
literally to be understood, but in a mystical sense: then that collection
concerning the certain exemption of any from the danger of the Plague, cannot
be grounded on that Scripture; but that the same is not literally to be
understood, appears by these reasons.

1. Because the whole Psalm (in a manner) is metaphorical, wherein there is
mention of the wings and feathers of the Almighty; of his arrows: of the hands
of Angels: of the snare of the hunter: of treading upon the Lion, Dragon, and
Aspe. Things not properly so to be taken; nor in that manner ever accomplished.

2. Because the promises all along according to the letter cannot be so
applied, nor expected, as for instance.

That such as trust in God shall not dash their foot against a stone. verse 12.
The pestilence shall not come nigh them verse 7. no not near their dwelling.
verse 10. They shall tread upon Lions, Dragons, and Serpents verse. 13. They
shall have advancement with long life, and with honor. verse 14, 15, 16.
For then, no true believer in his going should at any time stumble, or if so,
yet not at a stone, as the Devil applied it. Mat. 4.6.

The pestilence must not only not fasten upon their persons, but not so much as
come near their dwellings, At the honse of Mr. Doctor Chetwind in Berckley
before twenty witnesses.
as this foolish man once maintained in my hearing, out of this Psalm.

Then might also a believer by his faith, tread upon Lions, Dragons, and Aspes,
(or Adders,) without danger; also it would then follow that the most faithful
people, must live longest and be advanced in the world, contrary to the
Scriptures and all experience.

3. Because it is said in the general, that no evil at all shall befall such,
ver. 10. for so they must be exempted from all afflictions, Amos 3.6. where
they are termed evils, (although by the goodness of God they are turned into
good to his people:) so that according to the letter they shall not at all be
visited with any losses, crosses, or common sorrows; not with any mortal
diseases, or sicknesses, as the Fever, Consumption or Pox; not be hurt by any
deadly weapons, as swords, and spears (especially arrows) unless through
want of faith, Verse 5.
so that every soldier who dies in the field, must be concluded to want
faith: yea and every man's death, must be a judgment for some particular finne,
and want of faith in a temporal promise (as well as in the case of the Plague)
which by his opinion must needs follow, and so none at all shall be truly said
to die in faith, but through unbeleefe, at least in respect of temporal
promises.

4. Because according to this interpretation, the plague must be the punishment
only of wicked men, for so are the words: with thine eyes shall thou behold the
reward of the wicked verse 8. and so all that die of the Plague must be
condemned for wicked men, even upon that evidence, that they die of that
disease; which were a very wicked opinion to hold: Hezekiah was sick, and might
have died of the Plague, as he was told: Isay 38.1. David demanded concerning
them in his time: these sheep, what have they done? 2 Samuel 24.17. he accounted
them not greater sinners than others, because they were so visited; but more
innocent (in respect of that particular) than himself: many godly and
faithful people in all ages have been taken off with this visitation: yea
(which is much to be observed, some in our own times, Note.
men of note that have held the opinion of this Temporary, have died of the
same disease, for a warning to all to beware how they tempt the Lord with their
folly, and this man in particular, who proclaimed before many, that if ever
they heard, The time and place aforesaid.
that he died of the plague, they should report he wanted faith: to expound the
Psalm then according to the letter, we see how many unavoidable errors it
will bring forth.

Quest. It may be demanded what then is the true sense and meaning of the came?

Answ. The sum and substance of the Psalm. may be comprehended in this
assertion following.

That such as the Lord will protect by his power, The sum of Psalm. 91.
shall not need to dread any evil whatsoever, be it the snare of the hunter,
the wiles of Satan, and his instruments; both of them, as fierce and fell, as
Lions, Dragons, and Aspes: or the most noisome disease, be it the plague or
pestilence, which destroys mightily, See Calvin on the Psalm.
or yet the sword and weapons of war, though never so sharp and deadly, nor
any other mischief from any other creature. But if it please him to leave any
of his servants to such an outward evil, to be taken away by any of those
means before mentioned, then it is in mercy, and disposed of for their good,
either to prove them, or to prevent greater evils, that are to come upon
themselves and others, 2 Chro. 34.28. or to chasten them so here, that they may
not be condemned for ever, 1 Cor. 11.32, which is not therefore done, because
the Lord does fail in his power, providence, or truth toward his own; but
because he sees it best for them at such a time, in such a manner, by such a
means to be so visited by him; None of the temporal promises being intended
against, but for the works of mercy, to which they are all subordinate, and not
predominant; the fulfilling of them in their kind; being no certain evidence
of love, nor the contrary of hatred to any, Eccl. 9.1. upon which ground it may
come to pass that any of the servants of God may be taken away (as many have
been) with the sword, or with the pestilence, and yet not through want of
faith in the temporal promises, much less because they are wicked, and
forsaken persons.

Which exposition agrees: First, See Treatise on the fourth petition.
with the nature of all temporal promises concerning health, wealth, strength,
long life, good success, and the like, that are varied according to the will
of God: Secondly, the condition of all the faithful in outward matters, of
which it is testified by Solomon, that all things come alike unto all, and
there is one event to him that fears God, and to him that fears him not,
Eccles. 9.2. confirmed by continual experience: Thirdly, with the judgments
of the learned in all times, and of expositors upon this Psalm, hear one of
them.

Although God do sometimes permit the godly themselves to be infected and die
of the plague, or to perish by other dangers, yet that is nothing against this
testimony and promise: because the promises of temporal good things, have a
silent exception annexed, unless the Lord shall see it fit to do otherwise,
for causes known to himself. Piscator.

Fourthly, The contrary, what is it but an uncouth and uncomfortable error,
savouring of much ignorance in the sense of the Scriptures, putting
conditional promises for absolute, and abusing the faith of the servants of
God, to their great discouragement.

To all that fear God, then, would I direct this admonition, to look there be
no plague in their hearts, 1 Kings 8.38.
no sin unrepented off, but to make their peace in heaven through Christ, to
walk faithfully in the way of God, and to use all lawful and good means for
their preservation: and then not to be servilly afraid of any creature, no not
of the pestilence it self, which either shall not touch them, or if it do, yet
not in wrath for destruction, (as others) but to loose the soul out of the
prison of the body, with more speed (and it may be ease) than many other
diseases would have done; remembering that of the Apostle: That neither life,
nor death, neither principalities, nor powers, neither things present, nor to
come, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God,
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8.38, 39.

And for this peremptory dogmatizer, who sends forth his immodest and ignorant
dictates into all parts to discover his own shame; if he were capable of
admonition, I would advise him to do, And of publishing the errors and lies of
Traske, if it were he.
as his betters have done before him; make certain retractions of his errors,
and false doctrines, call in his exorbitant and unruly excursions; repent of
his personal reproaches and slanders (against his own knowledge and
conscience) especially that blasphemous imputation of distemper, on the holy
prayer of our Lord Jesus Christ, unworthy of a Christian: together with his
foul handling of the Apostle St. Paul in diverse particulars, as matters that
will not only lie upon his name which already is little worth; but upon his
conscience which should be precious to him.

And then before he print any more books, intermeddle any further in
Controversies, or undertake such high points as the censure of all Churches,
transcending his capacity; to labor to be better grounded in his Catechism,
to be informed in the Articles of Christian Religion; His ignorance is apparent
in these things.
to understand the difference between the Law, and the Gospel; the nature of
the new Covenant, what an absolute, and a conditional promise is; withal to
labor for an humble heart, the fear of God, the spirit of truth, and the
power of grace to govern his affections: and then he shall see, that which now
he does not, and be ashamed of what he now glories in, bewailing those
monuments of ignorance and folly he has published to the world, which I
heartily wish he may do, or that all, may beware what they receive for truth,
from one, that has so little in him.

It is an honor for a man to cease from strife: but every fool will be
meddling, Prove. 20.3.

FINIS.

