1598 SPECVLI BRITANIAE Pars

The descripsion of Hartford-shire By John Norden



Amplissimo honoratissimoque, D. Edwardo Seamor militi, Baroni Beauchamp,
Comiti Hertfordiae literarum fautori maximo.
SI hoc tibi (ornatissime) itinerarium, alicuius nouitatis pretextu, vel rei
non anteactae vel praefatae obferreviderer: Nonne tempus and veritas ipsa hac
in me sapientis irruant sententia: Nihil esse sub sole nouum? Imo vero mill
homines in me testes insurgant, asserentes hoc opus meum tarde post non
nullorum proficisci. Fac sit. Ego post omnes, hoc meum incultissimum in lucem
duco. Et cum summi honoris tui tituli typum, in publicum secum fert* Officio me
vinctum putabam tuae amplitudini primum libe^ter exhibere, tuumque and in opus
and operarium, vt praesidium digneris instanter obsecrare. Summis honoribus
viuas, Summisque consolationibus a deo opt. max.

Tuae celcetudini paratus. I. Norden.

To Gentlemen well affected to this travail.
FOrasmuch as many men are borne to many mysteries, and they bend their
endeavors to sundry ends. My lot lighting upon this labor, for which many
other are more fit, am not perchance so well furnished with such necessary
varieties as will please all men. And therefore I will thankfully accept, any
gentle reformation of my wantes and imperfections, And who so will lend his
assistance to further my simple endeavors, according to the course and method
herin intended, I shall most willingly repay him his own with advantage, and
yield every coadiutor his condign commemoration in the work.

Non vni omnia. Multis plurima.
Things to be considered in the use of this book and Map.
THe figures and letters, which follow the names of the places in the
alphabeticall tables, are a ready mean whereby to find, any place desired in
the Mapp, by referring them to meet, in the squares, very familiarly: without
which help a place unknown would be long to find in the Map.

Between the lines is 2. miles, by which a distance may be found without
compasses

Corrections.
In page 2. line 36. for oppiden read oppidum. In page 3. Among the market
towns, Hatfeyld is omitted. In page 6. line 18. for Wendod read Wendon. In
page, 6, line 26. for Laue read Luye. In page 6. line 42. for nosome read
noisome. In page 12. line 30. for tromules read tremulis.
ER
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
SEMPER EADEM
royal blazon or coat of arms

The Description of Hartfordshire.
HARTFORDSHIRE takes The denomination of the Shire.
name of the Town called HARTFORDE and the Town of the passage over the River.

The passage as (M. Camden supposes) is HERVDFORDE, Vadum rubrum. Vadum
ceruinum.


It may be also, both consonant to the sound and to the nature and situation
of the place, vadum ceruinum. THE PASSAGE OF DEAR of that kind whereof the
chief males were ealled Hearts, in former ages: at this day Stagges. The
disposition of this part of the country, to forest and weldish grounds,
fit for the fostering of such kind of wild beasts, does much more argue it
to be HARTESFORDE, then HERVD, for THE RVDFORD. As I conjecture.
Hartingfordberye.


Moreover, not far from the town, is a place called HARTINGFORD, which
signifies vadumad ceruinum pratum, or ad ceruinum pascuum.

This Shire was part of that country where Ptolomey placed the Cattieuctani
Cattieuctani: who possessed the greatest part of this Buckingham and
Bedfordshires. Situs.


It has on the East Essex, on the north Cambridshire and Bedfordshire, West
and South Buckinghamshire and Middlesexe.

As touching vicecountile jurisdiction, before and long after the Sometime
annexed unto Essex,
time of Edw. 3. it was annexed to Essex. And one Sheriff supplied both
Countics, as did also one Eschetor.

Concerning the Soil: The Soil.
It is for the most part, chalkie, though the upper cruste in the South and
West parts, be for the most part of red earth mixed with gravel, which yet
by reason of the white marle under it, yields good wheat and oats: But of it
own nature most inclined to ^ood, and coupisses, affording also fair ways.
In the North part of the Shire, as in the hundreds of Hitche, and Oddesey, the
soil is very apt to yield corn, and dertie ways, especially that part which
is accounted parcel of a veil called of the country men the veil of
Ring-tayle or Wring-tayle or The veil of Ringtayle.
rather Ringdale, which extends it self also into Cambridg-shire. And
affords no small store of wheat and malte toward the provision of London.

This Shire at this day is, and more has been heretofore, much repleat with
parkes woods and rivers. But for deep feedinges or Parkes, woods and rivers.
Sheep pastures. Meadows.
large sheep pastures, I could take notice of few, and they especially about
KNEBWORTH the best sheep gates within the Shire,

Meadows here and there, are dispersed upon the rivers sides: But many of them
cold and mossye, especially about RICKMANSWORTH. The LEA challenges the
commendation for the best meadows, the North part of the Shire is much
unfurnished.

To speak of the Soil as in deed it is most generally, for my part I take it
but a barraine country, in respect of some other The soil most generally
barraine. Thorrowfares the cause of good markets.
Shires, without the industrious toil and charge of the thirsty husbandman.

It is much benefited by thorrow fares to and from London Northwardes, and that
makes the markets to be the better furnished with such necessaries, as are
requisite for Innes, for th'intertainement of trauaylers. And I take it (though
it be one of the least) no one Shire in England for the quantity commes near
it for thorow-fare places of competent receipt.

The air for the most partis very salutarie, and in regard thereof, The air.
many sweet and pleasant dwellinges, healthful by nature and profitable by
art and industry are planted there: And above other Shires there are many
ancient Sites, houses in former ages famous, commonly called BERYES, which are
in other Shires Berryes.
called Halls, Courte-houses, and Mannorplaces. The most part of these BERRYES
are Manors or Lordshippes of themselves, the word BERRYE sodem significat: a
dwelling place or place of BERRY quid.
abode, inde Connie beryes, a refuge for Connyes.

But the word Berye is often confounded with Borough, Burye and Berge: every
of which have their distinct significations: BVRROW Berye often confounded.
Borrough, Burye, Berge, quid Beryes why decayed. The division of the Shire into
hundreds.
oppidem: BVRYE, sepulchrum: BERG, montem significat: And BERYE sometime is
taken pro castro* et exercitus castrametatione. And therefore in regard of the
antiquity of these Beryes, I thought it not superfluous, to observe the most
of name, and to insert them in the Map, though now they carry not equal
glory in outward show, with some of inferior condition: for the most part of
them having lost their ancient Lords, or the Lords let them for so lofty
rentes, as that they are sacked of their antique royalties, and bereft of their
former beauty.

This Shire is divided into 7. hundreds and namely:

ODDESEY hundred, which takes name of an ancient house called ODDESEY GRAVNGE
which stands Oddesey.
near old WATLINE-STREET, and abutteth part on Bedfordshire, and part on
Cambridgshire, and abounds especially with corn.

EDWINESTRE hundred bordereth upon Essex.

BRAWGHING hundred takes name of a parish of that Edwinestree. Brawghing.
Hartford.
name, and boundeth upon Edwinestree.

HARTFORD hundred is named of Hartford the prouincial town of the Shire.

BROADWATER hundred, so termed of a little hamlet Broadwater
of 2. or 3. houses near Steven edge.

COISHOO hundred, or CAEGSHOO, is named of Caishoo Cassij.
an anncient Berye, called Caishoo-berye, de CASSIIS of a people mentioned by
Caesar resident in this hundred as M. Camden affirms. See more of this under
that name in the table of parishes.

DACORVM hundred, (as I am out of doubt) de Dacis of the Dacorum.
Danes, who in this hundred, after many spoils committed by them were
overthrown by Adelnulph, and Adelbalde his son about the year of Christ 8
29. And in memorial of their overthrow, and stop of their further passage
that way at that time, the place where the fight was is to this day called DANE
END Dacorum clades. And near it in the highway toward Steven edge, are
DACORVM clades. Hitch.
many burials, great heaps of earth, under which are enterred, such as were
slain, at that conflict as may be supposed.

HITCH half hundred, so called of a wood called HITCHWOOD, and not of Hitchin
town, which indeed is HITCHENDE, terminus de Hitch, and not Hitch-ing, as it
is corruptly termed, and the hundred is HITCH-HAVLFE hundred not Hitchnie nor
Hitching haulfe hundred.

This Shire is well furnished with market towns, the most of them plentiful
of all things necessary for the peoples relief: namely.

SAINT ALBONS, which has market on the Market towns.
Saturday. BARNET on the Monday. BARKHAMSTED on the Monday. BALDOCK a little
market on the Thursday. BVNTINGFORD on the Monday. BARKWAY on the Friday.
HEMSTED on the Thursday. HARTFORD on the Saturday. HODDESDON on the Thursday.
HITCH-END on the (...) RYCKMANSWORTH on the Saturday. ROYSTON on the Wednesday.
STORTFORD, a very good market on the Thursday SABRIDGWORTH on the Wednesday,
TRINGE a little market on the Friday. WAYRE on the Tuesday. WATFORDE on the In
number 18.
The Fayres for the most Fayres.
part in this Shire. viz.
2 At RICKMANSWORTH on Lady day in harvest: and on Rickmansworth, Watford
the second of July. 2 At WATFORD on Trinity Monday, et per duas dies proxime
sequentes, and on the decolation of John Baptist. 2 At BARKHAMSTED on saint
Peter's day, and saint Barkhamsted
James day. 1 At TRING S. Peter's day. Tring
1 At HEMSTED at the day of Holie-crosse. 3 At saint ALBAN on Michaelmas day,
on Th'annunciation of S. Albans.
Mary, and upon saint Albans day, which is 3. days after Midsommer, 1 At the
PREE, called Sancta Maria de pratis, on It The Pree.
is held sometime in the town of S. Albans, or in Keyfeild near Sop well. 3
At HITCH-END on the Wednesday in Easter week, on Hitch-end.
Michaels day, and on S. Edw. day. 1 At BENNINGTON on S. Peter's day. Bennington
Hatfeild. Hartford.
1 At HATFEYLD on S. Georges day. 4 At HARTFORD on S. John Baptist day, on
Simon and Iudes day, on the friday before Passion sunday, and our Lady day 4.
September. 3 At BALDOCKE on S. Matthyas day, saint Androwes day, Baldocke
and on saint Matthewes day. 2 At SABRIDGWORTH on S. Georges day, and on saint
Sabridgeworth. Stortforde
Dionise day. 3 At STORTFORD on Michaels day, on Ascension day, and on corpus
Christi day, 1 At WAYRE on the nativity of Marie. Wayre. Hoddesdon Royston.
1 At HODDESDON S. Peter's day. 3 At ROYSTON on Ashwednesday, on the Wednesday
in Whitsun week, and at Thomas Beckets day. At Chipping Bernet on At S. Giles
on Bernet.

The division of the Shire.
THe Justices of the Shire for the more ease of themselves and The Shire
divided into 3. parts
the common people, have by consent divided the whole Shire into 3. parts or
deuisions, for the determination of matters of meanest moment.

1 The first division is of CAISHOO and DACORVM hundreds, and for this the
Justices of that limitte meet sometime at Welwine and sometime at Steuen-edge.
2 BROADWATER and HITCH haulfe hundred meet at S. Albans. 3 HARTFORD,
BRAWGHING, ODDESY and EDWINESTREE meet at Hartford or Hoddesdon.
But for matters of greatest importance the Justices meet all at Hartford,
where is also the common jail for the Shire, and in the Hartford the
Provincial town and most general place of meeting.
Castle the jail delivery, except only for the liberty of S. ALBANS which
both for ecclesiastical and eiuill government, has peculiar power within it
self, whose Jurisdiction reaches into these parishes, namely:

S. ALBANS. wherein are parishes.
S. Michaels S. Steuons. S. Peter's.
WATFORD. RICMANSWORTH. NORTON near Baldocke. NEWNHAM. S. Albans liberty.
RIDGE. HEXTON. WALDEN abbottes. SARRET. LANGLEY abbottes. ELSTRE or Eglestre.
BVSHIE. CVDYCOT. or Casticot, of some Caudecot. SHEPEHALE. SANDRIDGE. REDBVRNE.
BARNET. S. ANDROWES in S. Albans. Goole and jail delivery for the liberty.
The Deanrie of S. Albans, Brawghing

These have jail and jail delivery at S Albans, 4. times in the year,
namely the thursday after the quarter Sessions, at Hartforde, which is always
on the Monday.

For Ecclesiastical government, these former belong to the Diocese of
LONDON, and is called the DEANERIE OF S. ALBANS, together also with the
Deanerye of Brawghing.

The rest of the Shire belongs to the sea of LINCOLN and contains the
Deanries of

BARKHAMSTED. Deanries belonging to the Sea of Lincoln. Rivers. Stort.
HITCH-END. HARTFORD. BALDOCK.
To speak something of the Rivers that water this Country, the STORT may be
first mentioned, because it lies farthest in the East, and is the Bound
between this Shire and Essex: But that this Shire steppeth over the river,
both at Stortford, and near Sabridgworth, and fetches within her limits about
Stortford, the Castle of Waymore Hockerell, the parsonage of Stortford, with
other things in Essex side, and at Sabsworth or Sabridgeforde it depriueth
Essex of a house called HYDE-HALL.

Some, as I take it in tearming this Stort the STOVR are not Stour.
merely mistaken, for though the Stowre^ parts Suffolk and Essex, and
rises at STOVR-MER, the Stort rises in Essex also near WENDON LOWGHES and
signifies Wendod water, and begins to divide the two Shires between
Stortford and Fernham about a mile above Stortford: And may in deed not amiss
be called Stowret, THE LESSER OR LITTLE STOWR. Stowret.
And the passage over the river near Waymore Castle is called STOWRETFORD,
briefly STORTFORD, whereof the Town takes name, and is called STORTFORD for
Stowretsord. And under the name of the Stowret or Stort, it maintains
Stowretford.
that division, till it come beneath an ancient house called the REE, where it
meets with the LEA or LAVE, who as the The Ree.
more worthy bereaues the little Stort of her title and glory, and under the
name of the Lea, they both in one hasten to WALTHAM ABBEY, and there bid
HARTFORDSHIRE vale, continuing her most mild course as stickler between Essex
and Middlesex, until she present her self to famous Thames.

The LEA is the most famous River within this Shire: And Lea.
brings as it were a testimonial of her worh from the Saxons, who entitled
her LIGEAN or LIGEAM Lea water. And it may Ligean.
be supposed and probably gathered, that she yielded in those pristine ages,
some prayse-worthy fruits unto that antique nation, as her free entertainment
of boats and ships, from the Thames even to Hartford, for the more easy
entercarriage of things between London and it, though now, and many years
past, (as discontent) she Boats to Hartford.
has refused that public service affording only, of late, access for small
boats or barges to WAYRE, a benefit necessary and no way no some.

This River has many branches, but her head first seems to look into the
light, not far from an ancient house, called of the spring there, LEA-MER,
corruptly LAMER, which signifies eamer.
the head, spring or well of LEA. As the Stowre which passes between Suffolk
and Essex, begins at STOVR-MER, the Stour-mer.
head or spring of Stoure.

The Lea coasteth as it were through the Center of the Shire, dividing it near
into two equal parts, and in her passage, among Whitwell. Marran. Been.
Benefician.
other, she receives the WHITWELL river, whose ancient name is MARRAN.
Entering the Lea west off Hartford, and between that and Wayre, the BEEN or
ancient BENEFICIAN, a river that rises not far from BEINENTON or BENINGTON
increases the Lea, not far from a place alluding also to that name called
BENGEHOO or rather BENEHOO Benge koo.
the river of Been by interpretation.

A third branch, which first rises about Barkeway, Austie, and Buntingford,
makes way by Brawghing, and near Bengehoo enters the Lea.

A fourth branch, rises about the Pelhames, making way by the Hadhames, and
East off Wayre greeteth the Lea.

The RFDBVRNE river rises not far from Flamsted an Redburne.
ancient Baronie, and thence passes by Redburne, and in her way toward the
decays of old Verlam, it greeteth the Lady of Pree S. MARIA DE PRATIS a
Nunnerie and a kind neighbor Sancta Maria de pratis.
to Albans Abbey. This fall of water, was called VERLAME, as Antiquaries
observe, and thereof VEROLANIVM, and VERLAMECESTER: whereby it may be gathered
that the former Flamsted where this Verlame water first appears, should be
rather VERLAMSTED then Flamsted: Flamsted being more Flamsted for Verlamsted.
forte.
easy to be pronounced, and so drowning verlam with flam, as in many words f.
is taken for the u. consonant, and that u. fot f. especially among the common
people, that pronounce vather sometime for father. This Verlam river or the
Redbourne was the food that relieved that famous great poole which was
between Verlamcester and Holmehurst hill where Albans town stands: Of which
poole so many conjectures hauebeene, that it should be part of the flowing
Thames, whereof is spoken hereafter in S. Albans.

This Verlame or Redburne River not much below Albans town, offers her
self to the COLNE, a river that there imbraceth Colne.
her, and drowning both the names of Verlame and Redbourne, usurps the whole
ritle and glory to her self, and immediately begets COLNEY and
COLNEY-STREET, and passing on she Colney. Colney-street
visits WATFORD or WATLINGFORD, the ancient ruynes of Morhouse,
Rickmansworth, Vxbridge and another of her begotten called COLN-EBROOKE, and so
without stay she Colnebrooke.
submits herself to the Thams, the mained euouring gulf of all these
petite streams.

This river ere it commes to Riokemansworth deuoureth Caishoo river Caishoo.
and another that falls out of Buckinghamshire.

Beacons or Beaukens within the Shire.
THe Steeple of S. Peter's in S. Albans. Beacons.


Graueley Beacon. Tharfield Beacon. Amwell Beacon.
Hartford Town has long. 20. degrees and latitude 52. degrees. Longit. and
lat. Parishes in number.


Within this Shire are 120. parishes and 15. Chapels of ease, yet in use, some
of them carrying the name of parishes. In the whole 135.

HARTFORDSHIRE
map of Hertfordshire ^ HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENCE ^
royal blazon or coat of arms
Joannes Norden perambulaunt and descripsit 1598

Wilhelmus kip Sculpsit.



An alphabetical Table of the towns Parishes and Hamlets for the most part
within the Shire.
AYOT. h. 18. called Ayot Lawrence, near which place Adelnulph and Adelbaide
his son gave the Anno. 829.
Danes an overthrow: the place to this day where they were slain, is called
DANE-END Dacorum clades.
Dacorum clades.

AYOT h. 20. called Ayet Mountfitchet or little Ayot.

ALDBERIE d. 30. Villa vel aula antiqua.

ALDBERYE i. 18. eiusdem significationis.

AFFLEY e. 14.

ALDNHAM m. 18. Idem quod ALD-BERYE.

S. ALBANS. k. 18. Villa Albani. ALBANS TOWN first founded by Offa K. of the
Mercees, in perpetual memory of Albans town founded. 790* or 793.
Holmchurst. Dours-waldt
Alban in the 33 year of his reign. The Town is said to be builded in the
place where Alban was martyred, namely upon a hill in a wood called HOLMEHVRST
of Beda DOVRSWALDT: which is the wood near the water, meaning the great
Stagne, which was between Verlame and the place of Alban execution. Alban was
a Citizen of Verolame, and by blood a Roman, and gave entertainment to
Amphibal at his coming to that city. by whom he was from Paganism converted
to the Christian faith, Capgraue.
for which he suffered as Capgraue affirms, whose further frivolous reports
of the miracles wrought by this holy Convert, living and dead, I leave as idle
or needelesse* only it seems probable that such a man there was executed at
that place, and for his eternal commemoration, this Albans Monastery was
founded, and consequently the town, both consecrate to his own name. And
endowed with many large privileges and daily augmented and successively
confirmed, by the charters of many Kings of this Land The Kings ancient
confirmation of charters. The Monastery enlarged. The privileges of S. Albans.
whereof I have seen and read not a sewe; signed only signo crucis without
further ceremony of sealing.

This Monastery has been enlarged by sundry Abbots of this place, as
especially by Eldred and Edmer about Eadgars time, and in Edward 3. time, who
gave the then Abbot Licentiam ad confirmardam et kernellandam Abathiam de calce
et petra: in the 31. year of his reign over England, and of his reign over
France the 18.

Such were the privileges of this place, that the King could make no secular
officer over them, but by their own consent.

They were acquitted of all Toll through England.

They made Justices ad audiendum et terminandum, within themselves, and no
other Justice could call them for any matter out of their liberty.

They made also Bayliffes and Corroners.

No Bishop had any Jurisdiction to correct any person among them for any
matter spiritual or temporal.

They had the execution and return of all writs, and the goods of all
Outlawes: and that is yet continued to the Town by the Present Privileges of
the town
grant of Edward 6. And no man may be impanelled out of the Town.

They had gayle and gayle delivery within the town: and the town at this day
has the like, namely one gayle for the liberty, Gayle and gayle delivery.
Th'incorporation.
and another for the town. For the gayle delivery, the Steward of the town
is always in commission, but not by their Charter.

The town is governed by a Mayor and 10. Burgesses, a steward and a
Chamberlain.

There are in the town 4. Wards and in every Ward a Constable and 2.
Churchwardens.

In the Abbey church of this place is a Font of brass brought out of Scotland
by Sir Richard Lee: as may appear by a circumscription about the same font, as
if the font did proclaim the same in it own person in these words.

Cum letha oppidum apud Scotos non incelebre et Edenburgus primaria A Font
brought out of Scotland.
apud eos ciuitas, incendio conflagrarent, Richardus Leus eques aur atus me
flammis ereptum ad Anglos perduxit. Huius ego beneficij memor non nisi Regum
liberos lauare solitus, nunc meam operam etiam infimis Anglorum libenter
condixi. Leus victor sic voluit. Anno Domini. M. D. XLIIII. and Henrici octaui.
XXXVI. In this Abbey church lies buried famous Sir John Mandeuile Sir John
Maundeuile.
lively formed in a marble stone: whose trauayles in foreign regions and rare
reports, are at this time admired through the world.

There lie also many Nobles, who lost their lives in the conflictes Nobles
buried.
in and near this town, between the houses of Lancaster and York.

In the North-west end of the town was sometime a stately castle, and called
KINGSBERRIE, which is as much, as the Kingsberie castle.
Kings house or castle, for BERRYE castrum et castrametationem significat: the
ruins thereof do yet somewhat appear, the place now supplied with a farm
house. The Abbot of that place in the time of K. Stephen made suite unto the K.
to overthrow and supplant the same castle, for that (as he suggested) Antiquis
temporibus latebant quidam regales nequam homines, Abbatis minus infesti et
damnosi. At whose instance the castle was forthwith overthrown. A graat Mere
between Verlame and S. Albans.


There was sometime a great Mere or stagne, between this town and old
Verolamium* and many have constantly, but idly affirmed, that the Thames has
had issue that way, and nauigable so far, a thing merely fabulous, though it
be true, that an ancker was sometime found there. It was indeed Stagnum
maximum an ample and large fishpoole of the Kings, and belonged to his castle
of Kingsberie before spoken of: And the King for his recreation, and delight
lying there, did often pass by boat, to and fro within the same, according to
the order of the noble men and gentlemen of Rome, who did usually, make fair
fishpondes about their houses, to recreate themselves therein: and these with
exceeding cost, as Marcus Varro writes especially of the wonderful large and
costly fishpondes of Hortentius, Hircius and Lucullus. And of these, and such
other princely Romans, did these Verlame Citizens, take president for this
great ponde, which coming afterward to the king of the land, he often took
his repasle therein, accompanied commonly with no small troop of his nobles,
and therefore the boats, were provided of large hull, furnished with cable and
ancer, that at the kings pleasure, the boat might be moared in any part of
the poole, whereby, how easy it is to loose an ancre in the mere reason may
judge, and this was the occasion of the loss, of the ancre doubtless that was
found there, and not ordinary recourse of ships as some vainly suppose. And
yet as Ovid says: and vetus inuenta est in montibus anchora summis. This
fishpoole The ponde bought of the king and drained dry
continued in this pride, till the time of Alfric the seventh Abbott of this
Monastery, who bought the same of the king, and by industry and charge caused
it to be drayned dry: And the more to argue it to be but a fishpoole there
remains yet one witness, a street in the town lying toward it called
FISHPOOLESTREETE. Fishpoole street.


If any boats in former times, came thither, they came from Staenes and up the
Colne river to Rickmansworth, to Watforde and so to S. Albans, but in no sense
to the place where the ancre was found, for that the fall of the water there
was such as it could yield no access for shipping against the same. There is
indeed a feilde below S. Albans called key feyld, and below Rickmansworth, a
place upon the river called Westhythe, which may in sort argue some such
passage for boats, but for the first it may be as well pascuum, vaccinum a
pastor for kye, or kyne, as a strande for fastening of boats or ships and
more like. And Westhithe may be as well taken for a house as for a harbor of
ships. And yet these simple probabilities might work that conceit in Gildas,
who was the author of this error.

In and about this town, have been sundry battelles conflictes S. Albans
spoiled.
and spoils, as in the time of Henry 3. one Falcatius de Brent a notorious
robber, with a company of wicked persons came too this town by night, spoiled
the same and murdered many: and would have set the Abbey on fire, But the
Abbot feed him with 100 pound to depart.

This was a dangerous time when thieves and murtheres must be hired for reward
and not constrained by justice, to desist from violence and blood.

In the same year it was ransackt again by the souldiees, that went under the
conduct of Earl Patric, Sayre and others to remove The 2 spoil of S. Albans.
the seidge of Mount Sorrel.

Moreover, about the year 1455. Henry 6. of the famelie of Lancaster with
many of his nobles, at this town met with Richard Duke of York, and his
adnerentes, where the king was taken, and A batte'l at S. Albans.
a great slaughter made upon his men, even of best accoumpt. But afterward
within 4. years near the same, at a place called by the inhabitants BERNET
FEYLD but I take it rather Brentes field, of the former Falcatius de Brent,
such as stood affected to the famely of Lancaster, under the conduct of
Margaret the Queen, mightily prevailed against the accomplices of the house of
York, to the infranchesing of the Captaiue king, and overthrow of many of The
2. battle near S. Albans.
the adverse part.

In the middle of this town is a cross, very stately erected about the year
of Christ 1290. by Edward 1. as in many other places, in memorial of the death
and doleful carriage of his Queen, from. Herdbie nere Lincoln where she
dyed, toward Westminster where she was buried.

At this place was executed that Libellor and stirrer of the commons named John
Ball in the time of Richard the 2. John Ball executed.


The term is sometime kept in the Abbey chutch where all places are orderly
provided for the same.

AMWELL. h. 28. which signifies fontem amnensem a well by the rivers side.

ANSTIE. b. 30. At this place are the ruynes and deep trenches of a strong
castle, situate aloft on a steep hi^l, and was called HANST-HYE castle
depraecipitio. I take it of the stepenesle of it. Hanst-hye castle.


ASPENDEN. d. 24. so called either detremules of the Aspe trees, or for that it
has been cauerna viperina a place of venomous worms.

ASTON. f. 22.

ASHWELL. b. 20. fons inter fraxinos. M. Camdtn takes it to be, that which
Antoninus termth in his ltenerari MAGIOVINIVM Magiouiniu^.
And he proves it by the signification of the word Magionirdum, changing
only n. for u. which then signifies a nurserie for Ashes, and so much does the
nature of the place fitly import*

ASHRIDGE. i. 10. Iugum fraxinium, at this place was an hermitage built by
Edward Beanforde Earl of Cornwall, wherein (so it 1291.
was esteemed) Edward 1. kept a royal Christmas. Wherein also our most
worthy and ever famous Queen Elizabeth lodged as in her own, (being then a
more stately house) at the iime of Wyatts 2. Elizabeth
attempt in Queen Maryes days. And from this place she was in all post sent
for to the court, by such severe Commissionars, that though she were then
sick, she was forced to take her journey with them. The worthy history whereof
to our perpetual joy, for that the high Jehovah seeing her innocence
preserved her to the regal throane, is at large set down in our Chronicles.

This place is lately beautified by the Lord Cheyney.

B.
BARHAMSTED. k. 8. or rather BERGHAMSTEDT villa sita inter montes BERG in the
Saxon tongue is a hill, HAM a town, and STEDT or STADT a place or seat, and the
Berg quid hom quid stedt quid
situation of this place agrees to the former interpretation.

Nere unto this town was a strong castle, the ruynous walls and some
buildinges thereof yet remain. It was builded (as M. Camden affirms) by the
Normans.

The Conqueror, in deed stayed there, as histories report, as he passed through
the country, And thither resorted unto him many Lords and nobles of the
Realm, At which time, it is like, he gave Barkhamsted castle.
order for the erecting of the castle, if it were not a castle when he made
stay there, the beauty and strength of the castle, is now advanced on a lofty
hill, stataly and pleasant not far from the old site, not holding the former
form of a castle, but is become with addition and charge a beautiful house,
by Sir Edward Carry knight M. of her majesty's lewell house.

Jews of France beseiged this castle against Henry 3. the first year of his
reign, in the time of which seige certain knights and soldiers salied out
of the castle, adn deprived the adversary of The castle beseiged.
sundry pillage, and safely returned. But afterward at the kings commandment
it was yielded up to Jews.

Richard king of Almane dyed in this castle who was also Earl of Cornwall,
and brother to Henry 3. And Cicelie mother to Edward the fourth. And wife too
the Duke of York, too whom the Rich. king of Almain died
castle belonged, ended her days in this place in the time of Henry 7. after
she had seen the deserved fall of usurping Richard* who was also borne in this
castle, some say at Fotheringay.

There is in the town of Barkhamsted a fair free School built of brick, by
doctor Incent sometime deane of Paul's, the stipend Ric. 3. borne A free
school.
of the Master is 20. pound per annum, of the usher 10. pound confirmed by act
of parliament.

It is a market town, and stands most upon making of malt, it has two
fayres in the year.

BARKHAMSTED. i. 26. or Berghamsted vt supra.

BARKEWAY. b. 28. I have seen it in an ancient record BERGWANT which is as
much as viain montem the way to the Berg-want.
hill, it is a market town. In November last much defaced wtih sire.

BARLEY, a. 28* or BERGLEG ager montosus.

BARFEYLD b. 24. I have read it in the Saxon Berfeldt, and signifies the same
that Bergleg does.

BALDOCK d. 20. a market town standing between the hills, little furnished
with any matter of moment, only it yields maltmakers not a few, the praise
of the place is the chalkie soil fit for corn.

BAYFORD i. 26.

BERNET n. 26. or BERGNET monticulus, called high Bernet of the situation on a
hill, and chipping Bernet of the market famous for cattle, there bought and
sold every monday.

BERNET n. 18* called East Bergnet.

BERNET feyld k. 16. a place vulgarly so called, but corruptly as I take it, it
should be rather Brentes feyld, of that Fulcatius de Brent Brentes-feyld.
spoken of before in S. Albans, who with a troop of wicked men, about this
place robbed and murdered many.

In this feyld, was the matter handled by deadly blows, between Queen
Margaret leading the favorers of the house of Lancaster, Queen Margarets
victory.
and the accomplices of the house of York, and where she redeemed the king that
was taken before at the battle of S. Albans, And gave the kings and her
enemies a sound requital.

BENINGTON e. 24. or BENIGNTON villa Benigna, either of the bounty of the
inhabitants, or the pleasent and profirable situation of the place. As Blithe
in the North parts de iucunditate of mirth and good fellowship.

But it may be BENETON of a river called BEEN, or Been. Benefician.
BENEFICIAN which rises near it, which carries great probability.

BENGEHOO h. 26. or rather BENEHOO which is rightly enterpreted the river of
Been, BENEHOO for Benegoe in the German tongue, HOO with us being pronounced
for GOW Gow and Hoo. idem.
which is in the French EAV, with us water.

BEDMONT l. 16. a hamlet called Bedmont ponde de Stagno of the poole near it

BELLBARR l. 24.

BIGRAVE c. 20. a parish wherein is only the Berye, of Manor house and none
other.

BOVRNE-END k. 10.

BOVINGDON m. 10.

BROAD-WATER f. 20. a little hamlet whereof Broad-water hundred takes name, so
called not of the continual water for the place is commonly dry: But at great
floods the fall of the land water makes it a great Sea.

BRAGBERG-END f. 22.

BRADFEYLD a hamlet sometime a chapel of ease now ecayed.

BRANFEYLD k. 24. It was given by one Hardewine de Sealeris and Odell his wife
to th'aduancement of Albans Monastery.

BROWGHING d. 28. or BRAWGHING, A liberty having other members, And thereof
Brawghing hundred takes name.

BEOX-BORNE i. 30, or BROOKES-BORNE de aqua.

BVSHIE o. 18. aptly so called de Dumis of the Bushes, and woods there,
heretofore abounding.

BVRWELL f. 24. or BVRGHWELL

BVNTINGFORD a. 26. a large hamlet and a good thorowfare: also a market town,
standing as it is said in four several parishes, namely in Layston, Widiall,
Throcking, and Aspenden. And has two fayres in the year.

BVCKLAND b. 26. forte de fagis.

C.
CALK-COTE b. 18. rightly so called de creta vel calce, and signifies
cretaceam casam, a house standing in a chalkie soil. cretacea casa.


CAISHOO n. 16. or CAEGSHO, M. Camden deriueth the name de Cassijs of a people
mentioned by Caesar who had their abode in this part as is supposed.

Caishoo should import a water, called CAIS or Caegs the name, Cassij.
it may be, of the river that passes through this hundred, called CAISHOO or
Caegeshoo hundred, called of Hollenshed GADES and gives name to the Gadesdens,
where the river rises: And so by corruption of pronunciation they call it
Caishoo for Gadeshoo, Gades Gades. Cais. Gaegs.
river or else is GADES mistaken for CAIS or CAEGS and so for Caisden or
Caegsden pronounced Gadesden, for doubtless the river gives name to Caishoo
or Caegshoo, or Gadeshoo-berye.

Offa king of Mercia gave unto the monastery of S. Albans, a place by the name
of Caegshoo, whether it were the whole hundred Caegshoo-bery or some place else
now decayed, I can not affrime. But I take it most like to be the whole hundred
for that the most of it belongs to the liberty of S. Albans.

CHIPPERS FEYLD m. 12.

COLNEY l. 20.

COLNEY-STREET l. 18, these take name of Colney stream, which gives name also
to Colnebrooke, a town standing both in Buckinghamshire and Middlesex.

CODERYD a. 24. or Caude-rydge iugum frigidum.

CHESFEYLD e. 20. forte CHOISFEYLD Ager delectus, for the rich situation in so
fertile a corn soil.

CHESTON l. 30. cur non Chestin? castanetum of chessenut trees. chestin.


CORNERHALL a hamlet so called for the sudden turning in it from Hemsted way
to Barkhamsted.

CLOTHALL d. 20.

de Carbonarijs.
COLGREENE h. 24. COLLIERS-END f. 26.
COLSEHILL green o. 8, a hamlet of Hartfordshire, yet within Buckinghamshire
four miles from the nearest part of Harifordshire*

CVMBERLOW green d. 22. Casa frigida.


CVDICOTE g. 20. or CAVDE-COTE casa frigida.

D.
DANE-END i. 26. terminus velclades Dacornm.

DANE-END h. 16. of these see more in the definition of the hundred DACORVM.

DIGSWELL h. 22.

DATCH-WORTH g. 22.

E.
EAST-WIKE g. 32. vicus orientalis.

ELSTREE n. 20. in OFFAES grant EAGLESTRE

Nemus aquilinum: a place wherit may be thought Eagles bredd Nemus aquilinium.
in time past, for though it be now hilly and heathy-it has been replenished
with stately trees, fit for such foul to breed and harbor in. It is parcel
of the liberty of S. Albans.

EPPALETS e. 16, or HIPPOLETTS, vulgarly PALLETS, this place was dedicate to a
supposed Saint of that name, Eppalets was a good horseleach.
that in his life time was a good tamer of colts, and as good a horseleach: And
for these qualities so devoutly honored after his death, as all passengers by
that way on horseback, thought themselves bound to bring their steedes into
the church, even, up to the high altar, where this holy horseman was shryned,
and where a Priest continually attended, to bestow such fragmentes of
Eppolettes miracles, upon their untamed coltes and old wanton, and forworne
Iades, as he had in store, And did avail so much the more or less, as the
passengers were bountiful or hard-handed, but he that was coy of his coin had
but a cold and counterfeite cure.

ESENDEN i. 24. or EAVSENDEN.

F.
FLAMSTED i. 14, It may be VERLAM-STED, a place Verlamsted.
upon the river Verlame for there it rises, which of the ancients was called
Verlame water, of us Redburne stream which runs between the Ruins of
Verlamcester and S. Albans, Verlamsted is more tedious in pronunciation then is
Flamsted, and therefore Flamsted held in use, and sounds locum Flamenus. And
was sometime a baronie so called.

FLAVNDEN n. 10.

FINCHES-END e. 22.

G.
GADES-DEN i. 10. or CAIS-DEN called GADESDEN magna. It takes name of the
River Gades or Cais see more of this before in Caishoo.

GADES-DEN i. 10. called Gades-den parua.

GELDS-DEN g. 32.

GRAVELEY e. 18. or GRAVESLEY terra praepositi, the Graueley cum Chesfeyld.
Reeues land: Chesfeyld is annexed unto it, and in all charges is called
Graueley cum Chesfeyld.

GRAVES-END d. 32. limes prepositi the Reeues end or the bound of the precinct
of the Reeues office, this officer at this day in many parts Westward is yet
in force, especially in anncient demeisne Land.

H.
HARDING h. 16. in record HARPEDEN or HARPENDEN.

HATFEYLD k. 22. or HAVTFEYLD Campus alius called Bushoppes Hautfeyld for that
it did sometime belong to the Bushoppe of Elye.

It is now her Majesty's, and will be for ever famous, for that it Queen
Elizabeth.
first offered forth our most worthy Elizabeth to the Regal diadem, and to
recelue the triumphant cepter of this Realm, happy in her Royal Majesty. And
therefore let Hautfeyld be ever famous.

HARTFORD h. 26. after M. Camden HERVDFORD for the THE RVDFORD.

But under correction (reuerenoing his judgment) Irather take it vadum
ceruinum. HARTSFORD a passage for Dear, more Vadum ceruinum.
like then Oxeford should be de vado Boum, where in deed it is Ous-ford A
passage or forde over the River Ouse, which gives name to Owsney. More is said
of Hartford before in the definition of the Shire.

There is in this town a Castle never of great strength, buylt as The castle
is thought by Edward 1. and much increased by the houses of Clare and
Lancaster, and is at this day accounted parcel of the Duchy of Lancaster.

Rogerus de Clare was created Earl of this place in the time of Roger de Clare.
Henry 2.

The Castle and Town stands upon the Lea, which is said to Passage for
Ships.
have yielded passage for shipping even to the walls of the Castle, which I
dare, neither to affirm or deny, having seen no record to prove the one or
impossibilities for the other, more is said of the Lea and of the passage for
ships, before in handling the Rivers.

This Town has been of greater state, estimation and beauty then now it is,
And had four parish churches; namly S. Michaells, and S. Maryes decayed, only
All Saints and S. Androwes stand.

It has been most rob-d of her glory, by Wayres advancement The cause of
Hartfords decay. The corporation.
which since the turning of the high way through it has flourished more and
more, and this daily withered.

It has a corporation, a Bayliffe, elcuen Burgesses, and a Sergeant, the gayle
for the Shire is in this town, and the gayle delivery in the castle, and upon
occasion, namely when the sickness visits London, the term for the most part
is kept here in the castle, to the The term.
great relief of the poor town.

It has market Saturday, and 4. fayres in the year.

HARTINGFORD-BERY h. 24 whereof see in the definition of the Shire.

HAVT-WICK c. 24. de alto situ.

HADHAM f. c2 called Hadham magna where the Bishop of London has an ancient
house.

HADHAM c. 32. called Hadham parua.

HADHAM c. 30. called Hadham on ash a hamlet, standing on a brook of that name.

HEMSTED k. 12. or Hempsted locus cannabinus forte of hemp. Etheldred granted
it to the monastery of S. Albans by the name of HENAMSTED.

HENXWORTH b. 20.

HYDE o. 12. called West-hide or hithe.

HIGH STREET l. 14.

HITCHING c. 16 or HITCHINE more rightly HITCHEND, because it lies at the end
of a famous wood called HITCH Hitch wood
of which also the hundred of Hitch, called HITCH HAVLFE HUNDRED takes name,
and not of the town which is quasi terminus the utter edge or end of that
wood, though time have extinguished that part of the wood, which lay
toward the town.

It cannot be Hitch-ing which sounds de pratis, unless it be in that sense,
as Lucus is a thick wood de lucendo of yelding light being altogether dark.
So Hitch inge of meadow ground because it has no meadowe, and yet stands in
a valley between the hills.

The town is the Queens, and a very bountiful corn Market.

It is governed by a Bayliffe, and four Constables, whereof two are called for
the town, and two for the foreign.

In the town is made great store of Malt.

About the town is a kind of chalk, which they call Hurlocke a Hurlock.
stony Marle, more fit to make lime then to soil the ground, yet being
mixed with a more fragile and gentle Marle, which also abounds there, they
find it very helpful to their corn feilds.

HITCH-WOOD f. 16,

HILL-END h. 16.

HIGH-BRIDGE o. 16 a bridge near Moar house over Colney stream.

HOW-END g. 18. or HOO-END the head of the River.

HIGH-CROSSE f. 26*

HORMEADE c. 28. or HORMEHEAD magna as the head of the river or brook so
called.

HORMEAD c. 28. or HORME-HEAD parua.

HODDESDON i. 30. a market town and a through fare from the north parts to
London.

HOCKERELL c. 36. a little hamlet belonging to Stortforde on Essex side but in
Hartfordshire.

HVNSDON i. 32. This place gives unto the R. Ho. Sir George Carey knight, now
Lord Chamberlain to her Ma. the title of BARON of HVNSDOD. It is an ancient
house, and lately begun Baron of Hunsdon.
to be enlarged with a stately gallery, fair lodginges and offices, by the
right honorable. Hen. late Baron of the same place, and in his life time, also
Lord Chambersaine to her Majesty.

HICKLINGFORD d. 16. of some HITCH-INGFORD of some ICKLINGFORD.

I.
ICKLINGFORD vide Hicklingforde.

K.
KENSWORTH h. 12.

KELSHVLL b. 24* in record KELSWALDE.

KNEBWORTH g. 20.

KEMPTON g. 16. or KIMETON.

KINESBVRNE k. 14 or KINESBOVRN of the river so Kime river.
called whose head is near it.

L.
LAYSTON c. 26.

LANGLEY m. 12. called KINGES-LANGLEY.

At this place Richard 2. and Queen Anne his wife, with many Richard 2.
buried Edmond of Langley.
of their nobles kept a Royal Christmas. And when the king decea sed he was
buried in the church there, But afterward he was removed to Westminster by
Henry 5. At this house Edmond Duke of York was borne, and thereof called
Edmond of Langley, where also he was buried and many other of that famelie.

LANGLEY m. 14. called ABBOTESLANGLEY.

LANGLEY f. 18.

LADWELL d. 16.

LEVESDEN m. 16.

LETCHEWORTH d. 18.

LONG MEERSTON i. 4. So called for that it is terminus extremus huius
Hartfordiensis agri.

LVLLEY f. 12. or rather Low ley, de solo depresso, of the lowgrou^d

M.
MAGIOVINIVM see Ashwell.

MARKAT h. 13. corruptly so called for MER-GATE which is Scatebra an issue or
outgate of water called in Sussex and Surrey a Bourne that breaks out of the
earth, at sometimes, A Bourne.
foregoing (as has been observed) some dismal accident as yelding tears for
the evils to come, And of all men held malum omen and this is termed WOMERE, a
water presaging sorrow to Womere. Malum omen.
come* as in the time of Edw. 4 when it brake forth 19. February and ran till
the 14. of June following, But for these kind of waters some willyeeld natural
reasons of the cause, but for my part I will not deny but some divine mystery
may be hidden therein.

MICHAELS k. 16. called S. Michaels near S. Albans.

MYMS l. 22. called North Myms.

MEERSTON vide Long Meerston.

MVNDON e. 26. called MVNDON furniuall and great MVNDON.

MVNDON e. 26. called Mundon frewell and little Mundon.

MVNKES-WOOD f. 22.

N.
NAST-HIDE k. 20.

NORTH-CHVRCH k. 8.

NORTON c. 10.

NEWN-HAM c. 20. villa noua.

NORTH-HALL l. 26. corruptly for North-haw nemus boreale. The famous and
rightly honorable Henry Earl of Warwick deceased, there raised a stately
house from the ground, and contrived it in very beautiful order, gracing it
with delightful gardens and walks with sundry other pleasant and necessary
devises, now held and possessed by that most virtuous his Lady, the Countisse
of Warwick.

NEW-GATE-STREET k. 26. derianoua.

O.
ODDESEY See the definition of Oddesey hundred.

P.
PERITON d. 14. or PIRTON.

PREE k. 16. or the Prey called Sancta Mario de pratis, of the meadows, and
was a house of Nuns a sweet neighbor to the Munckes of S. Albans.

PVNCHIN-END k. 10.

POTTERS crowche l 16.

PVCKERIDGE e. 28. a through fare, called of Lealande PVLCHER CHVRCH. Pulcher
church.


PELHAM c, 32. called Stoken Pelham.

PELHAM b. 30. called Pelhamarsa, burnt Pelham, some fragmentes do yet appear
of the foundations of sundry buildinges, which were consumd by that fire,
wherofit takes the adiuncte arsa.

In the walls of this church lies a most ancient monument, A monument
a stone wherein is figured a man, and about him an Eagle, a Lion, and a Bull
having all wings, and a fourth of the shape of an Angel, as if they should
represent the four Evangelists: under the feet of the man is a cross
Flourie, and under the cross a Serpent, he is thought to be sometime the Lord
of an ancient decayed place, well moated not far from this place called
SHONKES.

PELHAM c. 30. called PELHAM furnix.

All these Pelhams seem to take name de scatebris, of the pells and Pelham
vndedicta.
water springes, which abound about and within them.

PVTNHAM i. 4. It signifies a town of wells and water springes.

R.
REDBVRNE i. 14. aquarubra.

Before the Conquest by the Normans, it did belong to the Abbey of S. Albans,
and at that general spoil and confusion of things it was taken away, and
Lanfranck being afterward Archbishop of Canterbury wrought the restoration
of it again, about the beginning of Rufus reign. 1089.


This Church was defaced and spoiled, with many other there aboutes in the time
of Henry 3.

At this place were found the relics of Amphiball, who is said The relics
of Amphiball.
to be the instructour and conuertour of Alban from Paganism, of whose
relics such was the regard, that the Abbottes of the monastetie of Alban had,
that they should be devoutly preserved, that a 1366.
decree was made, by Thomas then Abbott, that a pryor and three munckes should
be appointed to this holy function, whose allowance in those days amounted
yearly to 20. pound or vpwardes, as much as three hundred pound in this age.
Such was the price and Seca deuotio.
estimation of the loathsome relics of dead men's bones.

RADWELL c, 18.

RICKMANSWORTH o, 14. or Rich man's worth I have redd it Rickmersford And as I
take it the truest title, for that in former ages the d was pronounced th as
ath for ad quoth for quoth and forth for forde, and so for Richmansforde is
pronounced Richmansforth, not Rickmansworth.

It stands in a low ground watered on all sides, yet not highly to be
commended for great fertiletie, for the lowest and best meadows are but a
black moarish earth cold and mossie, for the most part, And the higher
grounds especially on the north side of the town stony and barraine, king
Ethelred granted it to the monastery K. Ethelred
of S. Albans by charter.

It is a market town but of no great repair.

The town is governed by two constables and two headborowes.

ROYSTON a, 24. Roisiae oppidum, Royes town, this Royes about the time of king
Stephen, was Countisse of Norff. and erected a cross of stone in the high way,
where Royston now stands. And the place was called CRVX ROISIAE, Roys cross,
and under that name Crux Roisiae.
t continued until Eustachius de Mark built a cloister there. And from that
time it began to be more and more peopled, and to be furnished with houses and
Innes. And Rich. I. made it a market town Made a market.
now famous for corn, standing in a very plentiful soil: And is a very
fit receptacle for traueilers that from the North parts have recourse to
London.

The town was almost consumed with fire in the time of Henry the fourth.

In the time of Henry 6. such was the plenty of corn, that in this Wheare
tweluepece the quarter
place the best wheare was sold for twelve pence the quarter, three half
pence the bushel.

The price was not then so low as it is now aloft, for it is at this present
in the same place at eight shillinges the bushel.

RIDGE m, 22. de iugo of the hill or Ridge whereon it stands

REED b, 26. de loco arundinoso.

RVSHDEN c, 24. vallis Scirpina a low rushie ground.

S.
SARRET n, 14. It was granted by Ethelred, to S. Albans by the name of SYRET.

SANDON c, 24. mons arenosus. It belongs to Paul's.

SANDRIGE k, 18. It diffreth not in signification from Sandon.

SAWCOMBE f, 26.

SABS-WORTH f, 34. or SABRIDGE-FORDE a market Town, standing near the Stort.

SLEPES HIDE k, 20. a little hamlet.

SHENLEY m, 20.

SHEEP HALE f, 22. Ager ouibus salutaris.

SPELBROOKE e, 34.

STEPHENS l, 16. called S. Stephens near S. Albans.

STEVEN-EDGE e, 20. or STEPHEN-EDGE, de accliuitate of the steep standing of
it on the edge of a hill, of some Steuen-haut or Stepen-haut.

The principal part of this town is from the church.. mile, and is a pretty
thorrow fare.

There has been in time past a market.

It is a liberty and belongs to the Bishop of London, having A liberty
pillory and gallows within it self, but how far the power for execution
extends, mihi latet.

STAPLEFORD g, 24. or STABLEFORD.

STANDON e. 28. or STENEDON mons saxosus there is a free Schole for the town,
the stipend yet in suspense, the Fishmongers A freeschole
of London contribute twenty pound vt ferunt.

STANSTED h, 32. or STENSTEDT locus glariatus of the gravely soil, called
Abbotes Stansted.

STANSTED h, 32. in time past called Le Veyle, now Old Lee veyle
Stansted and corruptly Stansted Theele.

STORTFORD e, 34. so called of the passage or forde over the River Stort.

There is near this town, on the east side of the river a little ruynous
Waymore castle.
castle, called the Castle of Waymour standing in an Island, upon a little firm
artificial mount very steep and though of small circuit, yet in former days
strong, within it is a dungion deep and dark, called the Conuictes prison,
arguing some great privileges in Conuictes prison. Given by William the
Conqueror
time past to belong thereunto.

William the Conqueror gave both the town and the Castle to the Bishop of
London, and to this day it belongs to that Sea, and thereof is called
Bishops Stortforde.

The town stands on the side of a hill, declyning toward the river, And
some fruitful grounds are about the same.

It has market on the Thursday and three faires in the year.

SVLLONIACA n, 22. the ruynes of an old city or famous place, mentioned by
ANTONIUS in his Itenerary, which he places twelve miles a Longidinio from
London, and nine miles a verolamio a city sometime near S. Albans: And where
others have heretofore placed this Sulloniacae at Chipping Barnet, regarding
only the foresaid distances M. Camden by dilligent observation has found
that it should stand upon Brokeley hills West of Bernet, whereby I being
occasioned made inquisition thereof in my travail, and was informed of the
place where these snpposed ruynes appear, namely some fragmentes of the
situation of some decayed buildings, where sundry pieces of Romish coin have
been taken up, as was informed me. This place indeed near agrees with the
former distances of Antoninus, and stands east of a regal ancient highway
called Watlingstreet or via consularis.

T.
THOMAS Chapel c, 14. called S. Thomas chapel.

TEWING h, 22. or TWEY-ING de binis pratis.

TRINGE k. 6. a little market town on the Friday.

THROCKING c, 24.

THVNDREDGE f, 28.

THORLEY f, 34. or THORNLEY terra spinosa.

TOTTER-EDGE f, 28. parcel of the hundred of Broadwater yet eight miles from
the nearest part of that hundred. Londoners have much beautified this place
with their neat buildings.

TWO-WATERS i, 13. a little hamlet so called de binis aquarum fluctibus, of the
two rivers that meet there.

V.
VEROLAMIVM k, 18. the ruynes of a most ancient city called of the Britons
Cair Maricipit, Cair Municip, Cair Watteline of Ptolomey Verolanium, of the
Saxons erlamcester (...), a City upon the river Werlame or Verlame.

This ancient decayed City seems at this day to publishe her pristine state
and strength, on the west side of S Albans, by the relics of her defensive
walls, And at this day although Seges sit vbi erat Werlamcester, yet the
sundry Roman coyns tumbled out of their Roman coin.
obscure denns, by the painful plough, do, as it were, proclaim unto us, so
many hundred years after her fall, that it is no fable that is written of her
antiquity.

The brass moneys whereof I have much but seem far more, Import the antique
names, and pictures, not only of sundry Emperors, but of some of their
Empresses also: which in those ages swayd the Roman monarchy, which argues
it to be quondam, CAIR MVNICIP or Municipium, a city, enfranchized and
endowed, Municipium quid.
not only, with the aid of the Romans by money, but with their Romish
privileges also, the inhabitants, for the most part being of the ancient
britishe line: who deserving well at the hands of the Romans* were made
Municipes as it were free denizens of Rome, having their Laws orders and
officers, free among them, permitted to live under their aid and protection,
until through the fury The subversion of Verlame.
of the Saxons and Danes it was sacked and subverted, and of a hautie city made
an heap of stones, which as a Caos laid afterward long smothered in the ashes
of her own rubble and ruynes, without regard, what it was or had been. At
length one Eldred Abbot of the Eldred searched the ruynes of Verlame.
new Monastery of S. Albans, coveting to advance the state of his monastical
sea, began to embowell this ruynate heap, to search what curious conceits,
he might find to beautify S. Albans sell. And found in short time great
variety, of stone work of sundry kinds, and pillars of metal as of
Brass, and Latton, towch and Allablaster. All which laid in heaps Eldred
beheld to his no small joy, but imploide them not according to his purpose
intended, for death prevented him: But as curious a searcher as he succeeded
him one Eadmere, who had both a will and workmen, to sound further Eadmere
continued the search. An argument of Verlams paganism.
into the bottom of this unknown gulf, not ceassing till he saw the very
entrayles of this confused Caos, in whose most hiddenvautes, he found sundry
Idols, and aulters not a few, superstitiously adorned for the honor of these
unknown gods of the Pagans, some of these Idols were of pure gold, some of
other metal, and withal he found great store of household stuff, and other
things witnessing the glory both of the city and the citizens of the same.
Besides sundry pottes of gould, brass earth, glass and other metal, Pottes
with ashes of the dead.
some frawght with the ashes of the dead, some with the coin of the ancient
Britons and Roman Emperors. And in a stone were found certain Brytish
books, whereof one imported the history of Albans martyrdom.

In the ruynous walls of this City grows licoras. Licoras.


There are within the walls at this day the ruynes of an old church called S.
Germans. S. Germans.


The cause why it was called of the Brytons CAIR WATTELINE was an ancient high
way, begun by Dunwallow and finished by Guitheline, called as some think
GVITHELINSSTREET corruptly WATTELINE-STREET which came Watteline street.
by this city from Dover leading Northwards.

About 70. years paste this high way, was found at this place (though
mentioned in history many years before) 18. foot broad and 10. foot deep,
now almost level with the feyldes as is also the City.

Tantum aeui longinqua valet mutare vetustas. Virgil. Plato.
And as Plato says.

Aeuum cuncta rapit furtiuaque tempora mutant.
Naturam sortem nominaque and faciem.
Alban was a citizen of this city, and being host unto Amphiball Albana
citizen of Verlame.
became converted, from paganism to the knowledge of Christ, and for the same
was condemned and suffered, as is set down before in S. Albans.

W.
WALDT-DEN f. 16. called kings Walden, vallis siluestris the woody deane.

WALDT-DEN f. 18. called Walden S. Paul.

WATFORDE o. 16. cur non WATELINEFORDE for that the Watteline-streete crosses
the Colne nere this place, and Wat telineforde.
so coasteth to old Verlame as is said before.

This town has market on the tuesday well repleat with country necessaryes,
and has two fayres in the year.

There is an alms house erected by the Lady Bryget Countisse of Bedford.

WALK-HORNE c. 22. or Wake-hurne.

WALLINGTON c. 22. de aquarum scatebris.

WATTON f. 24. called Watton at stone.

WARE h. 26. or WAYRE de Cataractis of the wayres and water stoppes nere it,
rather then de Mercimonijs as some will have wayre drow ned.
it of wares or merchandise, It was drowned in anno 1408. by the great
inundation of waters that from the vpland pass by the town, and since, and
before, there was great provision made by wayres and slcuces, for the better
preservation of the town, and the grounds belonging unto the same.

It began to be most famous in king John's time, in the furious when it began
to be famous.
broils of the Barons, for being then but a hamlet of small moment the high
way toward the North parts, was laid through it by the means of the Lord de
Wake, and by little and little by that means, increased and much obscured,
ancient Hartford.

Edward the first gave first order and direction for the founding of Frst
founded.
it about anno 914.

WAADESNELL g. 28.

WALTHAM cross m. 30, or WALDT-HAM de cruce of the cross which Edward 1.
erected in memorial of his Queens death, and conveyance of her corpse from
the place where she dyed to westminster.

WALSWORTH d. 16.

WATTELINE-STREET See Verolamium*

WAYMORE Castle See Stortford.

WESTWIKE k. 14. vicus occidentalis in regard of Eastwike before mentioned.

WELBERIE k. 14. called also wells, of the spring called Owghton head.

WESTON d. 20.

WESTMILL d. 26.

WHEATHAMSTED i. 18. locus frumentarius inde Ioannes de loco frumentario,
famous in the time of Henry 6.

WILSTERNE k. 4.

WIGGINGTON k. 6.

VVHITEWELL i. 8. fons albus a hamlet that gives name to the river that ryseth
there, and passes by Welwine Digswell, etc. and so to the Lea.

VVHORWELL a decayed hamlet in Kelshull parish, furnished in time past with
many howses.

VVYMLEY l. 18. or WIMONELEY magna, where are the ruins and ditches of a
castle which did sometime belong to the fitz-Taeces.

WYMLEY e. 18. or wimonly parua.

WILLION d. 18.

WYDYALL c. 28. of some Wythiall of some Wiggell.

VVIDFORD g. 30. or-VVYDEFORD so rightly termed de vado spatioso.

Wood-greene l. 30.

VVORMELEY k. 30.

Y.
YARDELEY d. 24. belonging to Paul's.

An Aphabetical Table of the Houses, and Anncient Beryes of name for the most
part in Hartfordshire, according to the vulgar names.
A.
ANsaberie. f. 18. Alsewike. d. 28. Abbottes-berye. a. 28.
B.
BEeche-woode. h 12. Bournehall. n. 16. Beamondes k. 18. Bibswell. h 18.
Broket-hall. i* 20. Bersted, m. 10. Bedwell park k. 24. Beachames. c. 26. or
Beauchampe. Bigging. b 28. Bartrames. f. 28. Bace. k. 30. called le Base.
Briggens h. 32. Bleakswayre g. 30. Beaches. b. 32.
C.
CHandoys. l. 12. Casio-berie. n. 16. vide definitionem Centuria CAISHOW.
Corney-berye. d. 26. Coken-hatche. a. 28. Cassalberie. f. 28.
D.
DArnells. d, 20.
F.
Friars. e. 28.
G.
Grove. n. 14. Gorehamberie. k. 16. Gowr-ham, or Guer-hambery. A house raised
from the foundation by the right worthy Sir Nicholas Bacon knight deceased,
sometime Lord keeper of the great seal of England to our most mighty Queen
Elizabeth, who for his excellent virtues and rare wisdom lives yet, in
honorable memory amongst the most honorable. Gubhyns l, 24. Saint Gyles. l. 28.
H.
HIde. k. 14. High - over. d. 16. Harpesfeyld-hall. k. 20. Hatfeyld-wood-hall.
i. 22. Holmeley. e. 22. An ancient decayed place, sometime famous as appears
by the ruynes. Hide-hall. c. 24. Holwell. i. 24. Haley. h. 28. Hetesham-hall.
c. 32. or Hetcham hall.
K.
Kinges-wood-berie, d. 22. An ancient place, sometime dowble moated.
L.
THe Lea. m. 16. Laomere. h. 18. or Leamere. A house very ancient standing not
far from the head of famous Lea river, it is corruptly called Lammer.
Ludwike hall. i. 24.
M.
MIchelfeyldhall. o. 12. Maiden crofte. c. 16. Mereden. h. 24. Minsing-berye.
a. 26. Mutforde. c. 28. Mattockes. g. 30.
N.
NEw-barne. l. 18. New fells. 3. 28. New-hall. g. 28. New-place. g. 32.
O.
ODdesey-graunge. b. 22. Thereof does Oddesey hundred take name. Owls. d. 28,
P.
PVtteridge. f. 14. Penley. k. 6. Pansanger. h. 24. Popes. k. 24. Potterells.
l. 24. Punsbourne. k. 26. Pissoberie. f. 36. Patmere hall. d. 32.
Q.
QVickswood. d. 22. Quenberye. d. 28.
R.
ROse hall. m. 12. Romerwike. e. 14. Itlyeth within Bedfordshire, but is of
Hartfordshire. Ricknesse. g. 26. Reuells. g. 26. Redgewells. c. 28. The Rye. i.
32. or le Ree.
S.
SHandoyse vide Chandois. Sincklees. o. 18. Sopwell. l. 18. Salsberie. m. 20.
The Seal. h. 26. Lee seele Satrydge. f. 28. Shingle hall. f. 34.
T.
THibauldes. l. 30. or Theobalde, A most stately house erected from the first
foundation by the right honorable Sir William Cicill knight, Lord Theasoror of
England. To speak of the state and beuty thereof at large as it deserves, for
curious buildinges, delightful walks, and pleasant conceits within and
without, and other things very glorious and ellegant to be seen, would
challenge a great portion of this little treatise, and therefore, least I should
come short of that due commendation that it deserves, I leave it as indeed it
is, a princely seat. Temple. g. 26. Temple. e. 16. Tittenhanger. l. 20.
Tannys. d. 24 Tunwall. g. 26. Tidnhamberie. f. 34.
V.
VPhall. c. 28.
W.
WElde. m. 20. or Weldt Woodhall. f. 24. Waterforde hall. h. 26. Widborow-hill.
k. 28. White-barnes. e. 30.
Many other houses and beries, there are within this Shire, but for that they
have no known proper names, but termed of the parishes wherein they are, as
Langley bery, North hawe, and such like. I have omitted the mencioning of them
in this catalogue, being easelie found by the table of parishes, with reference
to the places wherein they may be found in the map, though without further
name added unto them, then the name of the parish wherein they stand, which
does sufficiently distinguish them.


