THE GVNNER SHEVVING THE WHOLE PRACTICE OF ARTILLERY: With all the
Appurtenances thereunto belonging.

Together with the making of Extraordinary Artificial Fireworkes, as well for
Pleasure and Triumphs, as for War and Service.

Written by ROBERT NORTON, one of his Majesty's Gunners and Enginiers.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for HVMPHREY ROBINSON, and are to be sold at the
three Pigeons in Paules-Churchyard, 1628.

TO THE IMPERIAL MAJESTY OF GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE, AND IRELAND, KING
CHARLES.
ALmighty GOD having made your Majesty Sovereign over many strong Nations,
naturally Martial, and Artificially exercised in Arms: Yet if they want
Discipline (though many) they are but few; and though else strong, yet
therefore weak. Your mighty Kingdoms also being strongly situated by Nature,
Entrenched about with a broad Dike the Seas, Pallisadoed with Rocks and
Sands, Sentinelled with strange setting Tides of Ebbes and Floods, Defended by
frequent Storms and Tempests, highly Inritched with Fertillity of Nature,
Furnished plentiously with all manner of Matterialls fitting the felicity of
Man's life upon Earth, both for time of Peace and War; So that nothing can
seem to be more wished for, if Industery be used; but especially, if
Correspondency be found in a good and due temper between the Head and the
Members, as perfect Obedience and Service from the Members to the Head, and
entire love and care from the Head to the Members, for their good and safety.
Gunnes your Majesty has, but want Gunners, because they want Respect and
Encouragement: let Occasions be ruled with Reason, Wars managed with
Discipline, Judgment, and Policy: Let stubborn Offenders be punished,
Deserving Men preferred, Eminent Places not granted for Favor to insufficient
Men or Strangers, having honest Subjects far more able to perform the
Service: So we shall all make Holiday to serve our God, obey our King, and
enjoy Gods blessings bestowed upon us, every Man Eating his Grapes under his
own Vine, without fear of foreign Enemies: To conclude then, nothing can be
wanting, Men, Money, Means nor Prosperity; when the God of Order has settled
such a congruity. Now that your Majesty may the better be provided hereafter of
understanding Gunners to manage your Artillery, the powerful Regent of modern
War: I have endeavored in this Practice of Artillery, to supply their wants
the best I can, not doubting but in short time it may work good effect
therein: If your Majesty will be graciously pleased to countenance these few
Lines under your Royal Patronage. My wrongs and discouragements has hitherto
hindered the publication hereof: Which, if your Majesty would be pleased to
refer to be examined and relieved accordingly; It will then appear I had
cause to speak; And I should be again encouraged for greater and further
Services hereafter: So most humbly craving pardon for my boldness, prostrating
my self at your Sacred Feet, as by Oath and Duty bound, will ever remain,

Your most Faithful and Loyal Subject and Servant, ROBERT NORTON.

To Mr. Robert Norton, and his Practice of Artillery.
When first I knew the difference of Time, and several Climates of the Worlds
round Globe,
I then thought Artists fittest Men to clime to Honor, and to wear the Golden
Roabe;
But now these Times do differ from that Time,
Strangers respected are By Courtiers crime.
Then when I knew the Seas, my whole delight was how to trim a Ship
prepared for War;
But all was vain, till Gunners Skill and Might, with practiced Forces all
excells so far;
Let Seamen, Land-men, all Men truly know
That Gunners Art's of Substance, not of Show.
The Land-man, he most boldly makes Approach with Horse and Foot, with Sword,
and Shield, and Spear,
But all were vain, he never could encroach, if Gunnes and Gunners should be
wanting there;
Therefore such Artists sure it were best to cherish,
And expert Gunnered Engeneers to nourish.
For proof whereof, let every Artist view, why such Men should not to
preferment mount,
Peruse this Book, its Lines, and Fgures true, so may he find the difference
of Account
Twixt the English, and the Dutch, Norton, and Borre,
Then give our own their due without demor. Moratur in lege.

But Norton, I have been something to bold to Paraphrase upon thy Worth and
Quality,
Because I want sufficient, to unfold them, and th'Ingenious Works reality;
Let this suffice, thy praise will show it self,
It Is worth the Golden-Fleece, the Indian Pelf.
Captain John Butler.

A Due to the Author, his Work and Worth.
SInce among all Nations War it self does show,
It behooues Man Wars Weapons for to know,
Who here may learn the Gunners aiming Arts,
Which thy free industry to all imparts;
The fittest subject now it is by far,
At these times, when such Rumors are of War,
And filles the Ears, and Courages awake,
Go on then, and to Thee this glory take,
That he that reads these things which thou do write,
May know a Gunners part, though he nere fight,
And know Wars chiefest Engines use and strength,
In Bore, Cilinder, Axis, and in Length,
In Touchhole, Carriage, Wadd, in Shot and Charge,
Of Fire-workes in brief thou speakst at large;
French, Spanish, Dutch, Italian, veil your Cappes
To Nortons skill, in Mars his Thunderclaps.
John Rudstone a Lover of the Arts Mathematical, Theorick and Practick.

To his good Friend Master Robert Norton, on his Practice of Artillery.
I Told you Friend, before your Book I Would write,
But not Idolatrize with Poetic spright,
Doing our loves much wrong, in little right.
The Times necessity, and each Studious mind
Will make it praise it self, which you shall find
By'ts often impression, Thou Art being here refinde.
Yet (justly I confess) I have been shown
Books that sell well, yet not for what is their own,
But for Commendators before them known.
And this integrity Commands me say,
That to the Truth thou shewst the rightest way,
For Young Artists, and here the Old may stay.
For here they are satissied with small dispense
Of Purse, or Brains, of Skill the quintessence,
Drawn from the Antic Artists excellence.
I know rich Jewels may themselves commend,
Which be such Books (that for the public end)
With Judgment written are, So thine good Friend.
Richard Robinson.

In the due Honor of the Author Master Robert Norton, and his Work.
PErfection, if it has ever been attained,
In Gunners Art, this Author has it gained,
By Study and Experiences, and he
The Fruit of all his Pains has offered Thee,
A Present well befitting this our Age,
When all the World is but a Martial Stage:
Let sweeter Studies lull a sleep and please
Men, who presume security, but these
Thy Labors practizd, shall more safely guard
Those that foresee the Danger, the other barred
This benefit: We Soldiers do embrace
This Rare and useful Work, and over the face
Of all the World, let thy Fames Echo sound,
More then that roaring Engine, and redound
To th'Honor of our Nation, that thy Pains
Transcends all former, and their glory stains.
Captain John Smith, HVNGARIENSIS.

A Table of the Contents.
DEfinitions Page 1 Demands Page 2 Maxims Page 3 Theoremes Page 5 Arithmetic
Page 17 Geometry Page 23 Perspectiue for Heights, Breadths, Distance, and
description by Plat. Page 30 Chap. 1. Of the general definition of Artillery.
Page 35 Chap. 2. Of the first invention of Gunnes and Gunpowder. Page 37 Chap.
3. Where Ordnance were first used in these parts. Page 40 Chap. 4 Of what
forms and fashions Ordnance were first made. Page 41 Chap. 5. Of former
foreign foundings of Ordnance, and of French Ordnance. Page 42 Cha. 6 Of
founding legittimate Ordnance, with a Table, and Venetian Ordnances Page 44
Chap. 8. Of Bastard Pieces with their Table of Names, Waights, and Measures.
Page 44 Chap 9. Of extraordinary Pieces and a Table of their Names, Weight, and
Measures, and of the Drakes, and their Inuentor. Page 46 Chap. 10 Of English
Ordnance distinguishing into 4 kinds, and those into sorts, beginning with the
Cannon. Page 51 Chap. 11. Of the Cannons of Battery in particular, or of the
first kind, and the sorts thereof. Page 54 Chap 12. Of Culuering the second
kind, and the sorts thereof, Page 55 Chap 13 Of Canon Periors the third kind
and their sorts. Page 57 Chap. 14. Of Morters the fourth, and the square
Murderer Pettar, etc. Page 59 Chap. 15. Of several ways to prevent a
Pettard. Page 64 Chap. 16. With what Instruments to break Pallissadoes, Grates,
Percullisses, etc. Page 65 Chap. 17 To dispart a Piece true bored. Page 66
Chap. 18. Of certain faults in foreign foundings of Ordnance. Page 67 Chap
19. Of the Ligue or Aligation of Mettalls for brass Ordnance. Page 69 Chap 20.
Of Earthes or Powders for Moulds to cast them. Page 70 Chap. 21. Of making
Moulds for the founding of Ordnance. Page 71 Chap 22. Of the Place, Measure,
and use of the Trunnions. Page 72 Chap. 23. Of Examining if a Piece of Ordnance
be well made, and of what kind and sort it is. Page 74 Chap. 24. To tertiate
Ordnance, and find what Powder they can bear. Page 77 Chap 25. To find if
her Soul lie in the middle of her Body. Page 88 Chap. 26. To disport a Piece,
whose Soul lies Horizontally and paralelly awry in her Body. Page 81 Chap.
27. To dispart a Piece whose Soul lies vertically and paralelly awry in her
Body. Page 82 Chap. 28. To dispart a Piece, whose Soul lies awry Trauersly
and not paralelly in her Body. Page 83 Chap. 29. Of the Large and Large Line in
wry bored Pieces. Page 86 Chap 30. To find the Weight of any Shot by the
Diametre Arithmetically. Page 87 A Table of the Weightes and Measures of all
Mettalls and Stones named. Page 90 Chap. 31. To find the same Geometricaly and
Instrumentally. Page 91 A Table to mount any Piece by the Jnch Rule as well as
by the Quadrant, to any Degree assigned. Page 93 A Table for every quarter of
an Inch height, for Weight of Jron, Lead, and Stone Shot. Page 94 The
Description and use of my Gunners Scale. Page 94 Chap. 32. Of the Rule of
Calibres, or due vent for each Shot. Page 95 Chap 33. Of the Gunners
Quadrant. Page 95 Chap. 34. A new Devise of the Authors, to Level, Mount, or
Imbase a Piece of Ordnance by a Staff or Halbert. Page 96 Chap. 35. To find
the right Range of a Piece for every Mounture. Page 97 Chap. 36. To find the
Level under the right Range. Page 98 Chap. 37 To find the Level under the
Crooked Range. Page 99 Chap. 38. Of the violent Crooked and Natural Course of
a Shot. Page 99 An excellent Dyagram of Randons. Page 99 A Table of Randons,
and a Table of secant Ranges and their uses. Page 100 Chap. 38. To load a Piece
Gunner-like. Page 101 Chap 39. Whether the longer Piece will out shoot the
shorter of equal height. Page 102 Chap. 40 Of shooting Myra Commune or by the
Metal. Page 103 Chap 41. Of shooting by the Axis or despert. Page 104 A Table
of right Ranges. Page 105 Chap. 42. Of shooting upon the advantage. Page 105 A
Table of dead Ranges. Page 106 Chap. 43. To amend a fault at the second shot.
Page 107 Chap 44. To make an assured good shot. Page 109 Chap. 45. To make
Ladles and Spunges for each Piece. Page 110 Chap 46. To make Bridges over
Rivers for the Army and Ordnance. Page 112 Chap. 47. How to defend a Fortress
besieged. Page 113 Chap. 48. To make an extraordinary safe Counter-battery.
Page 114 Chap. 49. Reasons of failing of a shot. Page 115 Chap. 50. To conduct
a Mine to blow up a Place, and of Galleryes Page 116 Chap 51. Of the Windles,
Martinet, and Archimedes endless Screw. Page 118 Chap. 52. To draw Ordnance to
the top of steep and rough Mountains. Page 120 Chap. 53. How the Train of
Art should be ordered in a March. Page 121 Chap. 54. To draw Ordnance by labor
and Pyoners if Cattle want. Page 122 Chap. 55. Extraordinary privileges of
the Train in Marching and lodging. Page 124 Chap 56. To weigh a sunk shipp
and Ordnance surrounded. Page 125 Chap. 57. To make Cartredges to load
Ordnance without Ladle. Page 127 Cha. 58. The names of the parts of a Piece.
Page 123 Chap. 59. The making of a Field Carriage in proportion. Page 129 Chap.
60. To make Wheels and Axtrees for Cariages for Ordnance. Page 130 Chap: 61.
To make Candlesticks, Blinds, Saussedges, and Saussons to hide. Page 132 Chap.
62. To plant Ordnance in secret and double Battery. Page 133 Chap. 63. To plant
Ordnance where the Rampart is to narrow, and earth wanting. Page 134 Chap. 64.
To make a Battery with Pieces interred. Page 135 Chap. 68. How the Ordnance are
to be placed at the time of joining of 2 Armies in Battalia. Page 138 Chap. 69.
How to fill up a wet Dyke, to approach a Breach made. Page 139 Chap. 70. Of the
Gunners service in general. Page 140 Chap. 71. Of the difference of our
English measures and waights, from forraigue Nations of Feet and Pounds. Page
141 Chap 72. Of making of Salpetre, whether Natural or Artificial. Page 142
Chap. 73. Of Gunpowder, and the making of the usual sorts thereof. Page 144
Chap. 74. Of the making Matches to fire Ordnances, Traynes, Artificial
Fireworkes etc. Page 147 Of Fireworkes for Triumph. Page 149 Of the Rocket and
Structures, etc. Page 150, 151, 152 The description of certain Wheels of
Artificial Fireworkes, etc. Page 153 How to make a Rice, and a Castle, and a
Trunk of Artificial Fireworkes. Page 154 How to make flying Dragons and
Rockets that will run upon a Line and return again, etc. Page 155 How
Artificial Fireballs and Grenades are to be formed and loaded with their
mixtures. Page 156 How to conuoy or direct Fire into a place assigned, or upon
the Enemy in an Assault. Page 157 Of the Pyked Trunk Gunne, and quadruple
Barrell-Peeces. Page 157
I hope with Scapes that alter not the sense,
The friendly Readers will for Love dispense:
And those that are in th'Errata here expressed,
His loving Pen will mend, and thus digest.
Page Line 4 8 For bodies more, r. bodies move. 18 13 in the total for 2536,
r. 2356 Ib. 40 for 31701, r. 31941, and Jb. 43 for 49861, r. 1492101 19 vlt.
for the 2 and carry, etc. r. the 2 and 2 times 6 make 12, set down the 2 and
carry 1, etc. Ib. 10 for 149861. r. 149210 20 vlt. for files and flank, r.
Front 21 1 for Front multiply, r. Flank divide. Ib. 3 for Front, r. Flank 22 10
for double, r. double 3 and have 6 Ib. 22 for 22/300, r. 233/300. Ib. 23 for
thirty, r. three hundred. 23 7 for ^/61, r. 8/12 27 22 for subscribed, r.
circumscribed 29 36 for B to D r. B to C. 30 41 for parts the, r. parts give
the. 31 1 for 8000, r. 24000. Ib. 2 for 66 r. 200. 32 1 for 20, r 29. 35 16 for
near joined, r. near or joined. Ib. 26 for and both the ancient, r. and the
ancient. 39 19 for, For that now, r. That now. 39 27 for Aiming, r. Aim at. 42
24 for, For I say, r. I say. 44 3 for, r 1/20 and in the Table under for degrees.
r. heights, and for de, r. lengthes. 45 30 and 31, for leuelleth, r. level. 53
13 for 1, r. 17. 54 42 for 143, r. 250. 67 43 for afterward, r. forwards. 69
24 for 16, r. 100. 78 22 and 23, for ordinary Culuering, r. lessned Culuering.
94 vlt. for Table following, r. former Table. 97 39 for right range, r. dead
range. 105 17 in the Table for 424, r. 524. 106 35 for 2000, r. 1000. 142 33
for to disolue, r. to vapor. 144 Between lines 5 and 6, r. The 73 Chapter.
146 6 for asle, r. add. Ib. 27 for topped, r. Tapped. Ib. 31 for top, r. tap.

THE PREFACE TO THE courteous Readers.
THe Art and Practice of Artillery (the subject of this present Treatise) being
as Bianco says, the Crown and Palm of the Wars and Millitary discipline,
teaching how to overthrow and demollish Cities, Towns and Castles, to sink
Ships, and inhumanely even to tear the life and souls from the bodies of
innocent men, women, and children, viet armis, to get the possession of the
Goods and Lands that rightly belong to others for our selves: it may therefore
at the first blush seem to be absolutely contrary to all Christian charity.
But when on the contrary we come to find, that War is even the Mother and
Nurse of Peace, the Rampart of Justice, and the Law of the World; yea, the
Scriptures affirm that War was a thing authorized by God himself, who
commanded Saul thereby to destroy the Amalekites, and not to spare either Man
or Beasts, etc. As also that War was exercised in Heaven by the good Angels
against the bad: So likewise has Nature armed the Beasts of the Field, the
Fowls of the Air, and the Fishes of the Sea, and as it were by instinct,
taught them with their Horns, Tallents, Teeth, and Finnes, to fight one with
another, to defend themselves, and offend others. But more especially, when we
truly consider, how that without War and Warlike Amonition, and Discipline,
no Kingdom or Commonweal can long subsist in Peace, or be able to defend it
self, nor offend their Enemies: the case will then seem to be much altered.
These then, and the great preparations, the Martial policies, cruel
stratagems, and deuillish inventions of the common Enemies of our King and
Country (whereby they intend, and with malicious greediness daily endeavor to
destroy us all with our Wives, Children, and Families, to the end to possess
our goods and lands.) These I say may more then incite us now (though late) to
learn, know, and use to practice this principal and potent part of War, so
that thereby with Gods assistance (always making him on our side) we may
become able and prosperous in resisting those their intended mischiefs, and
break the necks of their cursed designs, and so consequently escape those
eminent and threatened dangers.

Now for as much as the most presperous effects have usually succeeded and most
vigorously prevailed, when ingenious inventions and religious politic
diligences has been joined with Arms (good Policy far exceeding Force.)
Therefore for the better understanding of the sequent discourses, we shall do
well first to conceive that every material thing is either to be lineally
described, or else intellectually understood by some proper Figure, or apt
word, name, or definition, which properly belongs thereunto: For as every Art
has certain Rules and Principles (to preceade) without the knowledge of which
no man can attain unto a necessary perfection for practice thereof, unless
he first endeavor to learn (rather by Reason then by Roate) what each part
thereof is, with the Name and Nature of each Member and part of it (without
which first obtained) And I say, let a man take never so much pains and study
therein, he shall but in vain pusle his brains and not benefitting himself.
The neglect of which is the cause why many (otherwise well affected to Art) do
so fruitlesly bestow both their Time, Labor, and cost, to no purpose, often
condemning the Art as too hard for them, when (God knows) the only cause is
their disorderly progress in the study and practice thereof: And I dare say
for the Gunners Art, although it be deep (even able to spose the known parts
of Natural Philosophy, Arithmetic, Geometry, and Perspectiue, each of which
her handmayd is) yet by the Definitions, Theorems, and Questions contained in
my former Book extant, Of the Art of great Artillery, and in this of the
Practice of Artillery, I hope the willing may (with small pains joined with
orderly and diligent practice) wade over this Ocean safely satisfied;
nevertheless that if Archimides (were he now living) without experience and
long practice therein) with sundry trials he could not possibly demonstrate the
manifold varieties of that Mixthelicall arch or circuit of the Bullets courses,
compounded of violent and natural motions, and receiving infinite diversities,
according to the several proportions and temperatures of the Powder, length of
the Piece, matter of the Shot, Mounture, and Metal, lead on by Experience the
Mistress of all Arts, Action being the best Tutor: Much less I (the most unable
of many) who have endeavored herein more to respect a few experimented truths,
then many Rhethoricall imbellishments of words. Therefore neither can, or will,
I presume to assume so exact perfection to be herein: although I have
endeavored to avoid the apparent errors of Santbech, the erroneous principles
of Tartaglia the false rules of Rosselli, the time-ouerwerne directions of
Cataneo, the gross allowances of Collado for Mountures and Imbasings, but
especially the arch false proportionality taught in Mr. Smiths Art of Gunnery,
now entitled the Complete Soldier (many of which are by Mr. Diggs and my
self noted, at the end of my said Book of the Art of great Artillery, and a
number more there are most intolerable false, For the positions which he
there incerteth, are fit only to lead young Gunners out of the right path and
way they should walk in, with a seeming easiness by tying (as he would) such
things to Arithmeticall works and proportions, as are directly contrary, and of
another nature, as a small trial will manifest, which in crutesie, I thought
fit to advertise the Reader of: But as Palingenius says, Friuola si fuerint
fundamina tempore paruo
Deficiet, quiquid super his fabricare volimus.


Some men also may imagine because the figures herein are many of them, the
same that were cut for Captain Vffanoes Book of Artillery, Printed at
Frankford, that therefore I have only translated the same. I confess the
figures most of them being good, and he for this and the most part he has
written of this practice, being the best of any the Authors that I ever read:
yet had I only translated him, I should but little have helped English Gunners
their Measures, Waights, Ordnance, and Powder so much differing from our
English, as in their places I have showed, it would not have been operae
pretium so to have done: But that I have from him and other Authors made choice
of some things, and refined and applied others for our benefits, I am not to
deny; nor that the Figures are many of them his that I have herein written
upon, which was by reason of their goodness, faireness, and cheapenes; for the
Figures, had they been cut of purpose in England, would have made these Books
too dear for Gunners, for whose good they were originally destined, wherein I
have roughly endeavored in well meaning, which if it be well taken, I shall be
therewith well satisfied, and restreadie to explain whatsoever shall herein
seem difficill.

Now that this my Treatise for the practice of Artillery, may the more
currantly proceed, and be the playner to the understanding and satisfaction of
the Reader, I held it necessary first to show by certain Definitions,
Demands, Axioms, and Theoremes (besides those in my former Book) called the Art
of great Artillery (which I wish every young Gunner to peruse also with
diligence) the names, natures, and operations of such things as are necessary
to be known, used, and done in the Practick part thereof, without which it
were impossible to conclude any thing well, and as it ought to be. Therefore as
in the Wars of our age, there is no earthly force that can more command the
Fortified, or resist the assaulting Enemy then great Ordnance duly used. So
the Gunners therefore ought to endeavor to understand these so well, that they
discharge them not in vain. First, in regard of the great expenses of
Ammunition thereby cast away: Secondly, least thereby they frustrate the wished
service. Thirdly, in laying themselves and their Companies open and vndefenced
to the Enemies Forces, which will (in them) increase valor, and in your selves
terror, thereby also deserving to purchase great blame and dishonor from the
hands of their Commanders, with the loss of the Princes favor, and utter
overthrow of their own preferment ever after. Wherefore seeing that such
fruitless discharging of Ordnance in the time of service, is so great an
inconvenience, and happens most commonly for want of knowledge, or ready
means to direct the Pieces precisely to the mark; I have thought it worthy my
labor therein to show Artificial means (to such as are desirous to learn)
how to know, direct, and prepare the Pieces committed to their charge; so, that
in time of need they may be assured to make their Shotts take good effect,
only by applying themselves to understand and practice these few things
following.

THE PRACTICE OF ARTILLERY.
The first Definition.
PLACE is the space environed with the interior superficies which contains
and enuellopeth each thing, Euclid. def. 5. lib. 1.
limited in every sense with the proper dimensions of the thing contained.

As the Place of my Body has the same dimentions that my Body has.

Definition 2.
Empty, is the Place in which no corporal thing is contained.

But nature abhorring Emptiness has left no place for it in this sublinar
world. Arist. lib. 4. tex. 57.


Definition 3.
Rare, Is that which under large dimensions has but little matter.

Contrariwise Thick or Gross has under little measure much matter for
Thickness and Thinness are such bodies consequent qualities, D. Tho. 3. pant.
qua. 77.
as have much or little matter under their dimensions.

Definition 4.
To Increase, is to enlarge the former dimensions.

Increasing comes of changing of quantity from little to more which may be
without changing the figure, As the Gnomon added to the Square increases it,
yet the figure remains square still.

Definition 5.
To touch, is to have their extremes together.

As touching is proper only to a Body, so is it also proper unto all Bodies,
Arist. si. 4. Phis. tent. 13.
for it is reciprocal with the quantity of a Body.

Definition 6.
To Moan, is to transport from one place to another, or to turn into the same,
or change the quality.

Because that which we entreat of is Material, and depends upon an Action of
Nature, Cap. 7. lib. 8. Phis.
we will define changing of Place to be made by mutation from the Place, or
from the Grandeur: as that which rarifieth, extends, and changes place by
increasing more, and one thing may move another by remoouing it, or by drining
it away.

Definition 7.
To remove, is to thrust out of the Place without expulsion or driving it away.

So to carry, Arist. lib. 7. Poys. ber. 10.
to lead, to put from, to press down, to draw, and such like moving
rare-things in that manner said to be removed without being driven, cast, or
shot away.

Definition 8.
To Expel is to Remove by driving out, darting, or shooting away, which is
either slowly and easily, or swiftly and rudely.

Either as the Ram Engine does slowly, Eodem.
or as the Cannon does swiftly drive away.

Definition 9.
Swistnesse, is a force that does much in a little time.

As any thing that is transported a long distance in a little space of time, In
Lache.
is said to be swift.

Definition 10.
To Mount, is to raise or eleuate upwards toward the Sky above the Horizon:
To Embase is to descend, or depresse under the same, downwards, from the
Heavens ward.

Those are terms depending upon the disposition of Men.

Difinition 11.
Under the name of Artillery we compehend all Arms of Fire.

As Gunns and Fireworkes, etc. for Warlike services.

Demand 1.
THat the Superficies of the Column of the Piece be perfectly round, or else
regularly squared, especially at the thickest of the Metal at the Mouth and
Breech.

Demand 2.
That the Axis of the Bore or Cauity (of the Piece given) be straight from the
one to the other end of the Column, and equidistant and parallel from the
concaue Circumference thereof, at all places so far as the Shot descends
into the same, being of equal wideness.

Demand 3.
That the Piece given to be prepared have her ordinary Carriage and Platform
given, so right and duly fitted, as will neither cause nor suffer the Piece
delivering and reuersing to start from the level or direction given.

Demand 4.
That the Shot keep his course so from his due resting place in the cauity of
the Piece unto the Point Blanke, or end of the right range thereof, so as that
the center of it be always in the Axis of the Bore (supposed infinitely to
proceed) without any sensible declination from the same. The faid Bore being
part of the way of the said shot, and the directer of theresidue of the course
of the same.

Demand 5.
That the Point Blanke, or right line or Range be that point in the Axis of the
Bore imagined to proceed and be infinitely continued unto that place where the
Center of the Shot shall in his course sensibly begin to decline from the said
continued imagined Axis downwards.

Demand 6.
That the visible right line made or imagined to pass from the Breech of the
Piece to the Mouth of the same upon the highest ring or supersicies of the
Metal (she lying on her Catiage and Platform) be called the Middle line of
the Piece.

Demand 7.
That the visible right line made or imagined to pass from the Breech to the
Mouth upon the surface of the Metal vertically over the Axis of the Bore of
the same Piece (she lying upon her Carriage and Platform given) be called the
Large line of that Piece.

Demand 8.
That the shortest distance between the vertical plane of the Axis of the Body
of the Piece, and the vertical plane of the Axis of the Soul or Bore of the
same Piece, taken upon the Baseringe at the Breech thereof (for the carriage
Piece and Platform given) be called the Large of that Piece.

Maxims of Natural Philosophy necessary to be first known.
1 EVery motion in the world ends in repose. 2 All motions are made upon some
quantity. 3. Every simple Body is either Rare and Light, or else Thick and
Heavy, and according to these differences it is Naturally carried toward some
part. 4 The world has high or upwards, and low or downwards, and the Low
depends upon the influence of the high. 5 The rare bodies mount, the fire,
more then the Air. The thick and gross bodies descend, the Earth more then
the Water. 6 The lighter are more moveable then the heavier. 7 Nothing works
Naturally in that which is wholly like or wholly dislike, but in that which is
contrary to it, and more feeble. 8 The Form working, is aided by the
Qualities, as the matter suffering, which suffers by the quantity. 9 Nature
is extremely curious, as well of her perfection, as of her conservation; and
then when all things conspire. 10 As Well the Action that comes from the
Agent, as the Passion from the Patienthath proportion. 11 Accident takes his
unity from the Subject, and goes not from one thing to another.
THEOREM. 1. Every Corporal thing reposeth in its natural place.
LIght bodies (...) toward the heavens upward, and heavy bodies toward the
Earths center downwards, each Body is light or heavy; if it be heavy, it will
then move downwards; if light upwards Now the circular motion is neither
upwards or downwards, therefore no Motion can be circular but by violence.

THEOR. 2. Motion may be made in any place within the Moons Orb.
Every thing that is within the Lunar Orb may make motion or change,

THEOR. 3. Before any thing moves toward its Natural place, from its first
being, it goes stretching unto the natural measure.
Neither augmentation nor diminution is made but only by changing of the
qualities or forms, for the qualities alone (incontinently following new
generation) do cause either stretching or shrinking. And true it is, that in
such Moouings as tend unto the entire ruin of the forms, the just demensions
are not found to be but either greater or lesser according to the quantity
agitating most forceably therein, and so it moves most violent and longest.

THEOR. 4. Nature admits no Emptynesse.
Nature pursues and entertaineth perfection as much as is possible. Now the
perfection of Motion is the end thereof; namely the repose, that the simple
Body would find either upwards or downwards in all places: therefore in the
Elementary universe, they affect their repose either upwards or downwards. So
there is not by Nature any such thing as vacuity, for the avoiding of which,
nature makes heavy things mount, and light things descend, whereby marvelous
things are performed. As we may see by our Pumps, which make water ascend as
high as the clouds, and by the Spiritualls the air is retained beneath. And
diverse other effects seeming so miraculous to such as see them as they cause
the^ to wonder thereat. For whence comes it that a vessel of Marble filled with
water, when the water comes to be frozen into ye, that it break the same
though a foot thick? but that the water thickneth thereby, and so breaks the
volume of the ordinary quantity thereof, the cause preceading, the effect
follows. So also a narrow necked bottle filled with liquor, and turned the
bottom upwards, yet retain the liquor from running out: because Air cannot
enter therein, to fill the place, whereupon we may judge that the Law of fulness
is more general, and precedeth that of the Moving of simple Bodies.

THEOR. 5. Every Body has a place.
A point which cannot be marked in essence, not having any parts, is no Body,
and therefore is contrary to the Hypotheses. But a Body has place of
dimensions, so if the surface of the body which approaches on all sides, and
touches every where, tying the superficies to close the body, it is then in
such a place as has the very same dimensions within, that the body has
without, or else there must be emptiness, which by the precedent were absurd.

THEOR. 6. A Body rarifying its self, the place thereof increases as the Body
increases.
As a Body of Earth that then contained one solid foot in measure be made
water, which adding thereto, one other solid foot, the place also must
increase, from one to two solid feet, or else it has not the same just
dimensions within, that the body has without, and so it is not the place of
that body of water; so if the place also were greater then the body filled,
there must in that place be emptiness between it and the body, which were
absurd: therefore the place increases as the Body ratifying does.

THEOR. 7. Two Bodies cannot be together in one and the same place.
If several Bodies could be together, all the members of one same Body might
also have one and the same place, and each part might one fall into the range
of the other, which were to take away from the quantity, the true Nature
thereof, and which by its essential property sets out the parts severally
one from another: Nevertheless that some slight apparances have seemed to
yield a suspicion that it might be so: As take a vessel full of ashes finely
sifted, and you may put into the same as much water also as would without the
ashes have filled the vessel. So by the vessel full of ashes, and the same
vessel full of water, two Bodies seem to be in one place: So into a glass
full of water you may put in many pieces of money before it run over. And
likewise an iron heated red hot, is it not fire and iron together, and so two
bodies in one place?

No, for these are but illusions: for the first vessel filled with ashes (that
are very volaryle) part flies, and the rest has place doubtless, but the
water swells by means of its vnctuousnes received, unto a roundnes above the
brims of the vessel as much as the true body of the ashes is over, and yet
spilleth not. And so in the glass likewise the supreme surface of the water
swells as much above the brims of the glass as the Body of the piece of
money has received place. And lastly, seeing it is but the form of fire or
quality of heat lively lent unto the iron, it can not be truly said, that
therefore two bodies are together therein, for there is but one matter under
those two forms having but one quantity, so neither are two bodies mingled in
one Place, nor penetration of dimensions, which is impossible: from whence the
ingenious practizer may extract admirable effects.

THEOR. 8. A place filled cannot receive another Body in without expelling the
former one.
Amongst Bodies, some are hard and robust, and some are soft and tender, so
that if unto a soft body in a Place, a hard body should enter, it would violate
the dimensions of the soft body. And seeing Plato himself said there was no
solid things, but terrestiall, this difficulty were fit to be resolved. Plato
then spoke not of Mathematical solidity, or of shorter or longer dimensions,
but of that rather which is called firmness or hardness: as we usually say
stone to be more solid then wood, and iron to be more solid then stone: also
if we have only respect to the demonstration, then there is as much solidity
in a Cubick foot of Butter, as in a Cubick foot of Marble stone: And so if
the Air or Water do give way to Bodies that are more firm or heavy, it is
not because they are less solid, but that they are more moveable and lighter.
Therefore if a vessel full of Air or Water had an other hard or heavy Body
put thereinto without expulsing of the Air or Water proportionally. Then two
Bodies would be in one place, which is a thing by the former impossible.

THEOR. 9. The Resistance of the Moved proportioned to the Mouer, furthereth
the Motion.
The Action and ^assion must be proportionalls amongst themselves: It were but
vain for the Agent to give a strong stroke, if the thing that is to be moved
receive it not: And it cannot receive it well, if there be not contrariety,
(which rests in the Resistance) for so in the object that should obey
entirely, Ma^^^. El. Artil.
there would be no Action at all: For nothing works that is wholly unlike.
Contrariwise, also if the Resistance were wholly like, or equal to the force of
the stroke, there would be no Motion: For nothing works in that which is
wholly like, wherefore there must be a proportion exercised between the Mouer
and the Resistance, By the same,
to attend the entire impression of the stroke: for if the Resistance be
greater then the force of the stroke, the Chaser shall be chased: for of two
Adversaries, the most violent is the Master. Besides, the more an Action is
continued, the greater it is. Therefore the longer time the Moner touches the
Moved in expulsion, the more the force of the Moving impressed, is entertained,
and longer does it endure. And this is the reason why the Powder, Wadd, and
Shot, are driven into a Piece, but with mean force: For if the Shot be too
loose put in, it would not well receive the fury of the Powder enflamed, and
the force of the blow will be but weak. And when the Shot goes in too
stiff, or is forced in too hard, or the Powder ouer-rammed, then the Powders
Come, being thereby broken, will be cloyed so close, that it will blow much
of the force thereof out of the Touchhole, before the Shot be discharged:
But if the Shot were ouall or too high, and being forced in, does stick by the
way; it breaks the Piece, and causes often lamentable and dangerous effects,
without performing the expected service.

THEOR. 10. Fire taking the Powder, of necessity the Shot must be driven forth,
and the Piece discharged.
At the moment of the inflammation of the Powder, the Piece must necessarily
shoot off, and discharge the Shot, for the Powder is then in his last power to
be enflamed, and the Fire takes in an instant. Now that which is burned is
rarefied, and so extends it self ( Fire being the rarest of the Elements) but
being so blocked up within the concaue ciillnder of the chamber, that it is
impossible to extend it self, unless it remove the shot which occupyeth the
place it must extend into (for penetrate the Metal at the Breech and sides it
cannot) Nature then otherwise absolutely commands this extention by the
perduction of this new form of fire. Wherefore from a Natural violence, and
from a force unto which all things conspire, and nothing can resist, the shot
is chased, and the piece discharged: whereby we may see how Philosophy and the
knowledge of Natures works, may guide us to admirable inventions, The
impossibility of the penetration of dimensions and the necessity of this sierie
generation, when the Active forces are united to the passive, this has lead
our predecessors by the hands to the fabric of the fearful Machyue the
Gunne beyond all that ever the Art of Man could think upon.

THEOR. 11. The Ballet begins to fly before the perfect firing of the Powder.
The Powder is not perfectly fired, unless it be all on fire; now before the
form takes into the matter (to give it that being) and to change the nature
thereof. Namely, from the first rudiments of being, the Matter rarifieth, for
the qualities of the Agent preceadeth. Therefore the Place augmenteth, which
cannot be unless the shot quit the place: wherefore it begins to suffer
before the instant of perfect firing of the powder; for that depart is so
sudden, that sometimes a great part of the powder goes out whole and vnfired,
which could not be if it were perfectly enflamed, and therefore the greatest
inflammation makes the greatest force.

THEOR. 12. The force of the stroke depends on the swiftnes of the Course.
To Strike is a matter of Moving, as is the Time and the Quantity or the
distance upon which it is made, which if the time be short wherein it is
carried home afar distance, then it is called Swift: Therefore the shorter
the Time is, the swister and stronger is the stroke; Now to Move more is to
act more in corporal things, and the more quick the Action is, so much the
stronger. Wherefore according to the measure of the Agents motion, the
swiftness of the course, the stroke is reckoned strong. This is the
Enginieres Helicon from whence the most of their strong Engines are drawn, the
greatness of the distance is nothing if the Time be long, nor the shortness of
the Time if the distance be short.

THEOR. 13. There can be no moving in Action made more violent then with a
piece of Ordnance.
The volume or extent of the rarefaction being ten times as much when it
becomes fire as it was when it was earth, Fire being ten times more rare then
Earth: By the 5. Max. By the 4. Theor
and of all Natures Agents the fire, and of all the Qualities beat carries
away the prize for violence, seeing the generation of fire in the Powder is
momentary. Therefore the time of the rarefaction is extremely short, as being
of one only instant, if any moment before that generation begin not to drive
out the Bullet, the stroke must then be extremely violent, seeing that the
distance is very great in respect of the shortness of the Time, Ariss. 2.
Meteor
unto which we may add the quicknes of the flame, which is such, that it will
not stay here below the least part of time but will fly away.

THEOR. 14. The longer the Chase of the Piece the stronger the streake.
The generation of this fire being made in an instant, the rarity ariueth at
once, the violence pressed to chase out the shot, the flame flies making it
issue out, By the tenth Theoreme.
and Air to come in to prevent emptiness, and all as it were in an instant.
Therefore the longer the Chase of the Piece is (being fortified and loaded
accordingly) the more effectual shall the Action be, and the stroke the more
violent, whereby it comes to pass that long Culuerings carry further then
great Canons although with less powder: yet the force is better entertained by
their greater length and better fortification to endure the full charge of
powder.

THEOR. 15. A Piece reuerseth when it discharges.
When the ignition begins at the bottom of the concaue of the Piece, at the
Touch hole, the piece reuerseth at the instant of the rarefaction, the vent it
can find, being only forth of the Touchhole, beats back until the shot be
gone out. And this makes a Piece Mounted to shoot from allow upwards, to
reuerse more then upon the level or from aloft downwards: for that the Shot
which is heavy, and consequently violent in his natural descending when it is
forced upwards, it resists more then either shot downwards or level; and so
the more the weight of the Bullet resists, the force that drives out the
shot, which at last it is constrained to obey and to yield the more to the
reuerse. But the Metal suffers the more when it is resisted, as some men
cause it by making a Rampart behind the breech of the Piece, against which it
may stay, thereby to augment the force of the shot. From whence we may gather
that the impression of Reuerse is only whileft the shot is within the Piece:
besides the Touchhole being made near the bottom of the concaue does not
only angment the reuerse more then if the Touchhole were in the midst of the
powder, or rather more forwards whereby the powder would fire together in the
less time, and little or none go out vnfired, reuerse less, and make the
fury of the Shot the greater: And this makes the small Pistolls so pierced, to
out shoot those that have their touch-holes peirced at the bottom of their
bores.

THEOR. 16. A Piece of Ordnance sheoteth further in a right line, from a low
upwards, then from above downwards, except Perpendicularly.
To the shot made upwards, there is greater resistance of the bullet, but when
a shot is made downwards, the force does not only work, but the weight of
the shot also by it is natural heaviness, the bullet easily descends from the
strait line, falling under expectation; whence it comes, that the right Range
is further in Mountures, then in any Imbasure, for this proposition is not to
be understood so at the going out of the shot, (for all right Ranges, are all
equally strait;) nevertheless, that it is shortest shooting from aloft
downwards, and longest upwards, and the level being the mean between them
both.

THEOR. 17.
There are three chief most material and efficient causes of the greater
violence of any shot made out of great Ordnance, viz. the Powder, the Piece,
and the weight of the Bullet.

THEOR. 18.
Powder is compounded of three Principles, or Elements, Saltpetre, Sulpher, and
Cole, whereof Saltpetre is it that gives the chiefest violence.

THEOR. 19.
Albeit Saltpetre be indeed the only, or most material cause of the
violence; And that Powder commonly found most forcible that is richest of
Petre, yet is there a certain proportion of Perfection of these three
Components. And that in such sort, as if you add more or less Petre, the
violence shall abate.

THEOR. 20.
Although Powder be also the most efficient cause of the force and violence of
any shot, yet is there such a proportional charge of Powder to be found for
every several Piece, in regard of the proportion of her charged and vacant
Cylinders, as giving more, or less, then the same proportional charges, it
shall diminish, and not increase the violence of the shot.

THEOR. 21.
If any two Bullets of equal quantity, but unequal weight, be let fall from
any lofty place to the Horizon, the more weighty, shall ever fall the more
swiftly: albeit, not porportionally to their weight; which Axiom is indeed
erroneous, albeit, a great Philosopher has auerred the same.

THEOR. 22.
If two equal Bullets of different weight, be shot out of one and the same
Piece directly to the Zenith, both Bullets being of massy metal, and charged
with one quantity and kind of Powder, the lighter shall always outflie the
heavier. But such kind of Bullets they may be charged with all, as the
heavier shall outflie the lighter, although they be both discharged with the
same Piece, and quantity of the same Powder.

THEOR. 23.
There is such a convenient weight to be found of the Bullet, in respect of the
Powder and Piece, as the Bullets metal being either heavier or lighter then
that weight, shall rather hinder then further the violence or far range of
the shot.

THEOR. 24.
There is such a convenient Proportion to be found of the length of every Piece
to his Bore or Bullets Diametre in respect of the Powder, and weight of the
Ball, as either increasing or diminishing that proportion it shall abate also,
and hinder the violence of the shot.

THEOR. 25.
This proportion exactly found in any one Piece, does not hold in all other,
and yet the difference and alteration is such, as may be reduced to rules
certain.

THEOR. 26.
Besides these three most material causes of violence, the Randons also and
different Mounts of Pieces, cause a great alteration, not only of the far
shooting of all Pieces, but also of their violent Battery. And albeit the
different alterations are very intricate and strange, yet have they a Theericke
certain.

THEOR. 27.
There are also many other Accidental alterations happening by reason of the
wind, the thickness or thinness of the Air, the heating or cooling of the
Piece, the different manner of charging by Ramming fast or loose the Powder, by
close or loose rouling or lying of the Bullet, by the unequal recule of the
Piece in his Carriage or deformity of the Axtree, with diverse other such like,
whereof no rules certain can be prescribed, to reduce these uncertain
differences to any certain proportions: but all these are by Practice,
Discretion, and Judgment to be considered, and uniformly guided and
performed in their best perfection.

THEOR. 28.
Any Piece mounted 90. grades above the Horizon, throws his Bullet most
violently immediately after the discharge, and then the motion grows flower,
till the Bullet be come to his utmost Altitude, and then by Perpendicular
falling, increases by little and little, his swiftness again, even till it
come to the Horizon. But at all other Randons, it falls not so out.

THEOR. 29.
Albeit in the subtlety of Geometrical Demonstration, no part of the Bullets
violent motion, can be truly auerred a right or direct line, save only the
Perpendicular: yet in these experiments Mechanical, That first part of the
violent motion (I mean so far as the piece is said to carry Point-Blanke)
being so near the direct, is, and may well be termed the direct line. As all
water leuels are accounted in all Mechanical operations, the perfectest leuels
and directest lines. Albeit the subtlety of Geometrical Demonstration, does
find them not right or direct, but Curue or Circular.

THEOR. 30.
When any Piece is mounted directly to the Zenith. Then does his motion violent
(being in that situation directly opposite to the natural) carry the Bullet
in a perfect right line, directly upward, till the force of the violence be
spent, and the Natural motion have gotten the victory. And then does the
Natural return the Bullet downe-ward again, by the very same perpendicular
line. And so is the whole motion of the Bullet in this case a very direct
perpendicular to the Horizon.

THEOR. 31.
But if any piece be discharged upon any Angle of Randon, albeit the violent
motion contend to carry the Bullet directly by the line Diagonall; Yet the
perpendicular motion being not directly opposite, does though vnsensibly, even
from the beginning by little and little, draw it from that direct and Diagonall
course. And as the violent does decay, so does the natural increase: and of
these two right lined motions, is made that mixed Curue Helicall Circuit of the
Bullet.

THEOR. 32.
Any piece therefore discharged at any Mount or Randon, first throws forth
her Bullet directly a certain distance, called of some Gunners their
Point-Blanke Range, and then it makes a Curue declining Arc, and after
finisheth either in a direct line, or nigh enclining toward it.

THEOR. 33.
The further that any piece shoots in her direct line, commonly called
Point-Blanke, the deeper also she pierces in her battery, if the bullet be
not of substance brickle or frangeable.

THEOR. 34.
The more ponderous a Bullet is, the more it shakes in Battery, albeit, it
pierce not always so deep, as the lighter or lesser shot conveniently charged.

THEOR. 35.
Any two Pieces of Battery Ordinance, charged with one kind of bullet, and
shot into one Rampire of massy uniform kind of Substance, shall ever make
their profundities of piercing proportional, to their leuel Ranges Horizontall;
and if they be discharged, either level or at one grade of randon, and at like
distance.

THEOR. 36.
Any two Pieces of Battery, discharged into any Rampart, of uniform massy
substance, shall ever make their piercing depths proportional to their lines
Diagonall, albeit these Pieces be discharged from different Randons, so as they
batter at like distance.

THEOR. 37.
As Archimides line Helicall or Spirall, is made by the direct motion of a
point carried in a right line, while that right line is Circularly turned as
Semidiameter upon his Circles Center: So is this Artillery Helicall line of the
bullets Circuit created only by two right lined motions, becoming more or
less Curue according to the difference of their Angles, occasioned by the
several Angles of the Randon. Whereupon by demonstration Geometrical, a
Theoricke may be framed, that shall deliver a true and perfect description of
those Helicall lines at all Angles made between the Horizon and the
Peeces-lines Diagonall.

THEOR. 38.
These direct or Diagonall lines, are always longest when the Pieces Axis is
directed to the Zenith. And always as the Pieces Axis declineth more and more
to the Horizon. So do the Diagonall lines grow shorter, and at the level
Horizontall, shortest of all.

THEOR. 39.
These direct lines Diagonall, albeit they increase in length at every grade of
Randon from the Horizon to the Zenith, yet is not their increase uniform or
proportional, either to their degrees of Randon, or Horizontall Ranges, nor
yet to their Circuits or Altitudes, and yet such as may be reduced to a
Theoricke certain.

THEOR. 40.
The middle Curue Arks of the bullets Circuits, compounded of the violent and
natural motions of the bullet, albeit they be indeed mere Helicall, yet have
they a very great resemblance of the Arkes Conicall. And in Randons above 45.
they do much resemble the Hyperbole, and in all under the Ellipsis: But
exactly they never accord, being indeed Spirall mixed and Helicall.

THEOR. 41.
Any Piece discharged at any one Randon with like bullets, and several charges
of powder, shall make both their lines Diagonall, and Curue Circuits of
different longitude, but the Curue Arkes shall always be as Paralels, and
their Longitudes proportional to their lines Diagonall.

THEOR. 42.
The last declining line of the Bullets Circuit, albeit, it seems to approach
some what to the nature of a direct line again, yet is it indeed still
Helicall and mixed, so long as there remains any part of the motion violent.
But after that is clean spent, the rest of his course to the Horizon is
direct, and Perpendicular, and a perfect right line indeed, which is best
discerned in those Grades of Randon, which are between the Zenith and the
Mount or Randon Aequorizontall.

THEOR. 43.
This declining line does always make a greater and greater Angle with the
Horizon, As you raise the Piece to a greater Mount, till you come to the Mount
Aequorizantall, about which point the same declining line becomes
Perpendicular before the Bullet fall to the Horizon.

THEOR. 44.
The Horizontall Ranges in all Pieces mounted from the Horizon toward the
Zenith, does not still increase, but at every Grade of Randon are longer, till
you come to the point or mount Tropicall, commonly called the utmost Randon,
which has been generally thought to be the grade 45. but is not so. An from
that Tropicall grade upward, the Ranges decrease again till you come to the
grade Aequorizontall, so called because the Bullet then falls a like disrance
to the level Ranges.

THEOR. 45.
This Aequorizontall Grade is as far distant from the Zenith, as that Grade
is from the Horizon, which shall cause the piece to shoot in the Horizontall
plane, a distance equal to his highest Altitude, or longest line Diagonall.

THEOR. 46.
The mounting of any piece above his Aequorizontall grade, does still decrease
her Horizontall Ranges, even till it come to the Zenith. But in a proportion
different from any of the former, her Bullet ending every of those Circuits in
a direct line perpendicular.

THEOR. 47.
The Graduall increase and decrease of these Ranges Horizontall, albeit they
are equal in the Quadrant, yet are they neither equal nor proportional in
the Horizon, neither the Ranges nor their Interualls. Neither compared between
themselves, nor yet conferred with the Chords or Sines of their Arkes. And yet
is there such a kind of proportional increase and decrease of the proportion
of their Interualls, as may be reduced to a Theoricke certain.

THEOR. 48.
The Tropicall Grade commonly called the utmost Randon, is not as has been
generally supposed the Medium, or Middle between the Horizon and the Zenith,
viz. 45. but rather between the Horizon and the Grade Aequorizontall, which
will fall out much nigher 50. from the Zenith, and 40. from the Horizon.

THEOR. 49.
The highest Altitude of any Bullets Circuit is farthest distant from the
Piece, when she is discharged at her utmost Randon, and at all other Randons
either above or beneath that Tropicall Point: That highest Altitude is ever
least distant, and the bases of these Triangles do ever increase to the Randon
Tropicall, and decrease after, even as the Horizont all Ranges; but in
proportion more different every one from other.

THEOR. 50.
The Altitudes of the Circuits of Randons do not increase and decrease as
their Ranges Reciprocally, but from the Horizon in every Grade to the Zenith,
do still increase, but yet neither equally nor proportionally, neither
conferred between themselves, neither yet with sines or Chordes of their Arkes
of Randon. And yet the increase and decrease of their Interualls proportions,
such as may be reduced to a Theorieke certain.

THEOR. 51.
The Hypethenusall lines of all these different Circuits carry a mixed
proportion of the composition of the proportions of these Altitudes and Bases
by addition of their Squares; But are not proportional to the lines Diagonall
of their corresponding Angles of Randon.

THEOR. 52.
Any two pieces of Ordinance being mounted to any one Grade of Randon, shall
make their Horizontall Ranges of their Bullets proportional to the Altitudes
of their Circuits.

THEOR. 53.
The Ranges Horizontall of any two Pieces discharged at one Randon, will be
always proportional to their lives Diagonall of the same Pieces Circuits.

THEOR. 54.
The Horizontall level Ranges of any two Pieces of Artillery are ever
proportional to the utmost Ranges Horizontall of the same Pieces.

THEOR. 55.
And two pieces whatsoever, discharged at one Randon, do ever make their lines
Diagonall, and lines of Altitude proportional, howsoever the proportions of
their charges vary.

THEOR. 56.
And two pieces whatsoever, discharged at one grade of Randon upon any
enclining or declining plane: shall nevertheless make their Ranges
proportional to their lines Diagonall, and Altitudes of those their different
Ranges. Albeit the pieces be charged with a different kind of proportion of
Powder and Bullet, so as the shot be made in a fair Calm day, as is in these
cases always presupposed, because for such uncertain Accidents there cannot
certain Rules Artificial be prescribed.

THEOR. 57.
One Piece discharged, at several Randons under the utmost Randon, being a
like charged and discharged, and the Piece also of one temper, at both times,
shall ever make several Ranges. But if she be discharged at several
Randons, the one above the Tropicke point, the other under. Then may their
Ranges be equal notwithstanding their Randous, Lines Diagonall, Altitudes,
Bases, and Lines Hypothenufall, be all different.

THEOR. 58.
When any Piece (being twice discharged at several Randons, the one above, the
other beneath the Tropike point) shall make the same or equal Ranges in a
Horizontall plane. The middle grade between those several Mounts, is very
night the grade of utmost Randon: and the Piece Mounted to that middle grade,
shall then make very nigh his utmost Horizontall Range.

THEOR. 59.
The grade of utmost Randon or point Tropicall of any Piece in a Plane
Horizontall, shall not be the Tropicall grade of that Piece, in a plane
declining or inclining, but an other Peculiar to that Angle of Inclination or
Declination.

THEOR. 60.
Any Piece discharged at his grade of utmost advantage Horizontall upon a Plane
inclining, shall not make so great a Range as on his Plain Horizontall: But
contrariwise on a Plane discending shall make a farther Range.

THEOR. 61.
A Piece discharged first at his due level, and again at his Aequorizontall
grade, albeit in the plain Horizontall they make equal Ranges, yet in Planes
declining they shall not so do, but always the Level Ranges shall ever
out-shoot in all declining Planes the Range of that grade Aequorizontall.

THEOR. 62.
A Piece discharged at any grade from the Zenith to the grade Aequorizontall,
shall always make a greater Range in any Plane enclining or declining, then on
the Plane Horizontall.

THEOR. 63.
In all Planes enclining at all Randons between the Horizontall Level and
point Tropicall, all Pieces shoot farther in their Planes Horizontall, then on
any Planes enclining, and contrariwise in Planes declining: But above the
Tropike grade not always so, but sometimes, and not always contrary.

THEOR. 64.
In any Plane whether it be enclining or declining, if any Piece of Ordnance be
discharged, being Parallel or Equidistant to that Plane, and the first graze or
bound noted. If the same Piece be with like charge uniformly charged and
discharged at such an high grade of Randon, as may cause the Bullet Range the
former Distance: That middle grade of the Quadrant, which lies between these
two Mounts, shall be very nigh the grade of utmost advantage, for that
enclining or declining plane. The which in all planes enclining, will be above
the utmost Range Horizontall, and in all declinings under.

THEOR. 65.
In all enclining or declining planes, as the grade Tropike of greatest
advantage does vatie; So does also the proportions of their Ranges, at every
grade of Randon differ, whether they be accounted from the Zenith, or Horizon
Planes, enclining or declining. But yet in such an assured and certain manner
as may be reduced to a Theoricke perfect.

THEOR. 66.
In all Grades of Randons, and in all manner of Pieces, whether the planes be
Horizontall, or vary by Inclination or Declination, the Diagonall Lines are
still proportional to those of the planes Horizontall, respectively taken by
Graduation from the Zenith, in all Pieces whatsoever. But the Lines of
Altitudes, their Bases and Lines Hipethenusalls are ever different in every
several Angle, both of Inclination and Declination, and vary by such a
different Proportion from the Horizontall, as they are to be discovered by a
several Method of Calculation.

THEOR. 67.
Such Theorikes, Scales, and Instruments, may be framed for the Invention of
these strange proportions of Altitudes, Lines Diagonall, and Ranges
Horizontall, as thereby with the aid of Calculations Arithmeticall, and some
Rules Geometrical, a man may exactly and readily discover the true Circuits
and Ranges of the Bullets of all Pieces of Ordnance whatsoever, mounted
howsoever; and upon all grounds or planes enclining, or declining, that can be
Imagined.

DEFINITION OF ARITHMETICKE.
ARithmeticke is the Art to number well, and is the ground of the Mathematics.

Of Notation or Numeration.
The Caracters are 9 significant, as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 0, a
Cipher, Remembering only One, Ten, a Hundred, reckon all your figures or places
from the right hand toward the left, always making a prick or dash over
every third figure, omitting the first: As suppose this number were to be
valued, 4-6 7 2-3 5 6. So herein you find two pricks; then reckoning back
again from the last figures on the left hand toward the right hand, name
after each figure pricked so many times a thousand as there are pricks toward
the right hand, saying 4 with his prick, and the next prick is four thousand
thousand, then say six hundred seventy two thousand, three hundred fifty six,
and so of all others be the places never so many, you shall name their true
values to their numeration, being the common beginning is known well enough:
This shall suffice.

The four Principles of Arithmeticke in whole Numbers.
Addition.
TO add is to Collect or assemble many Sums into one total beginning at the
right hand, and so proceeding toward the left: as by the example following. To
add 2356 with 5876, place them so under one another, that all the first
figures of the sums toward the right hand stand right under one another: and
likewise all the second figures and third, etc. of each sum directly under his
fellow first, second, or third, etc. Thus, as 6 under 6, and 7 under 5, and 8
under 3, and 5 under the 2, and then saying^ 6 and 6 make 12, whereof set down
the two under the two sixes, and carry one for the other ten unto the next
sum to add to 7 and 5, saying one and seven are eight, and sieve makes 13,
place the 3 thereof under the 7 and 5, and carry one again for the other ten
to the next place, saying one that I carry and 8, make 9, and 3 make 12: Of
which I set down the two, and for the ten again I likewise carry one unto
the next place, saying, one (that I carried) and five make six, and two make
eight: which being the last, I set it right under the five, and 2. and find
that they make totally 8232.

Substraction.
TO Substract is to take a lesser sum out of a greater, and to note the
remainder or difference, beginning also at the right hand, and proceeding
toward the left. As to substract 5876 from 8232 placing as before in Addition
each first, second, and third figure of the other thus^ As 6 under 2, and 7
under 3, and 8 under 2, and 5 under 8. And then saying 6 out of 2, cannot be,
but borrowing ten from the next place makes the 2 to be 12, then 6 out of
12 there remains 6: which set down under 6 and 2, then say 7 out of 3 less
one that was borrowed cannot be done, but 7 out of 12, that is 1 ten borrowed
out of the next place and 3 less 1, that is 2 making 12 remains 5: which
also set down under 7 and 3. Then say 8 out of 2 cannot be, but 8 out of 11,
that is, one ten borrowed of the next, and one lent out of the 2, makes
together 3 to remain. Lastly, say 5 out of 8 less one lent, that is 5 out of
7 rests 2. And so you shall find that 5876, being taken from 8232 will leave
2356, which the precedent Addition proves true for the remainder.

Multiplication.
TO Multiply signifies to augment a sum by it self, or by some other
number, placing the lesser which we commonly name the Multiplicator undermost,
so that no figure toward the right hand outreach other, (except Ciphers) and
then beginning at the right hand, and proceeding toward the left, still
multiplying every figure of the uppermost sum by each figure of the lower,
and set the products under the line: as the example here following will
demonstrate to the eye. And for the more easy solution of this proposition, it
will be necessary to know by memory the products of the multiplication of the 9
simple Characters, 1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9. amongst themselves. As five times 7. make
35, and 9 times six make 54, etc. Now 4563 are given to be multiplied by 327.
Place the lesser number under the greater with the first of it toward the
right hand under the first of the other, and then draw a line under them thus,
And say 7 times 3 make 21. Place the 1 under the 7 and 3, and carry 2 for the 2
tennes^ unto the next place, and say 3 time 6 make 18, and 2 that I carried in
memory make 20: whereof I set down the 0, and carry the 2 to the next, saying
7 times 5 make 35, and the 2 I bore in mind make 37: whereof I set the 7 under
the 5 and 3, and carry 3 to the next place, saying 7 times 4 make 28, and 3
make 31, which I set down also, so I have done with the 7, and cancel it, and
begin with the 2, saying 2 times 3 make 6, which I set down under the 2, and
carry 1 to the next, saying 2 times 5 make 10, and 1 that I carried make 11:
whereof I set down 1 and carry 1, and say 2 times 4 make 8 and 1 makes it 9,
which I set down also, and so I have done with the 2. Lastly, beginning with
the 3 remaining, I say first, 3 times 3 make 9, which I set down right under
the 3: And again say 3 times 6 make 18, whereof I set down the 8 and carry the
1 to the next place where say 3 times 5 make 15, and 1 that I carried make 16,
whereof I set down the 6 and carry 1 to the next, saying 3 times 4 make 12,
and 1 that I carried makes 13, and so I have ended, only adding the numbers
under the line as you were showed to do before in Addition, and you shall find
the Products will be 1491861: which having set down, may be enclosed between
2 lines as the Operation requires.

Division.
To divide is to search how many times one some is contained in another, as if
I would know how often 234 were containd in 5382, Place the greater first, and
the first of the less toward the right hand^ under the first of the greater,
thus, making a crooked line for the Quotient: and then say how often I have 2
in 5, say two times, which 2 set behind the crooked line, or Quotient, and
there will remain 1, Then say 2 times 3 make 6, which taken from 13, there
will rmaine 7, which set over the 3. Then say 2 times 4 makes 8, which take out
of the 78 above it, and there will rest the 70, so putting out the 8 and the
234, you must remove the 234 one place nearer to the right hand as above is
seen, Saying how many times two can I have in 7, say 3 times, and yet there
will remain 1, Set the 3 in the Quotient, and the 1 over the 7, and put out
the 2 underneath. And then again say 3 times 3 make 9, which taken from 10
over it, there will rest 1, which I set over the 0, and put out the 10 and the
3 under it. Lastly, I say three times 4 makes 12, which being taken out of the
12, there will remain nothing. Wherefore you finding 23 in the Quotient, or
behind the crooked line, may conclude that 234 is 23 times contained in 5382,
which was desired to be known. If any temainder had been, it would have made
a Numeratour to to the Diuisour, etc.

To extract the Square root.
TO extract the true square root (or the nearest that may be found) is to
search out a number, that being once multiplied in it self (with the remainder
if any be) will produce the number assigned. As suppose it were required to
find the square root of 4489, put under the 9 one prick, and under the next
4 another prick, thus leaving one figure between the two^ pricks, and so
always if there were more figures, and after take the square number or nearest
thereunto of the number over the last prick, namely of 44, which is the square
36, which taken from 44, there will remain 8, which place above the pricked 4,
and take the square root of the 36, which is 6, then double the 6, and it
makes 12, which take as often as you can out of 88, so as that the square of the
second number to be produced, may also be extracted, and it will be found to be
7: which being multiplied by 12, will make 84, which taken from 88, there will
remain 4, which set above the 8, and multiply the 7 in it self, and that will
produce 49: which taken from the 49 over it there will rest nothing, and so you
shall find 67 to be the square root of 4489; for multiply 67 it in self, it
will produce 4489.

To extract the Cubicke root.
To extract the Cubicke root of any number is to find that number, that being
multiplied in it self, and the product again by the same number, will make
the number assigned (or the nearest thereto if the number be not a Cubicke
number.) So to extract the Cubicke number of 3 2 7 6 8, place one prick under
the first figure 8, and another under the fourth figure 2, and so further if
there be more to leave two figures between each two pricks, and look (as
before for the square root) how many pricks there be so made, so many figures
there will be in the Quotient, and then seek the Cubicke root (or the nearest
to it) unto 32, which will be found to be 3, which multiplied in it self
makes 9, and that product again multiplied by 3, produces 27 out of 32,
substracting 27, there will remain 5, and that may be set over the 2, and the
Quotient 3 also by it self. And then to find the 2 figure of the Quotient, put
down 3 and his square 9, and his Cube 27. Now we must take a new number in the
Quotient, so that when the 27 shall be multiplied by the same number, which is 2
and the 9 by the square of 2 which is 4. and again the new number cubickely in
it self, and placing the 3 products in order, as the operation here set down
shows, and the same Agregate subtracted from the remainder of the division,
that in this extraction there shall want nothing, so the Quotient will be found
to be 32, which multiplied cubickely will make his Cube 32768.

By the square root all sorts of Battalions are framed thus. viz.
To make a square Battallion of Men.
EXtract the square root of the number of men proposed, and it will yield the
number both for Rank and also for Fyle.

To make a Battallion square of ground.
Allow 3 foot in breadth, and 7 in length, which is the space that every
Soldier occupyeth marching, Multiply the number of men proposed by 3, and
dividing the products by 7, then extract the Square root of the Quotient, and
that will be the number of men for the Fyles. By which then dividing the faid
number proposed, and the Quotient will be the number of men in Rank.

To make a Battallion whereof the Front shall be to the Flancke in any
proportion given.
Multiply the number of men proposed by the proportion appointed for the
Flancke, and from the product extract the Square root, which will be the
number of men for the Fyles or Flancke. And again to find the number of men
for the Front, Multiply the proposed number of men by the proportion assigned
for the Front, and from the product thereof, extract the Square root, which
root will be the number of men for Front.

To make a doubled Batallion.
Double the number of men propounded, and extract the square root of that, and
it will be the number of men in Front: Then half that number, and it will be
the number of men for Flancke.

To make a Batallion of a great Front.
Divide the number of men propounded by the number of men assigned for the
Front, and the Quotient will be the number of men for the Flancke.

The Batallions square of men, or square of ground, are weak in Front, and
those of great Front, are weak in Flancke.

The Spaniards most commonly use the doubled Batallia.

And the Hollanders the great Front, for they usually make their Flancke
consist but of ten Ranckes.

By the extraction of this Cubicke root you may find the solid capacity of any
Shot, Ordnance and such like solides: hereof we will speak more hereafter in
his place.

A Table showing the Square root unto 3844, and the Cubicke root unto 238328.
Calculated by the Author R. Norton.
1 4 2 8 9 3 27 16 4 64 25 5 125 36 6 216 49 7 343 64 8 512 81 9 729 100 10
1000 121 11 1331 144 12 1728 169 13 2197 196 14 2744 225 15 3375 256 16 4096
289 17 51^3 324 18 5832 361 19 6859 400 20 8000 441 21 9261 484 22 10648 529 23
11197 576 24 13824 625 25 15625 676 26 17576 729 27 19683 784 28 21952 841 29
24389 900 30 27000 961 31 29791 1024 32 32768 1084 33 35772 1156 34 39204 1225
35 42875 1296 36 46656 1369 37 50653 1444 38 54872 1521 39 59319 1600 40 64000
1681 41 68921 1764 42 74088 1849 43 81307 1936 44 85184 2025 45 87120 2116 46
97336 2209 47 103823 2304 48 110592 2401 49 117649 2500 50 125000 2601 51
132651 2704 52 140608 2809 53 148877 2916 54 156464 3025 55 166375 3136 56
175616 3249 57 185193 3364 58 195092 3481 59 208179 3600 60 216000 3721 61
226981 3844 62 238328

To find the Fractions Quantity, when the number given is not a square number.
When you have extracted the Square root of any number, and that yet there
rests something after the extraction made, that shows the number not to be
a Square number, and being very difficult to find the root of a number, not
square, exactly, but to come near it: double the root for denominicator, and
take the remainder for numerator. Example, I would find the square root of 10,
the greatest Root in 10 is 3, and 3 times 3 makes 9, so the remainder is 1
for Numberator, and I double 6 for denominator. so the nearest square root of
10 is 3 which is 1/36 part too little. But if I should add 1 to the double of
the Root for denominator, and take the remainder for Numerator, that would
make the root of 10 to be 3 ^, which is too much by, part.

Of Fractions.
What a Fraction is, and to reduce Fractions.
A Fraction is a part of a whole number, and the proportion thereof is to the
whole number as the Numberator is to the Denominator of the same. And where the
Numerators and Denominators are great numbers, they are to be reduced into
their least denomination: which to do, is to find the greatest number that
will divide them both. As I would abreuiate ^^1/300, I find 5 the number that
is common to divide them both, and thereby I first divide 225, and thereof
comes 45 for numerator, then I divide 30 by 5, and that produces 60. I say
then 45/60 valueth as much as 225/300. But to find the smallest fraction, take
225 out of 300, and there will rest 75, and then I take 75 out of 225, and
there rest 150: then I take 75 out of 150, and there rest 75, which is the
number I seek, whereby I first divide 225, and the Quotient will be 3, then I
divide 300 by 75, and the quotient will be 4, so and 15/60 and 225/300, are of
one and the same value equal amongst themselves, and one to another. And so
you may do with any other fraction to reduce it to the last denomination.

Again, some fractions cannot be abreuiated, as 1^/20, out of such a fraction
take 2 or 3 unities from the Numerator, that is, take ^/12 from 11/12, and
there will rest 6/1^, and reduce the ^/^2 to, so ^/12, and is equal in value
11/12.

To reduce many diverse Fractions into one denomination, There can but two of
them be reduced at once; as I would reduce and 4/8 into one denomination I set
them thus, ^4/68: And multiply the two denominators together, and they make 48,
which shall be the denominator, then I multiply 6, the first denominator by 4
the second numerator, and thereof comes 24 which I set apart for the first,
then I multiply 8, the second denominatour by 5, the first Numerator which
produces 40, which I also set apart for the second Numerator, each set over
the denominator 48, will be so reduced to 24/48 and 40/41 or 64/48 or 1 and
24/41 equal to and 4/^.

Addition of Fractions.
But if all the Denominators be a like, add all the Denominators together, and
set their common Denominator under the sums of them, as 2/6 make 20/9 or 1 4/6.

Substraction of Fractions.
To substract one Fraction from an other, first (if they be not) reduce them to
one Denomination, as to take from which reduced, make 8/62, for and 9/12 for,
then substract 2/12 from 9/12 rests 1/12 the remainder sought.

Multiplication of Fractions.
To Multiply Fractions, you must Multiply the Numerators together for a new
Numerator, and also the 2 Denominators together for a new Denominator, as 3/6
by 4/^ produce 12/48 or ^/24 or 1/12 or.

Division of Fractions.
To divide Fractions one by an other the easiest way, is to make one of the
Denominators to stand as Numerator, and the Numerator thereof as Denominator,
and then to work as you did in Multiplication of Fractions: As I would Divide
by I changing one, they stand thus and 3/2 and say 3 times 3 make 9, and that 4
is Numerator for the Quotient, and 4 times two makes 8 for Denominator thereof:
So Divided by make 9/8 the Quotient sought.

Definitions.
Geometry is the Art to measure well, and is the Sinews of the Art of
Artillery.

GEometry has her Original from Points, rights, crooked lines, right and
oblique Angles, Superficies, and Bodies, etc.

various geometric angles

A Point is a thing that cannot be divided as A.

A Line is a thing that has Length without breadth, and serves for lengths,
breadths, heights, and depthes, as B.

An Angle is the meeting of two lines, so as they make not one line, and are
either right lined Sphaeticall, or mixed Angles, as C.

And an Angle is a right angle, a blunt, or a sharp Angle.

An angle greater then a right angle, is a blunt or abtuse angle, as D.

An angle lesser then a right angle, is a sharp or acute angle, as E.

A superficies is that which has only Length and Breadth, as a Quadrate or
Triangle, and. as E. E.

A Body is that which has length and breath, and also thickness as a Cube,
etc. F. various geometric figures

A Tryangle is a superficies, made only with three lines, and is either right
lined, or Spliaericall, as G.

A Quadrat or square is a superficies quadranguled, made of sour lines, as H

A Circle is a plane Figure, contained under one line, which is called the
circumference thereof. as I

A Center of a Circle is a point in the midst thereof, from which all right
lines drawn to the circumference, are equal, as I. also

A Trapezia, is a right lyned figure of four unequal sides, as K:

The especial things belonging to a Gunner, being Arithmetic (which we have
heercin briefly touched) and Geometry which we now purpose to point at, and
Perspectiue whereof hereafter a word for taking distances: And of each of them
in as brief manner as I can, because they are not by necessity to be accounted
any real parts of this Art and Practice of Artillery, but only necessary
apendants thereto: For it is necessary that the Gunner should know what a line,
a superficies, and a body is, and how to measure each of them; as well the
right as the crooked, the level Hypothenusall and perpendicular and diametral
lines, and the Angles they can make right or obliques. And measure the
Triangles, Squares, and Circles, the Globes, Columns, and Cillinders: And in
effect to carry in his memory these Definitions, Demands. and Common
sentences, of Eclids Elements: and especially the first Propositian of the same
which teaches.

How to make an Equilaterall Triangle.
EVCLID. I. PROPO. I.

Which is Upon the given right line Ab, to make the Equilaterall Triangle a b c.

With the distance a b, upon a and b describe two circles, the intersection C
1. Them. 1.
joined with a and b, shall make the Equilater tryangle a b c required.
equilateral triangle drawn by linking points on the perimeters of two
overlapping circles

And then the 3. PRO. I.

Two unequal right lines being given, to cut from the greater a right line
equal to the lesser.

From the Center B, with the distance A 2.1.15. Def. 1.
cut C B in D, so will B D be equal to A.

And the 9. PROPO. I.

To divide an angle given by a right line in the midst, or into two equal
parts.

To half the given Angle b a c, with a right line. various geometric figures
and angles, with labeled points

From a b 3.1.
cut a d at pleasure, and also 1.1.
e equal thereunto, and draw the right line D C, and make the Equilater
triangle D E F, and join A F, which will half the given angle.

And the 10. PROPO. I.

To half a given right line as A. B.

Upon the right line A B, make the Tryangle A C B, the angle C 1.1.
halfed. 9.1.


And the 11. PROPO. I.

To raise a prependicular line C F upon a right line E D from a point C therein
given.

Upon the point C set the Compasses, and on each side thereof in the line E D
take equal distances at pleasure, and upon them make 1.1.
an equilater Tryangle D E F, and then draw the line F C which shall be
perpendicular to E D upon the point C.

And the 12. PROPO. I.

Upon an infinite right line a b given, from a point C without the same, to let
fall a perpendicular right line C F.

Upon the Center C the Arch of a circle described, will cut the right line A B
in D and E, divide D E into 10.1.
half at F, join C to F, and so C F will be perpendicularly let fall at F
upon A B.

And the 13. PROPO. I.

A right line a b falling upon another right line c d, makes either two right
angles, or else angles equal to two right angles.

In the perpendicularity of E B to C D, it is sufficiently manifest; but if A B
be not perpendicular in the point B 11.1.
erect the perpendicular E B: so we see the angle A B C and the angle A B D
taken together, to occupy the place of the two right angles EBC and EBD.

And the 21. PROPO. 1.

If within a Triangle abc in the side bc, from the extremes of two right lines
bd and cd, they are less then the sides AB and AC, but the angle D that
subtends it, will be greater then the angle A.

Continue out the side BD to E in the tryangle BAE, the sides BA, AE taken
together, are greater then 4 Axio. 1
the third BE, and D is therefore greater then 16.1.
A. various geometric figures and angles, with labeled points

And the 31. PROPO. 1.

By a point given A to the given right line BE to draw a right line parallel.

Draw AD 23.1.2
that it make the alterne angle ADC equal to DAF, and continue FA to E, and
the Alternates being equals, 29.1.
the lines must be parallel.

And the 32. PROPO. 1.

Every Triangle as ACB with one side produced AB to D, The external angle CBD,
will be equal to the 2 internal opposite Angles A and E, the three angles of
a Tryangle being equal to two right angles.

To the side AC 31.1.
make the parallel line by the point B namely BE in these two paralells AC and
BE, the line of incidence CB makes 29.1.
CBE equal to EBD, and B equal to A: so the whole externe angle is equal to
the two interne angles, to which let the third CBA the common angle, 13.1.
and the three angles of the Triangle equal to two right angles.

And the 46. PROPO. 1.

Upon a right line AB given to make the square of equal sides, and equal
angles ABCD.

From either extreme as A of the given line, let the perpendicular line AD be
11.1.
erected equal to the given line, and by D make to AB 31.1.
parallel and equal the line DC, join C and B equal, and parallel ABCD
joining DA and CB, they will be equal. And the Parelellogram made 1 Axiom. 1.
equilaterall, and because the Angles C and B opofite to the right angles A and
D, it is a rectangle and 30.1.
a square.

And the 47. PROPO. 1.

In the trectangled Triangle ABC, the square that is made of the side AC,
subtended by the right angle ABC being described, will be equal to the
Squares ABED and BCGF, which are described of the sides containing the
rectangle.

Let the three Squares AH, AE, and CF be described, and in a direct line let
AB, BF, and CB, BF lie, and draw BL parallel to AI, and draw also BH, BY, AG,
and CD.

The common angle ABC being added to the rectangles DAB and IAC, are 2. Axiom.
equal to the Angles IAB and DAC, 4.1.
and also to the tryangles.

And the 5 PROPO. 4.

About a Tryangle to describe a circle.

Divide any two of the sides into the 10.1.
midst by perpendicular lines meeting in F, from whence draw a right line to
each angle, and by their distance describe the circle, FA, FB, and FC, will be
4.1.
equal, and upon the 9.3.
center B a circle is described about the tryangle.

1. 31.3.
If the center fall in the side the tryangle is rectangled if within Acute, if
without obtuse angled.

2. By three points not being in a right line to describe a circle by this
proportion, for join the 3 points and you have a Tryangle.

And the Corolaries and the Scholion thereof, viz.

To every regular figure that is equilaterall and equiangled, a circle maybe as
well 4.
inscribed by the distance of the perpendicular, 6.1.
as subscribed with the distance to the Angles, and those cut in halfes.

And the 10 PROPO. 4.

To make an Isosceles Triangle that may have either of the angles at the Base
double to the rest.

Any 11.21.
given line as AB, that the rectangle under AB and CB, may be equal to the
square of AC, and by the distance of AB if a circle be described, it will 11.2
make BD equal to AC, then join CD and AD, and the Tryangle ACD may be 1.4
5.4
circumscribed by a circle.

Therefore because the square of AB is equal to the rectangle, by the cutting
of BA, and the outward segment CB it will be tangent, and the angle A to the
angle CBD will be equal, and add the common angle ADC, and ADB will then be
equal to the angle A and CDA, that is to the angle BCD or B: And so the sides
BD, and CD, and CA will be equal, and like wise the angle A to the angle ADC;
and so the angle A 1/5 doubled BCD, or double at the Base B 2/1 and D ^ in the
Isescelles tryangle BAD described. various geometric figures and angles, with
labeled points

And the 4 PROPO. 6.

Of the equiangles ABC, DEF of the Triangles the sides are proportionalls, as
AB to BC, so is CD to DE, and as BC to CA, so CE to ED, and as BA to AC, so is
CD to DE, which about equal angles B and DE, EBCA and E, A and D are
Homogeneall sides AB to DC, BC to CE, and AC to DE, which subtend BCA, and BA,
and CD, Band DCE

Let the Bases of the Tryangles be BC and CE, 11.1
and according to the quantity of the angles like situate in one direct line,
and BA and EP meet extended in F: Therefore because the angles ACB and E, and
DCB and B, are equal, BF and CB will be paralells, and also AC, and OF, and
ACDF 28.6,
a parallelogram.

And the 12 PROPO. 6.

Three lines being given to find a fourth proportional.

Of the lines given let AB the first and BC the second be set in a direct
line, and at any angle draw a third right line infinitely extended, wherein set
AD, the third given line draw together DB, and by C draw the 31.1.
Parellell thereunto CE, so it will be as 2.6.
AB the first, to BC the second, so will AD the third be to CE the fourth
sought. various geometric figures and angles, with labeled points

And the 13 PROPO. 6.

Two right lines AB, BC, being given to find a mean proportional between
them.

Set the two right lines given in one direct live as AB, BC, upon all that line
AC, describe the semicircle ADC, and from B 11.1
raise the perpendicular line BD, and draw AD, CD: therefore ADC is a right
angle (being in a semicircle) and BD the perpendicular makes two triangles ABD
and CBD 8.6.
equiangled, and therefore proportional: Therefore BD is the mean
proportional.

And the 17 PROPO. 6.

If three right lines be proportional, as A to B, sa B to C, then that
rectangle that is made of the extremes A and C, shall be equal to that which
is made of the Mean B.

Because the mean proportional B is twice put, it will be as in the 16. Pro.
that 4 right lines about 4 right equal angles, are 1. Def. 6. 14.6.
reciprocally proportionalls, Therefore rectangled and equal: and contrariwise
being equally rectangled about right angles, they have their sides reciprocally
proportionals, viz. as A to B, so is the same B to D, which was to be showed.

And the 25 PROPO. 6.

Any right lyned figure given a like, and in like sort placed, to make another
equal to the given.

Let A be the right lined figure given, a like unto which is to be made. To
the side DC at angle CDE, let the 44.45.1.
paralellogram F equal to it be applied: A gain to the side of this DE there
may be applied contiguat to EDG, the Paralellogram H equal to a right lyned
figure B, unto which it is to be constructed equally between CD and DG 13.5
seek the mean proportional DN or IK: upon which the right lined figure A is
to be made equal to B. Wherefore seeing it is as the first CD, is to the
third DG, so is F to H, that is A to B, and A to L, and also L is equal to 22.5
B made like to A which was to be done. various geometric figures and angles,
with labeled points

And lastly the 14. PROPO. 11.

To what planes soever ED and OF, the same right line figure AB is right they
are paralells,

If they be not Paralells being produced, they will concur to the parts C, E,
and 3.11.
make the Section GH a right line, in which any where take the point I, and
draw IA, IB in the planes GCD and GEF. And so when as AB is placed right to
either, it will be the plane of the Triangle AIB, the angles LAB and IAB would
beright, which are nevertheless 17.1.
lesser then right angles.

To measure inaccessible Heights, Breadths and Distances, and take a plat by my
Cosmodelite with the description thereof.
Upon the semicircle under the Cosmodelyte there are two squares Geometrical,
each side of them being divided into 120 equal parts, and upon the Center of
that Semicircle a Rule or Index with the two sights over or parallel unto the
fiduciall edge thereof. As suppose I were to measure the distance from me to a
Tree, to do which, place the Semicircle, so that the Index laid upon the
Dyametrall line may direct with the sight to the tree or mark, then laying the
Index upon the Semidiametre that is perpendicular to the Dyametrall line, and
choose some mark of competent distance whereunto the sights direct, or else
measure 20 or 100 yards, paces, or feet in that line, and there set a mark,
and then leaving a mark where you first stood, remone your instrument thither,
and by the Semidiametrall line looking back to the first station or mark,
thereby you may place the Semicircle in the first position; which done, turn
the Index unto the Tree or Mark whose distance you are to measure, and see
what number of those 120 parts it cutteth, then, say by the Rule of 3, If 120
all the parts, the parts cut, as suppose it were 80. What shall 300 yards which
I imagine was measured between the first and second Stations give, multiplying
the third number 300 by 80, the second number produces 8000, which dividing by
120, the first number yields 66 yards 2/3 the distance so right. several
instruments for measuring and surveying

To measure the breadth of a Breach.
LAy on the Index upon the Dyametral line, and turn that to one side of the
Breach, and the instrument remaining in that position, note the number the
Index will cut when it is turned with his sights to respect the other side of
the Breach, then go forwards or backwards until you see the last side of the
breach by some other number of parts (letting a convenient distance between
the Stations) and noting the difference of those parts, and the distance of the
Stations measured, suppose, 50 yards and the difference of parts to 20. Say by
the rule of three, if 120, all the parts give 20, the parts cut by aspect of
the Index, what shall 50 yards give, multiplying 70 by 50 produces 3500; which
dividing by 120, yields 20 yards, and (...) parts of a yard, the breadth of
the Breach sought. A height is taken in the same manner, only reuersing the
Plane of the Instrument perpendicular, which before did lie Horizontally,
imitating the rest of the work as aforesaid. two horsemen with a wheeled
measuring device

To measure the height of any Tower, or other thing by the shadow is makes,
the Sun shining.
TAke a staff and place it perpendicularly near the shadow you desire to
measure, mark the two shadows of the Tower and of the Staff, then such as
the shadow of the Staff has proportion to the staff, such has the shadow of
the Tower to the Towers height. Example. Let us suppose the length of the
shadow of the staff to be 12 hand-breadths, and the shadow of the Tower to be
45 foot; the staff was 8 hand breadths. Then say by the Rule of proportion:
if 12 give 8, what shall 45 give: work and ye shall have 30 foot for the
height of the Tower sought.

To measure the height of a Tower by a looking-glass, or the shadow thereof in
a puddle of water.
SVppose there is a Tree or Tower whose height we desire to know: Take a flat
Mirror, or Looking-glass, and lay it level or Horizontally upon the ground
some distance from the Tree or Tower, and then go backewards until in
beholding in the Glass you thereby see the top of the Tree or Tower, your
distance from the glass has proportion to the height of your eye, such as the
distance from the glass unto the point right under the top of the Tree or
Tower, is to the height of the said Tree or Tower, As for example, suppose the
distance between the Glass and the Tower were 48 foot, and the distance
between you and the Glass be 4 foot, and the height of your eye above the
level of the glass to be 6 foot, say, if 4 give 6, what will 48 give,
multiplying 48 by 6, produces 288: which divide by 4 giueat in the Quotient 72
for the height of the Tree, or Tower sought.

To find any distance, height, or breadth by resolving the Triangle made by
Stations and Marks.
TO find the unknown sides and angles, any 3 of these sides and angles being
given, so one be a side, to find the rest by Addition and Substraction. By
the Table of Logarithmes remembering this Theoreme, That the Sides in all plane
Triangles are in proportion one to another, as the Synes of the Angles they
subtend. Example. a right triangle, with several labeled points

Suppose that B, C, in the Triangle, A, B, C, be the height of a Tower, and let
it be required to find the measure thereof, and of the Hypothenusall line AB,
First measure the distance from A to C supposed 40 paces, then by the
Cosmodelite or other instrument planted at A, take the quantity of the angle
BAC 30 degrees, then by consequent the angle ABC will be the complement thereof
60 degrees (the angle at C being a right angle) and all the sides of a right
line triangle being equal to two right angles, so there is already had 4 of
the 6; namely, the; angles and the side AC. Then finding the Logarithmes of the
Angles. As for the Angle sixty degrees, and for the angle 30 degrees, and for
the rectangle C 90 degrees. Then say by the Rule of proportion, if AC the syne
of the Angle ABC give BC the syne of the angle BAC, what gives AC 40 paces, and
the Logarithme of AC to the Log of BC; and thence substract the Logarithme of
ABC, and the Log: of the syne remaining will be 23 27/43 for BC sought.

And for AB, the Hypothenuse say, if AC give AB, what will AC 40 paces give
facit, 46 ^/5 fere.

The like may be done for all distances and breadths whatsoever.

Thus much shall suffice for the apendants. Now to the principal matter it
self.

The Description of the Horse-litter, and the Cosmodelite, and to Delineate by
either of them any Champion assigned.
THis Instrument, the Cosmodelits is so plainly demonstrated to the Eye by the
Figure thereof, that it needs few words for further description; Only, you
may perceive it to have so many several bendings, that it may at once
represent any two or three planes assigned: It consisting of two concentrick
Circles divided, one into 360 equal parts as at A: The other into 24 and a
semicircle, each Quadrant divided into 90 equal degrees as B: and within each
Quadrant is a geometrical Square, each side thereof divided into 120 parts; It
has an Indez with sightes, as C playing upon a Centerpinne, under a box with
a Magneticall Needle therein as P: Upon the bottom of the Box is pasted a
Chart of the 32 Points, and a Limb of 360 degrees: It has also a Circle with
Joints at the knee, with an Index as F, to inclyne or reclyne the Instrument to
any Angle assigned, the Cheeks, the square hole of the half slitts between D
and E being the Index and moving of the suporters of the said Semicircle and
circle B and A as its and altogether considered, are represented at N to the
eye very apparently.

It is an excellent and general Iustrument, if it be well made, understood,
and used as it ought to be: This shall suffice, with the former Figure in the
31 for the Description, and some uses thereof; Only a word or two, how to
describe a Champion in plain by it, and a whole Region by the Horselitter,
whose Figure is also in the 32 Page hereof showed.

To make and Deliniate in Platte any Champion, or Region assigned.
THe Horse-litter traueling of purpose, with the motion of the Wheel hanged in
steel Springs, roaling on the way, The other Wheels which it turns, gives
the Measures of Paces, Yeards, or Feet, contained between every two angles,
and the Compass within, delivers to the Obseruor (sitting within the Litter)
the alteration of angles from time to time, which he dilligently noting in a
Book, with all obseruable things, as Towns, Vilages, Hills, Woods, Rivers,
Valleys, Parkes, Wastes and Enclosures in his way notable, to protract by the
degrees of the Needle, or points cut and measures found between angle and
angle, with the obseruable Circumstances not forgotten; And by the Cosmodelites
Index and Needle noting the degree cut, it respecting each obseruable Mark, at
the first, second, third station, etc. If need be of so many noted, and the
distance of each station from other being measured with a Chain, Line, or two
Poles, or such like, in known Measures also protracted, the true Platte of a
whole Region, Manor, Champion or Field, may be easily Described, by practizing
duly what has been already said, and all Distances, Heights, Breadths, and
Profundities accessible or inaccessible also measured: As Master Diggs in his
Pantometria, and Master Rathorne in his third Book of the Surueyor have
largely (with variety) described, which with great ease, the dilligent
Practician may well apply to either of these Instruments, which let suffice.

THE PRACTICE OF ARTILLERY.
CHAP. I. Of the general definition and distinguishing of Ordnance and
Artillery.
ARtillery generally taken, comprehends all manner of artificial Engines for
the Wars, divised or used at any time, either to hurl Stones or Darts, or to
shoot Arrows or Bullets, or such like things, to, or at any remote Object;
and that with greater violence and more certain direction, then by the natural
strength of any one man's hand can possibly be otherwise performed: Whereby it
appears also, that Artillery differs from all other Engines. First, for
that all other Engines exercise their violence either upon Objects at hand, or
such as are either near joined unto themselves, without whose presence or
contingencie they effect nothing at all: whereas Artillery exercises her
force and violence upon things far off, even when the Object is not present
or near it. Secondly, in the exercise of other engines, the special thing
required is strength and labor, rather then any great Art or Skill. Whereas in
the use and exercise of Artillery, the principal thing required is Art and
Skill how to direct and bend the same unto the assigned service: without which
they do altogether work in vain. Thirdly, the proper use of other engines, is
either to draw some thing unto them as, Capstaynes do; to thrust or to remove
some thing from them, as Skrewes; to heave up, as Pumps and Pulleyes; or to
press down, as Presses, etc. which most commonly serve at home for private
uses, whereas Artillery serves to shoot and cast forth Bullets, Balls,
Arrows, Darts, Stones, and diverse sorts of Shot, serving for the public
wars both at home and abroad, as well desensiuely to repulse and destroy the
assaulting Enemy, as offensiuely to spoil, kill, annoy, beat and weaken the
Common Adversary in his Towns, Forts, Armies, Fleetes, Ships, Ports, Subjects
and designs. Artillery therefore according to the times may be divided into
two sorts: namely, Ancient and Modern. Each of which according to Magnitude
may be again subdivided into two sorts also; namely, Great and Small. The
Ancient Great Artillery were the Catapult, Balista, Scorpion and Ram, The
Ancient small Artillery, the Long-bow, Crosse-bow, Sling, and Slurre-bow. The
Modern great Artillery are the great Ordnance, being the principal Subject
both of this and the former Treatise, which in their places are at large
particularly described, and distinguished; herein the small modern Artillery
are, the Long-bow and the Hand-gunnes. As the Harquebuse, Musket, Caliuer,
Carbyne, Petronell and Pistol, the particular uses of them as they appertain,
not necessiuely to the Gunners Office to manage or practice, being no way
exacted fro any accounted within the compass of the Train of Artillery: So I
therefore forbear to say much of them referring their Practices and Postures
to the iuditious instructions of Valiant and Worthy Gentlemen, who have
delighted in the profession, use, and practice of those Arms. For the
Long-bow, although it be now grown some what out of warlike use, since the
invention of small gunnes, yet bows and arrows being both ancient and
general warlike instruments, and were of two sorts, viz. the Long-bow and the
Crosse-bow. The Long-bow is so well known that it needs no description: which
doubtless of the two it was first invented and practiced in the Wars, as
being the more simple Engine of the twain, whose antiquity is surely very
great, and seems to have been before Noah's Flood: For Almighty God promising
to Noah and his sons, that he would no more destroy all flesh with the
waters of a flood, he gives the Rainebow for a sure token thereof, which he
there called his Bow, distinguishing the same from men's bows, as things then
familiarly known to Noah and his sons. And as it is ancient, so it is also
of great force, by reason that all things therein almost do work secundum
naturam. For first the Natural and proper work of the Chords, sinews and
ligaments of Man's arm are to draw and pull unto it self, rather then to
relate themselves to thrust off. Secondly, the matter whereof the Bow is made,
be it of wood or steel, by nature stiff and stark, being bent with the
string and drawn compass with the arm, whilst it flies out to the
straightnes which it naturally has, and so fulfilleth his natural work,
Thirdly, the Arrow artificially made, and proportioned to the strength of the
Bow easily hangs in the air, and swiftly and gently slideth through the
same. The general use of it in all warlike nations may appear, That the bow
was in special use among the Hebrews. Match. 9.11. Tit. Liu. lib. 7.
Many places of Scripture verify, and the place of their service was in the
Front of the battle; and amongst the Philistims, for Saul was sore wounded with
the shooters of the Philistims. Chron 25.23.24. Esaias 21.27.
And amongst the Egyptia^s, king Josias was hurt with the shooters of Phare
Necho king of Egypt: and amongst the Assyrians, Achas was slain with one of
their arrows: amongst the Citizens of Rabbah the Amonites their shooters shot
from their walls against the army of Ioab: amongst the men of Cedar, Arabians
and Ismaelites, Ierem. 46.9.
whose strong archers God threatens should be fewer. Amongst the Lidians whom
God calls forthwith their Bows against the disobedient children of Judah:
amongst the Assyrians; Iudeth 2.15.
Holophernes having in his army 12000 archers on horseback. And to be short,
if we shall read the ancient Histories of the Greeks and Romans we shall
find the bow and arrows every where so usual a weapon, that most nations
have continually used them: amongst whom our English Nation has been equal
to the best, as all Christendom can bear us witness in many battles;
especially that which our Nation did for Ferdinand king of Castille under the
leading of the Earl of Bedford, who with 10000 English bow-men, armed besides
their bows and arrows, with battell-axes that hang at their backs, whereby
he obtained so great a victory, that he and his successors have ever since
carried the sheafes of arrows, and the long-bow in their shield, and also on
their coined half Royalls.

The second sort of Bows is the Crosse-bow, which Titus Liuius calls
Scorpionius modicum, partly by reason it has the likeness of that beast when
the arrow is placed therein, and partly by reason of the like manner of
hurting, watching all occasions when and where to strike surest.

CHAP. II. Wherein is discoursed who were the Inuentors of Gunnes and
Gunne-powder.
Having undertaken in the former book, called the Art of Great Artillery, to
show by Definitions, Theoremes, and certain Questions, the Speculatiue part of
the Art of a Canonier, I have now also thought fit in the second part by the
rule of reason to demonstrate the Practicke part thereof, and to describe all
sorts of Ordnance, as well such as are, and have been used in foreign
Nations, as those that are founded in England, and both the ancient and the
modern of both: wherefore I hold it needful for compiling of the whole work
as complete as I can, to declare by whom, and how this so devilish an
invention was first brought to light. Vffano reports, that the invention and
use as well of Ordnance as of Gunne-powder, was in the 85 year of our Lord,
made known and practiced in the great and ingenious Kingdom of China, and
that in the Maratyne Provinces thereof, there yet remain certain Pceces of
Ordnance, both of Iron and Brass, with the memory of their years of Foundings
ingraued upon them, and the Arms of King Vitey who he says was their
inuentour. And it well appears also in ancient and credible Historyes, that
the said King Vitey was a great Enchanter and Nigromancer, who one time (being
vexed with cruel wars by the Tartarians.) coniured an evil spirit that
showed him the use and making of Gunnes and Powder. the which he put in
Warlike practice in the Realm of Pegn, and in the conquest of the East Indies,
and thereby quieted the Tartars. The same being confirmed by certain
Portingales that have traveled and Nauigated those quarters, and also affirmed
by a letter sent from Captain Artred written to the King of Spain: wherein
recounting very diligently all the particulars of Chyna, said, that they long
since used there both Ordnance and Powder: and affirming forther, that there
he found ancient ill-shapen Pieces, and that those of later Foundings are of
far better fashion and metal then their ancient were. Some also imagine
that Powder and Ordnance were invented by the famous Mathematitian Archimedes,
who made use of them at the siege of Syracusa in Cicillia, and they ground that
supposition upon Vitrunius, who reports that one of his engines with a
terrible noise did shoot forth great Bullets of stone: which by reason of
that report could neither be supposed the Catapulta, Balista, Scorpion, nor
any other of his known engines. Others say that Ordnance and Powder were used
in the time of Alexander the Great, who having a purpose to besiege a City
near the river Ganges, was diswaded from it by some of his good friends that
told him, the Citizens thereof were so much favored of Inpiter, that he
usually sent Lightning and Thunder from their walls, that destroyed whosoever
offered to assault that City. And indeed if we shall well consider the nature
and effect of Powder and Ordnance, we shall find them to come so near unto
natutall thunder and lightning, that I think we may well say, that as Nature
has long time had her Thunder and Lightning, so Art has now hers. Dionisius
Halic in his first book of Antiquities reports, that Alladius the 12. King
of the Latins after Aeneas, had invented a means by art to counterfeit Thunder
and Lightning, of purpose to make his Subjects believe him to be a God, yet in
the practicing thereof he burned his house and himself together, each of which
may be probably coniectured to be done with the materials of Powder and
Ordnance. Others affirm that a Monk of Germany, named Barthold Sheuuart,
otherwise called the Black. Upon a cettatne time (not thinking upon Powder or
Ordnance) in the year of our Lord 1300, having in his Mortar a mixture of
Sulpher and Niter for another use; by chance a cole of fire falling into the
same, caused it so to rarifie and blow it self away: that he being therewith
astonished, searched into the cause thereof, and upon further trials, he found
that the hot and dry qualities of the Sulpher being with coal and moisture
combined and wrought together, with the cold and moist qualities of the Nyter,
was apt by force to be suddenly unloosed with great rarefaction, whereby by
little and little he brought that unhappy invention of Gunpowder and Gunnes to
perfection, to make use thereof in Wars: which he revealing in short space
made it common. Beraldus says, that at the first invention of Ordnance they
were all called by the name of Bombards (a word compounded of the verbes Bombe,
which signifies to Sound, and of Ardco to burn) and they that used them, they
called Bombardiers, which name is yet partly retained. After which, as
Bertholdus says, they were called Turacio and Turrafragi of the breaking down
of Towers and Walls: and by John de monte Regio, they were called Tormenti:
their Shot Sphara tormentaria, and the Gunners Magistri tormentorum, But now
Ordnance are either named at the will of the inuentors, either according to his
own name (as the Canon was) or by the names of birds and beasts of prey, for
their swiftnes, or their cruelty: as the Faulconet Faulcon, Saker and
Culuering, etc. for swiftness of flying, as the Basiliske, Serpentine, Aspike
Dragon, Syrene, etc. for cruelty, whoseswiftnes, report, and terriblenes is
properly and wittily expressed by the Latin Poet Forcastorius, as follows.

Continue cana terrificis horentia bombis
Era and flamifferum, tormenta imitantia fulmen,
Corripiunt, Vulcane tum dum Theutonas armas
Inventum: dum tela Iouis mortalibus afers
Nec Mora, Signantes certam sibi quisque volucrens
Inclusum salucrum cineres, sulphurque nitrumque
Materiam accendunt, Seruatain vest fauilla
Fomite correpta diffusa repent furit vis
Ignea circumsepta: Simulque cita obice rupto
Intrusam impellit glander volat illaper auras
Stridula et exanimes passim per Prata iacebunt
Deiectae volucres, magno micat ignibus Aer
Cum Tonitru: quo Silua omnes Ripaque recurua
Et percussa imo sonuerunt aequora fundo.
Imitated by the Author, in English thus:

What Horrid roares proceed from Bombards souls
By air made fire, Torments of lightning flashes
From earth exhald, with vapors: Vulcan howles
For that now on earth men can make thunder dashes,
Ingenious Art now Aping Natures work,
Gives also name of birds and beasts of pray
To Gunnes, wherein maine cruelty does lurk,
When powdered Peter, Coals and Napths assay
To force the Sphaericke shot t'outflye Report,
And by Report to make the Welkin roar,
And Siluan cauernes, Echoes loud retort,
Batter, Sink, Kill, yet aiming mischiefs more:
For merciless they will spare nor high nor low,
Poor, fatherless, nor widows will they know.
The devils birds I think were fitter names
To call them by, that spit such cruel flames.
CHAP. III. Where Ordnance were first used in these parts.
PAulus Interianus the Ligurian Historiographer, a grave and authentic Author
writes, that in the year of our Lord 1366. when the Wars were hot between
the Venetians and the Genoweses, certain Germans presented two Pieces of
Iron Ordnance (wrought by hand) unto the Seignory of Venice, with some
provision of Powder and Leaden Shot; who received them very thankfully;
especially seeing how that diabollicall unknown fury had not only
exceedingly feared, but also slain so many of their Enemies, that thereby they
prevailed and obtained a wished victory against their adversaries, and
accordingly got their own deseignes. And Paulus Iouius in his third book
reports, that the first Field Ordnance that were used in Italy, were in the
Wars between the Bannitoes of Florence, and the house of Medices brought by
Bartholmeo Coglioni, and that the Prince of Ferrara having received a hurt in
his foot by a Shot, from one of those small Pieces (mounted upon wheels as
he notes.) The Prince earnestly complained, that Coglioni had behaved
himself that day very maliciously against him, by using supernatural
Barbarism, in making such horrible and unaccustomed Tempests, to beat and
spoil his Men with, who had none other Weapons to defend themselves, but only
Swords and Spears. Laonicus Chalon in his fifth book, reports that Mahomet
the great Turk at the Siege of Constantinople, in the year of our Lord 1419,
planted against it one piece of Ordnance, that he discharged seven times in one
day, which conveyed a bullet of 300 pound weight, and made the ground tremble a
furlong round about it (at the discharge) with the report thereof. And he
further affirms that the Grecians answered him again with Pieces that shot
bullets of 150 pound weight. Pollider Virgill in his fifth book of the English
History writes, that in the year of our Lord 1425, in the beginning of the
reign of the French King, Charles the seventh; the English having besiedged
the Town of Mantz so battered the walls thereof, that they soon fell to the
ground. And Munster in his second Volume writes, that the Duke de Bar 1431,
was defeated by the Count de Vademont, by means of the Ordnance that he used
(both Canon and Culuering) which was a matter then so new and rare, that the
Count himself at the shooting them off, fell always on his face to the ground
for fear. Ordnance were also used by the Almaines about the Coast of Denmark
in the year 1434. Paulus Iouius and Guichardine relate that Charles the eighth
of France having undertaken the Conquest of Naples, used Ordnance both in the
Planes, and upon the tops of high mountains. And the Italians that descrbed
his return, said, that with his soldiers, he drew them up over the tops of
the Appenyne Mountains, and so from place to place with admirable courage,
where by reason of the steepness and roughness of the place, horses and
cattle could not be employed to draw them, but his horsemen did then carry
the Shot and other Munitions to them several cannons Pierrier. Steinhuchsen.
Cap. 3.
Abatte mur. Maurbrecher.

several cannons Cap. 4. Pierrier ou Bombarde Steinbuchse.
Eschelle a mire.
Qiel. leittern.
parts of a cannon Cap. 5.
section of a fortress wall Tract. 2. Cap. 6.
Tract de l'espaulle auec ses troniers. et explanades.
Figur der schutren mitt ihren zangen vnd britschen.
belonging, each of them alittle. Camello Vitelli is said to have invented the
Pistols and small Hand-gunues for horsemen, whereby Ferdinand of Aragon
discomfited the French and Almaines. Muskets were invented for footmen, and
first used at the Siege of Rhege in 1521: since which time their inventions
have been so infinitely varied as no man can fully express: which now shall
suffice me, and I hope will give satisfaction to other men also.

CHAP. IIII. Of what forms and fashions Ordnance were first made.
Captain Vffano says, that at the first invention of Ordnance they made them
of iron bars by hand, with iron hoopes, and of several fashions, as may
appear in the precedent figure at a and b.

The first was like to the common drinking Cannes (used in England) tapring
less and less toward one end. having also a tapering skrew at the breech to
fasten it into a piece of timber: but the same growing wider and wider from the
breech to the mouth-wards, made the Shot thereof to scatter and to be of little
force and of less (and most uncertain) direction: these long since are quite
out of use, and for their fashions they were called Screwed Tapers.

The second sort were called A batte murs, or Beat walls, and is represented
therein at 2, they were not much unlike Bombards, but were laid in Troughes or
Trunk carriages with 4 truckes and two tymbers that rise up at the breech to
stay it in the carriage, and to perform the office of the Trunnions therein.

The third was called an Elbow piece, and is represented at 3 like a man's arm
bended at the Elbow orthe gonally, or at right Angles, whereupon it took that
name, but it being also of little force, is likewise left and of no use.

The fourth was a Bombard chambred which shot round stone shot, and is seldom
(without alteration) used.

The fifth was called Scala mur, or the Scale wall, not much vnnlike our Stock
fowlers, these two last are represented at a in the said first figure b,
differing only in that our carriages which are made to mount, and imbase them
by a sliding Standerd with holes and a trucke at the foot thereof.

And the sixth is like a Chambred Canon Perior, but that the Chamber is made of
a Piece by it self skrewed into the Chase, and has Truunions as is
represented at V 1 in the first figure, but by reason of the great trouble to
skrew it, the same is also out of commen use.

The seventh Piece is nothing unlike our Portingale-base, which with her
Chamber, Tail, and Hand stearne, to guide and direct it unto the assigned
mark, as is in the same figure represented at 2, being yet with us of use,
especially in small vessels at Sea.

The three last they sometime did work by Forge and Anuill, yet sometime they
did cast the two first of these 3 both of Iron and brass. And thus much may
serve to have spoken of the Ordnance first formed of Antiquity.

CHAP. V. Of former foreign Foundings of Ordnance.
GVnne-Founders about a hundred, or a hundred and fifty years past did use to
cast Ordnance more poor, weak, and much slenderer fortified then now, both
here and in foreign parts: also the rather because Saltpeter either being ill
or not refyned, their sulphur vnclarified, their coals not of good wood, or
else ill burnt; making therewith also their powder cuilly receipted, slenderly
wrought, and altogether vncorned, made it prove to be but weak (in respect of
the corned powder made now a days) wherefore they also made their Ordnance
then accordingly, (that is much weaker then now:) for the powder now being
double or treble more then it was in force of rarifaction and quicknes;
requires likewise to increase the Metal twice or thrice more then before for
each Piece. For whereas then they allowed for the Canon 80 pound of Metal for
each pound that the Shot wayed, now they allow 200 pound and more for each
pound of the Shot: and for Culuerings then they allowed but 100, and for Saker,
Falcon, and lesser Pieces they were wont only to allow 150 for one. But now
for the Culuerings they allow 300, and for the small Ordnance 400 pounds, for
each pound their several shots of cast iron is to weigh. And as for foreign
Foundings that it may appear how they differ from our English Ordnance, For I
say that in Spain, in Germany, and in Italy, they reckoning their Canons and
Culuerings by the weight of their iron cast shot, they make at the least ten
sorts of either. For they have Canons of 16, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 100,
and 120, and Culuerings of 14, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 100, and 120,
calling them Canons or Culuerings of so much as their Shot weighs, having
several heights of their Diametres, wherein although the Canon of 20 or of 30,
etc. shoot iron shots of equal weight, with the Culuering of 20 or of 30
being of like numeration, and also of like height of Bore, for the Cannon of
30, shoots a Shot of 30 pound weight, and so likewise does the Culuering of
30, and the like is to be understood of the Canon and Culuering of 50, 60, 80,
or of 100 pounds, and so of the rest: yet do they differ in the length of
their Chases and fortification of their Mettalls, for the Canons are but about
18 Dyametres of their Bores in length, whereas their Culuerings are about 32
Dyametres of their Bore long. And besides they likewise differ in fortification
of Metal,: the ordinary Canon being in her Chamber but of her bore; and at
her Trunnion but 5/^, and at her Mouth but 3/^ of her bore in thickness of
Metal, whereas their ordinary Culuerings are fortified with the whole height
of their Bores in their Chamber and with 14/16 at the Trunnions, and with 7/16
of the height of their bores, at their Mouths in thickness of metal. Now
because the Measures and Weights in those aforenamed Dominions do not agree at
all with ours their pound Troy being about one ounce and a half lighter then
our pound Haberdepoyz, and their feet and inches Brases, and Palms likewise
differing among themselves, and much more from our measure of foot and inch of
Assize in England, as may appear by the Scale here annexed, with the several
Tables; both theirs and our Ordnance are better to be distinguished and
understood Of a foot in Viena 6 a Pace Venice and Verona 8 a Pace Grecia 10 a
Pace Bauaria 6 a Pace Antwerp 10 a Pace Ferrara 8 a Pace Loraine 10 a Pace
France du Roy 8 a Pace England 20 a Geo: Pace



A Table of Heights.
lb. inch. 14 4 16 4 20 5 30 6 40 6 4/^ 50 7 60 7 ^/9 70 8 80 8 190 9 120 9
^/^in their Weights, Bores, and Measures, then many words can explain, I have
first therefore wished, that my Brethren and loving countrymen (English
Canoniers) should be also acquainted with those foreign Ordnance; lest
perchance being commanded to serve with some of them, they unhappily should at
first be dangerously mistaken therein: wherefore I have likewise here annexed a
Table, which will nearly reduce the Spanish heights unto our measures of
inches, and for the rest in regard their weights are so nigh one and the same
among themselves in the pounds, and differing from our pounds Haberdepoyze,
etc. it may also tolerably serve for them all in like fort, as the two examples
following will I hope satissie.

Example 1.
Admit there be a foreign Canon or Culuering of 40, and the height of the
Bore thereof be required.

Look in this Table against 40, where you shall find 6^, so you may conclude
that the Bore thereof is to be 6 inches (...) of our English Measures.

Example 2.
And in like manner for a Canon or Culuering of 60, you may find seven inches
and 1/9. But you must remember to allow part of that height less, for the
height of each shot, for the due vent thereof, as shall hereafter be further
showed.

Whereby you may also perceive that the wonted allowance of ^ of an inch for the
shot lower then the Bore of the Piece: for all Pieces Great and Small is no
good proportion for allowing the vent generally, being but a general English
error, and rejected by understanding Gunners, as hereafter when we show how to
find the due vent for every Piece shall more at large appear.

In France they have usually these 6 Pieces. viz. Bore. Leng. Shot. degrees. d. lb.
Canon 6 19 33 Culu. 5 27 16 Bast. 4 28 7 Mini. 2 1/^ 36 2 ^/2 Falc. 2 2/1 36 1
Falconet 2 37

And 3 sorts of Shot, Stone, Iron and Lead, whereof the first is to the second
subtriple, and the second to the third Subsesquitret in weight.

CHAP. VI. Of later Founding for legitimate Ordnauce.
THe Emperor Charles the fifth, finding the great inconvenience in those
confused varieties, consulted thereof with his Council of War, and thereupon
commanded. That all his Gunne-founders should thenceforth cast all Cannons of
18 Dyamerres of their Bores in length, and to carry an iron Cast shot of 45
pound and allowed about 7000 weight of Metal for every of those common
Cannons for Battery: but for reinforced Cannons (that is as we term them
double fortified Cannons) to give them one height of their Bore in thicknes of
Metal at the Touchhole, and 11/16 at the Trunnions, and ^^/16 at the Mouth
and to be also in length 18 Dyametres of their Bore, waying in Metal about
8000 pound. But for lessened Cannons being of like length he allowed but 6000
pound of Metal, being thick at the Touchhole, ^/16 at the Trunnions, and
^/16 at the Mouth.

Whereupon these observations may well arise, That each sort of Ordnance

cannons of different sizes Cap. 6.1.
Colubrines Legitimes.
Ordentliche Vndt rechte Veldtschlangen.


more cannons of different sizes Cap. 6.2.
Couleuurines bastardes.
Falsche Veldtschlangen.
that are reinforced or double fortified, being thicker or richer in Metal
both in their Chambers and Chases then the ordinary or lessened are, therefore
able to bear and resist the force of more Powder to be fired in them then the
others can, without danger, and so consequently do greater execution against
any strong resisting Object. And likewise we may conceive that the ordinary
fortified Pieces may endure more, and do more service then the Lessened can do.

Monsieur de Mot, Don Louis de Valasco, and Cond de Bucquoy, late Generals, or
Masters of the Ordnance to the King of Spain, considering the vtility and
benefit of these Imperial Orders, every of them in their several times gave
command to the Founders, that they should thenceforth cast all their Ordnance
according to the proportions and Rules following.

Namely, that every Ordinary Canon of battery should be made to shoot an iron
round cast shot of 48 pound weight, with 24 pound of fine powder, or 27 of
common powder, and to be in length 18 Dyametres of her bore, and fortified in
thicknes of Metal with 7/^ in her Chamber, and with at the Trunnions, and
with 7/^ at the Mouth, waighing about 6500 pound.

The reinforced or double fortified Cannons to be fortified the thicknes of one
Dyametre in Metal at the Chamber or Pillar of fire, at the Trunnions with of
a Dyametre, and at the Mouth with ^^/^^ of her bore, which were to be charged
with 48 pound shot, and 28 pound of fine powder, or 32 pound of common powder,
and waighing about 7000 pound, being 18 Dyametres in length.

The Lessened Canon to be ^/4 of a Dyametre of her bore in thickness of
Metal at the Chamber, and (...) at the Trunnions, and ^/16 at the Mouth,
shooting 48 pound shot with 20 pound of fine powder, the Chase being also 18
Dyametres of her bore in length, and to weigh about 5700 pound.

And to make their Demy-cannons as the reinforced to carry iron shot of 24
pound weight, to be 20 Dyametres of the bore in length of their Chases, and
weighing about 4500 pound.

The Quarter Canons (reinforced also) 25 times the Dyametre of their Bores in
length, and the shot of 12 pound, and the piece to weigh 2700 pounds.

Likewise they gave Order to cast their ordinary Culuerings 28 Dyametres of
their Bores in length to shoot a shot of 16 pound, with 16 pound of ordinary
powder, or 12 pound of fine powder: but for the Lessened with 14 pound of
common, or 10 pound of fine powder; and the double fortified or reinforced,
with 18 pound of common, or 13 pound of fine powder. And their common demi
Culuerings to be 30 Dyametres of their Bores in length, and more rich in
metal then the whole Culuerings, and their shot to weigh 10 pound, with 10
lb. of common powder, or ^/^ of fine powder namely: 8 pound. And for the
Lessened 9 pound of common, or 7 pound of fine powder: But for the reinforced,
11 pound of common, or 8 pound ^/^ of fine powder.

And their Sakers or quarter Culuerings to be 32 Dyametres of their Bore for
length of their Chases, and to shoot 6 pound of iron shot with as much fine
powder as the shot waigheth: and the like for the Faulcons, Faulconets,
Rabinets and Bases which may be from 36 to 50 Diametres of their Bores in
length, and the more fortified. And thus much for Modern Legitimate Ordnance:
as for Bastard Canons, Bastard Culuerings, etc. they shoot higher shot, but
are in Chase fewer of their proper Dyametres in length. And for extraordinary
Pieces they are of lower height in their Bores, and in Chase more their proper
Dyametres in length, then the Legitimate are. And of both the Bastard Pieces,
and of the extraordinary Pieces there are Common fortified, reinforced or
double fortified, or less, or lessened fortified Pieces, as well as of the
Legitimate: each of such thicknes of metal in every member in proportion
being compared with their proper Dyametres, as the ordinary, reinforced, or
Lessened legitimate Pieces are of ^ as the particulars with their names,
waights, and proportions here under mentioned, with the Tables following will
make manifest.

Ordinary observations in Venice.
A Piece being of a inches in height the shot waigheth 1 lb.

At 2 inches and, 3 lb. (...) At 3 inches 4 lb. At 3 inches one quarter 5 lb.
At 3 inches and, 6 lb. At 4 inches, 9 lb. At 4 inches and a half 11 lb. At 5
inches 16 lb. At 5 inches and a half 23 lb.

And note that all these shoot the full weight of their shot in powder. And
also that their pound is but about 14 ounces Haberdepoy zc.

And their Observations for their greater Pieces appears by the Table and
discourse following. viz. Bore. Shot. C Powd. inch. lb. lb. Canons of 6 inches
5 26 18 Canons of 7 inches 6 38 24 Canons of 8 inches 7 64 42 Canons of 9
inches 8 110 76 Cannons of 10 inches 9 174 136 Canons of 11 inches 10 205 146
Canons of 12 inches 11 245 162 Canons of 13 inches 12 285 190 Canons of 14
inches 13 348 232

The Canons of 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 inches they load with (...) of powder of
their shots weight and load with 3 ladles full of powder for their charge, each
ladle 3 bals long. But the Canons of 11, 12, 13, and 14 inches, they load with
4 ladles full of powder, each ladle being 1 Dyametre and a half of the shot in
length. As the figure following describes. three crossed ramrods

You may also further understand, that for the 4 last mentioned Canons, the
Ladle described in the midst of this figure serves, being but one Dyametre and
a half in length of the shots height: whereof 4 Ladlefulls makes up 6
Dyametres, which is of nine which is always accounted to contain weight for
weight: namely, so much powder as will be of equal weight with the iron cast
shot, as well for these as all other Pieces, which although it be not exactly
so, yet may it serve for a general estimate for a sudden service to guess a
near proportion.

A Table of reinforced Legitimate Ordnance.
Weight, Mir. Co. Leu. Best A The Dragon a Double Culuering 14000 714 357 4252
paces. B Whole Culuering 8500 630 315 3703 paces. C Demi Culuering 4600 470 235
2796 paces. D Saker or Culuering 2650 366 283 2181 paces. E Faulcon 1500 279
889 1659 paces. F Faulconet 850 215 107 1280 paces. G Rabinet 425 164 82 669
paces. H Base 300 126 63 725 paces.

A Table of Lessened Legitimate Ordnance.
A The Dragon or double Culuering 11000 650 325 3164 paces. B Whole Culuering
6300 570 285 3391 paces. C Demi Culuering 3150 434 217 2558 paces. D Saker 2000
334 167 1838 paces. E Faulcon 1100 254 127 1514 paces. F Falconet 600 196 98
1163 paces. G Rabinet 350 150 75 895 paces. H Base 300 180 40 842 paces.

CHAP. VIII. Of Foundings of Bastard Pieces, with their Names, Waights, and
Measures.
BAstard Pieces are as I have said, Ordinary, Re-informed and Lessened, namely
the Ordinary of one Diametre of her Bore in thicknes of Metal at the
Touchhole; Reinforced of more then one Dyametre, and the Lessened of less
then one Dyametre thick there: each of which have the name, the weight,
proportion of powder, and of the shot allowed as follows.

The ordinary Basiliske or Bastard double Culuering is about 26 Dyametres in
length, and shoots an iron cast shot of 48 pound, with 39 pound of Common, or
30 pound of fine powder, and weighs 12200 pounds.

The Serpentine or Bastard Culuering is in length 27 Dyametres of her Bore, and
shoots 24 pound shot with as much common, or 19 pound ^ of fine powder.

The Aspike or Bastard demi Culuering, shoots 12 pound shot, with 12 pound of
fine powder, and is 28 Dyametres long, waighing 4050 pound.

The Pelican or Basterd quarter Culuering is 29 Dyametres of her Bore in
length shooting fix pound, with as much fine powder, weighing 2400 pound.

The Bastard Faulcon shoots 3 pound shot, with 3 pound of fine powder, and is
30 Dyametres long, and waigheth 1350 pound.

The Bastard Rabinet shoots an iron shot of 1 pound with so much fine powder,
and is 31 Dyametres of her Bore in length, weighing 750 pound. These aforesaid
are Ordinary Bastard Pieces for the Reinforced and Lessened: the Table
following will describe.

A Table of Bastard Pieces reinforced by Metal.
Weight by mettle Level Best A Basiliske 14660 659 paces. 329 3921 paces. B
Serpentyne 8100 590 295 3511 C Aspicke 7600 440 220 2618 D Pelican 2550 344
172 2044 E Faulcon 1500 261 132 1553 F Rabinet 800 202 101 1198 G Base 450 120
72 916

A Table of Bastard Pieces Lessened.
Weight by mettle Leuel Best A Basiliske 10500 595 298 3540 B Serpentine 6300
530 265 3153 C Aspyke 3700 400 200 2028 D Pelican 2100 310 155 1844 E Faulcon
1200 212 118 1407 F Rabinet 610 182 92 1086 G Base 155 139 70 825

Thus much for the Common fortified Pieces, and these Tables for Lessened and
reinforced, as well for Basterd as for extraordinary Pieces which will further
satisfy the Reader in particulars then many words: which because they are
plain enough, I think they shall need no further explanation.

CHAP. IX. Of Foundings of Extraordinary Pieces with their Names, Waights and
Measures.
EXtraordinary Pieces having as I said, longer Chases, and lower heights of
Bore then either the Legitimate or Bastard Pieces are nevertheless of 3 sorts
also; as the Ordinary fortified with one Dyameter thick of Metal at the
Touchhole, and the reinforced with more then one Dyametre, and the Lessened
with less then one Dyametre of their proper Bore in thicknes there at the
Touchhole, even as we have already said both of the Legitimate and Bastard
Pieces also. And first the Ordinary have the measures and weight following.

The Flying Dragons, ordinary or extraordinary Double Culuerings are of 29
Dyametres of their Bore in length of their Chases, and shoot 32 pound of iron
cast shot, with 27 pound of Common, or 22 pound of fine powder, and weigh about
12200 pound, shooting by mettle, or Mira Com. 638, leuelleth 319 paces, best
3790 paces.

The Syrene or extraordinary whole Culuerings are 40 times length, the height
of their Bores, weigh 6900 pound, and shoot 16 pound iron shot, with 16 pound
of Common, or 12 pound of fine powder, shooting by mettle 560 paces, level 250
paces, best 3332 paces.

The Flying Sparrowes, or extraordinary Demi Culuerings are in length 41 times
the height of their Bores, shooting 8 pound iron shot, with 9 pound of Common
powder, or 7 pound of fine powder, and weigh 4100 pound, shooting by Metal
420 paces, level 220 paces, at the best Randon 2499 paces.

The extraordinary Sakers, or Quarter Culuerings extraordinary, are 42 times in
length, the height of their Bores: and shoot, a shot of 4 pound of cast iron,
with 6 pound of Common, or 4 pound of fine powder, and weigh 2350 pound,
shooting by Metal 316 paces, level 158 paces, Best, 1941 paces.

The Extraordinary Faulcons have 43 times the height of their Bores in length
of their Chases, shooting 2 pound of iron shot with 2 pound of fine powder, and
weigh 1350 pound, shoot by metal 249 paces, Leuel 124 pac. Best 1481 paces.

The extraordinary Rabinets, or Passengers, are 44 times their Bore in length,
and weigh 775 pound, shooting 1 pound of iron shot, or 1 pound lead, with 1
pound of Common, or 1 pound of fine powder, shooting by mettle 192 paces,
Level 96 paces, Best 1142 paces.

The extraordinary Bases weigh 450 pound, and are 45 Dyametres, their shot are
pound of iron, or of Lead, with as much fine powder, shooting by the Metal
147 paces, Level 74 paces, and at their best Randon 876 paces.

The Reinforced and Lessened extraordinary Pieces are made apparent by these
Table following.

A Table of Reinforced extraordinary Pieces.
Flying By Metal Level Best Weight A Dragon 658 329 paces. 3936 paces. 14000
lb. B Syrene 590 295 3511 81000 C Sparrow 440 220 2618 4600 D Saker 348 174
2044 2600 E Faulcon, 261 130 1553 1500 F Rabinet 202 101 1198 800 G Base 154 77
916 500

A Table of Lessened extraordinary Pieces.
Flying By Metal Leuel Best Weight A Dragon 595 paces 297 paces. 3540 10500
lb. B Syrene 530 265 3153 6300 C Sparrow 400 200 2018 3700 D Saker 310 155 1824
2100 E Faulcon 236 118 1407 1200 F Rabinet 183 92 1081 650 G Base 139 69 829
350

There rests yet another kind of modern Foreign Pieces invented by Iuan
Mauriga Lara that shoot only Stone or Murdering Shot, which are only Taper
bored in their Chambers, not much unlike our Drakes, whereof there were 3 sorts.

The first of them were 15 times the Dyametre of their Bore in length, and
called Rebuffes.

cannons of various sizes Colubrines extraordinaires.
Extraordinar Colubrine^


The second sort were 16 times their Bores in length called a Cracker.

And the third were 17 Bores in length, and called Ferrates, all which are
represented in the third figure at ^.

These last mentioned (as also our Drakes) may either be reckoned among the
sorts of Canon Periors, (being they are nearer the length of Dyametres) but
shooting iron shot, are nearer unto the sorts of Cannons of Battery: wherefore
I conceive they may properly be estimated as Bastards to the one, or else as
extraordinary to the other of these sorts, for the reasons before alleged.
And thus much may suffice to speak of Foreign Founding.

CHAP. X. Of our English Ordnance distinguished into 4 kinds, and those
generally divided into sever all sorts as follows.
THe Ordnance that are usually founded in England, may very fitly be divided
into four several kinds in respect of the height of their Bores, length of
their Chases, Fortification of their Metal, and the uses for which they are
to serve, whose differences each from other I here intend to show in general,
beginning with the Greatest; namely, the Canons of Battery, which we reckon to
be the first kind, They differ very much from the other three kinds, as will
appear by comparing the height of their Bores, with the length of their
Chases, The height of their Bores being all between 8 inches, and 6 inches
Dyametre; and the length of their Chases being between 15 and 22 Dyametres of
their proper Bores; in fortification of metal they differ also, for that they
never exceed one Dyametre of their Bores in thickness of Metal at the
Touchhole. They differ in uses, as being only used in Batteries, which the
rest are not except the Culuerings (which are sometimes also used to pierce and
cut out those ruins that the Canons have loosened and shaken) Cannon shot
being heauiest, because greatest, therefore only and most fitly used to batter
the Enemies Walls, Curtins, Bulwarks, and Defenses: of the Cannons of Battery
there are three sorts: Namely, the double Canon, or Canon Royal, or Canon of
8, whose Bore is 8 inches and upwards, in the height of her Dyametre, and being
15 or 16 Dyametres long in her Chase; the second sort is called the Whole
Canon, or Canon of seven, being 7 inches in height, and about 18 Dyametres
long. The third sort of this first kind are the Demi Canons, of about 6 inches
in height of the shot, and 20 or 22 Dyametres in length, Of this kind may also
the Minions and Drakes be reckoned. Of the second kind we reckon the
Culuerings and their Consorts which are in height of Bore between 5 inches and,
and 1 inch Dyametre, and in length of their Chases they may be between 28 and
60 times the Dyametre of their own Bores, and in fortification being never
less then one whole Dyametre of Metal in thicknes at their Cha^bers: Of this
kind are many sever all sorts; namely, all such lesser Ordnance as shoot iron
shot? As the double Culuering, the whole Culuering, Demi Culuering, Saker,
Faulcon, Faulconet, Rabinet, and Base, etc. whereof I shall hereafter speak
more in particular. The smaller of this kind are of the more Dyametres of their
Bores in length, and better fortified in thicknes of Metal, each having also
respect to their own proper Bore. Of the third kind are the Periors, or such
Pieces as only shoot Stone, or else Murdering Shot, both which, and Fireballs
may be likewise shot out of any of the aforementioned Ordnance. And there are
also sever all sorts of Pieces of this third kind, all which are distinguished
from the Ordnance of the fourth kind, for diverse respects, especially for
length, being 8 or more Dyametres of the Bore at the Mouth in length of their
Chases. The sorts of this kind are the Canon Perior, the Periera, the Port
Piece, the Stock Fowler, the Sling, Bombard, etc. of each of which more shall
be said in their proper places hereafter. Of the fourth kind are all sort of
Pieces that either shoot stone shot, Fireballes, Murdering shot, or else no
shot at all. The sorts of this kind are the Mortar Pieces, Murderers,
Pettards, etc. being in length under 6 times the height of the Bore of their
Mouths, of each sort of this kind some are bigger, and some lesser according
as the assigned service requires.

A Table out of Alexander Bianco, each pace two foot and a half for Randons
of the 6 Points of the Gunners Quadrant.
Point Blanke. 1 2 3 4 5 6 Faulconet 180 750 1275 1590 1710 1785 1800 Faulcon
260 1100 1870 2332 2508 2618 2640 Minion 240 1000 1650 2046 2340 2412 2440
Saker 300 1250 2125 2650 2850 2957 3000 Demi Culuering 348 1450 2465 3074 3306
3451 3480 Culuering 360 1500 2550 3180 2420 3570 3600 Demi Cannon 312 1300 2210
2756 2964 3094 3120 Canon of 7 324 1350 2295 2865 2978 2213 3240 Canon of 8 360
1500 2550 3180 3420 3570 3600

This Table seems to be Calculated after the Common Pace, which is but if the
Geometrical Pace, and must out of doubt be so understood, as he himself in
some part of his Book acknowledges, which I thought fit to give notice of to
avoid misprisions, and for making the matter more plain. Which the Reader may
reduce by taking of every number.

I have here also added another usual Table for English Ordnance, wherein I
acknowledge some errors are, because exactnes in Tables of this Nature is not
to be expected, by reason of the infinite diversities of Materials and
Accidents: But it may so become useful nevertheless, because it resonably
points at what should be in this matter expressed precisely, if it were
possible, which the courteous Reader I hope will accept of until better come.

A Table of Ordinary proportions allowed for English Ordnance.
Bore. Height of the Shot. Weight of the Shot. Weight of Serpent: Powder.
Ladles length. Ladles breadth Length of the Piece. Weight of the Piece. Weight
of Corn powder. Canon Royal, or, Canon of 8 Inches 7 3/6 inch. 63 lb. 40 lb.
24 inch. 14 inch. 12 foot. 8000 lb. 27 lb. Canon of 7 6 39 25 22 12 11 7000 18
Demi Canon 6 6 30 20 21 11 10 6000 14 Whole Culue. 5 4 15 14 19 9 4300 10 5 5 1
15 20 10 12 4400 12 5 5 20 16 21 11 4600 15 Demi Culue. 4 4 9 8 17 7 2200 6 4 4
10 9 18 8 11 2400 7 3/7 4 4 12 10 19 9 2500 8 Saker 3 3 5 5 30 9 1400 4 3 3 5 5
31 9 9 1500 4 4 3 5 5 32 10 1600 5 Minion 3 3 3 3 25 5 7 1200 3 Falcon 2 2
(...) 2 2 22 5 7 700 2 Falconet 2 2 1 (...) 12 18 3 3/^ 6 500 1 Rabinet 1 1 5/4
11, 2 4 300 Base 1 1 9 2 3 201 (...)

For the Culuerings whose shot weighs 18 pound, you must abate 3/6 which is 3
pound, for then the powder must weigh 15 pound.

For the Canon abate 1/^.

For a general observation take that a Ladle 9 bals in length, and 2 bals in
breadth, will very near contain the just weight in powder, that the iron cast
shot for any Piece waigheth.

And also that the powder here mentioned is for Serpentine powder, which being
now out of use, the Corn powder being 1/^ stronger, therefore (...) of these
weights is to be abated, as in the last Colume appears.

CHAP. XI. Of the Canons of Battery in particular, or of the first kind, and
their sorts.
IT would be too tedious and long, yea and almost impossible to show all the
differences and inequalities in the Weights and Measures of several Pieces of
one same kind and sort of Ordnance that have been cast, or yet are at this time
remaining in several Fortresses of England and other countries, besides such
as are here and there yet daily Founded or usually made either according to the
Princes and the Officers of the Ordnance invention and wills, or some Founders
opinions and self conceits. But forasmuch as it is a matter of greatest
importance for every Gunner that takes charge of Ordnance, to know perfectly
of what kind and sort every Pecce that is committed unto him to manage and
serve with, is; and whether they be sufficiently fortified or not, and to
discern and examine whether any defect be amongst them, and so to be able
thereby to judge what powder each Piece in loading is able to endure, with
safety to perform her uttermost services, considering then withal that Powder
is now reduced into a greater perfection for force then formerly it was,
wherefore former proportions are to be altered now: otherwise by ignorance or
oversight they may more endammage their own side then their Enemies. Some
Pieces being but poorly fortified, are too long to bear a sufficient loading,
others are too too short to burn their full charge of powder requisite to
carry their shot home to the assigned services; some are too light and, and
some too heavy in their breeches, by misplacing their Trunnions in making the
mold for their foundings, being too light they danger the vawmures, and by
being too heavy in their Metal toward their Breech, they become unwieldy and
troublesome to Manage.

There are three sorts of Canons of Battery, namely, the Canon Royal, or
double Canon, they are usually 15 times in length, the Dyametre of their Bores,
which is about 8 inches in height.

The next is the Whole Canon, or (as it is called) the Canon of 7, being about
7 inches in Dyametre of Bore, and in length of their Chases about 18 such
Dyametres.

The third sort is the Demi Canon, which is about 6 inches, and (...) in
Dyametre of Bore, and their ordinary fortifications for each of these are 7/^
of dyametre thick in Metal at the Chamber, and (...) at the Trunnions, and
(...) at the Coronish, and at the Mouth. But of late some Founders have given
unto the Demi Canons the full thicknes of one whole dyametre in Metal at
their Chambers; allowing for every one pound weight of their shot some 220 or
143 pound of Metal (for the biggest of this kind) and more, others in
proportion for the least.

various cannons and their cannonballs Cap. 8.
Canon de l'Emp. Charles V. don't deriuent les meillieures fontes.

Kaiss: Mt. Carolj V. Carthaunen nach Welchen die best guss gerichtet sein.



various cannons and their cannonballs Cap. 9.
Font nouuelle de l'Archiducq Albert. Neuw guss Ertzhertzogen Albertj.



These three are only used in Batteries against strong Walls and defenses of
the Enemies, because their greater weight of shot does shake more the^ the
lighter can, namely more then the demi Culuering, (although the same shoots
and pierces further) as by experience is daily seen. But foreign Canons
were formerly, and are in some places, as we have already said, named according
to the weight of their shot, being of 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80 90, 100 and
120 pound, and most of them 18 times the dyametre of their Bores in length of
their Chases.

CHAP. XII. Of Culuerings, or the second Kind of Ordnance, with their several
sorts.
THe second kind of Ordnance are the Culuerings, of which are five sorts, the
Saker, Faulcon, Falconet, Rabinet and Base, wherein the Modern founded
Culuerings, Sakers, etc. do much differ also from the Ancient, and our modern
English also from the former foreign Ordnance, especially in Length, Bore,
and Fortification, for that in former foreign Foundings, they did as we said
before cast the Culuerings to shoot iron shot of 14, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70,
80, 100, and 120 lb. weight, and called them Culuerings of so much as their
iron shot was in weight, and they then allowed them not above 150 pound weight
of Metal for each pound weight of their shot, and allowed them also to be but
between 24 and 32 dyametres of their shot in the length of their Chases, with
one dyametre of thicknes of Metal (at the most) in their Chambers or Columes
of fire, each Culuering being now 30 or 32 dyametres of their Bore in the
length of their Chases.

But of late (as I before said) they allow Falcons and Falconets to be 36 or
40 dyametres of their bores in length, and 1 or 1 of metal at their Chambers,
with 250 pound, 300 pound, and sometimes more of metal for each pound their
proper shot does weigh. The sorts of this kind by reason of their greater
lengths of more dyametres shoot further and pierce deeper then those of the
first kind, being loaded with as much powder as can be burnt in them whilst the
shot remains within the Cillinder of the Piece, but being loaded with less,
it abateth her utmost execution, if with mbre it increases their danger of
breaking the Piece, and some of the powder will go then out vnfired, or it
being fired out of her Chases, etc. little or nothing does further the course
or way of the shot. Wherefore the proportional length fitted to their
calibres, and the convenient charge of powder in respect thereof, and of the
weight of the shot mentioned in the Theoremes of my first part of the Art of
Artillery will most advance the shot with all advantage possible. And for their
uses they differ much, notwithstanding that they be reckoned as of one same
Kind, for the Greater sorts: namely, Culnerings and Demi Culnerings serve to
pierce and cut out in batteries what the Cannons have shaken and loosed: the
Sakers and Falcons serne for Flankers, the other smaller sorts of this kind,
for Field Pieces for the assaults, and to shoot at Troops or Companies of men
that are near together. Al these shoot iron shot, but may shoot stone shot
where the marks are but tender, and so they will save much in Amonition, and
yet perform as good service as with the iron shot they can do.

Alexander Biance in his Book entitled Corona e palma millitare de
Artiglieria says, That their Founders in Italy as I conceive, because their
Culuerings shoete shot of equal dyametre with their greatest Canons, and
therefore would, if those great Culuerings were not unwieldy, shoot further,
pierce deeper, and shake and unloose more then their Cannon: for the reasons
aforesaid they have of late years cast fewer Canons (and more Culuerings) then
heretofore, commending their force and service far beyond the Canons.

But Diege Vffano Captain of the Artillery in the Castle of Antwerpe, for
reasons in his Traicte de Artillery showed, denies the Culuerings to be of
equal worthiness with the Cannons: which difference grows by reason that
now Batteryes are made at shorter distances then heretofore: namely, within the
Canons right Range, as at 80, 90, or 100 paces, so their opinions (both being
judicious Gunners) I conceive to grow from the alterations also of Foundings,
according to the Imperial orders before mentioned, which in these parts of
Italy were not known as it seems by Bianco Chief Gunner of Cremes, in the
year 1603, nor altered from the aforenamed foreign Foundings; whereby we
may conceive that their seeming differences may be easily moderated by
theiudicious Reader. Now for the Harquebuse a Crocke, being in these days
seldom used but at Sea, where especially, with an Arrow, it is a very galling
and serviceable Piece, and may safely be discharged 300 times in oneday, or 25
times in an hour: his leaden shot weighs but three ounces, and it is charged
with two ounces of Powder, and by reason of the length thereof, might be also
accounted of this kind, but that it is a Hand-gunne, and so appertains not
properly to this discourse.

cross-sections of three loaded cannons Cap. 6.4.
Canon enchambre. Carthau ntitt cingesonckter kammern.

Canon de tuyeau esgal. Carth: mitt gleichem lauff.

Canm encampane Carth: mitt zugespitzter kammern.



cannons of various sizes Cap. 6.5.
Eber. Verrat.

Brecant Preller

Piece de l'Isle de Dio. Stuck auss der insul Dio.

Rebuf. Sturtzer.



CHAP. XIII. Of the Cannon Periors and Perieraes, the third kind and their
sorts.
OF this 3 kind are those Ordnance that shoot no Iron or Leaden shot, but only
lighter, as Stone, Murdering, or Fire shot: of them there are four especial
several sorts. The Canon Perior being the principal, and therefore as the
Canon of Battery and Culuering bring the rest to be of their kinds, so for the
same reason also may the Canon Perior do the like for hers. The Canon Perior
then, for the outside is not much unlike unto the Canon of Battery, but that
they are more uncertain in the heights of their Calibers or Bores, some being
higher and some lower in dyametre, It is a comely and a serviceable Piece) and
for those uses, namely to shoot Stone shot, they are well and sufficiently
fortified; so that being duly laden, the Gunner may therewith safely serve to
defend a Breach, keep a passage, murder, and spoil the Enemy being approached
near hand. Most foreigne Canon Periors are Chambred, being either taper or
belbored in their Chambers, the Mouth of which Chamber being but either or 3/2
in Calibre of the height or Calibre of the Mouth of the Chase, of the Piece;
the difference of which at the Mouth of the Chamber is called the Orloe or
Relish, their Chambers are to be in length 4 Dyametres of the Mouth of the
said Chamber. But the most of our English Cannon Periors are equal bored
through the length of their whole Chases (which I conceive were better to be
only taper bored in their Chamber) so as that the Mouth of their Chambers be
equal in height with all the rest of her Calibre or Bore forward, toward her
Mouth, because it will be thereby the better fortified in the Chamber, and so
the more able to resist the force of her due loading in powder: these Pieces
are to shoot the of the weight of their Stone shot in corn powder, only
abating proportionally 5 pound of powder for every 100 pound weight of shot.
The Chambred Canon Periors with Relishes (as aforesard) are troublesome to
load, for that they are therefore to use a Scafetta, and a Rolling Rammerhead,
with a shiuer in the Staff.

The length of these Canon Periors are about 8 Calibres of their Bore at the
Mouth of the Chase: they are to be in their Chambers 2/7 in thicknes of Metal
at their Touch-holes.

The Terieraes are the next sort of this third kind, which are in all things
like unto the Canon Perior (already mentioned) but that they are much poorer
and weaker fortified with Metal, being allowed for the Canon Perior, 80 pound
of Metal for every pound weight of their Stone shot, and but 60 pound for the
Petrieraes, whose Chamber being but in Bore of the Calibre at the Mouth, must
be loaded with but of Corn powder, but if it be 2/7 then with 1/7 of the
Stone shot weight.

The third sort of Ordnance of this third kind being the Port Pieces, and
Stock Fowlers which are Brass cast Pieces open at both ends, invented to be
loaded with Chambers at the Breech end, fitted close thereinto with a
shouldring, even as the wooden Trees for water pypes have tapred ends to let
them close one into another; The shot and wadde being first put into the Chase,
then is the Chamber to be firmly wedged into the Tail of the Chase and
Carriage. Now in stead of round Trunnions, there are 4 square tennants cast
joining with the side of the Chase of the Piece, on either side two, which
being let into the Block or Carriage, holds the whole Chase fast therein;
leaving the Cornish lying upon the ledge of the Ships Port, or upon the Vawmure
in a Fort, and tryced up with a rope fastened about the muzzle; The Tail of the
Carriage is to rest, and to be shored up with an upright post or foot, full of
holes to slide up and down in a square Mortice fitted thereunto, having a
shiuer at the lower end thereof, with two Tressle legs morteized before under
the block of the Carriage, the foot with holes has a pin to stay the Piece
upon any Mounture assigned. The fourth sort of this 3 kind are the Slings and
Portingale Bases which have Chambers fitted into their Breeches as the
Stocke-Fowlers have, but that the Tails that stays their Chambers to wedge
them fast (as in one continued Piece of iron whereof they are usually welded
and wrought) unto the Tail whereof there is a long stern handle of iron to
direct them to respect the assigned mark: They stand upon a forked Prop or
Pintle upon the ends of which the Trunnions rests, they are loaded with their
Chambers as the Stocke-Fowlers are: these shoot either Base and Burre, Musker
or any other kind of Murdering Shot, being put up in bags or Lanthornes
fitted to their Calibres. And being discharged, their Chambers are to be taken
out and filled again, and others to be put in ready charged in the place
thereof. These Pieces are usually loaded with or of the weight of their shot in
corn powder. Port Pieces and Fowlers are usually made of Cast Brass, but
Portingall Bases, Slyngs, and Murderers, are commonly of wrought iron; the
lengths of the Portingale Base is about 30 times her Calibre; the Sling about
12 times, the Murderers, Port Pieces, and Fowlers 8 at the most besides their
Chambers, their Chambers about 3 times their Calibre in length, and weigh the 6
or 8 part of the whole Chase.

A Table concerning Chamber Pieces.
Length Height Powder Stoneshot and waigheth A Chamber 12 inches and 4 inches
and 7 lb. 6 inches. 13 lb. stone. 22 inches and 4 inches 7 lb. 6 inches. 10 lb.
stone. 24 inches 4 inches 9 lb. 7 inches 17 lb. stone. 17 inches and 3 inches 5
lb. 5 inches. 9 lb. stone. A Sling chapter 22 inches 2 inches and 3 lb. 2 inches 2
lb. iron. A Port chapter 16 inches 3 inches 3 lb. 5 inches 9 lb. stone. A Base chapter
9 inches 1 inch lb. 1 inch 6 oz. iron.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the fourth Kind of Ordnance, Short Gunnes, Mortars, and Square
Murderers, Pettards and Tortles, and the sorts thereof.
Mortar Pieces, Square Murderers, Tortles, and Pettards are the sorts of the
fourth kind of Ordnance, and do much differ from the former 3 kinds, and in
many things also one of them from the other, as may appcare by the several
discourses upon their descriptions and uses. The Mortar Pieces are of several
grandures and fashions, for some of them are made to shoot a Stone shot of 350
pound weight, and some again are so small that their shot waigheth not above 4,
5, or 6 pound, and may be of any quantity between. And some are of one
Cillinder without side, others are of two, one of them lessened without as
far as their Chamber reaches bat all of them are Chambred, or as some
Gunne-Founders term it Cambred taperingly, being at the Mouth of the Chamber
about the Calibre of the Dyametre of the Mouth of the Piece, and in length
thereof or more as the Chase is longer.

These Mortar Pieces are of great efficacy, as well for the Assaylants as the
Besiedged or Defendants: for being duly used, they much terrify and trouble
the Enemy besieged in a Town, City or Fort; especially by sending upon them
Grenades either single or double, or great iron stone or leaden shot, and from
within when the Enemy should work, or would rest in their Tents and Lodgings,
whereunto by reason of some Hill, building, or Wall, they are so hidden that
none other Ordnance can be bended against them; for that all other Gunnes
rely principally to convey their shot in a right line, to do effectual
service, whereas this fort works altogether in oblique or crooked lines
unless the Piece be mounted to 90 degrees, mounting them commonly above 45
degrees: namely to 60, 70, 80, and sometimes more or less, accordingly as the
nature of the service requires. But for the Defendants, these are ordinarily
used to shoot forth Fire Bals into the Champion in the night, that they within
may see what the Enemy works abroad; or else when the Enemy is approached unto
the foot of the Wall, to undermine or pierce it, or to enter a Breach already
made, and cannot be well repulsed by other means or cannot be offended from
aloft, shooting out of a Mortar or other Perior, Bals of stone, old iro^, or
any other murthring shot or grenades and Fire-workes. Some of them have their
Trunnions in the midst, other moreaft, and some even with their Breeches being
fortified with metal about of the height of the Mouth of the Chamber at the
Touchhole, and of that Calibre at the Mouth of the Piece; They are of several
lengths in Chase, for some are two, and others are three Dyametres of their
Mouths Bore in length. They may be loaded either with Cartouches or with
loose powder, allowing. part of the weight of the Shot, shooting upon any
mountare above 40 degrees, but with shooting level or downwards, always
putting home a good wadde between the Powder and Shot unless it be a
Fire-ball, which the Powder in the Piece is to fire in her discharge; for then
the Fire-worke must lie in the loose powder, and have a wadd before it, and
some use for every hundred the Shot weighs proportionally to abate 5, which
Alexander Bianco likes not: The proportion for loading them must be ordered
according to the strength of the Piece and Powder, and weight of the Shot, and
is also accordingly as the Mounture and distance is more or less, if the Shot
be a Granado made of Potters earth baked, or of Glass, the 1/20 part of their
weight will be sufficient powder to blow them out with little or no danger of
breaking: for if they should have so much powder as that the ball is forced to
break within the Piece; or if any pinne-hole or vent should chance to be in a
mettailine Granado, so as that the powder within it be fired; the Piece would
not only break and tear the carriage, but also endanger him that gives
fire, and frustrate the service: As was proved by M. Kenuins indiscreete
practice in his late Majesty's Mortar Piece, breaking it, and also thereby
indangering the spectators; wherefore if the Granado be of cast metal, it were
best to be covered over with the ordinary coating, to stop such vents as is
hereafter mentioned: Then will 1/10 part of the weight of the Shot in corn
powder be sufficient. But if it be loaded with a solid Stone shot, then or
rather of the weight thereof in corn powder may be allowed, the more powder,
the less mounted, as we have already said.

Now having showed the proportion of powder, fitting each sort of Shot and
Mounture, it will not be amiss to show how to order and manage the same
Morter-peece, Gunner-like.

First then the Chamber is to be well sponged and cleansed before the putting
in of the powder, whether you load it with loose powder or Cartouch turning
the Mouth near upright; the powder being so put into the Chamber, there must be
a wad put in either of hay or Okam, and after a Tampkin of Willow or other soft
Wood; such as may, together with the powder that was first put in, fully fill
up the whole Chamber thereof, that there may be no vacuity between the powder
and wadd, or wadd and shot; after which the shot shall be also put in at the
Mouth with a wadd after it; especially if the Piece be not much mounted, least
the shot go out too soon, and the wadd between the Tampkin and the Shot, is
not only to save the shot from the Tampkins breaking of it, but also to avoid
vacuities, which are very dangerous for the Piece by second expansions.

Having then resolved upon the premises concerning the Piece, Shot, and
Powder, as before is showed, and upon the distance and Mounture for the Mark,
as hereafter the Rules and Tables following shall direct; then for the bending
and disposing it to the assigned service: Observe first to lay a straight Ruler
upon the mouth of the Piece, and upon it place a Quadrant or other Instrument
crosse-wise to set the Piece upright to avoid wide shooting, and then placing
them fore-right to eleuate it into the resolved degree of Monuture to avoid
short or ouetshooting accordingly, as the Tables and examples following will
lead you: for having made one shot, you may thereby proportion the rest,
considering whether you are to shoot with or against the wind, or whether it
blow toward the right or left hand, and whether weakly or strongly; and so
accordingly to give or abate the advantage or disadvantage: which judgment,
not Rule must induce, and yet by help of the Notes following, of mine own
experience late made in one of his Majesty's Mortar Pieces, and by these
Tables, any judicious Gunner may with a Shot or two first made out of the Piece
he with practice may very much help himself.

Captain Vffano his Table for a Mortar Piece to shoot therewith by the twelve
Points of the Gunneers Quadrant. And
Points Paces 0 100 1 248 2 377 3 468 4 534 5 570 6 583 7 566 8 532 9 468 10
377 11 243 12 000

Mine own Notes of practice in a Mortar piece that shot a stone shot of 5
inches in Dyametre high. The Mortar Pieces Chamberbeing 2 inches at the Mouth
thereof, and three inches deep, and the rest of her Chase being 10 inches deep,
which I discharged with three ounces of powder there being little wind.

degrees yards Skores At 45 750 37 At 50 710 35 At 55 675 33 At 60 620 31 At 65
575 28 At 70 480 24 At 75 360 18 At 80 270 13

A Table out of Vffano for the Mortar Pieces, Randons made for every degree
between the Level and 90 degrees.
degr. paces degr. 0 100 89 1 122 88 2 143 87 3 164 86 4 285 85 5 104 84 6 224
83 7 243 82 8 262 81 9 280 80 10 297 79 11 314 78 12 331 77 13 347 76 14 363 75
15 377 74 16 392 73 17 406 72 18 419 71 19 432 70 20 445 69 21 457 68 22 468 67
23 479 66 24 490 65 25 500 64 26 510 63 27 518 62 28 524 61 29 529 60 30 534 59
31 539 58 32 543 57 33 549 56 34 552 55 35 558 54 36 562 53 37 568 52 38 573 51
39 477 50 40 580 49 41 582 48 42 583 47 43 584 46 44 582 46 45 582 46

The use of the former Table. The use of the Table may be thus explained.
Having once made known the distance the Piece did shoot at any Monuture
given. As for example: suppose at 53 degrees which conveyed the shot 700.
paces, and you desire to know how far she would shoot at 60 degrees. Now
because 700 degrees is not at all in this Table, but against 60 degrees there
stands 529 paces. Therefore say by the Rule of 3, if 562 the number against
53 degrees gives 700 paces, what shall 529 the number against 60 degrees give,
multiplying 700 by 529, and divide the product by 562, and the Quotient will be
649 fere, the number of paces which the said Mortar Piece will shoot at 60
degrees Monuture being alike loaded, and having such like accidents as it had
when it was shot off at 52 degrees, and so for any other number of paces or
degrees, or distances assigned.

The second sort of this fourth and last kind of Ordnance, are the Pettards,
which are short Pieces of late years devised and practiced to make ouertures
into Towns, Cities and Forts by breaking open their Ports and Gates, and
blowing up of Bridges and Walls by means of the force of powder fired. Of
these there are of several forms and magnitudes, even as they are of several
uses and for different services; especially in grcatnes when great force is
requisite. Some of them are cast in shape not much unlike the fashion of a
Grocers or Apothecaryes spice Mortar, and some are tapered much like a Coopers
water pay le, little deeper then the Dyametre of their mouths, but being not
above in Dyametre at their bottom or breech of their mouths Calibre, and in
thicknes of metal of the Dyametre at their breech, and lessening in thicknes
toward their mouths. Their magnitudes are some to hold but one pound of powder
or less; and others to hold 50 lb. or more, and they usually allow 4 lb. of
Brass, or 5 lb. of iron to cast a Pet. for one pound of powder, and 250 pound
of Brass, or 300 pound for a Pettard that shall hold 50 pound of powder, using
those proportions diminished for lesser, and augmented for greater. The Pettard
is sometimes to be used in places accessible and inaccessible, Suppose then we
are to Pettard a Port or Gate unto which we may approach, in that case a
skrewed hook is to be let into the Port, upon which the pettard with her
Planchier or Matria is to be hanged, as in the 13 figure at ^ is representd.

The Pla^shier is at least to be 3 inches thick, armed with iro^ plates to
defend it from splitting, it is also to be under propped with the forked Rest,
and stayed in the ground at the hinder end to hinder the reuerse thereof.
Pettards are to be loaded with fine corn powder, the finer corned the better
being very hard beaten in, by little and little at once with iron drifts or
such like, of the just height of the Dyametre of each places concaue of the
Pettard, until it be full within one finger breadth of the top, and then some
use to make a hole through the powder unto the bottom with apyke head or such
like, into which hollownes they put in certain quils filled with raw
quicke-siluer. Lastly, they cover the mouth thereof with a waxed cloth, being
cut of the just breadth of the inside of the mouth of it, and fill up also the
rest that is yet empty with molten wax, mingled with hemp cut, or with ^oe
rather. They

tunneling beneath a fortress wall to place a mine Tract. 2. Cap. 3.
Comment il fault. armer et conduire vne mine.
Wie eine minen zu leitten vndt zu verwahren.


the entrance to the tunnel galerie.


various tools and devices useful for conducting a siege Tract. 2. Cap. 6.
Form et usage de quelques instrumens ingenieux pour vne entreprise.
Form vndt gebrauch ettlicher instrumenten zu einer empresa nutzlich zu
gebrauchen


tools for constructing a petard Tract. 2. Cap. 7.
Comment il fault charger et attacher le petart.
Wie ein petart zu laden vnd an zu hangon.
are to have a socket and backstay for the under roppe, and a pype over the
Touchhole which must be filled with slow and sure receipt of Fireworke, to the
end that the Pettardier having by a pryming of quick powder given fire the
reunto, and retired for his safety, wherein he must be careful to avoid
retyring in the right line of her reuerse, for fear of danger.

But if we be to Pettard a Port unto which we cannot approach to hang the
Pettard thereon, then make a little wooden horse with 4 wheels or Trucks
lyned with Cloth or Wool to avoid making noise, the Handle whereof is to
carry the said Pettard, being at the least 40 foot long, with a Counterpoyze
at the other end, having the Planchier fastened close before the mouth of the
Pettard, with the crochet or underprop to place the same as close and flat
against the Port as is possible, and the aftmost end of the staff or prop made
firm against some stake in the ground (to stay the reuerse) so always that it
belong enough to reach over the dike or drawbridge to be driven close, that the
Pettard may be firmed against the Gate. Then so loded and firegiuen to the slow
vent or pype with the slow receipt, the retrait may have time to be oblikely
made, least her reuerse supprize the Pettardier before he canget out of the
danger thereof. The figures and discourse following as well for the accessible
as for the inaccessible Ports here annexed, will make that which we have said
the better understood.

placing a petard

CHAP. XV. Of several ways to prevent the effectual working of Petards.
Diverse and several means there are also to prevent the placing and
effectual working of the said Pettards: whereof a word or two in brief. The
first is by a kind of strong iron Gridiron or Grate so placed before the Port,
somewhat distant, as 3 or 4 feet off, that the Planchier of the Pettard cannot
come close enough to the Gate: for that the Air between it and the Pettard
will doubtless make the action thereof to be of little or no effect: otherwise
to spoil the Pettardier and Assistants near, a falltrap being let go with a
buckle tricker when the Pettardier shall either tread upon a drawbridge or
board covered with earth, which will pull out the buckle, and so it will let a
great circle with iron works by a spring fall violently upon his head; likewise
they impeach the hanging and propping Pettards by certain points of iron about
3 feet long placed under the Drawbridge, which when it is drawn up, stands
out and impeacheth, the placing of them against it. In like sort by a
trap-draw-bridge which will fall down as soon as the Pettardier shall tread
thereon, and slide him and his Pettard into the dyke; so also if a pair of
compasses of iron with teeth on the legs have their head with a joint
fastened above to the stone work of the Port, so that as soon as the bridge
or board which holds the compasses and teeth open, is unloosed by treading
thereon, they are forced together by strong springs most violently, which
terribly will claspe and tear him in most miserable manner. Another is by two
semicircles with sawteeth to claspe together as soon as the Pettardier sets
foot on the false board or bridge to vnhitch the springholds. Also a cord being
fastened to the outpost end of the loose bridge, which by the Pettardiers
stepping thereon, vnlooseth the hold, so a number of stones will thereby all
fall on his head and beat out his brains. So also a false Port with 3 or 4
feet or more of vacuitie between it and the true Port, rising higher then the
true Port in greues hoisted up as a Percullis, and shall fall when the
Pettardier steppeth on the false bridge; likewise by a false or loose bridge
which shall pull a tricker that shall let down a snaphance, and give fire unto
20 or 30 loaded muskets, whose mouths shall be seen through the Port, and
discharge themselves upon the Pettardier and his assistants, As the figures in
the 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13 Chapters of the second book entitled Recuil
de plusieurs Machines millitaires will more manifest unto the eye.

CHAP. XVI. How and with what instruments you may break the Pyles Palesadoes,
Grates, Percallises, and Chaunes, or such like iron or wood-worke to lay them
open for entry.
TO break Palisadees, Grates, Bars, and such like enclosures of any Town,
Cassle, Fo^^^or strong house. The instrument that is noted with A, which is a
wrench that being aplyed and fastened as the figure shows, will tear open
strong Bars, Or the Saw B, in sawing asunder the joints, Or the Crow C, whose
Cloven soot being gotten between the (...), will forcibly disioynt them, Or
else Axlike wedge D. But if the enterprise be to be secretly executed without
noise of strokes of tools, then a fire wheel in such manner fastened, prymed
and fired, and fixed as the figure shows, will sone make way, if it be well
ordered, for the purpose, as hereafter in this Chapter shall be directed. The
same instruments are to be applied unto Bars of Gates, of Towns and Castles,
if they may be approached secretly. For else there can be no better way to
make ouerture then by battery with great Ordnance, which from far will soon
make a breach as well in Ports which are usually fortified with barracadoes and
other defenses, but may be thereby soon battered to make sufficient breach to
enter by, yea were it in bulwarks or Curtins as hereafter shall be showed,
more at large. If you would force a great Port of a Town secretly, there is
another means besides the Pettard already spoken of, namely the Skrew Nut
marked E, and his skrewbarre A, with, which in turning the winlase X, it will
soon break open the Port so that the backestay be fast and strong enough. Now
if it be strengthened with chains of iron within, although they were great and
strong, yet by the skrew spindles 4 and 5, turning the Nut B, by the winlase
and spykesthereof, and so in like manner the iron Burs and Grates may be broken
asunder or pulled out with the Pinchers C, and the drawing hammer D, and the
mallet of hard-wood I, and the short Axe-wedge 2, Next to those instruments the
drift bridge between them represented was invented to reach over a dyke and to
put any Town or Fort to the Scalado, it is not much unlike the Cartbridge used
for the Pettard, as before may be seen in his Chapter, but that it is not so
great and heavy as it.

CHAP. XVII. How to Dispart any Piece of Ordnance that is truly and equal
bored in the midst of the Metal thereof.
OF all things belonging unto a Gunner, the chiefest is to bring the Metal of
his Piece even; which the Gunners call disparting: wherefore the dispart for
any Piece of Ordnance, whose concaue Cillinder or Bore lies equal and truly
in the midst of her Metal, is nothing else but to equal the difference
between the thicknes of the metal that the Base Ring has in Semidiamette
more then the femidyametre at the Muzzle Ring, without which equal difference
applied upon the vpmost of the mettalls on the Muxzle Ringeyther had (or
guessed at with discretion,) it is impossible to direct a Piece to any mark,
to make a shot to an assured good effect: The dispart is many ways to be
found. First in such Pieces as are not Chambred by a priming iron, put down to
the lower part of the Bore in at the Touchhole, and making a mark upon it
even in height with the highest of the metal upon the Base Ring, then
carrying the same measure unto the Mouth, and placing it upright with the lower
end of the priming iron just on the lower part of the Bore there; Then look
how much the mark, so made on the pryming iron, reaches higher then the upper
part of the metal of the Muzzle Ring, so much is the length of the dispart to
be placed upon the highest of the metal there: Or else taking the Dyametres
of the Base Ring, and also of the Muzzle Ring with a pair of Caliber
compasses, or by guyrding or otherwise, and the half of their Dyametres is the
true length of the dispart to be placed upon the highest of the metal on the
Muzzle Ring as is aforesaid.

As for example, suppose the Dyametre of the Base Ring to be 24 inches, and the
Dyametre of the Muzzle Ring to be 18 inches, the difference is 6 inches, the
half whereof 3 inches, is the length of the dispart sought. Or take the
compass in inches and parts at the Basering, and divide it into 3 equal parts,
and do the like at the Muzzle-ring. And the half of their difference will be
the dispart for any Piece that is truly bored. Or rather having guirded the
Piece at the Base and Muzzle ring, look how many times 22 quarter of inches
are therein contained, so many times 7 quarters of inches does the Dyametres
contain. And the half of the difference of those two Dyametres is the due
dispart sought. Or else take a Rule or staff, and lay it cross upon the
Basering of the Piece, and then take a line and plummet, and hold it that it
may hang close: first to the one side of the Piece, and then to the other side
thereof, marking also upon the Rule or staff, where the line touches at both
times, that the string only touch the sides of the Piece without any bending,
Then lay that Rule and Measure to the mouth: likewise look what the over
measure comes unto, take the half of that measure for the due dispart. Now
for Chamber Pieces, there can be no certain general Rule given for their
disparts: for they must be ordered according to the form of the Chamber and
orelowe or Hall of the Piece; whether it be Sling, Base, Fowler, or Port Piece.
But every discreet and under standing Gunner, when he sees the Piece, may by
what has been said, know what to do therein: for Port Pieces, and Fowlers
they only shoot stone, and not iron shot.

CHAP. XVIII. Of certain faults committed in Foreign Foundings of Ordnance.
THe industrious Gunner may by that which has been said, take true knowledge
of all sorts of Ordnance, as well Ancient as Modern, and also understand the
reasons, grounds, and uses of them, and of any others which shall hereafter be
seruiceably invented, and so be able to judge of the goodness and defects of
any Piece whatsoever, to make choice of the best; and in time of need to make
use of the worst; yet it is not imposed upon the Gunners Office to practice
Foundings of Ordnance, although it be one of the most necessary Sciences of
these times in use, which was never bred among the common sort of men, as other
handycrafts were, for that they must not only be conversant and expert in the
Mathematickes, but also trained up thereto from their childhood if they will be
excellent for ready handines therein, which makes me and others wonderously
marvel, that so necessary a science should be no better respected amongst
us, and that that there is no more care taken to bring up expert Founders of
Ordnance for times to come, in this warlike age. But if we shall well examine
the most used Foundings in Europe: namely, those of Lisbon, Malaga, Barcelona,
Naples, Cicillia, Cremes, Millan, Genoa, Venice, Mellines and Vtrecht: in which
by reason of their continual practice they might easily have become excellent
and expert, yet whether it be by negligence ignorance, or else by the too much
haste made by those that have the charge and command of those Foundings, it is
apparent that they commit great and absurd faults therein. Some of their Pieces
(and not a few) are bored awry, their Soul not lying in toe widst of the body
of Metal; some are crooked in their Chase, other of unequal bores, some too
light toward the Breech turn their mouths downwards in their discharge, and
so endanger their own Vawmures and Defenses: insomuch that my self and other
good Gunners in time of service could hardly find means to remedy that fault,
either by hanging weight upon the Pommell or Cascabell, or by wedging it under
at the fore Transom of her Carriage: others are too heavy also in their Breech,
by placing the Trunnions too much aftwards, that Coins can hardly be drawn,
but by the extraordinary strength to manage and weigh them up behind, or lay
her under metal without putting a long leauer in her mouth. Some and a great
many Pieces are come forth of the Furnace spoongy, or full of hony-combes and
flawes, by reason that the metal runs not fine, or that the moulds are not
thoroughly dried, or well nealed: whereby either the Gunner that serves with
them is much endan. gered, they being as bad or worse to serve with, as those
that are too weak and poor in metal: for if they be loaded with so much
powder as is ordinary for those sorts of Pieces (as may often happen when such
Gunners load them, as are either ignorant or negligent in examining their
defects) they will either break, split, or blowingly spring their mettalls,
and (besides that mischief they do) they will be made utterly unserviceable
ever after. Wherefore to avoid those dangers and faults, Gun-Founders may do
well to confer one with another, and also with understanding and experienced
Gunners thereupon, who with the hazard of their lives have often seen into
those inconveniences: yet thus much I dare say to the due commendations of our
English Gunnefeunders, that the Ordnance which they of late years have cast,
as well for neatnes, as also for reasonable bestowing and disposing of the
metal, they have far excelled all the former or foreign aforementioned
fou^ders. But it is to be feared that there being so few of that profession
here employed for Founding of Brass Ordnance; (only Mr. Pitts and his Brother,
and Mr. Philips, and as yet so few or none brought up to learn it under them,)
as that it is like that hereafter there may be a great want of honest and
skillful Gunnefounders in England, the inconvenience that else may hereafter so
befall, I hope will be foreseen and prevented in good time.

Le Sieur du Praisac in his 13 Chapter of his Military Discourses, advises
Founders to have a special care for the temper and Allayes of the mettalls,
the inward cleannes of the moulds and nealing of them well, and to their Caps
and Cauities to anoint them with clean grease, and to guard and bind them
well with iron, to dry them and settle them firmly, and for the due placing of
the Trunnions, as is showed in the 22 Chapter hereof, that they may so nearly
equiballance one end with the other, that one Gunner with a Lever or Handspyke
may raise or imbase it upon her Carriage, either for the draining or putting in
Coins to direct them, or lay them under mettalls, The running of the metal
not fine or too cold, and the mould not well nealed, or the mettalls not well
incorporated; either of these causes flawes, crackes, spungynes, or hony-combs
in the metal of the Piece, whereby great danger often ensues.

CHAP. XIX. Concerning the League and Alligation or mixture of Metals to Found
great Ordnance.
FOr the Natural viscuosity, softnes, and dulnes of the color of Copper, there
has for the Foundings of Ordnance been many Alloyes, Leagues, or Alligations
of other mettalls by several Founders used as their diverse colors and tempers
do manifest. True it is, that the proper Alloy for Copper, is fine Cornish
Tin, when as you would have your work subject to the Hammer, or else it will
not be reduced to such subtilty; as to endure the fire, or to make vessels
off. But when as it shall be accompanied as shall herein be hereafter
mentioned, it does not only change the name, also the aspect and Nature
thereof, as to be called Ordinary Brass, Bell-mettall, or else Brass for
Ordnance, Brass ordinarily is made only by Tin, Copper, and Lapis
Caliminaris. Bell metal with more Tiune and some Latton, for Bells, Mortars,
and for Ordnance, As Biringuccio says, 12 pound of Tin for 100 pound of
Copper, for Bells 23 or 20 pound of Tin for 100 pound of Copper to cause the
better sound, and accordingly as they are to be greater or less, wherein I
intend not here to give any other Rule; but to mix them by weight, and
measure, as discretion and judgment shall induce. But more particularly for
Ordnance, I have thought fitting to relate the opinions of such worke-masters
and Authors as I have received instructions from. Jerome Rosselli, says, that
for 16 lb. of Copper, 10 lb. of Tin, and 8 lb. of Latton, and that the Tin
gives hardness, and sothereth the Copper and Latton, and that the Latton gives
them color together, adding the more force to resist the vehemence of the
powder sired in them, so that they make the Pieces that are cast of that
mixture to be fair and strong. Alexander Bianco in his Millitarie says, that
the best Allegations of those Metals for Ordnance, is for 100 lb. of Copper,
20 lb. of Tin, and 5 lb. of Brass or Latton is to be mixed. Diego Vffano in
his Instruction de Artillery says, that the best Legature for Ordnance is 100
lb. of Copper, 8 lb. of Tin, and 5 lb. of Latton, and 10 lb. of Sow-lead,
affirming that Lead being tough and cold, makes it also become hard.

And Sicur du Prissac in his Military discourses says, that the French
Founders unto every 100 lb. of Copper do either add 20 lb. of Bell metal,
(which is 25 lb. of Tin and Lead, for 100 lb. of Copper or Brass) or else 10
lb. of soft Tin to each 100 pound of Copper.

CHAP. XX. Of the Powders or Earths to make the Moulds to cast in Brass
Ordnance.
FOr the Foundings of Great Ordnance, there are special sorts of Earthes,
whereof the Moulds and Modells are compounded either to cast in Brass or iron,
whereof it behooves to seek the best, namely that are able to resist the fire
and receine the melted mettalls, so that they may render them to be cast and
Founded neatly without being subject either to be diminished, cracked or peeled
when they shall be nealed, which is such a matter as without experience cannot
be done well. The rather be cause that Earth in it self generally taken cannot
safely be chosen, the colors thereof is no sufficient sign: for we see some
earth to be white, some black, some yellow, and others red; and of each some
are good, some bad. But none of them can by their colors be assuredly said or
chosen for good in effect: for there may be some of each of those colors
good; yet all earths being either fat or lean, or soft, or gross, or
viscuous, whereof the lean soon turns unto dust, without holding together,
which also are a long time drying, and are but of little continuance for
strength. The Fat and viscous Earths shrink and chappe, and do soon break
by their natural brittinesse, and do often grow crooked by the unevenness of
their mixture or temper, whereby they become crooked in the Mould, and so warpe
the pattern it self: so that it is rare that such a Piece should come neatly
or well out of the mould: Where upon we may conclude that good Earths are
neither Fat nor Lean, but between both, and of a fine and subtle grain or
mould, which soon dries and remains firm, without breaking, being able to
resist the vehemence of the fire; and such Earthes are most commonly of a
yellow or red color: but relying not upon the color, prove the quality of
your Earths with judgment, and so will experience the Mistrisse of Art be your
best Tutour to direct you to the best powders, which must be the first
foundation of your work.

But to find such as are fit for your work, it behooves you to sink diners
pits or caves under ground, which have not been much stirred. And after you
have begun your work, and compounded your Earthes in a bank or heap, and wet
and moystened them like a paste, begin then to beat them with a rod of Iron, as
the Potters use to do their Claye. Then take two third parts of the whole
quantity, and mix it with lynt of Linen cloth and then beat the same again
together until they be well incorporated, that they may appear all one
substance, and if any small stones should chance to fall amongst it to pick
them out or bruise them as small as may be thereby, and so the powders being
well tempered may serve for your moulds and forms.

Some if they cannot have such Earths as they would, content themselves, with
such as they can get, which when they have tempered into paste, they dry, and
then beat and remoysten; others mix it with burnt sand and ashes; others
having but weak Earths, temper them with water wherein burnt salt is
dissolved, mixing therewith Scales or Lymmel of iron finely beaten and searced.

And lastly, some mix therewith Horse or Ox dung, and some used sedge and
straw finely chopped and mealed, each to his best liking, endeavoring to prevent
the ill accedents that may hinder the good successes of their works.

CHAP. XX. Of making of Moulds for the Founding of Ordnance.
EAch Workemaster in any Art whatsoever, holds always either the way wherein
he has been taught, or else that which in his judgment and understanding he
thinks to be the best: Even so is it with Gunne-Founders, who notwithstanding
the means that they use in Foundings are diverse and many, according as they
are either great or small, yet almost all tend to same end. man building cannons

And having so prepared and resolved of what kind, and what sort of that kind
the Ordnance is, you intend to Cast you are then first to make a Moddell or
perfect pattern thereof, either of Timber, or of Earth (or both) with all the
Mouldures, Ornaments, and Compartiments, even as you would have the Piece to
be, which you must thinnely anoint with soft hogs grease, and then cover it
over with a Colume of the aforesaid tempered earth, made and dried by little
and little, augmenting it until it be of a competent strength and thicknes;
This Colume must be to betaken into two or more parts, to the end to take the
said Model or pattern out of it, and it is to be fortified on the out side
with Plates of iron as long as the Chase of the Piece, and with iron wyres an
inch each from other, and lastly with iron hoopes a foot or two asunder, to
knock off and on as occasion shall require. There must also be a smooth and
equal Cillinder, whose Dyametre must be just the height of the Bore, and made
of the same earth molded upon a strong Iron square Bar, and upon a cord
woulded about the same, therewith to make the soul or concaue hollow Cillinder
of the Piece, by placing it (by help of the Base and Muzzle-ring) exactly in
the midst of the vacuity of the outermost Colume, which when the Pattern or
Model shall be taken out, will remain hollow to receive the metal that
must make the body of the Piece. All these must be well joined ted together,
polished smooth, and dried and nealed, that the metal berune fine, may come
off, smooth and neat.

Lastly, the pattern of the Breech, with all the Mouldures, and Cascabell is
in like manner to be covered over by little and little with the same tempered
earth, which must afterward be luted neatly and strongly to the Breech end of
the outter Colume: All which Mouldures, Rings, Arms, Devices, Flowers,
Trunnions, Dolphins and Circles may be at pleasure added thereunto, upon the
pattern either in wax, earth, or plaster, and so the perfect impression
thereof be received by the concauity of the outward Colume, keeping still the
due prescribed proportion of the Pieces, according to the kind and sort thereof.

CHAP. XXII. Of the place, measure, and use of the Trunnions.
THe Trunnions in pieces not Camber bored ought to be thus placed, divide the
whole length of the Chase of the piece into 7 equal parts, and at 3 of those
parts from the Basering forwards, in the imaginary right line that proceeds
from the lower part of the Metal at the Breech, to the upper part of the
Metal at her Mouth, must the place of the Center of the Trunnions be, and so
shall there be 4/7 of the length of her Chase from the Center of her Trunnions
forwards to her Muzle, and 3/7 backwards to her Breech, except it be for a
Taper bored or Cambred piece, for which the Trunnions must be placed more
backwards, because the thicknes of metal to the breechwards is greater in
compared proportion then it is in equal bored Pieces, which would otherwise
become breech heavy, and so be troublesome to manage, and it must be so ordered
for these sequent reasons. First for her better fortitude, Namely to take hold
the more firmly in the Metal of her body, and not lie directly against the
concauo Cillinder of the Bore. Secondly, that being somewhat under it, they
will the better support the great: weight of the metal: and lastly, that
thereby they may be only so much heavier toward their Breech as may be
sufficient to keep her steady in her discharge, and not be too unwieldy, but
conveniently approaching near equiballancing for the mounting and mannaging
thereof, which the Germane and Spanish Founders do somewhat seem to help, by
placing Dolphins somewhat more toward their breeches: and some others have
thought to remedy it by placing of strong Rings in Staples of cast metal in
stead and liew of these Dolphins. But for such Pieces as have neither Dolphins
nor Rings to mount or dismount by them, a Leauer being put into their Mouths
and a rope fastened at the mouth unto theoutward end thereof, and unto the Pomell
or Cascabell at the breech, thoy are to be thereby equibalancingly slinged
tomount or dismount them conveniently. The Trunnions ought next the body to be
in Dyametre one Calibre of her proper bore in thicknes, and also one in length,
only lessening 1/30 of a Calibre, tapering by little and little toward their
outward end of them. There are five things especially to be regarded in casting
of metal. The first is to make the forms and moulds duly. The second that
they be well nealed with Charcoales or dry wood. The third to place them well
in the Pit. The fourth is to melt the metal to run well and fine. The fifth
to be sure to put as much metal into the furnace as may be sufficient to fill
the moulds; and every mould (that is to be filled with Brass or any other
Metal) must have spyralls or vents: for there is no place (although called
empty) so void, but it is filled with Air, by means whereof if the hot
meltes, substance come to meet with the Air there enclosed, not finding
breathing vent, it will break the the mould: wherefore it will be fit that as
upon the one side of the mould, the metal is to come into it, upon the other
side the moisture and air may breath out without impeachment, that all the
emptines of the mould may be filled with metal. And to that end there must
be a vent made that may breath out the air from the top to the bottom of the
mould, concluding that by giving the more and the larger enteries unto the
moulds and vents, the better and more fair will your matter be cast off. And
so much for Foundings of Brass Ordnance.

CHAP. XXII. How to examine, search, and to find whether any piece of Ordnance
be well and duly made, and of what Kind, and Sort it is.
THe principal thing that a Gunner ought to look unto, when he is to take
many Pieces of Ordnance into his charge, is first to search and examine how
they are Fortified, and whether they be sound and safely serviceable, and
whether they be of the kind of Cannons of Battery, Culuerings, or Periors, and
then to know of which sort each Piece is of that Kind, and then whether they
be ordinary, reinforced, or lessened in their Fortification of Metal, and
whether they be Cambred, either equal or Taperbored, and with, or without an
Orlow or Relish, be they of cast iron or of Brass metal: and of what
heights their Bores are, and how much Powder they are each of them to shoot,
with any Shot, be it of Lead, Iron, Stone, Granado, or other Fire-workes or
Bales.

Secondly, that he look how the Spunges, Ladles, Rammers, and Waddhookes, are
fitted and conditioned, so that there may be no defect or default in them: And
finding all those things well, he is to place them all on the right side of
the Cariages of the Pieces they belong unto, so that the Ladles and Spunges be
turned toward the mouths, and the Rammers and Waddbookes toward the Breech
of their proper Pieces.

Then by putting a Rammer with his staff into the Pieces Concaue Cillinder as
far as it will go, to know whether that Piece be clear, loaded, or
Cambered, and equal or taper-boared, with Relish, or not, or have any
foulness got into her Concaue Cillinder, which he shall perceive if he make
a mark upon the staff, at the mouth of the Piece, and pulling it out when it
will go no further in, and by laying it upon the outside of the Metal, if
it reach to the Touchhole or not, for if it do not reach thither, it is
either loaded or cambred, or else some foulness is gotten into her. And if he
find or perceive nothing to be within, yet he shall take her Ladle, and put it
into her as far as he can, and moving it lightly about the lower part and
bottom of her concaue, giving two or three ietts, to receive into the same,
the dust or small stones or foulenes if any be in her, which he shall continue,
drawing out the Ladle and emptying it, until he perceive there remains no
more within her to be drawn out: Then placing the Ladle in his place, let him
also take her Sponge, and sponge her well; to draw out all the moisture, rust.
Verdegreace, or foulness, until she be clean: then search also her
Touchhole, with a Pryming-iron, whether she be therein clean, cloyed. or
have any foulness gotten into it.

That done, then may he with a common search upon a staff, having two or three
round Pease, poynted springs that bear out, unless they be forced close put
into the concaue Cillinder unto the bottom, all along to examine her within
whether there be any flawes, crackes, hony-combes, pynneholes, sinders, or
other faults: and the Sun shining clear, if the mouth be turned against the
Sun beams, they may by a Looking-glass well pollished, or with a bright
sword, be reuerberated into her concaue Cillinder: so that those faults may be
therein most easily discerned; or else in close weather or rooms, a Wax or
other Candle lighted, being fastened upon the end of a Cane, staff, or half
Pyke, her faults may be spyed, if the same be put into her hollow Cillinder,
and carefully looked for all along, the Gunners eye being therefore employed
diligently at the mouth of the Piece.

Wherein if he espy any creuises, flawes, cracks, or Hony-combes, he may
assure himself that Piece is dangerous both for breaking by recharging of her
too speedily after her discharge, as well for her debillity by means of those
defects or faults, disabling her to endure or resist her ordinary loading, or
allowance of Powder to be fired in her, as also least in such Cauernes, flawes,
or Hony-combes, some of the Wad, Carthouch, foulenes, furre, or Powder, lie
smothering therein, and so upon recharging, Fire, the Powder that should load
her, unless she be well spunged with wet spunges, with a great deal of
handinesse, care, and diligence, to be assured to have fully extinguished the
fire that shall so smother, before you recharge her. Besides, much discretion
and judgment is to be used in the allowance of Powder, as in the manner of
loading such Pieces, notwithstanding they be otherwise double fortified or
reinforced Pieces, yet to allow them (according as they are thereby more or
less weakened) so much more or less Powder, as if they were of the lessened
poor, or slender, fortified Pieces of the same kind and sort.

It may many times happen that he may meet with Pieces that are wider at the
mouth, then in the rest of her bore within, which is often found in Pieces that
have been long, and many times used to shoot Shot of Iron or stone, whereby
the mouths become enlarged, worn, and wider, by reason of the frequencie and
vehemency of their discharges, whereby the Gunner may be deceived, if he take
his measure for his Shot by the Callibre of her mouths, for by that means the
Callibre of their bores within being lower or lesser, it may cause the Shot to
stick by the way, and then a vacuity being in her between the Powder and the
Shot, they will endanger the Piece to break, which may soon be examined
with the Crossett, described in the 19 Figure a, whereby Shot for such Pieces
may be safely chosen serviceable, according to the Callibres of their narrowest
places, giving abatement of 1/20 of that height (though the Shot be round, and
not ouall) for a convenient vent, whereof more hereafter shall be spoken.

If he chance to meet with a Piece that is crooked in her Chase, which is a
hard matter to be otherwise remedred, then by sending her to the Furnace to be
new Founded: But if by necessity a Gunner must needs serve with such a Piece,
then must he take a Shot for her so low, that it be sure not to be hindered in
the going out thereof, in her discharge. And besides, he must accordingly (as
the crookedness lies) lay the Piece so much the contrary way awry, over, or
under the direction of the upper part of the Metal more or less, as her
bending and crookedness is more or less; the which after two or three Shotts
made in her, the Gunner shall be better directed then by many words.

Lastly, he may many times meet with Pieces whose concaue Cillinder
notwithstanding it proceeds from the breech to the mouth directly straight,
yet it lies awry in the body of the Metal thicker or more toward one side
then the other, which comes either by the ignorance or negligence of the
Gunne-founder. The Mould not being so justly fitted, that the solid Cillinder
thereof, filling up part of the vacuity of the outmost Colume of the Mould,
thereby to make the Concaue Cillinder of the Bore, as to be situated justly in
the midst or right line of the Axis; The which is so great a fault, that if it
be not well and artificially handled and ordered, it will be impossible to make
a good shot therewith, besides the dangers that depend upon such Pieces: for
being thin of one side, although it be thick on the other, yet must it be
allowed no greater charge of powder then if the same were as thin on the
thickest side as it is on the thinnest, for if she have a charge of powder
usually allowed to good Pieces of that kind and sort, she will be in great
danger to split or break: wherefore very great care and judgment must be to
fit her Charge according to her ability, and also to frame and place her
dispart duly, whereof also in his proper place hereafter, in the 26, 27, and 28
Chapters, shall be more particularly declared.

CHAP. XXIIII. How to measure or Tertiate any Piece of Ordnance, to know how
much Powder she is able to bear for her due Charge.
THe best understanding experienced Foreign Gunners, doc call the measuring
and examining of the fortification of Metal in a Piece, Tertiating, because
it is chiefly to be measured and examined in the three principal parts of each
Piece: namely, at the breech, at their Trunni^ons, and at the mouth.

Now that every industrious Gunner may be assured of the fortitude of any Piece
of Ordnance, and so the more safely and boldly allow unto her a due loading,
and proportion of powder, for proof and service, that she may without danger
perform her utmost execution, I have in the 18 figure a described three
Cannons, and three Culuerings, with the measures of their mettalls (their
proper Bores being their proper Scale) at their Breeches or Chambers, and at
their Trunnions, and at their Mouths. The uppermost of both which, is the
figure of a Reinforced or double fortified, the two middlemost of an Ordinary,
and the two undermost of a Lessened Piece, both Cannons, and Culuerings, with
all their measures. By which also their sorts, and all other Ordnance in their
due measures, will be the better conceived and manifested.

As for example there is a Culuering that shoots an iron shot of 17 lb.
weight with 13 lb. of corn powder, which is of the weight of her shot; and the
question is whether she may be able to bear so much powder, or if need were
more, which cannot be well answered without the examining or tertiaring her
metal.

But having already searched her, as in the precedent Chapter is showed, and
found her sound and free, except the defects therein mentioned, you may measure
and tertiate her to answer the question as follows.

First, with a Ruler, draw a right line upon a paper slate or flat smooth
Previous error not modified board, as in the said 18 figure is described from A
to B, Then with a pair of Compasses with strait or reuersed points, take the
Dyametre or widenes of the Bore of the piece, and place that measure from A
toward B at C, which space between A and C, you must divide into two equal
parts, and then with the compasses opened to one of those parts, set the same
upon another right line, as at the point D, and with the other foot draw a
circle, which will be truly equal in Dyametre unto the height of the Bore, as
may appear by the Circle AFCQ, and equal to the right line AC.

Then with a pair of Caliber Compasses take the thicknes or Dyametre of the
metal of the Breech at the Touchhole: which distance between the points,
you must divide into two equal parts, and then the Compasses being opened to
one of them (and one foot set in D with the other) describe the other Circle
GH, which shall be equal to the circumference of the metal at the
Touchhole, and so the thicknes of the metal or distance between the said 2
circles will show the quantity between F and H, and E and G.

And seeing that the distance from F to H is equal to the distance from E to
F, which is the Dyametre of the height of the Bore, he may be therefore sure
that it is an Ordinary or Common fortified Culuering. But whether it be either
a Bastard or an extraordinary Culuering, it cannot be known by the
fortification, but by the length thereof; being longer then the ordinary, it is
called, therefore an extraordinary Culuering, etc. and being shorter then the
Ordinary, it is therefore called a Bastard Culuering.

Now then this being found to be an ordinary Culuering, she will bear (...)
of the weight of her shot in Canon powder, which amounts unto 13 lb. 9 oz.
But to be more assured of her fortitude, the measure of her metal may be
likewise taken at her Trunnions, and Neck as follows.

At the Cornish or Ring before her Trunnions with a pair of Calibre Compasses,
you may take the Dyametre of the body of metal there, as you did before at
the Touchhole, and also divide the distance between the points or ends of the
compasses into two equal parts: with the compasses opened to one of those
parts, setting one foot in D, make with the other the circle IL, and if you
find 7/1 of the bore, it is the proportional fortification for an ordinary
Culuering; and the like may be done for the Neck, which the circle MN will
equalize and represent, and the distance from F to N being of the height of her
bore, and the due thicknes of the metal for an ordinary Culuering at the
Neck, confirms the former measures and proofs.

But if in taking the Measures aforesaid, there had bin found in her Chamber at
the Touchhole from F to H the thicknes of one Dyametre of the bore, and (...)
more, it had been a sign the Piece to be double fortified or reinforced,
having also at the Trunnions FL 1/16, and at the Neck FN 9/16 of the height or
Calibre of her Bore, Then she shooting an Iron shot of 17 lb. would have
endured also 17 lb. of Cannon corn powder to be loaded with, and be fired
within her without danger. And this would so have conveyed the shot further
then the ordinary could have done, upon like degrees of Mounture.

Contrariwise, if the circles there had been found, that from F to H, but of
her Calibre of the bore at the Touchhole, and at the Touchhole but for FL,
and at the neck from F to N but 7/16 of the height of her bore. Then she
appears to be one of the lessened or slender fortified Culuerings, and must
be allowed but 12 lb. 9 oz. of Cannon corn to convey her Iron shot of 17 lb.
which upon like elevation will not carry a shot so far as the Ordinary, much
less as the extraordinary Culuerings could have done.

In this self same manner all sorts of Pieces of the second kind are to be
measured and Tertiated with this consideration and allowance withal, That the
Demi Culuering has 1/16, and the Saker 1/^^, and the Faulcon more metal
comparatively then the whole Culuering has. And so much for the sorts of the
second kind of Ordnance.

Likewise upon the other side of the same figure, the Measures of the Ordnance
are thus described.

measuring the mouths of various cannons Tract. 3. Cap. 2 fig. 1.
Chamber 1 Calibre.
Kammer 1 Calibre.
Canon renforcee.
gesterkte Carthoune^.


Chamb..
Kammer.
Canon comun
gemeine Carth.


Chamber
Kammer
Canon amoindrt
veriungte Carth.
Comment il fault mesurer les pieces d'artillerie.
Wie das geschutz zu viesieren.


la chamber 1 Calibre.
die kammer 1 Calibre.
Colubrince Commune
Gemeine Colubkine


Chamber 1 Call.
Kammer 1 Call.
Colubrine re^forcee.
gestarckte Colubri^zc
Culebrinarrefarcada


Chamber
Kammer
Colubrine amoindrie.
Veriungte Colubrine.


The double fortified or reinforced Canons of Battery, have one whole
Dyametre of their bore in thicknes of metal at her Touchhole, and 11/16 at
her Trunnions, and 7/16 at her neck.

The ordinary Canons of Battery is in their Chambers, (...) at their
Trunnions, and at their Necks of the Dyametre of the Bores in thickness of
metal.

The Lessened Canons of Battery is at the Chamber, at the Trunnions 9/16 and
at the neck 5/16 of the Dyametre of their Bores in thickness of metal,
whose poorenes and debility of metal, although they be to shoot an Iron shot
of about 60 lb. yet they cannot endure above 25 lb. of fine powder, or 31 lb.
of common powder.

Whereas the Reinforced Canon of Battery can endure to burn 34 lb of fine
powder or 43 of common powder.

And so the Ordinary Canon of Battery will endure 30 lb. of fine, or 39 lb. of
common powder.

But if the Gunner when he should measure or tertiate any Piece, has not
Calibre compasses, he may do it sufficiently with a cord or string, by
guirding the Piece at the Touchhole, at the Trunnions and at the Neck, taking
part thereof for the Dyametre of the body of her metal in each places, Thus:

The Canon or ordinary Culuerings have about 11 Dyametres of their bore about
at the Touchhole, and at the Trunnions 8 Dyametres, and at the neck 6
Dyametres in their circumferences.

But the Common or Ordinary Canons of battery have but 9 Dyametres at the
Touchhole, and at their Trunnions 7, and at their necks 5 2/5 in the
circumference of their mettalls there.

Lastly, the Demi Canons are but of their bores in thicknes of metal at the
Touchhole: I need not to insist upon the rest of the measures, nor of the
Reinforced Ordinary or Lessened, only I may say that as they all tend to none
other end, but to make known the force and feeblenes of any Piece, to allow
her a convenient charge of Powder, that they may perform their best and utmost
force most safely: for if you give any Piece more then her due charge in
powder, you endanger the Piece your self, and the service expected, but if you
give less she cannot do sufficient execution.

The force and richnes, and the defects and poorness of the Powder, is
likewise to be well known for 10 lb. of one powder may do more execution
then 12 lb. of another, wherefore increase or abatement must be accordingly
made to or from the quantity, that is ordinarily allowed, according to the
strength thereof, more or less, whereof I intend to speak more particularly
in the chapter of the making and proouing of Powder.

But yet I will conclude with a brief and industrious way to measure a Piece
as is by the 19 figure a represented: First draw a right line, as the line CD,
then take the wideness of the bore of the Piece with a pair of straight
poynted compasses, and set both the points in the said right line from C
toward D, as CF which will be the height or wideness of the bore of the
Piece. Then with a pair of Calibre compasses take the Dyametre of the metal
at the breech, which being also set in the same right line from C toward D as
CE. Lastly, divide EE into two equal parts at A, so will FA or EA be the
thicknes of the metal at the breech. The like may be done at the Trunnions or
Mouth.

CHAP. XXV. To find whether the Concaue Cillinder of any Piece of Ordnance be
in the midst of her metal, if not where the thickest or thinnest of the
Metal is, and the difference thereof, and of the longest and shortest
distances from the Axis of the metal to the Axis of the bore, with their
Larges and Disparts.
BEfore I proceed any further, it will not be amiss here to show the use of
Parallel Squire described in the 19 figure a, which is an instrument requisite
to find and examine whether that any Piece has more metal upon one side of
her then on the other. The same is of two perches or pieces made square of good
seasoned wood planed straight and smooth, joined at the end with two trauers
pieces truly let in and well closed in their joints, so that as one of the
pearches may come nearer or go further off from the other as the Piece to be
measured shall require always, keeping the two pearches exactly parallel one
to the other, and so locked with shrew pinnes and nuts, as that they may not
boudge without his will that uses them.

These pearches have in each of them 5 or 6 skrewes with pins of brusse or
Iron, that the one perch being put into the Cillinder of the bore of a Piece
of Ordnance, the pins and skrewes with their half round heads may so bear
upon the lower side of the bore, that it may hold up the perch close to the
upper side thereof, all along even to the Touchhole. Then by the Trauerses,
locking the Perch that is without, that the further end may touch and rest upon
the Basering, and the upper pinnes also touch the Cornish frieze, and other
eminent rings of the outside. Then turning the said instrument round about, all
the concaue or soul within and about the metal or body without side of the
Piece, if you find it to touch all parts equally in such revolution, you may
be assured the Piece is truly bored in the midst of the metal; but if it
touch not equally but be stayde or stiff upon one side, and loose, that the
pinnes bear or tooch not one the other, it is certain that the side where it
is loose, is thinner in metal, then the other where it goes stiff or
stays.

The places which is thin^nest and thickest, being known by the stiffenesse or
looseness of the pinnes in the turning, and the lengthning or shortning of
those pinnes more or less, will also make known the quantity how much one
side and place is thicker or thinner then another, and that throughout man
examining several cannons with various tools Tract. 3. Cap. 2. fig. 2.
Kreutzstenglein. Croisetta.
Eschelle pour examine le ba^^n de la piece sil et droit ou non
Eine leitteren darauff erforschet ob der lauff an einem stuck gleich oder
vngleich is it.
Cecij est explique desoubs chap. 5.
Disses is it drunder im 5. Cap. ercklaret
Comment il fault mesurer vne piece.
Wie ein stuck soll visieret werden.
bouche.

rictal.

bouche. netal.

la cueilliers de charge.

^undloch.

mor^luch.

Die ladschauffel.

Regla pour signer le, lignes droitte.
Zoll stab daran die serack linien zu zihen.
every part of the Piece noting the thickest side with the Algebraicall figure
of more thus and the thinner with the character of less thus, marking and
noting very diligently how much the excess is, and in either of those places
with a cord, or rather a parchment that will not stretch guird the Piece round
about, Then halfe-ing that guirting, by doubling it, lay one end of it upon the
character -- that is where the metal is thickest, and where that half ends
there is the thinnest by the 15 definition of the first of Euclid: which being
done both at the breech and mouth also, and how much the thickest or thinnest
place is distant from the uppermost of the surface of the metal in those
places severally noted; so much is particularly prepared for the same Piece
only, yet how it may be applied in like sort for any other wrybored Piece, may
by like practice be conceived.

The same being done as well for the Brech as for the Mouth, and transferred
accordingly upon a board with Plumets in the centres of each circle, and one in
the perpendicular Dynametre of the middle line of the board, whose lower end
must be somewhat hollowed, that it may be the better applied upon the
roundnesse of the metal of the breech and muzzle of the Piece, as the figure
thereof may sufficiently explain, it would be too tedious, and not opera
pretium further to describe the perpendicill, or to demonstrate the same,
although I have prepared for any friends that defire it.

Note for as much as it is very difficil to reclaimc such Pieces from shooting
awry, or over or under, without these curious preparations: And because they
are not safely to be shot in, without very good and mature consideration of
their weakness and danger, for if an ordinary charge of powder be fyred in such
a Piece, the weaker fortified part would not be able to resist the force
thereof, but be in great danger to break and split: therefore I would advise
every Gunner that shall be appointed to serve with such a Piece, as well for his
safety as for his credit, either with or without reclaiming those Errors, not
to load her with more powder then if she were no better fortified in any place
then she is in the weakest part, her surplussage at the thickest, being no
better help to strengthen the thinnest of her metal; then if she were in all
places weak alike. Yet to examine the metal of any Piece do thus also,
Mount the mouth of the Piece upon a skidde or piece of Timber, and having from
the upper part of the metal, made four marks, or divided the circumference
of the Base and Muzzle Riggalls or Rings into 4 quadrants from the mouth to the
Breech, having stretched a chalk line laid upon two of those marks each with
his match, striking with that line, 4 lines along upon the outside of the
body of the piece, and having a great care that they betruely lined; Then take
a strait rod and put it into the mouth of the Piece, holding it close to the
side of the concaue directly within it as the lines directs, the one line
whereof lying directly, his opposite will lie directly underneath it, and the
other two lines will be stretched on both the sides of the Piece.

Then take your Quadrant, and place one side thereof even with the rod, and
look what degree the perpendicular plumlyne cutteth thereon, and so turning
the piece, that one of the side lines may then lie upright, if the plumblyne
then fall upon the same degree at each line of such application upon them all,
the Piece is then truly bored. Lastly, there may also for that purpose be an
Iron or Brass Instrument with a joint in the midst called Double Calibres with
four legs like the figure here described, which by putting them into the
concaue of the Piece, and turning it round within the bore, clasping the other
leg without to the metal of the Piece, the distance between the other two
legs without will show the thickness of the Piece in each part, and show,
with applying all the openings unto an inch Rule or scale of equal parts,
whether the Piece be thicker upon one side then on another, being alike
distant from the mouth of the Piece, and how much and where.

measuring the thickness of a cannon

Which differences of thickness and thinness of her metal, wry boring or
uneven lying, of the concaue Cillinder or Soul in her body or Metal being so
made known. The Large line and Large it self, together with her due dispart,
and lying of the Axis, for such a Piece may be found as follows.

CHAP. XXII. To Dispart a Piece of Ordnance, whose Bore lies horizontally
awry, and the Axis thereof being parallel to the Axis of the Metal.
SVppose that the Bore of the Piece lies awry so much of the Horizontall
Dyametre square, as w v, or of the circumferences of the metal at the mouth,
as m n, or at the Breech as t r, here represented by the two parallel right
lines, one v b m t, being the vertical semidiametre of the middle of the
metal at the Breech, and v b m at the mouth. And w h o u t the other
parallel, whereof w h is the vertical semidiametre of the middle of the bore
both at Breech and Mouth, and h n the vertical thickenesse therein of the
metal of the mouth, and h t the vertical thicknes of the metal at the
greatest ring at the breech.

The difference of b m for h n being added unto the difference of m r from t r,
augmented by the line of the usual dispart r m (the difference at the upper
part of the metal at the Breech and Mouth) will compound and make the due
dispart little or nothing differing from the usual dispart, but must be placed
upon n perpendicularly parallel to m r, which shall direct the said Piece to
make an assured good shot, the visuall line passing from the Gunners eye by t
and n unto the mark to be shot at, by the 10 definition, and the 65 Theoreme.

But if the Bore or Soul of the Piece lie awrye, the Axis thereof not being
parallel with the Axis of the Metal.

As if the Bore at the Touchhole were as the circle x bid. and the Bore at the
mouth, as e g h f, and the Axis of the Bore passes from v at the breech unto w
at the mouth horizontally level with the Axis of the metal; Then shall the
Dispart be of such length, as in the former ordinary manner, but the dispart
line upon the metal at the breech will pass directly from point z, unto the
point n at the mouth of the piece, to make a perfect shot with such a piece at
any mark assigned.

CHAP. XXVII. To Dispart a Piece of Ordnance, whose Center of the Bore lies
perpendicularly awry, either above or under the Center of the midst of the
metal, and yet the Bores Axis being parallel with the Axis of the Metal.
SVppose that the bore of the piece assigned lies awry so much of the
perpendicular Dyametre, as a b above the Axis of the metal, yet being
parallel thereunto, or as much as the circumference m o or b n. Herein the two
verticalls being in one same line, both of the middle of the bore, and also of
the middle of the metal; therefore the visuall dispart must be placed upon
the uppermost part of the metal of the mouth, and the visuall line must pass
from the Gunners eye by the upper part of the metal at the Breech, and by d
the upper part of the metal at the mouth, and will there serve to make a good
shot as if the Axis of the Bore had lain in the Axis of the metal; and so the
like may be said if it were in the perpendicular Dyametre, under the Center of
the metal at the breech and mouth, as a c, which may suffice.

But if the Concaue of the Bore lie awry, and not parallel to the Axis of the
metal; as if the circle r i s t represent the bottom of the bore at the
Touchhole, and the circle r k s w represent the bore at the mouth, and the
Axis thereof passing from b at the breech to c at the mouth, crossing the Axis
of the metal at a and lying vertically in one same plane therewith.

Then shall the difference of metal Xd. at the mouth differ from the thicknes
of metal i e, at the breech, only the quantity of g e, which is the true
height or length of the dispart, and must be set upon the vertical point d at
the mouth to make a good shot with the said piece at any mark assigned three
sets of concentric and overlapping circles, with various labeled points to be
shot at within the distance. For take k d out of the mettalls at the mouth of i
e, the mettalls are at the breech, and will rest g e the Dispart sought.

But if the Circle r k s w be the Bore at the breech, and r i s v the bore at
the mouth.

Then shall the thicknes of the metal at the Mouth i d differ the thicknes of
the metal at the breech k e the full quantity of d f the true dispart for the
same Piece to be set upon the vertical point d. As d f, to make a good shot
at a mark assigned. For take i d, the metal at the mouth out of k e the
thicknes of metal at the breech, and there will rest i e equal to d f, for
the dispart sought, by the 10 Definition, and the 8 Demand.

CHAP. XXVIII. To Dispart any Piece of Ordnance, whose Axis of the Bore lies
awry not leuelly nor vertically, the Axis of the Metal not being parallel
thereunto.
AS suppose first that the bore at the breech be represented by the
excentricke circle d g e f, and at the mouth by the excentricke circle o f p g,
and the Axis of the bore the right line a d. The outmost circle of the metal
at the breech by the concentricke Circle q r y w x, and the outmost circle of
the metal at the mouth by the concentricke circle s t z: So shall the
thickness of the metal at the breech be 3 q, and the thicknes of the metal
at the mouth be 2 t, which space or quantity 2 t being taken out of 3 q
leaves 4 q the dispart required, to be set vertically upon the mouth at the
point t, because the same is the point in the outmost metal of the mouth that
is vertically over d, the Center of the bore at the mouth, and the large line
shall be q t: for that q is right and vertically over the Center of the bore
upon the outmost metal at the breech, and q s will be the dispart line and
part of the sight line that must pass from the Gunners eye by the point q on
the Metal at the breech, and by the point 5 the top of the dispart, set upon
the point: at the mouth, and so extending it self unto the Center of the mark
assigned to be shot at; The like may be said if b were the Center of the bore
at the Touchhole, and c the Center of the bore at the mouth: For then would r
s be the large line, and r 4 the dispart line, and 4 s the dispart, each
reciprocally answering the forenamed measures, being only placed alike on the
contrary side which may suffice.

But if d were the Center of the bore at the Touchhole, and a were the Center
of the bore at the mouth.

Then would 3 s be the thicknes of the metal at the mouth, which being taken
out of 2 r the thicknes of the metal at the breech, there will rest 6 r to be
set vertically upon the vpmost metal of the mouth at s, because s is the
vertical point there over d the Center of the bore at the mouth of the Piece,
so shall 6 r or 8, 7 equal thereunto be the length or heigh of the dispart,
and r s shall be the large line, upon the metal passing from the breech to
the mouth; and r 7 shall be the dispart line, part of the sight-line that
passes from the Gunners eye by the points r and 7, and extends unto the
Center of the mark assigned, by the 10 definition and the said 8 Demand.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Larges, and the Large Line in wry bored Pieces.
Having already showed how to find whether the Piece assigned were equally
bored in the midst of the metal, if not where the thickest and thinnest of
the metal lies, it rests now to show also how to find her middle line, or
highest of her metal at the breech and muzzle, as also her large and large
line in a piece that is bored or cast awry.

The Middle line is none other thing, but an imaginary Right line supposed to
pass upon the highest of the metal of a Piece of Ordnance from her Base ring
to her Muzzle ring, directly and vertically over the Axis of the body of
metal of that Piece, which by the perpendicill aforesaid is easily found by
placing the two corners K and L seuerly upon the Base and Muzzle rings in such
sort as that the plummet belonging to the line n, o, may hang directly over the
same line, and being let down, until the point thereof do touch upon the
surface of the metal there, make points or pricks at each place, I say then
that those points will be directly over the Axis of the Metal of that Piece,
between which points if a Chalk line be stretched and stricken, or a right
line imagined to pass, the same shall be the middle line of that Piece.

Now to find the Large line, and the Large it self, in such Pieces as are
bored, or cast a wry: Having found the middle Line, and the Plummet hanging so
directly over n. o. upon the said marks; and having found the Excentricke
circles of the thickest, and thinnest of the Metal, at the Breech, and Mouth,
and described them upon the Perpendicill, as is before showed, with their
Perpendicular lines parallel to n. o. letting down their Plumets, each in his
proper place severally, so that it hang directly over his own Perpendicular
line, and that the point of the Plumet also touch the Superficies of the
Metal, and there at each touch, make a mark and stretch a chalke-line
between them, from the Base to the Muzzle rings, and strike a line upon the
Metal therewith, or else imagine a right line to pass between them; I say,
that line will be Vertically over the Axis of the Bore, of that Piece; and is
the Large line sought, and the distance between the extremes of the middle line
formely found, and this Large line upon the Base and muzzle rings noted, are
the Large it self: and so is that Piece reclaimed and prepared to avoid wide
shooting.

Now it rests also to reform her over, or under shooting, whose cause may by
the former sections be conceined, and by the perpendicill easily, and readily
found and performed thus: First, upon the mark under o, where the plumet
touched, place a due Dispart for her, as if she were truly bored; then if the
Center of her Bore, at her breech be found by the instrument, to be under the
Center of the Bore, at her Muzzle; the difference thereof, is then to be
subtracted, from the level height of the Dispart. But if the Center of the
Bore at the breech, be higher then the same at the mouth, then that difference
must be added, and placed upon the mark of the Large, at the muzzle, with that
addition, or abatement; and so the visuall line, must pass from the Large, at
the breech, by the top of that Dispart there placed, which will avoid all over,
or under shooting in that Piece.

CHAP. XXX. To find the weight of any Shot by the Diametre thereof, as well
Arithmetically, and Geometrically, as Tabularly, and by Scale, and Compass.
THe weight of the Shot, being a fit Index for the Gunner, to allow any Piece
of Ordnance her due charge of powder; is therefore most necessary to be made
known, or first sought; and because a Gunner, cannot at all times when the
weight of a Shot is required, have Balance and weights about him, to weigh the
same; therefore, it shall not be a miss, here to set down, how he may know
the same, to a sufficient neerenesse, by the height of the Dimetre, or circuit
of the circomference thereof; And that also for variety sake, as well
Arithmetically, and Geometrically, as Tabularly, and by Scale, and Compass.

The first thing to be done in Arithmeticall working, is to find the solid
square inches, contained in the Ball, or Shot assigned; which may be thus
found, multiply the measure of the known inches of the height, or Dyametre
thereof Cubickly, and then again multiply that Cube by 11, and divide the last
product by 21, and the number in the Quotient, will express how many solid
square inches of Metal, or Stone is contained in the Globall body of that
Shot: If then you know, how much one square inch of the Metal, or Stone
assigned weighs, you may then soon know the whole Shots weight sought, (for
cast Iron 4 ownces allowed for each inch square, comes near the matter) and
the proportion of Iron to Lead may be as 30 to 56: And ordinary Stone to Lead,
as 18 to 72, and Stone to Iron, as 18 to 48, tolerable accepted.

But to come more precisely near the truth (although spunginesse) and the
difference of each Mine from other, and infinite accidents, vary the
proportions between their capacities, and weights, and do hinder it. The
table following will sufficiently help, in the mean space, I will give one
example to illustrate the precedent rule. As for example, it is required to
find thereby the solid square inches, in a Shot of 4 inches and in height; the
near Cube of 4 being near 91, which I multiply by 11, and the product I find
to be 1001, which I dividing by 21, find in the Quotient 47 inches, and of an
inch more, for the solid content of that Shot, which if it were of Iron, by
such allowance as aforesaid, it would weigh 11 lb, and about 15 ounces, but by
the first Table following, it would be 12 lb. and 12 ounces, and by the sequent
treble Table for Lead, Iron, and Stone Shots; it is found to be but 12 lb. and
10 ounces, wherein appears also that a Leaden Shot, would be 17 lb. and 15
ounces, which by the first Table, would be found 19 lb. and 12 ounces. But for
easiness, some (and because it may for any Iron Shot be wrought by memory, by
a man of any small practice) do use only to divide the Cube of the Shot by 8,
and take the Quotient for pounds, and each unity of the remainder for 2
ounces, and so the Cube of 4 being 91, as aforesaid, and divided by 8, the
Quotient will be 11 lb. and the 3 remaining will be 6 ounces: The like in all
kinds may be done for Stone Shot, by the rule of 3 only, saying, if 48 the
proportion of Iron, give 202 ounces, what shall 18 the proportion for stone
give? 76 ounces, which will be 4 lb. and 12 ounces for the weight of the Stone
Shot, that is 4 inches and in height.

But the most artificial, and exact Arithmeticall working of all such
questions, for all usual Mettalls and Stones, is according to the next Table,
wherein, I have imitated the Lord Marchistones Table, in his Rabdolagia,
applying this unto ounces, and inches, which are our usual known weights and
measures: Whereas his was for Cochleas, or Spoonefulls, and Drames, more used
by Physicians, then known in Gunners practices; yet, for his two first
Theoremes, and Problemes, I have followed them, because their works are easy,
and excellent.

The first Problem.
By the inches of the capacity, of the Metal, or Stone named, to find the
ounces of the weight thereof.

The first Theoreme.
As a 1000 to the inches of the capacity, or solid measure of the Metal, or
Stone named; So is the lowest number of the Colume, of the same Metal, or
Stone, to the ounces of the weight thereof.

The first Example.
Let there be an Iron Shot of 8 inches high, which by solid measuring, (as
above is taught) is found to contain 268 inches, and: By the said first
Theoreme, as 1000, to 268, so is 4333 the lowest number of the Colume measuring
several cannonballs Tract. 3. cap. 5.
Mesure qui montre le pois des balls selon leur calibre.
Mas darauff^^ gewicht der kugcln nach ^ere. Calibro verzeichnet.


Patron duquel en haste on peult Calibrer diuerses sorts de balls
Model durch welchen in cill vnderschiedliche kugeln konuen Calibrert werden


Pour montrer combien de vent il faillt donner a la balle
We viel lufft man einer kugcln geben muss.


of Iron, unto 1162 ounces which being divided by 16 (the ounces of the
Haberdepoise,) amounts unto 72 lb, and 10 ounces the weight sought.

The second Example.
Let an ordinary Stone shot, of the same height and measure be propounded,
containing as aforesaid, 268 inches, say, by the same first Theoreme, as 1000
is to 268, so will 1420 the lowest number of the Colume, of ordinary stone
thereof, be to 382 ounces, which the Stone shot weyeth; they being reduced
into pounds by division thereof by 16, will amount to 23 lb. 14 ounces, the
weight of Stone shot sought.

The second Problem.
By the ounces of the weight of any Metal, or Stone named, to find what
number of solid inches it is in capacity.

The second Theoreme.
As 1000 to the ounces of weight of any Metal, or Stone named, so is the most
right hand number of the Line, of the same Metal, or Stone, to solid inches
of the capacity thereof.

The first Example.
Let there be a Shot of Iron of 8 inches Dyametre, weying 1162 ounces, and we
desire to know, how many solid inches it contains: By the second Theoreme, as
1000 to 1162, so is 230 the most right hand number, in the Line of Iron to 268,
fere the solid inches contained therein.

The second Example.
Let there be a Shot of ordinary Stone, whose weight by the second example of
the first Theoreme, will be 23 lb. and 14 ounces, whereof the solid inches is
required: By the second Theoreme, as 1000 is to 382 ounces the weight, so is
710 the most right hand number, of the line of ordinary Stone, to 270 fere the
solid inches required; exactness by Table, is not to be expected.

A Table for the Weights, and Measures, of Mettalls, and Stones.
Gold. 1000 810 670 645 380 420 410 170 130 120 Quicksil. 1392 1000 950 820 678
568 550 210 150 140 Lead. 1650 1150 1000 910 740 675 635 250 160 160 Silver.
1785 1340 1248 1000 820 710 750 270 200 180 Brass. 2225 1680 1448 1345 1000
925 850 320 240 200 Iron. 2588 1930 1670 1535 1190 1000 930 380 260 230 Tin.
2725 2045 1765 1640 1280 1160 1000 420 280 250 Marble. 6780 5120 4278 4090 2216
2784 2642 1000 710 680 Ord. sto. 9960 7415 6405 5948 2650 4020 3828 1530 1000
710 13200 7880 6798 6315 4958 4333 4067 1645 1420 1000

CHAP. XXXI. The Geometrical finding the Dyametre, for the weight of any Shot
assigned.
Having a Shot of one pound, 2 lb. or 3 lb. weight of the Metal, or stone
assigned; if it be of one pound, divide the Dyametre thereof into 4 equal
parts, and 5 such parts, will make a Dyametre for a Shot of the said Metal,
or Stone, that shall weigh just two pound.

And divide the Dyametre of a Shot, that weighs just 2 lb. into 7 equal
parts, and 8 such parts, will make a Dyametre for a shot of 3 lb. weight.

And dividing the Dyametre of a shot of 3 lb. weight, into 10 equal parts, and
11 such parts, will make shot of 4 lb. weight.

And divide the Dyametre of a shot of 4 lb. into 13 parts, 14 such parts, will
make a Dyametre for a shot of 5 lb. weight.

And dividing the Dyametre of a shot of 5 lb. weight, into 16 equal parts, 17
such parts, will make a Dyametre of a shot, that will weigh 6 lb: And so
dividing each next Dyametre into 3 parts equal more then the next lesser was
divided into, and it will with one part added frame a Dyametre of a shot, that
will weigh just one pound more; and so you may proceed infinitely, increasing,
or decreasing, by taking one part less, then it is appointed to be divided
into, for 1 lb. less, and the next into 3 lb. less, to abate one from the
remainder, infinitely decreasing it.

A second Geometrical way.
Having exactly the Dyametre of a shot that weighs one pound; first describe
a Circle, whose Dyametre shall be just equal thereunto, and divide it into 4
Quadrants, with two Dyametres, cutting each other in the Center Orthogonally,
then take the Chord of the whole Quadrant, or of 90 Degrees, that is, extend
your Compasses, from one extreme of a Dyametre, to the next, as in the figure
following: Take the distance A. B, being supposed the Dyametre of a shot, or
ball of just one pound weight, which distance being set in the continued right
line D. B. f. g. h, and from E. to f, then will D. f. be the Dyametre of a
shot of 2 lb, and then opening the Compasses from A. to f, and setting the same
from E. to g. Again, taking the distance from A. to g, and setting it from E.
to h, so likewise taking the distance A h. with the Compasses, and setting the
same from E. to i, and so continuing until you have proceeded as far as you
will: You shall find if D. B. were the Dyametre of 1 lb. that D. f. will be
the Dyametre of 2 lb, and D. g. will be the Dyametre of a shot of 3 lb, and D.
h. of 4 lb, D. i. 5 lb, D. k. of 6 lb, and D. l. of 7 lb, and D. m. of 8 lb,
etc. and lastly, D. q. of 12 lb, whereby you may proceed in like manner
infinitely.

ten nested circles

Or else you having a Dyametre of 1 lb, double that Dyametre will make a
Dyametre of 8 lb, and treble the Dyametre of one pound, will make a Dyametre of
27 lb. and the quadruple, or 4 times the same will make a Dyameter of a shot of
64 lb, and 5 Dyametres, will make a Dyametre of a ball of 125 lb: and five
times the Dyametre of a shot of 1 lb, will make a Dyametre of a shot, that will
weigh 216 lb.

It rests now, to show how to find the mean divisions between those
extremes, as for the Dyametre of a shot of 2 lb, 3 lb, 4 lb, 5 lb, 6 lb, 7 lb,
and more: so as by such progressions, you may proceed from pound to pound,
until you come to the last term, for extreme of 216 lb. Nevertheless, the
same manner of working will proceed infinitely; the former mentioned six
Dyametres, being marked upon one and the same right line, you must at the end
of them, draw another right line Orthogonally, and set therein two such
Dyametres, as at C, and from thence draw another right line parallel to the
first, from C. to K, then put one foot of your Compasses in C, and make a
quarter of a Circle from B. to D, that done, plant a pin, or needle in C, and
then draw from the Center C. lines through all the division of the Dyametres,
marked upon the right line A. B, so shall you have six divisions to be
divided: The first being divided already, abides as it was, and is the
Dyametre of a shot, or ball of one pound; but the second division, is to be in
the circumference, divided into 7 parts equally; because it contains the
second Dyametre unto 8, from 1 to 8, for adding 1 to 7, it makes 8; the third
division is into 19 equal parts, which being added to the 8, makes 27; the
fourth, shall be divided into 37 equal parts, which together with the 27,
makes 64; the fifth space shall be divided into 61 equal parts, which
together with the 64, amount unto 125; and lastly, the sixth space must be
divided into 91 equal parts, unto which adding the 125, you shall make a
Dyametre, for a shot of 216 lb. justly.

an arc, a small circle, and various labeled points

Now for as much, as these divisions are deficill, to make well within so small
a Quadrant, you may therefore describe a greater, as the Quadrant K. E, wherein
the divisions are more distinct, then in the lesser they can be; further you
may note, that Fireballs, Grenades, and other Globous Artifices; must have
the same proportion in their Grandures, from their Ball of one pound, which may
be exactly considered: and so by this method, you may make Balls of Lead,
Brass, Stone, Grenades, Fireballs, and all other Sphericall works, of what
weight you will, having one of one pound first to lead you, according to the
precedent instructions.

A Table whereby, and by the Inch sight-rule, any Piece of Ordnance between
six foot, and fifteen foot in length, may be mounted to any Degree of the
Quadrant, under twenty Grades as well as by the Quadrant it self, or by any
other Instrument whatsoever.
6 Foot. 7 Foot. 8 Foot. 9 Foot. 10 Foot. 11 Foot. 12 Foot. 13 Foot. 14 Foot.
15 Foot. Gr. Inch. 1 1, 2 1, 3 1, 4 1, 5 1, 6 1, 7 1, 8 1, 9 2, 0 2, 1 2, 2 2,
3 2, 4 2, 5 2, 6 2, 7 2, 8 2, 9 3, 0 2 2, 5 2, 7 2, 9 3, 1 3, 3 3, 5 3, 6 3, 8
4, 0 4, 2 4, 5 4, 7 5, 0 5, 2 5, 4 5 6 5, 8 5, 9 6, 0 3 3, 7 4, 0 4, 3 4, 6 4,
9 5, 3 5, 5 5, 7 6, 0 6, 3 6, 7 7, 1 7, 4 7, 7 8, 0 8 4 8, 8 9, 0 9, 2 4 5, 0
5, 4 5, 8 6, 2 6, 5 7, 0 7, 5 7, 9 8, 0 8, 8 9, 2 9, 6 10, 0 10, 4 10, 8 11, 2
11, 6 12, 0 12, 4 5 6, 2 6, 8 7, 4 7, 8 8, 2 8, 7 9, 3 10, 0 10, 5 11, 0 11, 5
12, 0 12, 5 13, 0 13, 6 14, 2 14, 8 15, 2 15, 6 6 7, 5 8, 2 8, 9 9, 4 9, 9 10,
4 11, 0 11, 9 12, 6 13, 4 14, 6 14, 8 15, 0 15, 7 16, 4 17, 1 17, 8 18, 3 18, 8
7 8, 7 9, 5 10, 4 10, 9 11, 7 12, 1 12, 8 13, 8 14, 5 15, 3 16, 0 16, 7 17, 4
18, 2 19, 0 19, 9 20, 8 21, ^ 21, 8 8 10, 0 10, 8 11, 9 12, 3 13, 3 13, 8 14, 2
15, 8 16, 6 17, 5 18, 3 19, 2 20, 0 20, 8 21, 6 22, 7 23, 0 24, 2 24, 6 9 11, 3
12, 3 12, 5 13, 7 14, 5 15, 1 15, 5 17, 7 18, 7 19, 7 20, 6 21, 5 22, 4 23, 4
24, 4 25, 0 25, 8 26, 6 27, ^ 10 12, 3 13, 0 13, 8 15, 4 16, 7 17, 7 18, 7 19,
8 20, 8 21, 9 22, 9 24, 0 25, 0 26, 0 27, 0 27, 8 27, 9 29, 2 30, 8 11 13, 7
14, 8 16, 3 17, 0 18, 4 19, 4 20, 4 21, 7 21, 7 24, 0 25, 4 26, 8 27, 4 28, 5
29, 6 31, 1 32, 6 33, 3 34, 0 12 15, 0 16, 2 17, 5 18, 7 20, 0 21, 1 22, 2 23,
5 24, 8 26, 2 27, 6 29, 0 30, 0 31, 2 32, 4 33, 7 35, 0 36, 2 37, 4 13 16, 2
17, 6 18, 5 20, 3 21, 6 22, 9 24, 2 25, 6 26, 9 28, 2 30, 0 31, 6 32, 4 33, 9
35, 2 36, 5 37, 8 39, 2 40, 6 14 17, 4 18, 9 20, 3 21, 8 23, 3 24, 6 25, 9 27,
5 28, 9 30, 4 32, 0 33, 6 34, 8 36, 5 37, 8 39, 0 40, 0 41, 9 43, 6 15 18, 6
20, 2 21, 7 23, 3 24, 9 26, 3 28, 1 29, 4 30, 9 32, 8 34, 3 35, 8 37, 2 38, 3
40, 4 41, 9 43, 4 45, 0 46, 6 16 19, 8 21, 5 23, 1 24, 8 26, 5 28, 1 29, 8 31,
4 33, 0 35, 0 36, 8 38, 4 39, 8 41, 5 43, 0 44, 8 46, 2 47, 9 49, 6 17 21, 2
22, 8 24, 0 26, 3 27, 9 29, 8 31, 2 33, 5 34, 9 37, 1 38, 9 40, 0 42, 4 44, 0
45, 8 47, 3 49, 0 50, 8 52, 6 18 22, 4 24, 1 25, 9 27, 8 29, 9 31, 5 33, 0 35,
4 36, 8 38, 9 41, 2 43, 8 44, 8 46, 5 48, 2 50, 0 52, 8 53, 7 55, 6 19 23, 5
25, 3 26, 9 29, 3 31, 4 33, 2 34, 8 37, 5 38, 7 40, 2 43, 5 45, 7 47, 0 48, 8
50, 6 52, 0 52, 9 55, 5 58, 6 20 24, 6 26, 7 28, 7 30, 8 32, 8 34, 9 36, 9 38,
9 41, 0 42, 1 45, 8 47, 6 49, 4 51, 3 53, 4 55, 4 57, 4 59, 5 61, 6

A Table, showing the Height and Weight of Iron, Lead, and Stone-shot,
accuratly and newly calculated by the Author, and applied to our assize of
English Measure of Inches and Parts, and to the Haberdepoize Weight of 16
Ounces to the Pound: With the Description of my Gunners Scale.
Inches high Quarters. Iron poun Ounces. Lead pou Ounces. Stone pou Ounces. 1 0
0 0 3 0 1 1 0 0 6 0 3 2 0 0 9 0 4 3 1 0 0 13 0 5 1 2 0 1 1 1 11 0 7 1 1 9 2 0 0
9 2 2 2 3 0 0 12 3 2 14 4 3 1 0 3 0 3 12 5 0 1 4 1 4 12 6 9 1 8 2 6 1 8 1 2 0 3
7 5 9 14 2 7 4 0 8 15 11 5 2 13 1 10 10 15 15 3 10 2 12 10 17 15 4 3 3 14 14 21
5 5 9 5 0 17 5 24 12 6 3 1 20 1 30 0 7 8 2 23 2 35 10 8 14 3 26 6 39 9 10 10 6
0 30 0 45 0 11 4 1 34 0 51 0 12 12 2 38 0 57 0 14 3 3 42 0 63 0 15 12 7 0 48 0
72 0 17 10 1 53 0 79 8 19 14 2 58 0 87 0 21 12 3 64 0 96 0 24 0 8 0 72 10 106 8
26 12 1 ^8 0 117 0 28 8 2 87 3 130 8 32 8 3 95 0 141 8 35 10 9 0 101 0 150 0 37
10 1 109 6 161 8 40 4 2 121 10 181 13 44 2 3 132 11 198 5 49 8 10 2 138 0 2^7 0
51 10 0 164 2 246 0 0 0 11 0 184 0 275 8 69 8 2 216 0 324 0 81 0 12 0 240 0 360
0 90 0 13 0 305 0 457 8 114 8 14 0 389 2 583 8 146 8

THe Use of this Table in the left margent, is to find out the height of your
Shot in the two first Collume of inches, and quarters of inches: Then if is be
an Iron shot, over against the height so found in the two second Collumes under
the tytles of Iron pounds and Ounces, you shall find the weight thereof. The
like may be understood, if the shot be of Lead, by the two third Collumes, or
of Sone, by the two last collumes, each under his proper title, and over
against the height assigned. As for example; For, an Iron shot of 8 inches, the
weight will appear to be 72. pound 10 ounces; and if it were of Lead, it would
be found 106 pound 8 ounces; but if of Stone, then would it be but 26 pound 12
ounces, which may suffice.

The Description of my Gunners Seal, is to be made in Brass by M. Allen: And
in Wood, by M. Nathaniell Gors of Rateliffe. IT is a square Rule of one foot
in length, made either of Brass, Box, or other fine grayned Wodde that will
not warpe: Upon one side or square whereof I have set the height of all sorts
of Iron shot, from 1 pound to 100 pound weight: And of Stone shot to 37 pound:
And of Lead shot to 150 pound weight: Each distinguished from an other by the
Letter I. for Iron, S. for Sone, and L. for Lead shot, and their Weights and
Measures accomodated unto our English Haberdepoiz weight of 16 ounces to the
pound, and to our Foot of assize of 12 Inches to the Foot. The second side
has twelve Inches of assize, each divided by Paralells and Dianonall lines,
into 100 equal parts, distinctly to take any Number from 1 to 1000, from
thence, with a pair of Compasses. The third, has Sinicall and Logarithmall
deuisions, exceeding necessary for the Gunners practice, as hereafter shall
more plainly appear. The fourth, has deuisions proportional to the right
Ranges and Randons of any Piece of Ordinance upon any Mounture from degree to
degree; and the number of Inches that any Piece between 6 and 15 foot long
requires to mount her to any degree of mounture, under 20 degrees, as well or
better then by the Quadrant; as the Table following will also explane.

several tools of measurement Tractat. 3. cap. 13 fig. 1
La facon form de repartement des quadrant;
Form vndt abtheillung der quadranten.


CHAP. XXXII. Of the rule of Callibres, and of the difference between the
heights of the Bore and Shot for any Piece, which is called the vent or due
abatement to shoot with safety, and most advantage therewith.
FOrasmuch as it is an excellent quality in a Gunner to be expert and ready in
the Heights and Calibres of Bore and Shot for Ordnance, and to retain them in
memory, rather by reason then by roate, they being the ground and Scale from
which all the Measures and Proportions for all parts, as well of the Piece and
her Carriage, as of the Powder, Shot, and distance, or the way of the Shot are
derived and understood, as by the precedent and sequent discourses may appear:
But because most English Gunners have hitherto generally as well for the
greatest as the smallest, or mean sorts of Ordnance chosen the Shot for them
all, one quarter of an inch lower then the height of their Bores; which the
best experienced Gunners of late years disliking, have for a general
proportion chosen rather one twentieth part of the height of the Bore to be
abated for a due height of the Shot vent, affirming that in the Faulcon and
small pieces the abatement of of an inch is too much, and for the Canon of an
inch is too little, and that 1/20 of the Diametre of the Bore will be a
reasonable abatement for all Pieces, be they higher, or lower, which being by
Arithmatick so easily found, will not require any example.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Gunners, Quadrant, and Triangle, with their Degrees and
Points, whereby either to Level, or else to Mount, or Imbase any Piece of
Ordnance, to any degree or point assigned.
THe Gunners Quadrant is a Geometrical Instrument, made of brass or fine
grained wood, containing in the circumference one quarter of a circle, divided
into 90 equal parts or degrees in the outmost limb, and in the second limb
within into the 12 points of the Gunners quadrant, having within the same also
a Geometrical Quadrate, with each side divided into 12 equal parts, and those
each of them subdivided by means of paralels and Dyagenalls into 10 equal
parts, so that each side will be thereby found distinctly divided into 120
equal parts, fitly serving to take all Geometrical Mensurations, of
distances, heights, breadthes, and depthes, accessible and inaccessible, by the
directions hereafter mentioned. The degrees and also the points being
principal helps for the Gunners practice, to shoot at the most certainty
both by the right line, and also upon the advantage of any Randon to and at any
Mark assigned, to a probable or assured good effect; as by the Tables, Scale,
and directions following, will more plainly appear, and by the 21 Figure
hereof marked ^ wherein each Quadrant, (but that which is marked with 4) has a
strait Ruler about 2 foot long, joined either firmly, or by a Grove
doue-tayled unto one of the sides of Semidiametres thereof. Now to plant any
Piece level, having put the said Ruler in close unto the lower side of the
Metal, within the Coucaue Cillinder of the Bore thereof, then mount or imbase
the Piece in her Carriage, until the plummet fall directly upon the other side
of the Quadrants fiduciall edge, by means of drawing out, or putting in the
Quoyns as reason will direct you: so will the Axis of the Bore or Concaue
Cillinder thereof, be found to lie directly level, or parallel to the
Horizontall plane: you may also without a Quadrant level any Piece duly
founded by holding a plumb line upright before the mouth of the Piece, and
mounting or imbasing her by means of her Quoynes, until the line shall
appear only to touch the Flat of the Metal at the mouth above, and below
alike: So will the Axis of the Soul that is to cut the flat of her mouth at
right Angles, the plumb line being parallel or equi-touching, the same flat be
found to be parallel to the plane of the Horizon, or truly level as was
required: But if by the said Quadrant you would mount the piece to any degree
or point of the Quadrant, then you are to mount or imbase her in her Carriage,
by drawing or putting in of her Quoynes more then before so much, until the
plumb line of the Quadrant appears freely (the Ruler being put into her mouth
as before) to hang directly over the degree or point assigned. And the like may
be said concerning the imbasing of any piece; as in the 21 Figure a at 2 for
the 12 points and at 3 for the 90 degrees A B C and E M N, And also concerning
the level at 4, to level pieces, and to find the upper part of the metal:
And lastly, to mount and imbase the piece by the help of the plumb line; And
by the whole circle at 5, divided into 48 equal parts, making in each Quadrant
thereof the 12 points of the Gunners quadrant. The like may be done with the
sight Rule, by the Table hereof.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Of a new devise by any Staff, to level, mount, and imbase any
Piece.
ALso any Piece may with a field Linstock, Rammer, or Sponge, or other Staff
be mounted to any degree of the Quadrant, being thus prepared. First, mark
from one end of that Staff a distance, equal unto the height of the Pomell or
Caskabell of the Piece the ballistic arc of cannonballs Tract. 2. Dial. 9.
Quelle piece sera de plus lointaine portee celle du hault ou celle du pied
d'vne tour.
Welches stuck am weittesten tragt das so oben oder das so vnden am thurn
abychet
a cannon aimed at a fortification Tract. 3. Cap 12 et 15
Mire commune rez les metaux de 1000 pas.
Gemeine vizier vber die frisen auff 1000 schritt.
Poinct du niueau de l'ame de 500 pas.
Vizier der wogen auff 500 schritt.
placed level upon her Platform, and then take the distance between the
Center of the Trunions and the Pomell or Caskabell, which make or imagine a
semidiametre of a Circle, and divide it by Dyagonalls and Paralels, or
otherwise into 1000 equal parts. Lastly, out of the Table of Sines, take the
number answering unto every degree out of the said 1000 parts, and set that
distance from the said mark downwards. And if the total Syne of the Table be
100000, omit the two last figures of each number thereof toward the right
hand, and if it be 10000000, then omit four figures of each number you find
in that Table, and the remaining number will show how many of those 1000 equal
parts are to be set downwards from the mark beneath the said level for each
several degree: Then drawing also 10 Paralels and Dyagonalls from the first
degree to the second, and from the second to the third, etc. successively
continued from each to his next, noting every degree with Arithmeticall
characters; so may you from 6 minutes to 6 minutes by those right synes mount
the Piece, so set forth for any Piece which it shall be prepared for. This may
also be described upon such a staff without the Table of synes in a
mechanical manner thus: If you describe a Quadrant or Quarter of a circle with
a semidiametre, equal to the distance from the center of the Trunions, to the
center of the Pomell or Caskabell, and divide the Arch of that quadrant into 90
equal parts or degrees, and then from each degree, letting a right line fall
perpendicularly upon the base side of the said quadrant. And lastly, each of
those right lines being thence transferred from the said first mark downwards
upon the said staff, and marking them with Arithmeticall figures for each
degree, thereupon making also Paralels and Diagonalls, as aforesaid you may
thereby Geometrically and mechanically mark the same from 6 to 6 minutes as
before. The use of them are plain and easy, for if you bring down the center
of the Caskabell or Pomell of the Piece to any number of degrees thereon, so
marked, for that piece, you setting the lower end of the staff to the
Platform being even, although it be rising or descending backwards: I say then
the Axis of the bore of that Piece will be found to be elevated unto the degree
assigned: If you be to imbase the Piece, those lines and number also set above
the first named mark, will perform the like office there in the thing
required.

CHAP. XXXV. How to find the right line or right range of any Shot discharged
out of any Piece, for every elevation, by any one Right or dead Range given for
the Piece assigned.
IF the Range given be the right Range, say by the Rule of three if the Tabular
number found in the Table of dead Ranges for the degree of the Range given,
give the number of known measures in that Range: what shall the Tabular number
of the Table of right Ranges, proper to the degree assigned give. And having
multiplied and divided them duly, the fourth number will be the right Range, or
right line for the Peecesought.

Example 1.
SVppose you are to seek the right Range of 30 degrees for that Piece, whose
dead Range for 30 degrees is given or known to be 2200 paces by it, multiply
the Tabular number of right Ranges for 30 degrees, which is 695, and divide the
product by 2150, the Tabular number for 30 degrees in the Table of dead Ranges,
and the Quotient will be 711 paces for the line or right Range of that Piece,
mounted and discharged at 30 degrees elevation.

Example 2.
SVppose the level right Range is given, and the right Range for 30 degrees
mounture be sought, say, if 192 the first number in the Table of right Ranges,
give 695 the Tabular number thereof for 30 degrees, what shall 197 paces the
level right Range given give, multiply the third by the second, and dividing
by the first, and the Quotient, will be 713 paces for the right Ranges sought,
the difference is that Tables cannot be so exactly calculated, but by omitting
small fractions, small differences will grow apparent, by working one question
or example diverse ways, which let suffice.

CHAP. XXXVI. To find how much of the Horizontall line is contained directly
under the right line, or right Range of any Shot, made out of any Piece at
every elevation assigned.
Having by the last Chapter found the number of paces, the Piece will carry her
Shot in a right line being duly discharged, at any Elevation assigned, multiply
the same by the right Sine of the complement of the degree of Mounture, and
divide the product by the whole Sine, and the Quotient will be the number of
paces (or such like measures) contained in the level, directly under the right
Range sought.

Example.
BE it propounded how to find what part of the Horizontall line lies,
directly under the right Range of the Piece assigned at 30 degrees elevation,
the right Range at 30 grades by the precedent, being found to be 713 paces,
and the right sine of 60 grades, the complement of 30 being 866, being
multiplied together, and the product divided by 1000, the whole sine leaves in
the Quotient 617, for the number of paces lying directly under the right Range
sought.

CHAP. XXXVII. To find how much of the Horizontall line lies under the
crooked Range of a Shot, made out of any Piece at any Elevation assigned.
THe crooked range is so much as the course or way of the Shot, as it goes
helically between the right Range, and the natural or perpendicular motion,
or before it make the first graze; And may be thus found either by deducting
of the level distance contained directly under the right line or right Range
of any Shot made, (found by the last Chapter) out of the dead Range thereof
found by the Chapter before-going: For the remainder will be the paces or other
measures, lying directly under the crooked range.

Example 1.
THe Piece supposed to be mounted to 30 degrees, is found to convey the Shot
2300 paces to the dead range or first graze of the Shot, and it also conuayeth
the Shot 617 paces in the level under the right Range, which deducted out of
the said dead Range, there remains 1683 paces, which lies directly under the
Crooked range, in the Horizontall line the thing sought.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the violent, crooked, and natural motion, or course of a
Shot discharged out of any Piece of Ordnance assigned.
BY the third and fourth suppositions of the second book of Tartaglia his
Nouascientia, every body equally heavy (as a Globall Shot) in the end of the
violent motion thereof, being discharged out of a Piece of Ordnance (so it be
not in the perpendicular line right up or down) the crooked Range shall join
to the right Range, and to the natural course or Motions, and be between
them both: So for example, the right Range being all the line a b of the Figure
following, and c d the natural motion. He says B C will being the mixed or
crooked Range join, and be contingent to them both in the points b and c,
wherein c will be the furthest part of the crooked course or range from the
Piece so directed, and d the end of the natural motion thereof.

And in his seventh proposition of the same book he proves, That every
Shot equally heavy great or little, equally elevated above Horizon, or equally
oblique or leuelly directed, are among themselves like and proportional in
their distances, as the Figure following shows: as A E F is like and
proportional in the right and crooked Ranges, unto A H I, and in their
distances or dead Ranges A F unto A I.

And in his fourth, fifth, and sixth propositions of the same book, he proves
that every Shot made upon the level, has the crooked range thereof equal to
the Arch of a Quadrant, or quarter of a Circle; and if it be made upon any
elevation above the level, that then it will make the crooked Range to be more
then a Quadrant, and that if it be made imbased under the level, that then the
crooked Range thereof will be an Arch less then a Quadrant, as the three last
figures following do represent.

several ballistic arcs, with inscribed angles

And lastly in his ninth Proposition of the same book, he undertakes to
prove, if one Piece be shot off twice, the one level and the other at the best
of the Randon, that the right Range of the level, is but one quarter of the
right Range of the best: And that the dead Range of the level is but 1/10 of
the dead Range of the best Randon, whereto he that desires further
demonstration, may have recourse, and examine his demonstrations of those
propositions in his said second book of his Noua Scientia. A Diagram for the
Randons of a Saker upon each of the first six Points, according to Alessandro
Bianco.

measuring several ballistic arcs

Now to find at what distance from the platform whereon the Piece is to be
discharged, the course of the Bullet will cut the aspect of every Mounture
(which will help when a mark shall be without the right Range of the Piece
in the aspect of its elevation, above the Horizon) to make a fair Shot at
first by taking a greater advantage of mounture: as suppose a Mark elevated 15
degrees, to be distant 700 paces.

By the last Diagram open the Compasses, until the aspect cut the point of
Mounture, then applying the same unto the scale under it, you shall thereby
find at what distance it cutteth the Randon required.

Alexander Bianco his Table of Randons for the six first Points reduced.
1 2 3 4 5 6 Falconet. 375 637 795 855 892 900 Falcon. 550 935 1166 1254 1309
1320 Minion. 450 765 954 1026 1071 1080 Saker. 625 1062 1325 1425 1487 1500
Demi-Culuering. 725 1232 1537 1653 1725 1740 Culuering. 750 1275 1590 1710 1785
1800 Demi-Cannon. 625 1062 1325 1425 1487 1500 Whole Cannon of 7. 675 1147 1431
1489 1606 1620 Double Cannon of 8. 750 1275 1690 1710 1785 1800

A Table of secant ranges.
0 1000 1 1000 2 1000 3 1001 4 1002 5 1003 6 1005 7 1007 8 1009 9 1013 10 1015
11 1018 12 1023 13 1026 14 1030 15 1035 16 1040 17 1045 18 1051 19 1057 20 1064
30 1154 40 1305 50 1555 60 2000 70 3923 80 5758 90 Infinite

The use of these Tables.
FIrst by Bianco his Table, having resolved upon the point of Mounture, look
against the name of the Piece, and right under that point, in the common Angle,
you shall find the number of Paces of her Randon sought.

The Table of Secant Ranges are proportional numbers, whose use by the
examples before mentioned, are plainly manifest, which let suffice.

CHAP. XXXVIII. How to load a Piece of Ordnance Gunner-like.
THe Piece being mounted, and duly planted on his Platform, and well provided
with all things in readiness for service, as of powder, Shot, Ladle, Sponge,
Ramer, Wadhooke, Wadds, and Tampions. The Gunner must place his Linstock to
Lee-wards, or under the wind, and having cleared the piece and Touchhole; he
must sponge his piece very well standing on the right side of the piece, and
drawing out his Sponge, let him give it two or three blows upon the Month on
the outside of the piece, to beat off the foulness and dust it has
gathered within: then his assistant declining the powder or boudge barrel
aside, he shall thrust in his Ladle to fill it, striking off the heaped powder,
giving a shogge to shake down the surplusse: and it being so filled and
striked, put in the Ladle down to the bottom of her Concaue Cillinder unto
the Touchhole, but at the first putting of the Ladle (so filled) into the
Mouth of the piece, slide in the Ladle staff, so that the upper side may keep
uppermost all the way, and when it is arrived to the bottom of the Bore, then
he laying his right thumb upon the said upper side of Ladle staff, near the
Mouth of the piece, and turning the said staff so much, until the said thumb
unremoved upon the staff be found directly under the same; then giving two or
three shakes, and bearing up the Ladle, that the powder may be turned out, or
go out clean, and that the Ladle bring no powder back therewith, for that
were a foul fault for a professed Gunner to commit. Then shall he put the
powder home softly, with the Rammer that is at the end of the Ladle staff;
putting in a good Wadd, and thrust it home to the powder, giving three or four
hard strokes, which will gather the scattered powder together, and drive close
the same, and the rest to the bottom of the Chamber the Assistant, having a
finger upon the Touchhole all the whilst: And then put in the Shot which with
a Rammer he must put softly home, and afterward another Wadd of Hay, Grass,
Weeds, Okham, or such like: And again, give two or three good strokes with
the Spunges Rammer head: But if the Piece do require two or three Ladles of
powder, it must be all put in before any Wad, in that manner as the first was
mentioned, and so in all other things. And then place the Boudge or powder
barrel to wind-wards, and cover it safe with some Hide, garment, or cloth:
always avoiding to stand before the mouth of the Piece, but on the right side
thereof in loading her for fear offurther danger. And lastly, the Piece is to
be laid to the mark and prymed and fired, and so will his Piece said to be
loaded Gunner-like.

CHAP. XXXIX. Whether the longer Pieces out-shoote the shorter, and why the
Culuerings shoot farther then the Cannon and the Demy-Culuering then the whole
Culuerings, etc.
Nevertheless, that the eighth Theorem of this book affirms, that The
longer the Piece the stronger the stroke, which is most true, yet must it
require this moderation, that all proportions be agreeable in the longer
Pieces, namely that the proportion of the height of bore, and fortitude of
metal, and charge of powder, be correspondent one to the other, as in my
Exposition upon one of Mr. Digges his Questions is related: For if the
Fortitude of metal be wanting, and so unable to resist the force of powder
due to load your Piece withal, in respect of her length and height, so that
the Shot may be come just to her Mouth in that instant, that all the Powder
shall be perfectly fired, or that by reason of her shortness (she having
fortitude) the Shot be gone out before the powder in her be all perfectly
fired, there is neither of them both can perform so much as they otherwise
would do, if their proportions of height, length, and fortitude had been
correspondent one to another. And there must also be a respect had unto the
force of the powder used, that there may be a convenient correspondencie
between the proportion of it to the rest: For otherwise, a Piece being loaded
with a proportional Charge of worser powder, may shoot further, then if she
were loaded with as much in weight of better powder, by reason of the
disproportionalities before said. It was experienced, as Luigo Coluado in his 21
Chapter mentions, that an extraordinary Culuering of 48 Dyametres of her bore
in length, being loaded with a Charge of powder usually allowed to Culuerings
(proportioned to the weight of her Shot) did shoot fewer paces, then
afterward when 8 dyametres of her length was cut off from her Mouth to her
Breech wards. And then also 6 dyametres more being likewise cut off, and in
like sort, she being loaded and discharged at the third time, conuayed her
Shot farther then either at the first or second, whereby and by the 14 Theorem
hereof, with the said exposition, all will most plainly appear both
Theorically and Practically: But the old error of the Rule of Flat, as some
Gunners have called it, and taught it to others: I thought fit to warn you of
being a sight Rule, divided into inches, to set on the breech of any Piece, to
mount her to any angle under 30 degrees, by a like certain number of inches,
and parts, for Pieces of all lengthes, which is not only impossible, but also
absurd: As I have showed before in the 76 Page, where I shall speak of the
good use that may be made of the inch Rule for that purpose, with my Table for
the same in the 93 Page.

two cannons Tract. 2. dial. 20.
Quelle sera de plus grande portee la Colubrine ou le Canon.
Welches stuck am weitesten tragt die Colubrina oder du Carthaune^
En tell poinct la Colubrine portera 7000 pas. quelque peu plus ou moins.
In solcher erhohung tragt die Colubrina vngefchrlich 7000 schritt.
Le canon 6000 pas.
Die Carthaun 6000 schritt.


CHAP. XL. Of shooting Mira Comune, or by the Mettalls of the Piece, and the
difference between shooting so, and by the due dispart.
ALthough the difference of making a Shot to a Mark, by the highest of the
Metal at her breech and muzzell, and by the continued aspect of the Axis of
her bore, is so uncertain, according to the length of the Piece, and the
differences between the Dyameter of the Base and Muzzell Rings, that no
certain proportion can be generally assigned: yet for most Pieces it has
been well observed, that the Piece directed by her Metal, will shoot about
twice as far, when the Mark is level, or the sight line being parallel to
the Horizon, as it will do upon the laying it level by the dispart Quadrant
or Axis of her Bore, the incertainty thereof depending upon the Angle, it
makes more or less above the Horizon, which for each Piece may best be found,
by the differences of the disparts of several Pieces that are of equal
lengthes, but is accepted or guessed to be generally to shoot twice the
distance Mira Comune, as it will do upon the true level Axis: But that Rule
is seldom exact, for the difference is sometimes five gr. and other sometimes
seven degrees, and sometimes neither, even as the Mounture upon the Metal,
and the level of the Axis will (being precisely examined) make manifest. And
therefore to shoot with any Piece Mira Comune, or by the Mettalls, the
difference or Mount about the level, which the metal causes being
considered, and exactly examined, will show the Angle of the Pieces Mounture,
with which you must repair to the following Tables of proportional Mountures,
for the several Randons upon each point or degree of the Gunners Quadrant,
which is thus easily to to be appropriated unto any Piece, having made one
Shot with her at a Mounture certain, and finding her proper dead Range for
the same, which reuerted to the given Elevation, will soon yield the Range
required. As for example, suppose that by examination it be found out, that by
reason of the rancknes or eminency of the Muzzle ring, and length of the Chase
of the Piece, the direction by the Mettalls at the Breech and Muzzle ring, to
mount the Piece higher then it would, if the Azis of her Bore were duly
directed by a true dispart, unto any Mark assigned by six degrees, and let it
be imagined that the Mark is elevated six gr. above the Horizon, so found by
the Quadrant: And lastly, let it be given at that mounture, the Piece did
shoot 850 paces for her dead Range: the question is, how far the same Piece
would convey the like Shot with like loading and accidents, if she were by the
highest of her Mettalls at Breech and Muzzle, directed to the same Mark. Say
then if 722, the number in the Table of dead Ranges against six gr. give 850
paces, the measure of the Shot made in her at fix degrees mounture, what
shall 1394 the number against 12 degrees mounture give, multiplying the third
of these three numbers by the second, dividing the Product by the first, the
Quotient 1534 paces, will so much better answer to the question then Mr.
Smithes rule can do.

CHAP. XLI. Of shooting by the Despart or Axis of the Bore (in right hored
Pieces, called by some Gunners erroniously the point Blanke) as far as it
curreth a Shot in a right line.
THis kind of shooting called (point blanke) is so far as a mark is within
the strait line of the Piece, which for some Eleuations or Mountures, is much
more then for others, for that the more a Piece is mounted, the farther she
conuayeth her Shot in the right range, except it could be shot perpendicularly
downwards, which (as I have already in my first book called, The Art of great
Artillery showed) may therefore in Piece given, yield infinite point blankes.
But be the Mounture given, and the mark within the right line, or right Range
of the Bullets course (that is within that space of the Shots right course) as
it may be said to go strait (or insencibly crooked) or so far as it
accompanies the continued Axis of the Metal, in right bored Pieces, or of the
Soul in the wry bored (which is the cause that in such a Shots there is more
seldomer failing, then in any other manner of shooting whatsoever) this kind
of shooting being made by the Dispart, so makes the error to be no more then
the distance between, the visuall line directed from the middle point of the
said Axis, and the visuall line that passes from the Gunners eye, except
accidents cause the contrary, it being directed by the highest of the Metal
of the Base ring, and by the top of the dispart unto the assigned Mark. Now
forasmuch as the length of the Piece and the variety of the Powder by the
eighth Theorem, breeds the difference of force, swiftness, and vehemency of
the Shot and stroke of the Bullet: it is therefore impossible to give general
certain Rules for the right Ranges, without some experience in that Piece be
first made, found thus.

If many Papers or Clothes be set in the right line or way of the Shot,
between the Mouth of the Piece and the Mark, then making an orderly shot
with a full Bullet directed to some Mark, setting a stick in each place, with
the top thereof right in the Center of the hole which the shot went through at
every paper: You shall thereby perceive where the shot did first begin to
decline, and how much at each distance, which being measured, will very much
inform the Gunner both for level Batteries, and shooting at randon, and upon
advantage, in the mean space the Table following will for right ranges help.

A Table of the proportions of right Ranges, or point blanks.
0 192 1 209 2 227 3 244 4 261 5 278 6 285 7 302 8 320 9 337 10 354 20 424 30
693 40 855 50 1000 60 1140 70 1220 80 1300 90 1350

The use of the Table, with example. Having foundby experience that at 6
degrees of Mounture the Piece assigned Shot 200 paces in a right, or insencible
crooked line, and would know how far the same Piece will shoot in a strait
line, being mounted to 10 degrees, say by the Table, if 278 the number, against
6 gr. gives 200 paces, what will 354 the number therein against 10 degrees
give, 278 paces.

CHAP. XLII. Of shooting upon the Advantage or Random at a Mark, beyond the
right line of the Pieces reach, or right Range of the Shot: and of the dead
Range for any Piece at every degree.
AS in the last Chapter we have said for the right Range, so must we also say
for the dead Range, which consists of the addition of the right and crooked
Ranges together into one, and then called the dead Range, which is the whole
distance from the Platform, upon which the Piece assigned is discharged, unto
the first fall or graze of the Bullet, upon the level line, or Horizontall
Plane, by reason the different lengthes of the Pieces, and strength of the
powder increases or deuinceth the course or fury of the Shot, and therefore
more difficult to be found, but only by experience, or by Diagrams, Tables, or
Scales made from experiments. Now although it be very difficult, and a thing
uncertain also, to ariue herein to exactness, without some experiments made
with the assigned Piece and Powder: Yet to come to a necessary neerenesse at
first (far surer then by uncertain guessing) either by the Table here
annexed by my Scale or Rule, grounded upon often observations and trial, I
having made 200 shot for it, you having the right range, for the Mounture
assigned by the former dead Range, of the Shot for the Mounture required. Note
where the Shots course cutteth the Angle of every Mounture, for that Piece and
powder given in this manner: First, take the right Range of the Piece
experimented from the right Range for the Mounture assigned, and divide the
remainder in such reason, as the said Angle of Mounture is to the Angle of the
complement thereof, and to the Quotient add the said right Range found, and
the off come there of, will be the dead Range for that Piece, Powder, and
Mounture assigned. As for example, let it be supposed, that a Piece mounted at
30 degrees, shot 300 paces in the right Range, and 3000 at the dead Range, I
desire to know the dead Range at 40 degrees.

A Table of the proportions of dead Ranges.
Gr. Pa. 0 192 1 298 2 404 3 510 4 610 5 722 6 828 7 934 8 1044 6 1129 10 1214
11 1396 12 1394 13 1469 14 1544 15 1622 16 1686 17 1744 18 1792 19 1849 20 1917
25 2013 30 2185 35 2249 40 2289 42 2296 45 2289 52 2283 60 1792 67 1214 75 1000
85 192 90 0

To do this the plainest mechanical way, is to divide that dead Range into
any number of parts at pleasure, which set out in a line, at one end of that
right line, make an angle by the 23 proposition of the 1 of Euclide
demonstrated herein, and from the other end thereof erect a perpendicular line
by the 11 proposition also there mentioned, until it intersect the line that
framed the Angle given, and note well how many such parts it contains, and
multiply the parts of the dead Range by the parts, that the line that framed
the Angle contains, and then divide the product by the number of parts you
divided the line of the dead Range into, and the Quotient will be the Secant
Range, which known, (as imagine, for the secant Range was found 1555 paces,
and for the dead range 2000 paces given) Say if 1555 give 1000 the whole sine,
what shall 1000 the dead range give, 643, the right sign of the Angle, the
Piece must be mounted unto, upon the advantage, to shoot 1000 paces for her
dead range.

CHAP. XLIII. How to order and direct a Piece, and amend an ill Shot that was
made either by the Metal, level, right line, or advantage, or Mount.
IF leisure will not permit to use the Ruler and Beuill, then the Gunner may by
his judgment, according to the Charge and proportion of the Piece, take such a
mark as he guesseth nearest, and likest to be best for the purpose; if it
prove to strike on it just, then he has his desire: for using like Powder,
Shot, and having like temper and accidents, he shall always make thereby the
like Shot. But if the Shot went too high, he shall then direct the piece in
like sort again, and lay some small thing, as discretion will guide him upon
the highest of the muzzle ring, and bring it and the highest of the Base ring
in one, with the first point or mark, doing so, or more or less until he hit
the mark desired, and the same may be tried by bringing the piece upon the
first mark, which without doubt he shall attain unto with reasons Rule as
before. And if the first Shot be under or short, he must do as before ordering
and directing his piece in like manner, saving that before the piece be
removed, he must lay some little thing on the highest part of the metal at
the breech, and then by help of the Quoynes, she being imbased or mounted
more or less, as occasion requires, until the highest of the metal at the
Mouth and Breech with that help, and the first mark become together into one
right line. And so is the piece ordered for the shooting by Mira Commune,
unless fault be by loading of the powder too much or too little, etc. And
although other accidents may misleade him therein, yet either of those faylings
are also to be reformed by the Beuell Quadrant represented in the 25 figure.
As if the Gunner by the metal take his mark so, that the Shot fall short: To
correct the same, after the piece at the next Shot, is placed as before, he
may then by the said Beuell quadrant eleuate her one degree or point higher. As
if she were formerly at six points or degrees, she may now be set at 7, and
then giving fire, if it strike the mark, he may always order it in the same
manner afterward. But if it were too high, little, or much, he must
accordingly divide that difference between the sixth and seventh point or
degrees by discretion (by the lighting of the last Shot.) And if it were too
low, then proceeding in the same manner, to add to the sixth point, with
judgment: and so may assure himself he may be like to get reputation
thereby. But if he be to order a piece to shoot by the level of the Soul, or
Axis of the Bore horizontally, then place a piece of board, within or upon the
bottom of the bore at the muzzle, as in the precedent Chapter between the
said long Ruler and Beuell Quadrant, raising or imbasing her with Handspeeks
and Quoynes, until the plumb line of the said Beuill, hang directly in the
midst thereof: So will the Soul or Axis of the Bore lie directly level or
parallel with the Horizon. Then taking away the Ruler and Beuill, and taking by
the highest of the metal at the breech and muzzle, direction to lay her
right, and to what mark they respect for height; note that for after uses, and
giving then fire, he may attain therein his desire.

Forasmuch as opportunity will not always permit to place the same on the
Mouth as aforesaid. The Gunner may keep that thickness or dispart in his
hands, and take his level by the metal as the fashion is, until thereby he
discern the mark, and them both to be in one right visuall line. And then
setting on the dispart upon the muzzle ring duly, and bringing down the mouth
of the piece until the said mark, and the top of the dispart, and the highest
of the metal at the Breech become all three in one right visuall line: then
take off the said dispart, and note what mark will then be in one right line,
with the midst or highest of the metal at the breech and muzzle, which will
be much under the first mark, and it will so serve ever after to make a shot,
to an assured good effect at the same mark, and with the same piece, from the
same plat-forme.

The like is to be done in shooting at a mark, elevated to any degree about
the level: As also for such marks as are beyond the distance of the right line
or right range, by allowing an addition of a Minute, Degree, or Point of
elevation, for advantage more or less, as need shall be, until the Shot hit
right, and as reason will direct. As for example, a Saker is to shoot at a
mark elevated unto 15 degrees, it being distant from the plat-forme 1325
Geometrical paces 5 feet to the pace. But being mounted to the second point,
or 15 degrees, she will shoot but 1062 paces in her dead range, and in her
best Randon she will convey a shot but 600 paces, in a right line, wherefore
it being almost 300 paces short of the dead range for 15 degrees, and above 700
paces short of her right range upon her best Randon, I must by my Gunners
Scale, or by the Diagram of Randons in the 27 precedent Chapter, by the
perpendicular raised from the Base at 1325 paces, find what randon crosses
the aspect of the second point, which will be thereby found to be the fifth
points Randon. If then I shall mount the said Saker unto the fifth point: so
then I may expect her said Randon, to strike or come near to that mark, that
shall be elevated to the aspect of the second point, or 15 degrees, at the
distance of 1325 paces, and so after 2 or 3 shotts at that advantage attain my
desire.

This is the ordinary manner of shooting upon advantage of any Mounture
whatsoever, always observing the means how to draw as near the Enemy as can
be. In general, you may observe, that in taking aim by the highest of the
metal, without consideration of the disparture, if the visuall line thereof
aspect the mark, the shot will be always too high within the right range,
contrary to the Gunners diseigne, which should be to ruinate the Foot of the
defense in Batteries the sooner to overthrow the wall, also to facillate the
entery of the Breach, but singly to shoot at a Troop of Horse or Squadron of
Foot, and especially in grauelly or stony places it were not amiss purposely
to shoot short to light upon the stones, to beat them so up, as that the
raising of the grauel and stones may do the more execution, entering
trauerse-wise amongst the Enemy. But in a plain or level Champion, and
amongst Battalions of men the Piece should be so bended and directed, as that
her shot may pass by the midst or thickest of them, guirdle height: and so it
may cut off a hundred, or whole Rank or File of Men at once, and break their
Orders and Ranks, whereby those that fall on their Faces will hardly elcape,
but shooting over, profits nothing at all, but is merely lost.

To amend a wide shot, if it went too much toward the right hand, then remove
the dispart, or take the large of your sight line somewhat more toward the
left hand at the muzzle ring, keeping the former height, or letting the Dispart
stand as before, and take your mark as before, only remove your eye a little
more toward the right hand upon the Base ring: And so likewise do
contrariwise, if the fault of the short aforesaid went too much toward the
left hand: and so you shall assuredly amend the former shooting, unless some
of these ouer-ruling causes or accidents cause the contrary, namely her Soul
or Concaue bore, not being strairt and right, or lying a wry in the body of the
metal, for then the fault is not in the Gunner, but in the Gunne, which he
must with judgment and good discretion rectify, as has been already showed
in the 44. Chapter hereof. She will shoot wide also if the Trunions lie not
directly the one against the other: as also if the platform lie awry one side
higher then the other: or if the Gunner take not his aim, so that the visuall
line that passes from his eye to the mark: or if one wheel be higher then
the other, or if one wheel be stiff and the other iocond, or be squatted with
any rub in the reuerse of the Piece, or run upon soft, and the other upon hard
ground; or if the Cariage-maker have made the Carriage lean, or hang more upon
one, then the other side: If the Naue be too wide, that the Piece shake thereby
in her discharge, and reuerse: or if the tail of the Carriage rest harder on
the plat-forme upon one side more then on the other, when the shot is too low
for the Piece, and at the delivery touches upon one side. And lastly the
vehemence of the wind being sidewise, ouer-rules it to the contrary-side-ward,
etc. But if the Shot fall to short or too far, that happens by the force or
feebleness of the Powder, or unskillfulness of the Gunner, not directing his
piece as he ought, or in ignorance, or by mistaking the distance to the mark
he would shoot at.

CHAP. XLIIII. How the Gunner may be assured to make a good Shot.
SOmetimes the occasions offer to require, that the Piece be curiously
directed, and precisely bended to dismount a Piece of the Enemies that galleth
shrewdly, or at a single mark, or at the Loope, Tronier, Cassamat, Horseman,
Boat, or other secret place assigned, that else would impeach the appointed
service and deseigne: For which the Gunner ought to have an entire and perfect
knowledge of the condition and quality of his Piece, by experience made by
former practices in her; otherwise it will be uncertain and unlikely, that he
at the first shot, out of a Piece, wherein they never practiced, to make an
assured good shot: and then in loading her, to have great care so to put home
the Powder, Shot, and Wadd as that the powder may fire at once, that the Piece
reuerse not vnrulily, it being a certain thing, that the more slow the powder
is in firing within the Piece, the greater will her reuerse be, and the shot
also of the less force in execution. And likewise the reasonable putting home
of the Shot and Wadds, neither too hard nor too easy, but that the Ball may
gently with a convenient vent, only enter in close unto the Powder-wadd. And
lastly, he may direct his Piece by the Quadrant Beuill inch rule, or other
former directions, taking his aim directly by the highest of the Metal unto
the assigned mark, or with a due dispart placed upon the point of the muzzle
ring, which highest parts may there and at the Base ring also, with a small
line be noted for the visuall line to pass vertically over them: And then
giving fire, let him not doubt of an assured good effect, having a diligent
hand in preventing the accidents that are to be provided for, as in the 43
Chapter hereof are mentioned, to avoid side, over, or under shooting, and
considering well that such a good shot made, gains the Gunner much love and
honor. The fittest Pieces for that purpose, are either the Culuering, Demi
Culuering, and Saker, or the Cannon, Demi-Cannon, and Minion.

Such a Shot ought to be made known to the General of the Army, who should
therefore liberally reward the Gunner that made the same, not only to
encourage him, but others also, afterward to do the like, or better if it
were possible. Louis Collado in his Manual Practice of Artillery, writes,
that at the Siege of Siena there was a Piece lodged upon the great Church, from
which the besieging Army received much damage: but in the end a German Gunner
made a shot thereat, who at the first did not only dismount the same Piece,
but also made the Gunner thereof, and those that were about him, fly together
in the air to their destruction: the which Marquis de Martinian, the General
of the Army seeing, it pleased him to take a Chain of gold from his own
neck, and to give it unto the Gunner that made the shot, for his reward, which
did not only rejoice him, but encouraged all the rest of the Gunners to
endeavor diligently, so to purchase the like honor and reward, when like
occasions were presented.

CHAP. XLV. How to make Ladles and Spunges for every sort of Ordnance.
IT were very requisite that the Gunner himself should know how to trace, and
cut out, and also make up, and finish, all manner of Ladles, to load Ordnance
with, either when need shall require, to prepare them himself, or at the
least to direct others how they should be proportioned and wrought, various
instruments for firing and cleaning cannons Tractat. 3. Cap. 3.
De demij can ronforce
Zur halben gesterckten Carth.


De canon renforce.
Zur gesterckten Carth.
^ampon
Der stempfel.


Canon commun
gemcine Carthau


Canon amoindri
geschwechte Carthaun


lanade
^mesure et proportion des cuieilliers a charger.
Lass vndt proportion der ladtschauffelen.


De quart de Canon renforce
Zum gesterckten quart


De commun quart.
Zum gemeinten q.


Du quart amoindri
Zu veriungten quart


De demij canon comun
Zur halben gem. Carth.


Demi canon amoindri
halbe geschwechte Carth


De piece enchambre ou cacampanee.
Zu veriungte^ oder zu gespitzten kammern.


as also, that he may be the better able out of the Magazin or store, to make
choice of filch as shall duly fit those Pieces that are under his Charge and
Command: For as it is a dangerous thing, or a great show of ignorance to
mistake one sort of Shot for another, which may soon happen, if he know not
how to examine or Calibre them: so it is not only shameful, but dangerous
also for a Gunner, to implby an improper Ladle, unless upon necessity, and
then also with great care and judgment, being either too long, too short, too
low, or too nigh for the Piece, for being too high, it will not enter, too
low, it will not fill, but spill, and too long over, and too short vndercharge,
each of which should be a counted for an absurd fault. Wherefore Laduise every
Gunner to be very vigilant and careful, that he commit not that error, out
rather to be industrious, not only to learn how to make his Ladles and Spunges
himself, but also to be able to direct and show others, how they ought to be
severally proportioned, made and distinguished: as follows.

For double fortified Cannons, to charge them with two Ladle-fulls, they are to
be two dyametres and a half of their Shot in length from the head of the
Ladle staff, which shall be one dyamere more of plate, which must go about
the said head: The Brass plate must be in breadth two dyametres unto the said
head where each side must have half a dyametre more, to enclose the head of
the Ladle staff within the plate.

The Button or head of the Ladle-staffe must be one dyametre, and of such
height or thickness, that it together with Brass plate may be equal to the
height of the Shot (due vent being abated) for Spunges, their buttons or heads
are to be made of soft fast wood, as Aspe, Birch, Willow, or such like, and to
be one dyametre, and in length, and not above of a dyametre of the shots
height: The rest being covered with rough Sheep skin wool, and all, be
nailed thereon with Copper nails, so that together they may fill the Soul or
Cauity of the Piece.

The Button or head of the Rammer, must be turned of hard wood in length 1
dyametre, and of such height or thickness, that it may fitly enter into the
Piece the shots vent allowed: it were the better for fashion and strength: if
the next the staff were handsomely turned with abatement, and a Ferrill, or
Circle of Brass fitted thereupon, to save the Head from cleaving, when as with
force we shall ram the Shot home. All these Heads or Buttons must be
pierced, with a hole for the staff an inch or more dyametre, wher-into the
staff must be fastened: and the staff must ever be so long, that it must be at
the least one foot longer then the Cauity or Soul is deep.

For the ordinary Canon, the Ladle must be of the same breadth, but must not
surpass 2 dyametres of the shot in length: and for the lessened Cannons two
dyametre only to load at twice, all according to the fashion, length, and
breadth, as is showed in the 20 figure a, with the manner of fastening them upon
the staves; wherein also the fashions as well of the Heads or Buttons, as of
the Ladles and Rammers, are so represented to the eye, that the discreet
Gunner shall need no other instruction therein: Where the description for the
Demy-Cannons, which are of the same measures and proportion as aforesaid are
these, having respect to their own proper Bores.

The Ladle for Culuerings and Demy-Culuerings, have four dyametres of their
proper Shots in length, and two in breadth.

The Sakers, Faulcons, and Falconers, which may with one Ladle fulbe load at
once, may have their Ladles of 7 dyametres, and dyametre of their Shots in
length, besides that Couerture of the Head of the staff: and of breadth 2, as
all the rest have.

For Periors, which usually have Chambers, with ore loes or less in bore, then
their Chase contains, to them 3 times the dyametre of their Chamber may be
allowed for length of their Ladles.

Now if it should chance you were (having no Ladles not Balance ready)
commanded to load a Cannon, or any other Piece in haste: First, put the rammer
into the Piece up to the Touch hole, and mark, the staff, even with the
mettle at the mouth of the Piece, and then pull it out 3 dyametres, for the
Cannon, and 3 for the Culuering, and 4 for the Saker Falcon, etc. and mark
there another mark, which is the place that the Powder must supply in the
Chamber: And then take Paper, Parchment, or Cloth, as long as the distance
between the two marks wrapped round, being of height equal to the bore of
the Piece, 1/20 less, fasten the same with mouth glue, or sow the sides and
bottom, and fill the same with powder, and power it into the Piece, putting it
gently home, do so until you see the last made mark, to be equal to the
flat of the mouth, the Rammer head being home unto the Powder, then put in your
Wadd and Shot, as elsewhere is taught.

CHAP. XLVI. How to make Bridges over great or small Rivers, to pass an Army
with the Ordnance, and other Cariages over the same.
OFten times it so happens, that passages are stopped, and not to be
recovered, especially about Rivers for want of Bridges, or else some Marrish or
Moorish place interposeth: Wherefore to be prepared in all Accidents,
especially to pass the Ordnance over a River, that one Bridge or Moore may be
speedily made, either with Boats placed 12 or 14 foot asunder, and moored by
Ankors fast a head and a stern, especially where the River ebbeth and flows,
else if they be but fast a head, it may serve they must at such distance be
laid in a right line, to ride cross the whole breadth of the River, at the
place appointed. And then between each two next Boats, place 3 beams of
Timber, being 18 foot in length, whereof 14 foot must be to rear between the
2 next Boats at each end, two foot must be to bear upon the Boat, which Boats
must be of even height or nigh, and the Beams are to be laid 6 or 7 foot
wide, each from other, that the bridge may be 10 or 12 foot broad, as well to
convey over the Horse and Foot as the Ordnance, Cariages, and all other
necessaries belonging to the Army, for the surety and strength of which, there
must upon every Boat be also three other pieces of Timber of such length, that
it may at each end reach 3 foot over the Boats side, unto which the three
Beams aforesaid, must be fast pinned with Tree-nayles and iron bolts, with
forelockes and keys, to make them fast one to another. These Beams and
Timbers are to be conered over with Planks two inches thick, or one inch and a
half at least, and 17 or 18 foot in length, the description of which may be
seen in the 17 figure at a.

But if any boggy or muddy space be between the River and the fixed ground, so
that the Ordnance cannot be brought nor drawn near enough unto the Bridge,
then that part must be filled up with such things as are fittest to make it
firm, whether it be with Faggots and Earth, or Chalk or stones, pyling the
sides with Timber driven in, until they reach into firm ground at the bottom
for foundation, and to reuest it then with boords or walls, according to the
time intended, it shall last and continue, that thereby the way may be firm
land and even. But if any doubt be that the Enemy will supprise this Bridge,
to make himself Master of the River then at each end thereof, a half Moon,
or Reddout, or Fort, with Ordinance to do murder, and fireworks must be
prepared to prevent him, and therein besides the side of the Bridge, may be
palissadoed with long strong sharp poynted sparrs fastened, thereto to secure
it that way. Also a continual and a careful eye must be cast upon every part
of the Bridge, that if any accident of defect be in any place, it may be
speedily repaired and amended: and a Rail on each side would be needful for a
stay. A Bridge also may in like manner be made with Truncks, as is represented
in the said Figure at b And also to be linkt upon one great vessel, with a
falling defensive poynted pallisado, as therein likewise at 4, is represented,
and upon Cask, Cables, etc. which I omit, being rather proper understandings
for the Enginier.

CHAP. XLVII. How to defend a Fortress besieged, and the order, and what
provisions of Ammunition will be necessary for the defense thereof.
AFortresse besieged being well defended, may return to enjoy her former
liberties, which the better to do, it will be necessary to make plain, cut
down, and ruin whatsoever shall be hiding and hurtful, within half a mile
or more round about the Fort, be they Banks, hollow ways, Hedges and Dykes,
of Lanes, Bushes, Trees, Houses, Mills, Gardens, Conduits, and such like
obstacles, as not only hide them, but hurt you also. Next look that the Place
be well victualed, according to the number, for man and beast, fitting for
defense, and necessary use thereof fix months, which is the longest time a
Fort can be like to hold out, without succor or supply from abroad. Also
Ammunition must not be wanting, at least so much as may furnish the Flankers and
Artillery, which must be as safe and covertly placed as may be, and not to be
easily choked or dismounted. For Amunitions, precise proportions cannot be
prescribed, because each day ministers new necessities, and as the Enemy
abroad raises or makes new works. Within Men and Munition may be reasonably
paralelled with 1/10 of the besiegers. Then to look that the Counterscarp
(which is the shield of the Fortress) be duly flanked, covert, and capable,
that the false Ports and ways for Sallyes, be safe, close, low, and
commodious for issue. That the the Parrapets be of Turffe, or unburned Brick,
that the platformes for the Ordnance be even, and the Planks close joined, that
their Reuerses cause not errors, and be also capable for the Gunners and
Laborers to trauerse their Ordnance every needful way upon them. The number
of your Garrison may also be estimated by the quantities of the places, to be
defended by the out-workes you would hold, by the intrenchments imagined
requisite, and Sallyes you purpose to make. Now after the proportion of a Place
whereas 60 Pieces will be requisite, 12 of them may be Cannon, to beat down,
and batter the Defenses and Trenches of the Enemies, and to make therewith
Counter-Batteries, to dismount the Enemies Ordnance; And 8 of them may be Demi
Culuerings, and 10 Demi Cannons, they being lighter, are more easy to manage,
and 10 Sakers, to keep the Enemy continually play to hinder their works,
offend their Centinells, beat the entrances of the Trenches, impeach their
Approaches, and for that they are light, they may be removed easily and quickly
from one place to another, yea out of the Ports with some Drakes, to rake the
Enemies trenches, from some part of the Falsebray. And lastly, 20 Falcons and
Falconets for Field Pieces, are necessary, and may be able to serve, not only
upon the Ramparts and Walls, but also at the entries of a Breach, and at single
Marks, Horse, man, or Boat.

CHAP. XLVIII. To make a Counter-battery upon a Bulwark, from whence without
danger of discovering or dismounting the Enemies Ordnance, abroad may be
dismounted.
SVch Counter-batteries are not to be made without great labor and charges,
neither can every Bulwark yield a sufficient room for that purpose, without
demolishment of some buildings and houses about the same (which in a time of
need, must not be stood upon) as in the 10 Figure at b the whole structure
thereof is represented. All the place must then be of that capacity, that from
the Parrapet to the foot of the sholde^ positioning cannons to defend a
fortress Tract. 2 Dial. II.
Comrnent il faut ordonner l'artillerie pour la defense dune Ville

Wie das geschuts Zur Defension einer Stattsoll gestellet Werden.

positioning cannons to attack a fortress Tract. 2. Dial. II.
Comment il fault loger des pieces seeretes en un bastion.

Wie heimliche stuck in einer pasteijen zu gebrauchen

tracing the ballistic arcs of several cannonballs Tractat. 3. Cap. 13. fig. 2.
Comment il fault appliquer le quadrant.
Wie der quadrant an zusch lagen.
Poinct du nueau.
Punct der Wagen.
there may 40 foot of ground, and for the thickness thereof it must ^e 21 or
22 foot, with 27 or 30 foot for reuerse, for each Piece making almost 100
foot in all, and leaving yet thirty foot more at least from the said reuerse
to the other Parrapet of the same Bulwark, to the end there may he no
impeachment, but that the Troops may march and pass to the defenses required
freely. And having also room to plant three Pieces of Ordnance upon each of
the Shoulders of the same, which will also require 65 some of ground at the
least: The Trouniers or Loopes are to be 3 foot broad within, and distant 20
foot one from another: Having within the Platformes 3 foot of Barb, and
without 9 foot of breadth, and every where 8 foot of height. These three
loopes must have a counter loope at the Parapet of the Bulwark, having in the
midst 4 within 6, and without 8 foot in breadth and deep, that it be even
with the Terraplene. Now from these Loopes there must be, as we have said so
much room, that within the Shouldrings there may be 3 Pieces distant 20 foot
asunder. Now two or three of these Shouldrings discharge their three Pieces,
traversing croswise to the Enemies Batteries, beating so upon them, that they
must be forced to quit the place: And although the Euemie abroad may beat the
Couertures of the outmost Loopes, yet can they neither for the inner Loopes,
not the Pieces within, come to touch any of them: But you may note that such
Batteries cannot be made in a narrow or straight place, as I have said without
demolishing structures, and raising the ground so, that it be level with the
Terraplene of the Bulwark, which would otherwise be too small for that
purpose. And having finished them, they are not to serve for one place only,
but they may turn those Shouldrings and defenses, and make the Pieces thunder
about on all sides where the Enemy would settle himself.

CHAP. XLIX. Of certain reasons that causes a Shot, though well directed to
err in her discharge, and be faulty at the Mark wide, short, or over.
THere are very many causes and accidents that may make a Shot well directed,
to deuiate from the expected course. The first is, when as the Soul or bore of
the Piece lies awry in the Body or Metal thereof, or that the Chase or
vacant Cillinder (the director of the Shot) is not strait; wherefore the
Gunner may receive disgrace, but having examined and found the fault, he is to
supply the defect by discretion and skill. And if the Trunions also be not duly
placed directly in a dyagonall line with the Axis of the Piece, it will be
wide: likewise if the Platform be unequal, as higher upon one side then the
other. Also if the Gunner lay the highest of the metal at mouth and Breech,
it will shoot over if it be within distance: if one wheel be higher then
another, also if one wheel go stiffer then the other; or if one wheel meet
with a squat by a stone, or otherwise when the Naues be one longer and wyder
then the other, when one wheel reuersing goes on soft ground, the other on
harder, when the Carriage or Trunion ears are higher and lower one then
another: if the Carriage be too wide, so that the Piece lies not fast the rein,
but starteth in her discharge: if the Shot be not equally round, or the bore of
the Piece not lying strait, but more on the one side of the metal then the
other. The vehemency of the wind, with, against, or aside, may drive the Shot
forward, back it, or deuie-at it, aside, the thickness and thinness of the
air, the heating and cooling, the slight or hard ramming of the Powder,
putting home or short the shot. And lastly, the want of skill and experience:
All these, and many more, may be causes of the failing of a Shot at an
assigned Mark, which I thought fit here to note at last, not to minister
matter of excuse to ignorant, negligent, careless Gunners, but to advise the
discreet Gunner to have a vigilant eye, and consideration of all, or as many
of those accidents with reason, and of the former directions, to avoid or amend
them as well as he can at first. To fail at the first shot, if he be not
acquainted with the Piece and Mark is passable; and at the second to fail is
pardonable, but to fail of a fair shot at the third time, is too much, and
argues but little judgment and discretion in such a Gunner.

CHAP. L. How to conduct a Mine under ground, to blow up a place, and to
prepare a Gallerie, to pass the Dyke to the foot of the Breach.
THe use of Mining is ancient, and was commonly used by the Persian, Greek,
Parthian, Romans, and other Nations, that have managed great wars, and no
marvel, for that the same is the easiest, and most proper means to force a
place: But Pietre Nauarro a Spaniard, was the first that invented the Fowrne
and the use of Powder therein, for which and some other services the Emperor
Charles the fifth, gave him the name of a Conde, and great rewards besides. Yet
nevertheless, there is nothing more dangerous for such as work in these
Mines, by reason the Counter-mines of the Enemy: so that if there be any
suspicion of countermining, it will not be amiss to divert the course with all
dexterity, either toward the right or left hand, as the occasion of the Place
will permit. And forasmuch as according to the natural effects of fear, it
behooves the besieged to seek out the shortest and nearest way possible, to
offend the Enemy abroad by Countermine or otherwise. The Mine-Master then may
sink his Mine, and conduct the same either as in the 16 Figure at a, is
described by the letters from A by B to C, or as the other 4 square angular
course, and there to prepare the Fourne, which may be armed with powder in
Barrels, so that giving Fire thereunto by a Train, he blow up the Place and
the Enemies above it: And to the end the same hurt not the Pyoners or Worke-men
that dig and travel therein? it will be needful to line the same with
sparres and bords framed accordingly, seven foot in height, and 5 foot in
breadth, but it must be covered with 2 inch planke, to keep up the earth: But
if the ground be moist or full of Springs, a gutter with 2 descent must be
made, that the water may run to some lower euacuation; if that cannot be, a
Well at the mouth of the Mine must be made for a receptackle for all the
Springs to run into by their gunters, and Pumpsor Forcers, are to be set
sufficient to mount the water, that it may after find a current to run away.
But if there be any suspicion of Countermining; then always forwards in your
intended course, you may bore long holes in the earth with your long ground
Awgars used for such purposes, and pierce holes on all sides, also to know upon
what part from you the Enemy works, which cannot be done so private, but so
the noise of their Mattocks and Shouels will soon be hard by those pierced
holes, when you come near their works: if by those means you hear nothing
by reason that the besieged had ended their Countermines before you began, and
he watching them hears you work, those piercers being but 12 or 15 foot
long, will discover the danger by boring thorough the solid earth, to the
hollownesse of their Countermine; and so you shall have Counteraduantage of the
Enemies counter-minings. My Cosmodelite before represented, is an excellent
instrument, and for that purpose I think the best extant.

Now being come right under the place to be blown up, and made the Fourne
arched upwards higher then the Mine place, therein sufficient powder, either in
Barrellor Troughes, you must also stop closely and strongly the mouth of the
Fourne, very diligently, looking it be so close that no air breath out, but at
one small hole wherein the Train runs in to give fire thereunto; unto which
he that gives fire, must look that the Match of the Train, be not too long
before the powder take, as also to see it be not too short, and so to give
fire too soon, that is, before he be gotten into some place of safety out of
the blast and ruins, least he pay the wages of improuidence. The means then
to set the matter a work, needs no long discourse, being very commonly
known, only to advise that the entrance into the Mine for height and breadth
as aforesaid, may be as close and secret from the Enemy as may be, and that in
his proceeding on, he must deminish those measures in such manner, that in the
midst it be but 5 foot high, and 4 foot broad: And the neeret you come to the
end, so much the less give in breadth, so that even to the coming in to the
Furne it must be close and narrow, that you may only get the powder thereinto.

Above all things, the Mine-Master before he begin, must be sure to know the
true measure and distance, with the height or depth of the place intended to
be Mined, be it above or under the level of the place he begins, most
precisely taking exact notice of all his windings, turning, and angles, which
he makes from the beginning to the end, as well above and under the level of
the right line, passing thence right under the Place, as toward the right and
left side thereof: Otherwise his labor will not only be deficill, but also
uncertain and most dangerous: there being four principal causes to impeach
the effectual working thereof. First, the ill stopping of the Fourne:
Secondly, the weakness of the sides by countermines or Cauernes. Thirdly, by
failing of the Train by moisture or ill contriuing. And fourthly, the most
important, is, that the Frame whereupon the Barrels stand, be not placed too
low, as under the level of the entrance, which it must ever exceed, because
the quality of fire is always to ascend. And so obserning every 15 or 20
paces, how high, or low, or wide on any side you are gone, above or under the
leuel strait line. Two of the greatest shames to Soldiers, being either to
lose any piece of Ordnance, by negligence or ill guarding them: Or the failing
of a Mines due effect.

And for making great or small Galleryes to pass a dyke unto a Breach
covertly, be the dyke watered or dry, the manner is described in the precedent
Figure with the Mine* and may be made ready in several parts, to be set
together speedily by joints, fitted for that purpose, for the easier carriage
also: And they must be covered over with Faggots, earth, and green Hides to
prevent fiting them.

CHAP. LI. Of the Guindall, Windlas, and Ginne; or Martinet, Krow, and
Handspyke, and Lever, and the endless Screw.
THe Guindall or Windlas, is a convenient ingenious inu^^tion, to mount a piece
of Ordnance, or heave aloft weighty matters, and is represented in the 24
Figure, with the Crow of Iron, or Goates-footed Handspyke, and Leauers,
accompanied with the Ginne or Martinet, which will lift up the Axtrees, when
the Piece is upon her Carriage mounted, to take off, or put on the Wheels, to
grease, or ease, or mend what is amiss about them. The Guindall is thus made
of a piece of Timber, six inches square in the feet, or with three young dry
Oken Sparres, about 12 or 15 foot long, joined together at the top with an
iron bolt, passing through Iron Ferrills, upon which bolt a double pulley is
hanged, and at the lower end of each Sparre another iron Ferrill, and a Pyke of
iron is placed to keep the feet from all slipping, almost at the lower end of
two of those legs or Sparres, a piece of a Sparre about 4 or 5 foot long, is
fastened between them, and also 3 foot from the end, a Roll and Windlas, with
half round yrons, are clasped to those 2 legs or spartes, and above that 2
or 3 other pieces of sparres: In that Roll, are 4 mortis holes, for
Handspykes, pierced thorough, whereby they with 2 or 4 Handspykes turn that
Roll which has an end of a rope 4 or 5 times, or more about it, and the other
end reeued in the said Pulley, so continued unto another double pulley, with a
hole or hook to take hold, or seize a Rope that has slung the Piece,
appointed to be mounted into her Carriage: Or else the Frame may cannon in a
sling beneath a system of scaffolds and pulleys Instruments pour le service des
pieces. Tract. 3. cap 8. Der zu them geschutz gehorig hebzeug.
Martinet.

Wind.

Guindal.

der bock oder heber.

Pied de cheure.

Leuies.

pebel

gejss fuss.

Eschelette.

hebleiterlein.

be of 3 square Tymbers, the head of two of them joining at the top together,
and the rest for the other leg and parts, may by the sight of the said 24
Figure, be framed and understood sufficiently.

two wheels and an axle driven by a crankshaft

The Ginne or Martinet is another instrument, serving to lift up the Piece with
her Carriage, and all her furniture from the ground with one man's strength, when
the Gunner would change a bad wheel, or the like, or put a wheeleon upon the
Axiltree, or take it off for any purpose, the proportion of this Engine for the
use of Ordnance, is that it ought to be about 2 foot long, and 8 inches
square, or there-abouts: the Viceron is of iron forked, to take hold, and with
his teeth is wound up by a handle, with a spur of few teeth, it will lift a
great weight, multiplying the force proportionally, according to the height of
the secret wheel, and of the said spur (contained in the distance of the
handle, from the center of the spur) or to semidiametre of the handles
circular revolution, dyametrally multiplied by the reasons between the spur
and wheel. That Viceron comes out of the midst of the said square case of
wood, at the top thereof, and by his Fork or Esse, takes hold of whatsoever is
fitted to be lifted up. The Scaletta with the rest may be easily made,
understood, and used, as in the said 24 Figure is described. And for the same
or any the like purpose, the endless Scrue of Archimedes here above
represented, is of infinite effect being duly applied.

CHAP. LII. How to draw a Piece of Ordnance up to the top of a steep and rough
hill or mountain.
HOw to get a Piece of Ordnance up to the top of a steep Mountain the best
manner is, that which may be seen represented in the 23 Figure, by means of
the Capstane: As suppose D to be the top of a Mountain, the Piece being at the
foot thereof, ABC to be the crabbed and rough crooked way, by which the Piece
must be gotten up, drawn with a long Cable or strong Hawser, by Pullyes or
Blocks, with sheeuers to make a Battery against the Tower F, between D and C:
For the better effecting of which, the Gunner and Enginer after they have taken
good notice of the Place, and made the passage smooth and even, they may place
the Capstane behind D, fastening it surely that the same may not ouer-master the
great poyze of the Piece: And then in convenient places of the crooked way (if
there be no Trees there to serve the turn, which would be great helps if
there were) there must great Pyles by force be driven into the ground, to
fasten the Hawser in good and strong Pullyes, by or in which the said Cable or
Hawser, must pass the upper part thereof, being fastened to the spindle of the
Capstane, and the lower end thereof unto the tail transom of the Carriage or
Rings near the same, at each side one. Lastly, four or more men turning the
Capstane about, with the Bars thereof, shall first make the Piece to mount up
unto the first Pulley or Block at A, where it must be first scotched, until
the Block be taken away, by taking out the Pin or Axis of the she ever, and
then the Piece is to be tauersed toward the second Block or Pully B, and so to
the third C, and then to the desired place near D. It were also needful to
have a small Truck, as well to bear the Tail up from staying against rough
stubs or stones in the way, as also to help the motion, Laborers also must be
readily attending near unto the Piece, as well to advance and help the
Motion, by heauing and shouing the same, as to trauerse the Piece the rightest
and best way, as occasion shall require, as in the said 23 Figure may be seen.
And after each Pully, has performed his office, let a man be ready there with
grease, vinegar or Lie, to annoyot the end of the Axtree, that it may soke into
the Naue, least the weight of the Piece in that Motion fire, and also to have
an eye to each of the Pullyes, that the Cable break not. And if any danger of
its breaking be perceived, then to give warning to them above to stay, and to
them allow to scotch, until the Cable be changed or amended. But if the hill be
so rough and steep, that the means aforesaid will not do it. Then take the
Piece out of her Carriage, and either lay it upon a block Carriage, or on a Sled
with Trucks, and lay plankes along in her way where it is rough, and use then
the Capstane and Pullyes as aforesaid. You may also use for the same purpose
Archimedes endless Scrue, represented in the 51 Chapter.

transporting a cannon up a mountain Tractat. 3. Cap. 14
Comment on peult moner vne piece d'artillerie sur vne montaigne
Wie ein stuck auff einem berg zu zihen.


CHAP. LIII. How the Train of Artillery and Ordnance should be ordered with
their Cariages in a journey, or upon a March.
THe whole Train of Artillery, one body divided into two parts Van and Rier,
is wholly under the command of the Master, or General of the Ordnance, or in
his absence under his Lieutenant or Brave, imagine then that the Army be with
suspicion according to advise, to be set upon by the way, both in the Van and
the Reire. Then were it fit 500 Horse divided into two Troops, should advance,
to discover all the Coast of the Champion, with the dangerous ways, Woods,
Thickets, and such like, by which the Army must pass, after these 2000 Foot,
should march as well for Couerture as guard of the Ordnance. And they also to
be divided into two squadrons, furnished with all necessaries of defense. After
them the Train of Artillery, with the Ordnance, marching with their
Conducters, Wagons, and Cariages of Powder, Shot, and Tanpions, or Wadding,
Coins, and Beds, together with a reasonable number of Pyoners, and some
Mariners, and such like spare people, to be ready to make Couerts and
defenses for the Ordnance and Gunners, or to cut wood, to plain the ways for
the Van to pass with four field Pieces, ready mounted in their Cariages, with
all their necessaris, as Ladles, Spunges, Rammers, Crows, Leauers, Ropes,
Tables, and breechings, with experienced Gunners, Gentlemen of the Ordnance,
Mattrosses, and Conductors. After follow the Munition and Engines, serving for
the use and defense of the Rier of Artillery, with the Boats and Bridges, and
then again follow 8000 Foot, and after them the great Ordnance, either in the
Cariages with fore-Cariages, or else upon block Cariages, whose wheels being
higher, makes the draught the easier. And lastly, follow 3 or 4 Field Pieces
ready mounted, accompanied with all their necessaries and apurtenances of
Powder, Shot, Instruments, and Attendants. After which there march 2000 foot
more, that are for Couerture and defense of the Ordnance and Riere of the
Train: these are followed with 500 Horse to close up the Army, whose Charge,
is, to see that the Rier of the Train be not set upon at unawares, suddenly,
or unprovided. The Army then Marching in this Order, The Enemy shall find the
Van and Riere, and also the Body furnished with force in all places. And being
always so provided with the Train of Artillery divided into 2 parts, yet
remaining one Body: so furnished, as that no doubt but a good and a happy issue
will succeed such good equipage, well guarded with Horse and Foot, provided
for defense of the Artillery, to march without danger, but in large capable
Champions. This Train may be shortened, the Van taking the right hand, and the
Rier the left, and the Train between both, equal in Front with Van and Rier,
and so Marching more compact, it will be the stronger: as in the 6 Figure at a,
by the letters ABC is represented to the eye.

CHAP. LIIII. How to draw Ordnance if Cattle be wanting, by the strength of
Pyoners or Laborers.
ARtillery or Ordnance, being the principal instrument of the Wars,
requires a great strength of Cattle, either of Horse or Oxen, to transport
them from place to place, which being wanting, must in a journey be suppled by
Pyoners and Laborers: as imagine that 16 Pieces were to be employed against a
Place to be forced, consideration must be had (Cattle being wanting) how
those Pieces, whereof 6 are Demy-Canons, 4 are Demy-Culuerings, and 6 are Field
Pieces, that shoot 6 l. ball, and how all the provision that belongs unto
them, as Powder, Shot, Waddings, and Cordage, etc. may be transported thither,
the Place to be forced being situate in a rough, stony, and hilly ground, by
Pyoners and Laborers only, sparing the Soldiers for other services. The
Ammunition and Persons that must carry them readily, are first to be confidered
of: As 600 Shot for the Demy-Cannon at 30 l. each Shot, will be 18000 l.
loaded in Wheele-barrowes 2 Shot, in a Barrowe which will be 60 l. for a Man,
and will require 300 Men to drive them. Also 600 Demy-Culuering Shot of 10 l.
loading 8 Shot in a Barrow, will require 75 Men, each man carrying 80 l. And
900 Shot for the 6 Field Pieces of 6 l. each Shot, putting 13 Shot in a Barrow,
will be carried by 69 Men, each man carrying 78 l. except 3 of those men, which
shall carry 14 Shot a piece, that is, 84 l. each of them: So all the Shot will
be carried by 444 Men. The strongest men which carry most, are loaded with the
weight of less then a bushel and a half of Wheat for each man in a
Wheelebarrow, which he may easily drive. Then for the Demy-Cannon, loading
them with 18 l. of powder for each Shot, will for the 600 Shot amount to 10800
l. every man carrying 80 l. in a bag, will require 135 men.

And for the 600 Demy-Culuering, allowing each Shot 8 l. of powder, will come
to 4800 l. each man carrying 80 l. 60 men will transport the same.

And for the 900 Shot, for the 6 Field Pieces, allowing 5 l. for each Shot in
powder, that will amount unto 4500 l. which at 60 l. for each man to carry,
will requite 56 men, and a Boy to carry the odd 20 l. of powder overplus,
which will amount almost unto 180 barrells of powder, each barrel containing
112 l. nete.

And for the Furniture of the Pieces, the Figure 5 a, shows the manner of
drawing them by 3 lines or traces equally divided, according to the number of
men that are to draw them, so that the Demy-Cannon with her Carriage, waighing
6000 l. reckoning 60 l. for every man to draw, it will then require 100 men,
and so the six, six hundred men.

a cannon drawn by a team of laborers

a cannon drawn by a team of horses Tract. 2. Dial. 3.2.


laborers transporting munitions Comment il fault pour f^^te de che^^^dy
Condu^^^ t^ent les muretion, que l'^^^tillerie. Tract. 2. Dial. 22.
Wie in mangel der pfer de heides ^^^^ition vndt geschutz vart zu bringon.


a cannon atop a cart Tract. 2. Dial: 3. Canon en chariot. Carthaun auff einem
lastwagen


a train of artillery on the march Tract. 2. dial: 5.
Comment le train de l'artillerie doibt marcher force en campaign large.
Wie-das geschutz in einem wei: them feldt ordentlich bei einan: der zihen soll.


artillery encamped in a laager Wie das geschutz mitt seiner zu gehor soll in
seinom guartier losiert werden. Tract. 2. Dial. 5.
Comment le train de l'artillerie doibt estre loge en son quartier.


The 4 Demy-Culuering Carriage, and all waighing about 2400 l. will require 40
men, to draw each of them, so 160 men will at 60 l. for each man serve to draw
them.

The 6 Field Pieces with their Cariages, waighing about 2400 l. a Piece, will
each of them require 30 men, so the 6 will be drawn by 180 men, each man
drawing 60 l.

Now forasmuch as there may be cause often to dismount and remount a Piece by
the way in the journey, it will therefore be fit to have ready the Gyndall or
Winlas, and the Martinet or Gynne, and when they are to be drawn up any steep
hill, then also the Capstone Cable and Pullyes in the 2 last Chap. described,
must also be carried, all which may be carried by 40 men with ease: so that for
the Carriage and transportation of all these Amunitions in any journey (where
Cattle are not to be had) may be carried and drawn by 1675 men and a Boy
without any difficulty.

It may also be demanded, because in such an expedition, that many other things
will be needful to be transported for the Ordnances use: As Ironworkes,
Nails, Crows, Hooes, Fore-Cariages, Grease, and such like: But seeing they
may more easily be divided amongst the Laborers, there rests for them no
difficulty of transportation. And for the better drawing of the Ordnance for
each Fore-cariage, a long Transome or Whiping-tree must be fastened before it, as
between A and B is described, that the 3 Ropes or Traces may be placed
equidistantly, far enough asunder to avoid trouble, and because the Traces
will be some of them too long, an other Trauers or Whiping-tree, or two may in
the midst, or in convenient places be fastened to those, or else other Traces
rather may go between Whiping-tree and Whiping-tree, to keep the so long
Traces from swaying, with too much trouble to stagger the men in drawing, and
so hinder their draughts. And three men behind would be needful to guide the
Carriage in the bendings and turnings of the way. Upon the Traces also each man
must have a double Cord fastened to the Traces, which he must put over his
shoulder Scarff-wise, and laying his next hand on the Tract, he may so draw
with all advantage.

And for Horse or Oxen, allowing each Horse to draw 500 l. and each draught Ox
600 l. The same may easily be thereby found how many Cattle will be requisite
to transport the aforesaid, or any other assigned quantity of Munition for any
journey. The manner of the Mannaging, whereof is represented in the said 5
Figure at b. And the carrying of the Shot and powder in Wheelebarrowes and
Bags, is deciphered in the said 5 Figure at V. And lastly, the description of
a Piece ready furnished for a journey, with Carriage and Fore-cariage, Ladles,
Sponge, Ramers. etc. is in the same Figure represented at d.

CHAP. LV. How many Privileges the Train of Artillery have more then
ordinary in Marching and Lodging.
IF it happen that in Marching, any other Carriage offer to advance before any
of those of the Traynes Cariages (except the Treasurers Carriage) then the
Master of the Ordnance has power to command and compel the contrary by
Privilege, whereof they enjoy more then others, because of the extraordinary
weight of the Ordnance and Shot, and for that they have charge of the
principal instrument of the Wars, and therefore has the first Rank,
without contradiction, and ought to have the best Quarter and Lodging, and to
be first settled therein. And in March in a Champion they of the Train of
Artillery, are to match more close and short, then does the Vant or Reire
between which two and the Batallion, they are always ranged or placed, as may
appear in the 6 Figure at a. And the General or Master of the Ordnance, is to
have care that his Train be timely lodged, to have time to provide all
commodities needful. And if it were possible that they may be so lodged, as to
discover the whole Champion about them, whereof these advantages would arise:
First, that they may discover all approaches: secondly, that the Camp may be
the better defended thereby. And thirdly, the Enemy advancing to give an
assault to the Camp, they may by them the better be repulsed. But for their
Lodging, the order represented in the said 6 figure at b, it must be observed.
First, that between the Retrenchments made with certain Chains of the
Munition, and with the empty Cariages and Fore-cariages, they may be enclosed,
so that there may be room and space, that the Footmen appointed for their
guard and defense, may if need be skirmish, which for that purpose, hold the
places therein marked ABCD, having 25 paces breadth at the least. And secondly,
that the Pieces of Advice, whereof there are always 3 or 4, regarding all the
ways of the Enemies Auenewes which are ever ready charged and fitted in all
things. And lastly, that the Cariages of powder be lodged in the middle, as
about the center or midst of the other Cariages, as you may see by the letters
FGHI.

CHAP. LVI. Showing how to weigh a Piece of Ordnance, or a Ship sunk under
water, and the proportions of all Mettalls and Ordinary stone, what, or how
much they will weigh in the Air, and how much in the water.
IT being a certain thing, that whatsoever is heavier then so much water, as
the body of the matter thrusts out of the place will sink, and being lighter
then so much water will swim, as Nicholas Tartaglia has not only well
collected from the learned Archimedes, but also calculated not only the
proportions of all the ordinary sorts of Stones and Mettalls, whether in Air
or Water, according as they poyze in both; And also notably expressed their
surrounded accidents, in his Treatise entitled by him Nouo Scientia, wherein
he delivers as follows. Namely, that ordinary Free stone, waighing 93 l. in
the Air, will weigh but 48 l. in the water, which is near as 2 is to 1
between the Free stone and water.

And that Marble stone that waigheth 7 l. in the Air, will weigh but 5 l. in
the water, which is near 7 to two, between the Marble and the water.

And Iron and Tin that in the Air waigheth 19 l, will weigh 16 l. in the
Water: so Iron or Tin is to water, as 19 is to 3.

And Brass waighing in the Air 65 l, will in Water weigh but 55 l, and so
Brass is to water, as 65 to 10.

And Lead and Silver waighing in Air 30 l, will weigh in Water but 27 l, so
Lead and Silver are to water, as 10 to 1.

And lastly, Gold in Air being 17 l. weight, will in the Water weigh 16 l. so
Gold is to Water as 17 to 1.

And in the first declaration of his said Book, he shows how by a Concaue
Globe of Glass, having a hole to put in a man's head under it, being set in a
Frame of Timber in the form of the Frame of an Houreglasse, with a Winlas,
Rope, and weight thereat to sink. A man entered into that Frame, to the bottom
of the Sea, or other deep water, his head being within the said Concaue,
Glass, Globe (wherein he may both see and breath, being no water can enter
into the same.) And when he will again rise to the top or surface of the
water, vnwinding the Rope (being long enough) the frame and his body in it,
will in like manner mount up as he pleases: and the weight remaining at the
bottom of the water, and the Rope going through the bottom of the Frame, it
will guide it to go up upright.

And in his second declaration thereof, he sets down the principal
impediments, that usually hinder in the waighing of a Ship, or other heavy
thing sunk under water.

First, if it be docked, or have made his bed, or impression at the bottom.

Secondly, if it be filled or covered with Sand or Oaze, so that sufficient
Ropes cannot be fastened thereunto to sling the same.

Thirdly, how to get the thing sunk, to separate it self from the bottom of
the water, where Air cannot come between, which will be harder to cause such
separation, in muddy, oazy, or sandy ground, then in grauelly or stony rocky
bottomes; yea, and with more difficulty to, in very deep then in shallower
waters.

And lastly, that it is harder to weigh things that have been long, then such
as are but newly sunk, because it and the bottom will be so joined and
closed together, that to separate them, Nature refusing to let vacuity to come
between them, they at the first will be found loath to depart. But having
fastened Ropes to sling the sunken thing, either by his help sunk in the said
Frame, or else by the means here in this 14 figure at b represented, which may
be conceived, a man entered into a case of leather made so thight, that no
water can soake in, and with a pair of glass Spectacles fast set, and
cemented close, with a pype of leather boyed by bladders blown, at the brim or
top of the water, whilst he fastens the Ropes below. Then 2, 3, or 4 vessels
being ankered over the place, and firmly fastened together with Timber beams,
the slinging Ropes also fastened to a main Timber between the vessels, being
deep loaded at the first, fastened of the said slinging Ropes, and after the
vessels being unloaded and lightened, will be more boyant, and weigh to their
power: Or else if the slinging Ropes be fastened to their stems (they being
loaded forward) and afterward the loading removed aft, toward the stern of
the vessels, they will then weigh all their Force: And where the water
heightens much, if Ropes be fastened at low water, at high water, they will have
boyed the sunk thing, or done their most force and help they could.

two wheels and an axle driven by a crankshaft

Tract. 3. Cap. 4.
De Colubrine
Lur Colubrinen.


(...) au default de sa propre cueilliers.
Form vnd mass der secklein oder patrohnen so in mangel der rechten
ladtschauffeln gebraucht werden.


Pour le Canon
Zur Caethaunon


Lastly, also if 4 Vessels be fastened, so that a square space be between,
and one or two of Archimedes endless Scrues called Tripastons, here in a
lively figure, represented with which, he said he would move the world out of
his place, if he had a firm foundation to plant his Engine upon Datum pondus
datis viribus mouere: There will be therefore no doubt, but industry and
diligence joined, will produce the wished effect: and so knowing the lading or
weight of the Ordnance in the Air, as each thing would weigh in a pair of
Balance, the matter being Mettaline, then Tartag his true proportions will
help, or if other goods, then industry will soon find how much all will
weigh in water, which let suffice at this time.

CHAP. LVII. How Moulds, and Formars, and Cartredges are to be made upon them,
to Load and Charge any Piece of Ordnance, without any Ladle.
Having already showed how to load any Piece with, and without a Ladle: Now I
will show how to make Cartredges ready for all Pieces, wherewith in time of
service any Piece will be more speedily and certainly loaded. Cartredges are
either to be made with Canuas Fustian, or other linen cloth, or with thick
strong Paper, especially of Paper Royal: which prepared, take the height of
the bore of the Piece, without the vent of the Shot, and cut the cloth or
paper of the breadth of three such heights; and in length, for the Cannon 3,
for the Culuering 4, and for the Saker Falcon, etc. 4 of the heights of their
proper Bores, and leaving in the midst at the top and bottom one other such
height, at each place to make a cover and bottom for the Cartredge, cutting
each side and end, somewhat larger, then the strict measures appointed for the
sowing or glewing of the seames thereof, so much as will counteruaile the same,
having also a respect for augmenting and deminishing those measures, as the
powder shall be better or worse then ordinary, and also abating with
discretion, when as your Pieces shall be already heated in fight, least else
you endanger the breaking or splitting of your Piece. Having resolved then for
what sort of Ordnance your Cartredges are to serve, you are accordingly to have
a Model or Former of wood turned of the height of the Shot, and of a
convenient length, longer then the Cartredge is to be. Then if you make them of
Canuas, half a dyametre is to be allowed more in breadth for the seames: but
if they be made of Royal paper, then having lapped it once about the Former,
leave about inch surplussage more then will compass it, which with Starch,
Paste, or mouth Glue, close about the said Former, having some part of the same
substance, fitted upon the end of the Former; first for a bottom, which must
also be pasted or glewed close, and fast to the side of the Cartredge, so that
being dry, it may hold the Powder fast, and sure from spilling. And you must
remember first to tallow the said Former, so that the Cartredge being so
molded thereon, it may be easily and without tearing, slipped off again. A
pattern for these Cartredges is here in this 20 figure represented. Now having
showed how the Cartredges are to be proportioned and made, it rests also to
show how a piece of Ordnance is to be loaded with them, wherein we are only to
consider, that if the Piece be Chamber-bored, it must be laid in a Scaffeta,
or Semicircle, or Cillinder of wood, of the thickness of the Orlow, or
different thickness, or height of the Metal between the Chamber. Also if
the Piece were Taper-bored as the Drakes, and some ancient Cannons are, then
the Mould, must accordingly be made to taper for the making of Cartredges for
her, and her Ladle must also be cut tapering-like, the figure represented at T
in the last figure but one; but if the Piece be equal bored, and the Cartredge
made of Paper, then there is no more to do, but to put the Cartredge into the
mouth of the Piece, and with the Rammer-head, to put it home, to the bottom of
the bore of the Piece, with two or three easy strokes: and then with a sharp
three squared Pryming Iron, to cut and pryme the Cartredge, that the Powder
prymed at the touchhole, may give fire to the quick powder thereby. In all
other things for wadding before and after the Shot, and ramming home the Shot,
you are to perform the usual manner taught in his proper place.

CHAP. LVIII. The names of the principal members, and parts of a piece of
Ordnance, as they are to be called and known by.
THe names, kinds, and sorts of each Piece of Ordnance, with their
differences, weight, measures, and in their fortifications, being already
handled in the precedent Chapters hereof, needs not here be repeated. But in
regard the most of them have special parts common, and of like names, I will
speak a word or two thereof, and so proceed to the manner of making and
proportions, belonging to the Carriage of each particular Piece, as in the next
Chapter will appear. The whole piece together, or as much thereof as is matter
of Metal, may by the 2 definition of my Book of the Art of Artillery, be
called the body of the Piece. The hollow Concaue, Cillinder, or Bore of the
Piece, may be called the Soul, by the first of the same. The whole length of
her shaft or Colume, is the Chase. So much of her bore as contains the Powder
and Shot, is the Chamber, or Charged Cillinder, and the rest of the same is
called her Guide or vacant Cillinder. The two spindles or eminencies that come
out about the midst of her chase, whereupon she (in her Carriage) is mounted or
imbased, are called her Trunions. The most afterward pummell at her breech, is
called the Casacabell. several ships Tract. 2. Dial. 24. fig. 1
^^mmont tirer un batteau enfonce en l'eau.
Wie ein versenckten schiff auss them wasser zu heben.
a diver retrieving a cannon from underwater Tract. 2. Dial. 24. fig. 2.
La maniere et trace des instruments pour tirer vne piece noyee de l'eau.
^he vndt mitt was instrument ein versencktes stuck auss them wasser zu zihe
The little hole near the breech, whereby she is prymed and fired, before her
discharge, is her Touchhole. All the Metal behind the Touchhole is the
Breech. The greatest and most eminent Ring or Circle of Metal at the Breech,
is the Base ring. The next Circle or Ring before between the Trunions and the
Touchhole, is the Reinforced ring: the Circle or Ring next before the
Trunions, is the Trunion ring. And the Circle which is foremost, and most rank
and eminent at her Mouth, is her Muzzle ring. Lastly, the Ring between the
Trunion Ring and the Muzzle, is called the Cornish ring, and the part of the
Chase of her shaft contained between the Cornish and Muzzle, is called her
Neck. And all the Rings, Circles, and eminencies at her Mouth, are called the
Freize, taking these names from Pillars or Columes, which somewhat represent
the Chase of Ordnance: being in form of the Scapus, of a Pillar or Colume so
nearly, that they take the names of some such part of Pillars, as they nearly
represent.

CHAP. LIX. Of the making Proportions and Measures of every part of a Field
Carriage for any usual Piece of Ordnance assigned.
IT being most certainly a matter of great importance for service, to have the
Cariages of all the Ordnance, with their Wheels, Axtrees, and their Furnitures
to be strong, well proportioned, and neat, and gracefully wrought, so as the
Piece mounted therein be every way so duly fitted, as that in the discharge of
her Shot, nor in her Reuerse she may not remove from the Angle wherein she was
directed. We have thought good here to show the due measures and proportions
for all Field Cariages, both by figures represented in the 19 figure at b, and
also by rules and discourse as follows. But first, a word or two of the
reasons and different opinions of some of the best modern Authors, that have
written of this subject. Louis Collado affirms, that long Cariages are better
then short: first for their more agillity in reuersing: secondly, for the much
less shaking of the Carriage, Axtrees, Wheels and Plat-forme, saying, that
Ordnance mounted upon short Cariages in a few times discharging them, make them
utterly ruinous and unserviceable by their passions in reuerse. But Alexander
Bianco commends the short rather then the long Cariages: first, because they
then require less room to reuerse in, and that being loaded, they are sooner
brought again to their place of service: And lastly, that a Piece shoots
further, being mounted upon a short, then it would do upon a long Carriage.
Both being moderated speak reason, as Pieces are yet accommodated: but because
I know that any Piece of Ordnance may without any inconvenience be so fitted,
that it with a short Carriage, it shall less shake the Carriage and Plat-forme,
shoot further, and reuerse less by far then in these as now they are fitted
will do. Therefore although I with Bianco approve of short Cariages, were they
fitted for them, and with Collado as they are yet fitted: yet I will here show
the measures and proportions of late used, of the best Cariage-makers, and are
made according to the directions of the most experienced Gunners, which
although it be most particularly appropriated to the Cannon, yet with the
destinctions following it may well lead to the proportional, making and
measure of a good Carriage, for any usual piece of Artillary whatsoever as
follows. The sides and Cheeks called Limbers, ought to be of Elm or other
Planke that is not apt to split and cleave, which for the Cannon must be once
and, and for the Culuering and smaller Pieces once and the the length of the
Piece, and for each of them, they must be one dyametre of the proper bore of
the Piece in thickness and in breadth, at the head of the Carriage, it must be
4 dyametres, at the first bending 3, and at the tail, 2 dyametres of the bore
or height of the Piece.

The Transomes are to be in breadth 1 Calibre, and of the bore, and in thicknes
one Calibre, except the tail transomes, and coin, which must be 2 Calibres
broad, and 5 long, where of Calibre may be let with a mortis into the cheeks at
each end, and it must have a bar of iron pass through the midst thereof from
side to side, with a hole for the Pintle of the Fore carriage to enter into; on
either side of this transome there must pass an iron bolt from one side to the
other, with an iron or rose on each out side, to hold them firm together.

The next Transom forwards is the Coin Transom, which must be 4 Calibres in
length, that is 3 Calibres between the Cheeks, and of a Calibre, let in at
each end into the cheek, upon this the breech of the Piece is to rest his bed
and coins.

The next forwards is called the bed Transom, because the forepart of the bed
rests thereupon, and the backer part of it rests upon the coin transom
This is also 4 Calibres in length, but Calibre at each end is likewise let into
the cheek near to the Axtree, so 3 whole Calibres thereof will be left
discovered between the cheeks.

The foremost is called the head Transom or fore-Transom, which is 3 Calibres,
and in length, with at each end also let into the cheek, and so leaves 2
Calibres, and discovered between the sides.

Through each of these Transoms there must pass an iron bolt (at the least,
for the greater sort of Pieces) from side to side: By means of these 4
Transomes all the Carriage is locked fast, as into one entire body, and is
plated and bound strongly with iron, that the joints open not with the
vehemency of the reuerse. And thus is the Carriage in his perfection, so that
if it were armed with his Axtree and Wheels, the Piece might be thereon
mounted, and ready to do service.

parts of the carriage of a cannon Tractat. 3. Cap. 7.


CHAP. LX. Of the Wheels and Axtree for Cariages for Ordnance.
THe Wheels should be in height about the length of the Piece, but in that
consideration must be had of the height of the Parapet where they are to serve.
And for the Saker, Falcon, and smaller Gunnes, the height of their Wheels must
needs exceed that proportion, namely by 1/12 for the Saker and Minion and by
1/6 for the Falcon and Falconet, and by 1 quarter for the base. The Fellows or
Circles of Timber-worke, must be in length 4 dyametres 11/16 of the bore,
whereof there must be 6 to make the whole circumference, and each of them one
dyametre in breadth, and one in thickness: For the greater Pieces, they are to
be shod with iron strakes, grasped and nailed with 2 or 3 Ranks of great head
Nails, as in the figure 19 at b is represented.

The Naue or head is to be in thickness 3 dyametres, and in length 3 and one
half, armed with Circles or Hoopes of Iron, and fastened with stays of Iron,
that they stir not from their places, nor go round upon the Timber of the
Naue. The spoakes or Rays are to be in length 3 dyametres, namely so that
being let into the Naue one half, and into the Fellows one half, there may
be 2 dyametres discovered between the Naue and the Fellows. There must be 12
of these Spoakes in each wheel, each one quarter of a dyametre square. The
Axtree must be 1 dyametres 2/^ in thicknes. The Arms thereof shall be in the
thickest place one dyametre, and at the ends thereof 2/3 of a dyametre in
thickness. And at the place where it pierces the Lymbers or sides of the
Carriage, it must be 1 and a quarter in breadth, and 1 2/3 in height. As by the
figure 19 b may appear, wherein also the places where the Mortis for the
Transomes, Axis, and Trunions, are marked with A B C D E F.

And for further explanation of that which has been already said, I will here
set down the particular proportions used therein for the whole Culuering,
wherein the measures for the rest may the better be understood: First, for the
Culuering, the Carriage shall be once and a half of the length of the Piece, so
that if the Piece be 32 dyametres, the Carriage shall be 48 in length, and the
Wheels 11 dyametres high. The Naue 4 high and 5 in length, the Spoakes 4
besides the one half let in at each end. The Fellows two, and the Arming one.
The Axis shall be in length 13 dyametres, and at the cutting of the Carriage
therewith to be 2 in breadth, and 2 in thickness. The Limber Planks or sides
of the Carriage must be 4 and a half, or 5 dyametres broad, one thick, at the
Trunions 4, and at the Tail 2 and a half; the rest may be conceived in the
former figure 19, made for the Cannon.

Now to make the Carriage for the Demi-Cannon or Demy-Culuering, you may add to
their former proportions 1/24, so that in stead of one dyametre let 25/24 be
placed, which proportion should be constantly held in all the measures
propounded.

The like may be said for the Saker and Minion, in stead of one take 23/22, and
for the Falcon for one take 7/6, and for the Base, etc. in stead of 1 take
10/^. And so these measures being necessarily added, may suffice, as well for
gracefull^ show, as useful service.

CHAP. LXI. Of the making of Candlesticks and Blinds, and of great Saussons and
little Saussons, and little Saucigdes, and of the inuentor and service of them
first used at Ostend. For biding of Ordnance and men behind them, and to fill
watered Dykes to approach a Breach.
THe Candlesticks are made in the form described in the next figure 15 at y,
and are of such height, as being clothed with Blinds, of Canuas, Sedge, or
such like light things, they may behind them cover and hide those that work in
the Trenches, o^ labor in Batteries, having the one Point or Piramis distant
fr^^ the other in such sort, that 2023 Saucidges, or more, or Bauins, or
bundles o^ Sedge, may be placed between them one by another, but of what wood
i^ shall be best, is not fit to appoint, seeing that if it be good, and sound,
and light with all, to transport with them, ready clothed from place to place.

These Candlesticks are very necessary to make Blinds of proof, as were seen
at the Siege of Ostend in Buckuoy his Ramparts, where his double and great
Saucedges were not alone able to cover the Fabric.

They may also serve in ouertures of Trenches, or in passing over Dykes, a^ was
practiced at Rhinberg in the Spanish quarter. They being by experience found to
be singular good, especially in myrie places, in which reuesting them with
Faggots, and setting them accordingly, men may pass by without any danger.

As for the Blinds, although their inuentor be not known, it being an old^^
device, yet are they of singular use, to cover for a while, and to hide ou^
works from the Enemies sights. They are represented in the next 15 figure also
at b: For them certain Stakes are pitched in the ground man's heigh^^ as big
as a man's leg, in number, according to the distance, as the cou^^ ture that
is to be made requires. being placed 4 or 5 foot one distant from another,
enterlacing them with the longest bows can be gotten, bindi^^ them close
together. By means whereof, in one half day haife a Cham^^ on may as it were
be so covered, and all the Laborers therein hidden: was experienced at Ostend,
and in the Isle of Bommell: besides, that they so serve very commodiously for
couertures of Batteries, and very commodiously angles of cannon fire during the
siege of Ostend Tract. 2. Cap. 2.
Ostende.
S Carl
S. Phdippe
Comment it fault mouuoir le saulsisson
Wie die salfitzen fort zu bringen
constructing walls of tall grass Tract. 2. Cap. 1. --
Blindes.
Blinden.
spikes set into posts Chandeliers. Leuchter.
Tract. 2. dial. 13.
Comment pour plus grande asseurance des pieces se fait vne double battery
Wie zu mehrer verwahrung der stuck eine doppele batteria zumachen.
(for waterworks) Saucedges were first made small, invented by one Adrian
Heranson, one well experienced in making of Dikes and Walls, and such defenses
against Water, who both made also Field Sausedges, which are singular to break
the violence of streams of Water, to strengthen Dykes, make Walls, and other
such like businesses. After which, one Christopher Propergenius perceiving,
that many Sausedges joined fast together, would make a great Sausedgion, but to
little profit, because the excessive bigness thereof would not yield them
means to move it, until the Count de Buqnoy divided it, and thereof made 2
Sasedgeons better to be managed, whereupon they were afterward used to reuest
Candlesticks as we said before. They were first made 46 foot long, and 15
foot dyametre, but were after brought to 23 foot long, and 12 foot
euer-filled within with earth, and if to sink with stones, and in diverse
places, as 3 at least bound firmly together with iron Hoopes, and rolled to
the places of use and service, or else with two Pyles or Anchors, Hawsers, and
Blocks or Pullyes drawn thither by men behind them, as in the said 15 figure
at a is represented to the eye: whereby an approach may be much the more safely
expedited.

CHAP. LXII. How to plant Pieces of Ordnance in secret Batteries, and in double
Batteries, so that they may not easily be dismounted by Counter Batterings.
IF the Pieces appointed to make a Battery, be planted upon a plat-forme that
descends behind, that in their reuerses they may go under the vawmure of the
Tronier, the Troniers being vaulted, as in the Cassamattes at the 157, and 158
figures of Marlois is represented, they must by strength and by Tackles be
brought up again above the vawmure of the Tronier, and the aim to be readily
taken before the Tronier be opened, and fire given immediately after the instant
of opening it: So will they in their Reuerses be again got under the vawmute,
and be free from dismounting, so long as the Furne mouth and Vawmure is able
to keep from the ruin of Counter-batteris.

There is also a means to save Pieces from being dismounted, namely by such
double defenses as are represented in the 22 figure b, with such Battlements or
Loopes as are there underneath represented, then only observing that they be
of equal wideness, both before and next the Piece, and to make them equally
deep enough, so as the right line that may discover the Enemies Pieces, lie
right through each Loope one, then 10 foot more backward or forward, make such
another Battery: As the said figure will sufficiently demonstrate, so by those
two several Loopes the Pieces will be so surely defended and hidden, that the
Enemy shall very hardly discover them, much less shoot so precisely, as to
dismount them through both.

CHAP. LXIII. How to plant Ordnance, whereas the Rampart is too shallow for
their Reuerse, and where earth is wanting.
FOrasmuch as such necessities may often happen, it will not be amiss to show
how to supply the same when need shall be: First, for each Piece take 6 Trees,
high enough, strong, and straight; if 6 be not sufficient, take 9 or more for
each Piece, which driven deep enough into the ground to hold them firm, and
making each of them strong to carry their burdens with Braces, Ioyces and
Plankes, making thereon a Plat-forme 20 foot long, and of sufficient breadth,
that the Pieces may both be managed thereon, and also play and reuerse freely,
remembering that thereon a Piece will more reuerse upon this being level, then
upon a Plat-forme that rises behind, and will therefore without sufficient
room and care, endanger the Piece by her falling from aloft to the ground.

CHAP. LXIIII. How to make a Battery with Pieces enterred.
THis manner of Battery has long been used both in Italy and Hungaria,
whereof the delineation following is a sufficient illustration, yet a word or
two thereof: First, you may mark out as much place upon the side of some Hill
or Mount near, and raised of sufficient height, as will suffice to receive
your Ordnance, so that they may each stand 20 foot distant from one another.
And then by the aid of Pyoners and other Workmen, make a Dyke deep 11 foot,
defensible sufficiently, be it forwards, artificially, or naturally, by
thicknes from the bank or outside of the hill, to the inside thereof, and so
broad, as that people may pass behind the Ordnance, when they have reuersed.
And when you have made Plat-formes, open Troniers or Loopes through the earth
of the side of the hill, so high, broad, and deep, as you would have them,
which is a way so sure, that the Town walls cannot any way hinder you therein,
especially if it be in a natural firm mould of Earth, if the blowing of the
Pieces cause any of the earth within the Trunier to fall, a long Colerake will
soon draw out the same, and you may also line it with Watlings.

cannons firing from a small earthen fort

Tract. 2. dial. 15.
^^me on fer a (...) battery de ^^qs de l'aine.

Wie von woll: sacken eine bat terie soll ge: macht werden.



CHAP. LXV. How wanting all other means, to make a Battery by Woolsackes.
WHere none other but grauelly earth is to be had, thereto avoid the
shottering, that the Enemies Ordnance may make by the stones, to endanger the
Camp, Woolsacks, may make the Sholders and Troniers in such manner, as this
figure 11 is represented. This is no new invention, for it has long been used
by diverse Nations: now it were necessary that these Sacks were 17 foot long,
and 7 foot thick: And to resist the Cannon, there should be three in breadth
to make the Shoulders or Parapets of the Troniers, and for the Demy-Cannon 2
and a half: And it is to be understood, that the two outmost of the three
Sacks, must be somewhat shorter then that within, to give sufficient ouerture
for the Troniers without, that the blowing of the Pieces endamage them not,
upon the said ouerture 1 or 2 Woolsacks should also be laid to serve in place
of Blinds, for the traversing and mannaging them the more safely: if by chance
the Sacks do any where take fire, there must be water and earth ready to
quench the same; and to fasten these Woolsacks, they must be Pyled with Pyles
driven into ground, all firmly bound together. Also if other Ordnance then the
Cannon or Demie, there must be as many more Sackes of Wool for shoulder
defenses, as that all the Pieces may be well covered: as the undermost of the
11 figure next manifests.

CHAP. LXVI. How to place great Ordnance, both to dismount the Enemies
Artillery, as also how to make a Battery on the Curtin of the Place, and when.
ALthough it has been a received opinion, that such Pieces as do lie high on
the walls, are in less danger, and have more advantage then such as are allow
in the Champion plane, because those aloft may more easily discover those allow
then the contrary. Yet it is found otherwise by experience, as in the 9 figure
is seen, where the Pieces allow, playing always under the Pieces, aloft, do
and may well embouch them, or else not fail to cloy their Plat-formes, or
beat their Cariages Wheels and Axeltrees, and so consequently make them
unserviceable, besides that if they take them underneath, they often dismount
those aloft, whereas those aloft cannot dismount those allow, for if a Shot
should light upon the upper part of the Metal of a Piece lying under it, it
will but glance away with little danger of dismounting, whereas if a Shot
light under a Piece from allow, it either dangereth the dismounting thereof, or
else the tearing of some part of her Carriage or Wheels.

Now for that the charge of making Batteries is great, it requires good
husbandry should be therein used, and the cost not vainly spent, for thereby
will acrew encouragement to the Enemy, and discouragement to the party.
Besides, therein the Scyte and position of the place besieged, is to be well
considered before it can be resolved, which is the best way, either to
beleaguer or place the Battery thereunto: For a Place may be assaulted in one
place, and yet battered in another, and sometimes the Batteries are to be made
upon the point of the Bulwarks, and sometimes upon the Curtins, ever aiming at
victory, the end of the enterprise undertaken. To batter a place well manned,
as Forts and Castles, at the Bulwarks and Caualeriaes is best, being places of
defense: But in a Town having cloyed their Cassamats and defenses, the Curtin
is fittest to be battered, because it requires more entrenchment, and is of
less force in the Terraplenes thereof. Grave and Tramont were battered upon
the Bulwarks, and Cort and Cambray were battered upon the Curtins, and so each
gotten, wherein the best opportunity, and way is to be taken, to obtain the
deseigne. And for battering a place upon the Curtin, 18 Pieces will be
necessary, namely 8 Cannon, 6 Culuerings, and 4 Demy-Culuerings, placed as in
the figure 9 at a is showed, wherein the 8 Cannon playing at right angles, they
are to shake and batter, by reason of the weight of their Shot, the Culuering
play trauersly, and to cut out that which the Cannons have battered, and the
Demy-Culuerings to play upon the Flankers and defenses, as also to hinder the
Sallyes of the besieged, and discover and dismount their Ordnance. The distance
that a Battery for either should be made, ought not to be above 120 paces, or
150 at the most, or at 80 or 90 paces if possible, the less the better, yea
though it were at the edge of the Dyke, for the nearer they are, the greater
are their forces: so as the Ordnance may be covert, that the Gunners and
Matrosses may be without danger of Musket shot, which is best at 80 or 100
paces if you may conveniently approach so near.

Take this by the way into remembrance for a note: That a Cannon at 120 paces,
will pierce a wall or Rampart meanly settled 15 or 16 foot, and being well
settled only 10 or 12 foot, but in close sandy ground 20 or 24 foot deep.
And that a Cannon may being well fortified, and duly and discreetly managed,
be discharged 100 times in one day.

Note also that a Cannon with one shot made well and orderly, will ruin more
then 100 Hods of earth can repair: For one man can carry but 100 Hods of earth
in an hour, the distance of 130 steps, or not much more.

Further, you may note that 1000 Shot succiactly made out of 10 Cannons, will
ruin more then 1500 Shot can do, being made out of 5 Cannon. And less can
the Enemy repair the first, then the last: For a Cannon Shot made every eight
part of an hour at 100 paces distance, will make as much ruin as 12 men, can
keep in repair.

Tract 2 Dial. 10.
Comment il fault battre en (...).
Wie die Cortinen zu beschiessen.


Tract. 2. Dial: 8.
Les pieces sont de plus grand effect celles qui sont logees en la campaign
^^elles qui se tiennent plus hault aux murailles des villes et forteresses.
^he stuck am starkesten die undone im feldt oder
^oben auff der statt mauren stchon.


But if 12 Cannons be well employed in a Battery together the 96 Shot, that
they may make in one hour, will ruin far more then 144 men can keep in
repair.

For 14 Cannons will ruin more then 12 and 16 more, then 14 spending, but the
like quantity of Powder and Shot. Therefore Ramparts ought to be augmented in
thickness, according to the Batteries made, but not in proportion, because the
inner part of a Rampart suffers not so much, nor is it so easily ruined, as
the forepart thereof may be.

CHAP. LXVII. How and when to make a Battery upon the point of a Bulwark, and
of the defenses to be made therein.
WHen and where the Curtins are short and close, the Battery is to be made
upon the point of the Bulwark and Caualeriaes: But then it requires as many
or rather more Ordnance then before for the Battery of the Curtin was
appointed. The 8 Cannon to beat about the point of the Bulwark, the six
Culuering traversing more at right angles with the Front thereof, and the four
or six Demy-culuerings to play upon the Cassamats, on each side 2 or 3, and
they are also to attend other occasions that shall happen, as has already
been said, and as the figure 12 at a represents together, with such
retrenchments and defenses, as the besieged may or should make, being forced,
of which there is no danger when the Battery is made in the Curtin, wherein the
Breach being once made, it may be more easily forced without any other dangers
then those of the Bulwarks and Cassamats, which are not only far off, but
also to be cloyed or dismounted aforehand, or else they are opposed and
encountered with the Demy-culuerings, and other Pieces placed on the brinke of
the Dyke, especially where necessity will urge, or occasion require, whereas in
the Curtins there can hardly any such retrenchments be made, as in the Necks
of Bulwarks, where with half Moons, in the neck thereof, they may make new
resistances with a few men, the Bulwark being Mined, and the Town imagined to
be gained, yea when fire shall be given to the Train, which may be perchance
prevented also by countermynes, which cannot be so directly directed on the
breach of a Curtin, as on the Bulwark whose neck is narrow, and may soon be
defended, and retrenched with less labor, time, and force, and cause the
assay lants to present more men in danger of blowing them up by the Enemies
Mines.

CHAP. LXVIII. How the Ordnance are to be placed at the hour of joining of two
Armies, to offend the Enemy most.
THis is a point hard to be handled by me that have not seen many Armies
meet; but finding several opinions delivered by others, I have thought fit to
recite them, and deliver what to me seems most reasonable, leaving each to
choose either of them, or any other way as to him shall seem most fitting. Some
say that the Field Pieces should be placed in the Front of the Bands, and some
that they should be placed trauersly two and two, or three and three together,
on the sides or flanks in the form of the Muskatiers, covered with the wings
of the Horsemen. But it seems to me most expedient, that certain Pieces
should be placed in the Front, which may endomage the Enemy on all sides,
seeking always the places of most advantage, without danger of loosing any of
their Ordnance, and certain Pieces also to be placed in the Flank, some to
shoot forth-right, and some a Trauers, each 3, from other distance 50 or 100
paces. And then there is no more danger but in the joining to withdraw the
Ordnance, that our Ordnance hurt not our own bands. And that they be always
ready to be Trauersed, and retreated, as need shall require, which may much
conduce to victory: But it will seldom happen, that in a Battle there be
such places so commodious to be found as were to be wished, for that most
commonly we shall be constrained to conform our selves, according to the
present occasions, as woods, hills, and other uneven places, for which no other
rule can begiuen, but with great judgment to seek how to get the advantage of
the Enemy, without being offended by Sun, wind, or dust, and such like,
which though they may be thought to be small things, yet they will be therein
found to be of great importance. But I cannot be of their opinion to have all
the Pieces on the sides to be best, for so the Squadrons meeting, ours shall be
more offended thereby then the Enemies, besides, that thereby this great danger
will arise, that when the wings of our Horsemen would be willing to advance
speedily, they will be greatly troubled with those Pieces so shot out of the
sides: wherefore the General, or Master of the Ordnance, or his Lieutenant,
considering these things, must give directions how the Ordnance shall be
lodged, either all in Front, all in Flank, or some in both.

cannons exchanging fire across a battlefield Tract. 2.
Comment il fault loger l'artillerie au poinct du Combatt.
Wie das geschutz in der schlacht zustellen.
Dial. 5.


CHAP. LXIX. How to fill up a wet Dyke, whereby to approach the Breach made.
Having already showed how a Battery may in diverse sorts be made, and also how
to make the Breaches sufficient for entery, we will now show likewise, if the
Dyke should be deep, and full of water or mud (that the Soldiers are thereby
hindered) how the same may best be filled up. Wherefore, although there be many
ways to perform the same, yet this in my judgment is the best; namely, that
when a sufficient Breach is once made, that then the Approaches be also
immediately made under the couertures of the Trenches, even unto the edge of the
Dyke, and then with Faggots, and earth, or Sausedges, (whereof we have
sufficiently spoken already) to fill it up, having the benefit of the ruins
that the Cannons have made of the Wall, and Faggots, and Sausedges which cannot
be wanting, whereas either Gardens, Trees, or Woods are near hand. Or else if
great Trees be thrown into the Dyke, if they swim, being of Fur or dry
light wood they will, then Plankes laid upon them (the Dyke being excessive
deep) and on each side of such Floats, blinds being raised to hide the
Passengers from sight of the Flanker, they may thereby pass to the foot of
the Breach, even as by a Bridge: But over a small River or narrow Dyke a Bridge
may be made over upon a Boats, as in the 17 figure at b is represented. But
being first well informed of the quality of the Dyke, whether it be of standing
or running water: If it be standing water, then a dozen of light Float Bridges
will help well; if there be any scarpe on the other side, or else they are
worth nothing: But in sted of them Floats being made with two Fir poles or
light wood strait about 15 or 20 foot long, about the thicknes of a man's leg
or thigh, upon which two sides may be nailed crosse-wise ledges or boords of
wood, about 3 foot long all along upon them. And so these may each of them be
carried by 6 men; namely 4 at the two ends, and 2 at the mid sides, as a corpse
is usually borne to be buried. And at both the ends of those two sides, there
must ropes be fastened, by which hese floating bridges shall be lanched, and
drawn from one side of the Dyke to the other, four or six Soldiers being
gotten upon it, resting them upon their Pykes, which being landed and passed
over: the Soldiers on the other side may draw, bake the Float by the ropes at
the end next them, and then 4 or six more may get upon the same, and the
Soldiers already landed, may draw them over by the ropes at their end, and so
helping one another from side to side, many men in a little space of time will
be transported over. And when as there are a competent number gotten, or the
Floats drawn up, may serve for scaling Ladders, or to mount the Breach the
better by. But if for the walls these Ladders or Floats be too short, there may
at one end of each side be two loopes of Iron fastened, and so firmly fitted,
that the two other ends of another Float or Ladder may fitly enter thereinto,
and so two or more shall make one Ladder, until they be found of sufficient
length. And lastly, we will remember you of Ladders, of Cords, or Ropes, with
wooden steps like entering Poope Ladders in Ships, having an iron Grapnell to
throw over the wall, to hold fast on the Vawnure or Paraper.

CHAP. LXX. Of the Gunners service in general.
NOw forasmuch as Ordnance are Engines of force, reason, weight, and measure:
and the Gunners men exercised and experienced in them, and their apurtenances
in making plat forms, with defenses, Troniers, Gabbions, Loopes, Parapets of
earth, and Faggots about 23 or 24 foot high of Faggots 2 foot high of earth,
bed upon bed unto eleauen foot high, and after 3 foot of Terraplene, to raise
the Troniers and Loopes, so that for the Cannon it be 3 foot wide in the Barb
within, and 12 foot wide without, the lower part thereof to descend scarpwise,
the better to discover the Enemies auenewes, and offend them the more freely,
for avoiding the blast, and smoke, and ruin, it would else make: For the
Culuerings 2 foot and a half within, and 9 foot without will suffice; and
for less Pieces, less measures. If the Battery be to be made with Gabbions,
they being filled with earth without stones, moystened and rammed 7 foot a
piece in dyametre, 3 ranks between each 2 pieces, if the place will permit,
or 2 at the least, and 3 rows also one before another, setting one between
two; so if the first rank have 3, the second will have 2, and the third one:
But it will be hard to make a safe Battery with Gabbions, Cannon, or Culuering
proof: And each plat-forme is to have 30 foot for the reuerse of the Cannon,
and 27 foot for the Demy-Cannon, he ought to see that it be leuelled, or
rising 1 foot for 20 backwards, the better to stay the reuerse and facillite,
the bringing the Piece being loaded to the Loope: He ought to search and
examine the goodness of the Pieces, their Ladles, Rammers, Spunges, and
Tampions, fitness, and roundnesse of the Shot, force and goodness of the
Powder and Match: And to see all fitted accordingly, and to place the Powder
covertly, hid safe from the fire of his own, as also of the Enemies Ordnance.
To see the Gunners take their marks toward the under part, giving each under
Gunner his charge.

In Plat-formes, the first plank next the Barbe should be 9 foot long: the
second 9 and a half; the third 10, etc. every planke increasing half a foot,
to spread for the Reuerse, as may be seen at the first figure at b.

CHAP. LXXI. Of the differences of our English measures in Feet and Inches,
from the Measures of other Nations. And also of the difference of pounds and
hundreds.
ALmost all Countries agree in this, that 12 inches make a foot, but the
length of their several inches do commonly so much differ from one another,
as whatsoever they speak or write of Measures in feet and inches, must not
without reducement be understood, to agree with our English foot and inch of
Assize, as the discourse and Table following will make plain, whereby it will
appear how little Foreign translations, without diligent and exact
reduction, when they discourse of paces, yards, feet, inches, or other
measures, write they never so well and truly of their own, can avail us.

For three inches at Vienna is 3 and ^/10 of our English inches.

And 3 inches at Venice contains 3 ^/10 of English inches.

Two Grecian inches is 3 English, they having 8 inches in our foot, so their
foot is equal with the English foot of Assize.

The foot in Bauaria wants 4/5 of our inch of the English foot.

The foot of Antwerpe is 6/10 of our inch, shorter then the English foot.

The foot of Farara is 15 9/10 of our English inches.

The French foot de Roy is one foot and 4/10 of an inch English.

The Tuscan Brase is 23 English inches.

The Florentine Brase is 22 and a half of English inches.

The Bressian Brase is 17 4/10 of English inches.

The Can of Naples make 20 English inches.

The Can of Rome make 22 English inches.

The Millan Brase make 23 English inches.

The Loraigne foot is 11 of our English inches.

Whereby each man may judge how much confusion would have grown to the Reader,
that should have read a French, Italian, Germane, or Spanish Author, and had no
means to understand, that there were any difference in length of the Measures
of one same name. And the like may be said of the waights used of several
Nations, which with the former of Measures, would not only have a double
error, dangerous for practice, but also confounded the Readers that suspected
no such thing.

The pound Troy being about 1 ounce and a half lighter then the pound
Auerdepoyze, yet the ounce Troy being heavier then the ounce Auerdepoyze,
because Troy has but 12 ounces, whereas Auerdepoyze has 16 ounces in the
pound. The Kintall of Biscay 150 l. is but 124 l. English. And the great
Kintall of Portingall 128 l. English, the lesser Kintall is 112 l. English.

The hundred subtle or small hundred, is 100 l.

The great hundred is 112 l.

One pound Troy weight is 13 ounces 4 d. weight, 19 gr., of a grain of the
Hauerdepoyze weight. By these are all their Ordnance and Munition waighed. But
in several Countries they differ, as you may see in M. Records book of
Arithmatick, called I be Ground of Arts, whereby the Reader may judge how
necessary these differences are to be known, and that reduction should be duly
made least confusion follow.

CHAP. LXXII. Of the making of Salpeter, whether it be Naturallor Artificial.
SAlpetre is a body of Air, transformed into Earth, apt by Moisture to be
dissolved, and by Fire to be resolved unto his first state Air, being an Ayrie
substance, fixed in dry Earth, dissolved by Water, and concocted by Heat into a
solid substance, and accepted the rich Mine of Princes in this Warlike Age, and
by Philosophers accounted a quintessence of Qualities, participating of all,
and yet simply no one of them: For being sharp and salt, in Taste hot and
dry, it enjoys the quality of Fire, and being also hot and moist, easily
dissolved into Water, and by fire tesolued into Air, appears to be Air it
self: And being white and clear cools warm Wine in hot weather, being
dissolved, and a vessel therewith put therein, it approaches near Water,
cold and moist: And being, it will bruise, and be brought, or be molten into a
hard stone: it is also cold and dry of the quality of the Earth, enjoying all
the qualities, and a conuertible to all the Elements. It so becomes as they
say a quinta essentia. Salpetre is of two sorts namely, Artificial and
Natural. The Natural Salpetre is that which grows in continued Mines of the
Earth, or upon Rocks, or in Vaults, on Walls, and by Natures work becomes
perfect Salpetre, whereof the store is to small too depend upon. The
Artificial Salpetre (though naturally growing) also requires the help of Art
to bring it into true and perfect Petre, and is found in so many places, as in
Loame-Floores, Mud-walls, Sellers, Dove coats, Stales, Sta les, and such like
places, whereas the rain cannot come to dissolve, nor the Sun to dissolve
the Air, substance, fixing and growing therein, that with labor and industry
with Arts help, to cause abundant procreation, sufficient store may be
provided, and Artificially made thereby in this manner. First, for choice of
the Earth for finding, it whether sufficient quantity of Petre be therein or
not, observe this, Pare the Floores, and dig 3 or 4 inches deep therein: if
you find the Earth full of white and yellow specks, and that having put a
little thereof upon the top of your tongue: if it yield an Ayrie biting, or
sharp tindge thereon, the Earth is good, and will be rich, and yield store,
according to the more biting or tindging taste thereof. Then dig that Floor
so deep, as you find the Earth to be good, which in some places will be a
yard, and in others not a foot deep, under the upper Floor make the Earth
somewhat small. And put it into half Tubs loose, having a Taphole in the
bottom of each, which stop with a staff and cover, with a wispe, that the
Earth run not out, when the liquor drayneth. Then fill the said half Tubbs
with water a handful higher then the Earth, and so let it stand in soke 24
hours, and then draw out the staff or pegge a little, that the water may drop
and drayne out thereby into another half Tub that must be set under it of
purpose to receive the liquor, which Liquor keep, and lay the Earth upon the
Floor, which in six or seven years will again breed as much more Petre
therein, and in some floores, especially with help, in far less space. When
you have collected a sufficient quantity of such Salpetre liquor (unless you
have Mother liquor) you must of some of it make the Mothers thus, boil your
Salpetre liquor in a Caldron, and scumme it (which scumme reserve) until the
liquor being proved with a knife, be found ready to congeale; then take off, or
else put 8 or 9 times as much Salpetre liquor thereunto, and having made the
scum rise, and taken it off, and reserve it, let it boil a fret, until the
liquor be again able to congeale: which if it prove too tender, it is a sign
it is no boiled enough; and if it be too hard, then that it is burnt too much,
and must for the first be more boiled, and for the latter recovered with more
Salpetre liquor, and renew the Work: but being found indifferently between
both, take it from the fire, and put it into half Tubs, wherein good wood
ashes are placed upon a laying of Straw upon faggot stick, or Lathes in the
bottom thereof, and let the liquor drayne through the same, and put it into
coolers, or brass shallow pannes to congeale, and let it stand in a cool
room, where in two or 3 days it will shoot out like ye sickles, and keep
that for Roch Petre, and the liquor that will not congeale, keep for Mothers,
to work a new for more as before. And this is the order to make Artificial
Salpetre: And the scumme that rose in the boiling mixed with water, and
sprinkled upon Floores, will exceedingly procreate Salpetre in short time.

To collect Salpetre that naturally breeds on Walls, on Caves, in t e Ground,
or in Vaults. GAther the Petre together, and add thereto of quick Lyme and
ashes, and put them into a half Tub with a hole, to drayne out water, then put
in warmed water, and let it so stand, until the Petre be dissolved; then let
it drayne out at the hole by little and little, and filtre it if need be, if
it come not clear enough: and then boil it until it will congeale as
aforesaid.

To Refine Salpette wet. TAke what quantity of Salpetre you please, and put the
same into a clean Caldron and put thereto a little fair water, and boil them
together until it raise the scumme, which take off and keep, and let it
congeale and shoot in coolers, as at first it did, and what remains, boil
again with more clear water until it congeale.

To know if Salpetre be well refined. TAke of it, lay it on a board, and put a
coal to it, if it raise an Azure scum, it is yet greasy; if it leave pearls,
it is yet earthie: But if it burn into the board, and leave nothing but a
black color, and rise with a long flamed ventosity and exhalation, it is well
refined.

Of Gunpowder, and to make the usual sorts thereof. FOrasmuch as Powder is the
Base and foundation of all Fire-Engins, therefore I will show his preparations.
There are ordinarily three sorts of Powder made, whereof one serves for Birding
and Fowling, which is quickest, being 7 or 8 of Petre, for one of coal and of
Brimstone: The second for Muskets and Pistolls, called fine Powder, which is 5
or 6 of Petre for one of Coal and one of Brimstone. The third, called Ordnance
Powder, is of 4 or 5 of Petre for one of Coal and sulpher: But for service,
there is but two namely, Ordnance Powder, and fine Powder. There are infinite
receipts for making of Powder, but most States have enjoined a certain
proportion amongst themselves, although much different one from another:
wherefore no certainty can be herein generally concluded, but every man must
practice for his experience: only a word or two I will say thereof, namely,
that before the Receipt assigned be compounded, it is requisite for making of
good Powder, to refine the Petre, to purge the Sulpher, and to choose good
coals, made either of Hazle, Alder, Willow, or Birch, Wood without Bark or
Knotts therein being well burned. And then to work those three Materials well
together: for therein consists a greater difference of force, by the
difference in working of them, then is credible without experience. It is to be
wrought together by a Horse-Mill, or Water-Mill, or in a Mortar with Pestles,
the Materials kept moist.

The Compositions of Corne-Powder. Five pound of Salpetre, one pound of Coals,
and one pound of Brimstone, five pound of Salpetre very well refined, as before
is showed, 1 l. of Willow, or Alder Coals well burned, and of Sulpher well
purged 12 ounces: Or of six l. of Salpetre, Sulpher and Coal of each one l.
Or of Salpetre 7 l. Sulpher prepared with Quicksiluer as we have also showed
before: Or Floores of Sulpher one pound, and coals of Hazle half a l. Or if
you mingle as much quick Lyme in powder as Sulpher, you shall make powder that
the moisture shall not impeach taking of fire. Now seeing that it will be to
little purpose to show the Compositions, unless we also show the manner of
making thereof, which though the varieties both in composing and making are
many, tending all to one same end, we will therefore show one reasonable way
for small quantity. First, put your Composition into a brazen Mortar, or of
wood with a brass bottom. And take also a brass pestle, and beat it so well
together for the space of six, seven, or eight hours, that in cutting the
same with a knife, there can none of the Materials be discerned a part, but
all well incorporated into one body, always moystning the same with a little
clear water, strong Vinegar, or Aqua-vitae, so much that the coals dust not,
and so little, that the composition in working become not paste. But if you
would have your powder very subtle, moysten the same with the distilled water
of the outer rynes of Oranges, and let your sulpher be clear Sulpher vine
which in the melting had of Quicksiluer put therein, and incorporated, finely
beaten, and searsed with coals, quenched with clear water, wherein quickly
me has been slaked, and either let it stand to clear, or else be filtered:
and this moystning will make the corns thereof become hard, and not yield to
moisture suddenly. After the composition is thus well beaten and wrought
together (the more the better) take a Syue with a Velome, or Parchment, or
Leather bottom, made full of holes, of the bigness you desire your corns,
and put the Receipt or composition therein, with 2 or 3 short Rowlers, a little
moystening it, that the pousier or dust thereof fly not away. And sifting them
upon a long Rowler, over a half Tub, so will the short Rowlers driving the
composition through the holes, make the corns come out round yet of several
syzes, which to bring to have all the corns of one bigness, you must pass
through several siues, as they use to syze Hayleshott: So shall your Corns of
every syze be equal. And look what in searcing and dusting rests vncorned,
must be separated from the rest, and new moystned and beaten, and then again
fifted as before; whereof some dust called Ponsier, will still remain
vncorned, which may serve excellent well to make Rockets with. And these corns
may be dried in the Sun, or in a warm place, safe from fire. The powder
being dried must be dusted again to separate the Pousier from the corns. And
to the end the powder become not moist, it should be kept also in a dry warm
place, Moisture and Age being both enemies to powder: Moisture, by making the
Petre descend, or else vapor, whereby one end of a barrel of powder that has
stood long, will be better then the other, and Age by breaking the proportion
and incorporating by the Petres growing and increase, and by the coals
corrupting together, with the Sulphers decaying by age in quickness to take
fire. And so both through moisture and also by Age powder will decay. Next it
must be considered whether it be moist or dry, or wholly, or but in part
decayed, and so accordingly to use reason, with diligence to renew the same.

Several ways to know if Powder be decayed or no, whether by moisture or age,
and are decayed in part. IT is the real practick part of a Gunner, to know his
powder, and whether it be decayed or not, by mutation or corruption. And there
are especially three ready ways to find the same. The first, is by the sight;
the second, by the feeling: and the third and surest is by firing it. By sight
if it be not black and dark, but bright, and enclining to a tawny bluish
color. By feeling grasping it in the fist, if it run through the fingers
quickly, and auoydeth the handling, and cling not together. By fire, if fired
it rise quick, and spread in a moment, smoke little, but rises in a clear
flash, unto which add further, if it leave no feces but carry all away, the
powder is good, or else the contrary is to be judged.

To revive or renew powder, which is in part thereof. OFten times in Forts, but
usually at Sea, powder cannot be kept so far from humid vapors, but that it
decays the same, and makes it of little, and sometimes of no use without
renewing it. And sometimes it may decay by age as we have said. Let therefore
the Gunner first prove the powder by fire, and if it make a flame with a long
tail, that is, if it sleep in its burning more or less, then for every 100
l. aside 4 l. or 6 l. as need requires of refined Salpetre thereunto, mixing
them well together, and put them to be beat and wrought by the space of 3
hours together, and then moysting, corning, and drying the same as aforesaid,
proving it in meal dried, how it will rise by firing: and so doing, the powder
may be made serviceable, if the coal be not corrupted.

Another proof of powder to be renewed, decayed in part. TAke a pynt, or
quart, or any other measure of good powder prooned and dried well: Then take of
decayed powder well dried the like measure, and weigh them both, and look how
much the equal measure of good powder waighed more then the decayed powder,
add so much Salpetre refined, as the difference of their waights was unto
every time, so much of the decayed powder, and moysten, beat corn, and dry it
aforesaid, and it may being proved, be found serviceable and good powder: for
the Salpetre only wastes by dissolution, which neither the coal nor brimston
does, wherefore by the rule of 3, you may find how much Petre any assigned
quantity of decayed powder, will require to renew the same.

To renew powder totally decayed. But if the powder be wholly decayed, lay a
Raysin frail or Matt in a bottom topped, bucking Tubb upon Fagots or Lath,
set on edge, to keep the Matt from the bottom, and put in straw, laid
crosse-wise, upon which power the decayed powder, then warm water and put
thereon, and let it stand and soke 10 or 12 hours, that all the Salpetre may
be assuredly dissolved, then let out the liquor at the bottom top, which
filter and congeale into Petre, and add thereto a due proportion of coals and
Sulpher, and make it into powder as is formerly taught: For the coals and
Sulpher dissoluing, will remain behind in the Straw, Frail, or Matt: Or else
if you put the decayed powder in a bag, and boil, or soke it in warm water,
the Petre will soke out, but some will be soked into the cloth of the bag,
and with more labor must be soked out.

Another manner to renew powder without new making it. TAke 3 l. of the decayed
powder, and divide it into 3 equal parts, which spread thin upon 3 Tables or
smooth boords. Then dissolve one ounce of refined Salpetre in a little warm
water by it self, and with a hair ouersprinkle it upon one of the third
parts. Likewise dissolve 2 z, and sprinkle it upon one other of the third
parts. And lastly, so dissolve 3 ounces of Salpetre, and sprinkle upon the
third part of the 3 l. of decayed powder. Then dry the said 3 parts or pounds
of powder severally, and prove by fire whether there that which had 1 z, or that
which had 3 z. of Salpetre sprinkled upon it is best, you may thereby know how
much Salpetre will renew all the whole quantity of decayed powder in the same
manner, without new making the same.

To make powder that shall not decay with time. TAke what quantity of powder
you will, and mix it well with Aquavitae, and make it up in Balls, and dry
them well in the Sun, or in a warm place, and keep them in an earthen pot
well glazed, until you have cause to use them. Cateneo says, this powder will
neither decay, nor waste by age.

CHAP. LXXIII. Of the making of ordinary and extraordinary Matches, to give
fire with unto Ordnance, or Artificial Fireworkes, and such like.
TAke Ropes made of Towe, about the bigness of a Man's little finger, being
twisted loosely, and Taw and beat them with a Mallet upon a stone, till they
be soft and opening: Then put them into a Caldron full of strong Lee, made with
ashes and quick Lyme, wherein also a quantity of Salpetre or Mothers being put,
and when they have boiled well of the liquour of the Lee consumed. Then draw
out the Match, and twist it harder while it is moist, and afterward dry it upon
Lines, but first draw them through a hole, as Wyre-drawers do their Wyre to
make it even.

To make extraordinary Match of Cotton, Yarne made Bobbinwise, of a finger
thickness. TAke as many threads of gross Cotton yarne, that has not taken
Saltwater by transportation or other ill Accident, and work them Bobbinwise of
a competent bigness, and boil them in Salpetre-water, and squeese them, and
roll them on a Table, whereon Mealed-Petre, and Sulpher is spread, then draw
them through the palm of your hand, and then dry them well.

To make Match that will resist fire and water. TAke Salpetre refined one part
Sulpher part, and put them into a Pot with part of Camphere mealed with the
Sulpher, and one part of fine mealed quick Lyme, with so much Lynseed oil,
oil of Petre, a little Vernish liquid, to temper them well together. Then take
of Cotton bobbin Match as big as your little finger, and put it into the
mixture to soke over a sire, until it be well imbybed, and have soked up the
liquor. Then take the Feces or remainder, and put them in the palm of your
left hand, and with your right draw the Match through it twice or thrice,
clasping close your fist, that the Match may receive the substance of it
thereinto. Then dry it upon a line, and keep it for special uses, for Vaults,
Mines, and moist weather.

To make a very violent Match. TAke two ounces of Powder, 4 z. of Petre, two
ounces of Aqua vitae, dissolve them over fire, and put in your Cotton Match, to
soke it up: if you imbibe the Ficelles for your Rockets therein, it will be
very proper, you may roll and rub them in Meal Powder upon a Table, dry them
and keep them in a dry place, which let suffice at this time.

decorative endpiece

OF ARTIFICIAL FIRE WORKS FOR Triumph and Service.
ALthough Gunpowder with the soul Petre, and the life Sulpher, and the body
thereof Coal, be indeed, the chief bases and foundations upon which the
practice of Artillery, and making of all artificial Fireworkes, either for
service in the Wars, or for Triumph after Victory, or for delight and
pleasure depends, whereof we have already spoken sufficiently: yet Fire
being the Primarie cause for performing their sequent effects, we will first
briefly define what Fire is, and then show who were the inuenters of it,
according as Antiquity has diversely left us their Testimony. Fire is an
element hot and dry, the most rare light and piersing, either detayned here
below by Art, or constrained by Accident: It ingenders and feeds upon that,
which by Nature it always affects and it strives to get aloft, as unto the
natural place and repose thereof, as our first Theorem plainly manifests.

The Poets fained, that Promethius first stole the Fire from Heaven: But
Vitruuius says, it was accidently found, and happened by the violent agitation
of the Winds and Tempest, among the Arms and Branches of Trees, robustly
rubbing one against another, which made them kindle fire and burn. Plynie
said, that it was found by Soldiers, because they usually give violent strokes
upon solid things, often times striking sparks of fire. Lucretius said, it was
engendered from the lightning, and that Vulcan the King of Egypt, was the first
that perceived that fire to make use of it amongst humane creatures, wherefore
the making of Jove's Thunderbolts was attributed to him. And Orpheus making
little or no distinction between Vulcan and fire, in his Himne sings.

Brave valtant Vulcans living flames on earth remain as yet,
Where in bright shining fiery Roabes his Majesty does sit, etc.
Fire being also a thing necessary for man's life, consisting of heat and
humidity, simbolizeth generation so nearly, that sage Antiquity therefore
faigne the marriage between Vulcan and Venus, and attibute the carriage of
Nuptial Torches unto him, at such times as the Lovers would embrace each
other. Many more were the ancient fictions and opinions concerning this element
of fire: but those I leave for breuities sake, concluding it as I begun, Fire
to be a more rare, subtle, and light element of Nature; then the air which is
but his Nurse, seeing that if air become compact, and fixed in a straight
place, and fire chance to burn such an Ayerie body, that would either eat or
drink, or consume it, and thereby leave the place void, which nature
abhors, as appears by our 4 or 5 Theorems, or else that rarifieth and
increases the body thereof by the third and 6 Theorem, and so 2 bodies should
be in one place contrary to the 7 Theorem hereof; which let suffice, and so I
will proceed to the matter, for contriuing and composing of some Fire-workes,
both for Service and Triumph, and conclude this Treatise for this time.

Of Rockets and their structures.
Having hitherto showed the Gunner how to apply Artificial Fire-workes in the
Wars, referring their several composings hither, as also the manner of
making Fire-workes for Triumphs and pleasure, wherein I will begin with the
making of Rockets in the due construction and application, whereof consists
all the pleasure of Motions of Fireworks: For the making of Rockets there are
many things necessary, as the Mould The Drifts, and paper or Parchment (for
paper or Parchment Rockets double and well pasted, or glewed) Pryming Pearcers,
Rodds, Morters, Searcers, Mallets, and diverse Receipts and Compositions of the
Materials, wherewith they are loaded or made. Therefore it will not be amiss
to show the reasons, forms, and proportions, as well of the Moulds for Paper
and Parchment Rockets, as also the Mixture, Receipt, and Composition, whereof
they and the Cane and bored Rockets, according to the syze of their grandures,
are to be made. First, upon a Paper you should know how to trace or draw the
figure of the Mould, according to the bigness you would have your Rocket, that
your Turner may understand how to make them. To do which, make a right line
upon a paper, and take with your Compasses the breadth and height of the Rocket
you intend to make, and with that distance, set six of them along in the said
line, as from the point A, to the point B, with the Tail and all, next the
vent or mouth thereof, or rather 6 and of several rockets Tract. 3. cap. 26.
fig. 5.
those ouertures or heights. The wood of the Mould must be inuirond about the
Soul, or concaue Cillinder thereof, and also as thick as it, in such sort,
that the Calibre thereof be full 3 diametres. And the Soul or Concaue of the
Paper to abate in circumference for his thicknes, as may be seen in the 21
figure at b. So A B is the length of the Mould, and B C is the dyametre
thereof, the figures of 4 show the thickness of the wood on each side, and 2
the thickness of the paper. The foot shall have the thickness or diametre of
the Mould, and be at 1 and 3/2 thereof in height, with a head lessening to fit
the vent, with a Pearcer, joined to the foot and body of the Mould, and is to
be screwed, or let in that with a dove tail, that they may be firmly
fastened together, as A to E. The Drifts must be of the full length of the
Mould, and very little lower then the dyametre of the Soul of the Paper, the
one represented at L, and the other at M, and that which is for the driving the
powder, M must be the thickness of one rolling of paper less and longer then
the other L, that is for the former to roll the paper upon, that it may enter
in and go out, to drine the powder and mixture close home, being filled by a
little and little at once, and then driven.

So then the Rocket N will be 10 Calibres, 9 for the powder, and 1 for the
bindings above, and the bond and fucill below. And the Pearcer O must be at
least of the length of the Rocket, whereof by the figure you may see both the
form and proportion. And also although some would have a pin reach so high
from the breech of the Rocket, and of the Drifts fitted with a hollownesse to
receive it in the driving: yet that fashion being very uncertain and requiring
much skill, handinesse, and practiced experience, to bring it to rise well, I
have rather left it to be pierced after the driving.

For the Receipts, they must be according to their grandures, and to be filled
by a little and a little at once, and giving 4 or 5 strokes upon the Drift with
a weighty Mallet, continuing so until it be full within a finger or twos
breadth of the top, and it must be made of strong paper or parchment well
rolled about the Former, or else it will be worth nothing, and besides, if it
be not also well pierced and prymed, it will never rise well. If the Receipt
for small Rockets should be filled into great, the mixture would be too
violent, for that experience teaches that, fire being given to a composition
in a large amplitude, and burning a great quantity, in a little space it
holds not proportion with the little. For the Rockets of one or two ounces of
Receipt, For one or 2 ounces Rockets.
they may be of the composition following. Either take fine or Harquebuze
powder one pound, and soft wood coals two ounces: or one pound of fine powder,
and another pound of Cannon powder: or take one pound of fine powder, and an
ounce of Salpetre, and 1 z. and a half of coal.

For Rockets of 4 z, and for Serpents in quills take 4 l. of powder, For 3 or 4
z. Rocket, and for Serpents.
1 l. of Salpetre, and 4 z of coals, and sometimes ounces of Sulpher may be
added thereunto: or take powder 1 l. 2 ounces, and l. of Salpetre, 4 ounces and
of coals: or experienced, take powder 1 l, Salpetre 4 ounces, and 1 ounce of
coals.

For 6 ounces take 2 l. 5 ounces of powder, Salpetre l, Coals 6 ounces, For 6
ounces Rockets. For 8 ounces Rockets or 10 Rockets.
Sulpher and Limmell of Iron of each 2 ounces.

Take for 8 ounces 16 ounces of powder, 4 ounces of Salpetre, and 3 ounces of
Sulpher, with 1 ounce of Coal.

Take 2 pound of powder, For 1 l. Rockets.
5 ounces of Salpetre, 5 ounces of Coals, Sulpher and scales of Iron of each 3
ounces: Or take 1 pound of powder, 3 ounces of Coals, and 1 ounce of Sulpher.

Take Salpetre 12 ounces, For 2 l Rockets.
powder 20 ounces soft, wood Coals 3 ounces, Scales of iron 2 ounces, and
Sulpher 1 ounce.

Take Salpetre 30 ounces, For 3 l. Rockets.
Coals 11 ounces, Sulpher 7 ounces.

Take 30 l. of Salpetre, 10 l. of Coals, 4 l. of Sulpher.

Take 8 l. of Salpetre, For 4, 5, 6, or 7 l. Rockets.
2 l. of Coals and 12 ounces, Sulpher 1 l..

For in the great Rockets you must put no powder, for the reasons
aforementioned, For 8, 9, and 10 l. Rockets.
as also for that powder having bin long time mealed and dry, it fortifieth it
self, and grows too violent. But if you will at every third or 4 driving,
dip the end of your Drift in oil, of Petre or Linseed oil boiled to the
height to sealed a feather, you may keep such Rockets long good. The great
Rockets are to be made of the weaker or slower Receipts. And the simples must
be well beaten and sifted in a Searce, and well wrought together to incorporate.

After the Rocket is filled within two fingers breadth of the top, For Breaks.
you may fold 5 or 6 double paper, and pierce it through, and make a Pettard or
Breaker therein of an empty Walnut shell or 2 filld with powder, or a coffined
Cap rather of tinned iron Plate, which will give the better report, and pierce
the Air swifter, in which you may else put in 2 or 3 Star made of Cotton
bumbast, put in Aqua-vitae wherein Camphere has been dissolved, and sprinkled
over with Sulpher Viue. For Flyers.
The Rocket being thus made, you must bind unto it a Rod that must equibalance
it, if it be placed upon your Thumb 2 or 3 dyametres from the Rocket, and it
should be 6 7, or 8 times the length of the Rocket, and straight, to cond the
Rocket as right through the Air as may be: And ever remember to prove some of
your Rockets before you go to perform any show, and also at the first making
that if the Receipt be too strong or too quick, it may be in time slowed with
Oil or Coal: if to slow, with powder or Petre, quickened according to the
rising, burning, and arch it makes.

Those Rockets that run on lines also, For Runners
ought to be very carefully made, whether they are to double, or single, or
those that carry Draggons, Men, Ships, or other shapes in Motion, least they
shame their Master. The line must therefore be fine, even, and strong, and
being anointed with soft Soap, it will be slippery, and not easily take fire.
And these as well as those that turn wheels, may have a further addition of
Roch Petre in their receipt, to add pleasure and life to the Aspect, which let
suffice for Rockets.

various fireworks Tract. 3. cap. 27.


various fireworks Tract. 3. cap. 29.


CHAP. LXXIIII. The Description of certain Wheels of Artificial Fireworkes,
and of their Structures and Compositions.
Having already spoken of Rockets sufficiently, we will next speak of
Fire-Wheeles, which were wont to be the chief inventions used at Feasts and
Tryumphes for pleasure, and which by their Motions yield great contentment to
the spectators, as they were anciently used. But now of late by joining many
Tyres between the Rockets that burn, and are moved with variety, the pleasure
is much increased. The Works may be framed both for vertical, and also for
Horizontall Mouers, either upon great woollen spinning Wheels, Coach Wheels,
or other Wheels, made of purpose easy to run round, and the greater the
better show, and must have the Perch or Axis whereon they are to turn, fitted
unto the bore of the Naue, which Perch and Wheel should be anointed or
reuested with some incombustible oil, ointment, or coating, to guard it from
firing, which would confound the aspect intended in the 2 figure a following:
the first at A is to move Horizontally upon his Perch. The second wheel B
moves vertically upon an Axis, proceeding out of the side of his Perch, their
other Structures and Compositions may be both alike, or varied at the
Worke-Masters pleasure, only that if the Axis of the second were of iron
polisht, and fitted to the Naue, it would be surer from breaking and burning,
either of which chances would much disgrace the Fire-Master. To Arm them,
furnish them with as many Rockets fast bound, and between them as many Tyres
of colored Fires, Serpents, breakers, or shewers of Gold, as you shall think
with time between them fitted, that the Wheel may move from the ending of
every Rocket, until the beginning of the next, with a Sulpher Match between
them. And when you have done so, cover them over with painted papers, although
they be represented naked for the Readers better apprehension. Now to make a
Wheel or Vessel that shall move Horizontally, and have standing Fire-Lanterns
move round, and flying Rockets mount up into the Air. The forms of the
Lantern, and all the rest may well be conceived by the same figures at C, which
for the inworkes, may be also covered with painted paper, as well to hide as
grace the Aspect by daylight, before it come to be fired.

CHAP. LXXV. How to make a Rice, and a Castle, and a Trunk of Artificial
Fire-workes, of great delight.
THe frame A is like unto Ryces that skaynes of silk are usual wound, and is
a pleasing invention, being environed with Bandrolls of Rockets, with a
continued rank: But yet the half of them being turned with their heads the
contrary way, when the other half have spent themselves: Then by a secret
Match on purpose they are fired, and suddenly the motion will be made contrary
to the former, the last of the first half being spent, it giving Fire to the
first of the latter half, which immediately workketh its effect.

The Frame B is a Castle with 4 Towers and 4 Curtins, and a Caualariae or
domineering Turret in the midst: The structure thereof is with a thick planke
or two, joined well together of the bigness of the plane or foundation of the
bottom of the Castle, making a great hole in the midst into, with the top of
the Perch, which bears all the Frame is to enter. The Towers are to be turned
of good and strong Timber, about which a number of auger holes, and gutters,
are to be made to put to Breakers and Pettards, and to carry Traynes between,
to fire the Work in order, in the midst of each Tower a slow Match is first
fired aloft, or an earthen pype filld with sure and slow receipt, one Tower
receiving fire from another until all be spent. The Curtins also giving
several rounds of Cane Cannons, which being well Armed and loaded, will yield
a good report: there may be placed Runners that shall fire each other, and
pass from Tower to Tower, and Flyers, whose Rods may be let down through the
Plankes, the Roofes of the Towers shall have Turrets arched, and Vanes upon
them, with flagge and flagge-staffe.

The figures C and D is formed as Cilinder Granado made of turned Timber, as
big as you will with a hollow Concaue Cillinder in the midst from end to end:
That a Match or slow receipt may orderly fire the Rockets and Cannons entered
into the hole. And if you would issue a quantity of Flyers aloft, at once to
spread and fly every way, place them declining somewhat that way you would have
each fly when fire shall be given: So shall you with a small care and
handinesse give great variety of content to the spectators to your
commendations.

various fireworks Tract. 3. cap. 19. et 20. ct 2 i. ct 25.


various fireworks Tract. 3. Cap. 28.


Tract. 3. Cap. 30.




CHAP. LXXVII. How to make flying Dragons and Rockets that will run upon a
Line and return again, and of Nocturnall Combats in Fire-workes.
THe burning flying Draggon is somewhat busy in the contriuing Structure and
Compositions thereof, and he must be his Arts-Master that can perform the same
well: Although perfection be not required therein, we will show the easiest
manner of Framing and Arming them, and putting them in practice, furnishing
each of them with one or two Main Rocket of a pound or two of Receipt for that
grandeur as aforesaid, according to the way and weight thereof, which must
passethrough the bore threof, having a sparkling starry flaming Receipt to
burn in the Draggons mouth, that being fired when the vent at the Tail is
fired may make the Draggon seem to breath Fire forwards, and void Fire
backwards also: The body thereof being all over furnished with ordetly Tyres of
Breakers that at last shall break and consume all the body thereof, which
being framed with Ribs of dry light wood, or Whale bone, or Crooked Lane
Plates, and covered either with Paper or Muscouie Glass, colored like to a
Draggon, may so represent that creature in shape: these are to have either a
void Cane, or else certain swiules for a line, freely to enter into that
ballasted, it may almost equipoyzedly hang, and be yare to runnevpon a line.
Now at great Tryumphes two of these Draggons may be made to move oppositely
unto the midst of the line, whereas a Globe with Sun, Moon, Staries, and
Clouds, may appear lively represented, as in the 24 Figure at g is showed. The
line may be made either of Iron or Brass Wyre, or of Whipcord, anointed with
Soap, or such like incombustible matter. These Draggons and Globes may be
framed with Arches and Circles of thinn Latten, fastened with small lines,
until the Body thereof be framed to your mind. And then set up her wings as
she were flying, somewhat shaking with small Rackets in them. Also in the same
Figure is a double Rocket, coined with a vacant Cane, they are placed ones head
to the others vent, to the end that when the first has carried the other to the
end of the line, the other may take fire, and return to the place where it
first began his Motion. Also it will be a pleasant spectacle to behold to see
two men issue forth at contry places, armed with small Trunks or Staves, and
Targets furnished with Artificial Fireworkes, which putting themselves amongst
the People, shall Combat together in Fire. The Targets being of Plankes, may
spyrally have Fires of Breakers and Rockets: And the Trunkes and Staves
furnished with Cane Armed, Rockets and Pettards, no bigger then a quill, and
Armed loaded Nutshell: Or in stead of Staves or Trunkes, they may have wooden
dulled Swords or Curtlaces, furnished with Fireworkes, which will be a pleasant
fight.

CHAP. LXXVIII. How Artificial Fireballs and Grenades are to be formed and
loaded with their mixtures.
FIreballs and Grenades, are upon all occasions very offensive to the Enemy,
to vex and trouble them in their Army, or besieged in their Hods, or Houses,
Tents, or Trenches, Bulwarks, and Defenses. They may be made round many
ways, according to their Calibre resolved. First, take strong Canuas, and cut
out 2 Circles greater, or more in dyamitre then the Calibre, and having turned
in the edges of their Peripheries, sow them strongly with Needle and Third
round about, only leaving a little hole, until you have thereby loaded the
Receipt, ramming it in very hard, and working it Globally: Or else cutting the
Canuas into 8 quarters, as appears at P in the 27 Figure a, or into 4
quarters, with the Compasses as Footballs, with cross quarters: Otherwise some
cut them into 12 panes, as the Globes are cauted in their covering papers, but
by their too many seames they become tedious, and subject often to open. If you
mean to shoot them out of a Mortar or other Piece, you must have a respect
unto the bore of the Chase, that lopded, and armed, and coated, it may near
fill the Concaue Cilli^der. And if you intend to make Balls to stick, and Fire
commonly Hedgehogges, you having slight filled your Ball unto a Mark, must
take two cross sharp barbed poynted, hardened, or steeled Irons, that must be
put in to the Ball, to appear through on each side, as at 4 therein is
represented: Or loading it with Cannon Chambers and Shot as at C. These may be
prymed and fired before they be put in to the Piece. The Figure A represents
invention of a Lantern, or case that with a pryming Pype, firing a quick
Receipt at a time lunted, will break and blow up, and tear all near it
fired, yea though it were shot or buried in earth or wall.

The Balls that break made either of hollow metal glass or clay, baked, and
nealed, and loaded with quick Receipts and pype, to pryme with slow receipt
for time, are either single or double to break, are commonly called Grenades.
But Fire-pots and Balls to throw out of a man's hand, or with a Bascula may be
made of Potters Clay baked with Ears, unto which lighted Matches be fastened,
and throwing them, to light upon any hard material, when they break, the
Matches lighten the powder, and dispierce the pieces (or Pistoll-shot contrived
about them) as at B may be seen. Their mixtures may be of Powder, Petre,
Sulpher, and Salarmoniak, of each 1 l, and 40 z. of Campher pounded, and
serced, and mixed well together with molten Pitch, Linseed oil, or oil of
Petre, prove it first by burning: if it be too slow, add more powder; and if
too quick, more Oil or Rozen. The Balls and Pypes A A and I I, show how to
make double Balls to light a Champion with one, and when it is thought the
force past, it breaks and teareth all near it: At B and Z the making and
loadings are represented.

explosive arrows to be fired by bow or crossbow Tract. 3. Cap. 23.


a multi-barreled cannon and a "pyked trunk gunne" Tract. 1. Cap. 23.


CHAP. LXXIX. How to conuoy or direct Fire into a place assigned, or upon the
Enemy in an Assault.
BEing desirous to fire any Ship, Barque, House, Barn, or other building
combustible, the Crosbowe, the Slurbowe, with his Rack or Gafle to bend it,
represented in the 25 Figure at a, charged with a Fire Arrow fitted therefore,
with a Mixture proper thereunto, by the Barbes on the Arrow heads, it will hang
where it strikes, and by the vents made of purpose, it will fire whatsoever
combustible matter shall be near it, especially Sails, dry Timbers, or Pitch
and Tarred places: the effect of this Instrument was well experimented at the
Siege of Ostend and elsewhere, taking great effect. The like may be done with
a long Bow, but that the Arrow must be longer, as may appear at A. The Trunk
B will be necessary for defense of a Breach, or to keep a narrow passage, or
in giving an Assault, or entering a Ship to keep all the Defendants before, or
in the night suddenly to set upon Foot or Horse, or in an Onslaught. To the
same effect is the Pocket or Bag C filled with fitting Mixtures, whereof we
spoke in the last Chapter for resisting the Enemy, assaulting, by fensing or
displaying it about on all sides. The Garland D being filled and coated with
one of the said Mixtures, will do much damage unto whatsoever it lights upon
being combustible. The Arrows, Darts, and Bags are to be prymed by Vents,
and Armed with Marling, and coated with the Roch fire before mentioned.

But if the Enemy be approached to the foot of the wall, and yet covert, in
that case, use the Instrument traced at T and S in the 27 Figure a, which is a
block of square or round Timber, pierced and loaded with quick Powder, and on
the sides round about it having holes bored to the Concaue, either to receive
Pistoll-shot or 3 square Irons poynted, that being let down by 2 Ropes from
the top of the Wall or Parapet, may by a Snap-hance or Match drawn through a
Train or Channel of dry powder. Fire the loading within, which by the bores
will give direction to the Shot, to do the Enemies mischief, when other
devises cannot be used to repulse them.

CHAP. LXXX. Of the Pyked Trunk Gunne, and quadruple Barrell-Peeces.
THese latter Pieces represented in the 25 figure at ^, are to be accounted
amongst the number of Bastard Pieces, but are of a new and serviceable
invention, not only for their lightness, but also for the great slaughter of the
Enemy they will make being duly used. The first of them is 4, 5, or 6 Pieces
joined together, lying like Organ-Pypes placed upon a broad Carriage, taking
fire all at once by means of a Gutter or Pype, that conuayeth the trayn^ of
priming powder, from one touchhole to the next, and all the rest: these are of
the proportion of legitimate Culuerings, being 27 Calibres-in length of their
Chase, and double fortified, being 1 and a half in thickness at the Calibre
of the Bore in Metal, each carrying 1 l. of Iron cast shot, with ^ of powder,
or else 1 l. and a half of Lead shot, with as much in weight of fine powder:
Or they may be loaded with pease leaden or spelter round shot, which will
pierce an Armor of proof 12 score yards off at least, being put in a bag or
Cartrouch for each Piece. And some few of these will send to the Enemy a far
off a continual vley, or shewre of shot, they are neat and light, for sour
of them will not much exceed 2000 l. weight, and to keep a Passage, or defend
a Breach, they are of excellent use.

The second Piece is a Trunk Gunne for fashion, like a Fowler, but close
breeched, and is discharged with any charge: in the Carriage thereof behind
there is a thick Elm Planke Musket proof, with Loopes to the end: their
Conducts may be safely covert from Muskets before them: Their wheels need not
be gross, and the shaft is with cross pinnes. Behind in the midst of the
Carriage to drive it forward by men's force, in the midst thereof, is a Barrel,
like the figure, filled with inextinguished fire, and loaded with Cane,
Chamber, with Musket or Caliuer shot, and fine corn powder, and guarded at
the Mouth with two Iron or steeled Pykes, and on each side of the Carriage four
long ones fastened, some few of which will exceedingly gall a troop of Horse
Charging, and are easily moved; for 2 men with their Muskets are only
needful, and for their use, and the structures of them the figure will
sufficiently explane* for their receipt, it may be any sure one with Roch Petre
to flame, and scales of Iron to sparkle which unto Horse by reason of the
continual casting out of Fire, and Flame, and Musket shot, or smaller, will
exceedingly affright and gall Horse-Troope, which let it suffice.

A Table of Proportions for old Receipts.
For Fire-Pikes 2 Pound weight a piece for one dozen.
Powder 10 pound.
Peter Roch 2 pound and a half.
Peter Meald 2 lb. and a half.
Sulpher 1 lb. and a half.
Rossen 1 lb and 3 quarters.
Turpentine half a lb.
Linseca-Oyle half a lb.
Some. tot. 19 lb. 4 oz.
For Coating and Arming.
Sulpher 3 lb.
Turpentine a quarter of a lb.
Thread 1 lb. and a half.
Some. tot. 4 lb. 12 oz.
For 2 dozen of Balls, each one lb 3 quarters Dry work.
Powder 24 lb.
Sulpher 1 lb. and a half.
Rozen 1 lb and a half.
Peter Roch 3 lb. and a half.
Peter meald 1 lb. and a half.
Some. tot. 32 lb.
For Coating and Arming.
Pitch 2 lb. and 3 quarters.
Rozen 3 lb.
Sulpher 3 lb. 3 quarters.
Tallow half a lb.
Marlin 2 lb. and a quarter.
Canuas 3 quarters of a yeard.
Some. tot. 10. lb. and a quarter.
For 2 dozen of Balls wet work of 2 lb. a piece.
Powder 24 lb.
Peter Roch 8 lb.
Peter meald 6 lb.
Pitch 1 lb.
Rosen Roch 1 lb.
Turpentine 4 lb and a quarter.
Linseed-oyle half a lb.
Trayne-oyle half a lb.
Some. tot. 45 lb. and a quarter.
For Coating and Arming.
Pitch 7 lb.
Rozen 1 lb.
Sulpher 4 lb.
Canuas 1 yeard and a half.
Small Marle 3 lb.
Some. tot. 15 lb. and a half.
For Arrows 2 dozen each 1 lb.
Powder 12 lb.
Sulpher 3 quarters of a lb.
Rozen 3 quarters of a lb.
Roch Peter half a lb.
Peter meald 3 quarters of a lb.
Some. tot. 15 lb. 3 quarters.
For Coating.
Sulpher 5 lb.
Peter Roch 2 lb.
Peter meal 1 lb.
1 Yeard of Canuas 1 lb.
and Marlynes. 1 lb.
Some. tot. 9. lb.
For 1 Dozen of Pots, each one lb. and a quarter.
Corn Powder 1 lb. and a half.
Ser Powder 9 lb.
Sulpher 3 lb.
Peter Roch 1 lb. and a half.
Some. tot. 15. lb.
For Capping.
Canuas 1 yeard.
O^^m^ a quarter of a lb.
Sulpher 3 quarters of a lb.
Packthred 1 oz.
Some. tot. 1 lb. 9 oz.
For Hoopes.
Ser Powder 2 lb.
Roch Peter 3 oz.
Petre meald 2 oz.
Rozen a quarter of a lb.
Sulpher a quarter of a lb.
Turpeutine 1 oz.
Linseed-oyle 1 oz.
Trane-oyle 1 oz.
For Coating.
Pitch 3 quarters of a lb.
Rozen a quarter of a lb.
Sulpher 1 lb.
Tallow 2 oz.
The Authors Len-voy.
SInce now my Book thou art so far gone on,
Abroad on Gods name, and be better known:
But had there been now but one quarter done,
That, nor the rest, should never have seen the Sun:
To friends be free, open them, thy Treasures store,
But carping Scoffers let them have no more
But Scraps, for that is enough and good for such
As poison all they see, foul all they touch:
And on Mechanic scapes forge Arts detraction,
Ere they will wink or mend, which is the faultier Action?
The Errats made, they will not, did I intend it
For such as not commend, nor can come mend it,
Not I, and so I end it.

