engraved title page royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
DIEV ET MON DROIT

SPECVLVM BRITANNIAE.

The first part

An historical, and chorographicall description of Middlesex. Wherein are also
alphabeticallie set down, the names of the cities, towns, parishes hamletes,
howses of name etc. With. direction speedily to find any place desired in the
map and the distance between place and place Without compasses.

CVM PRIVILEGIO

BY THE TRAVAIL AND VIEW OF John Norden Anno 1593



TO THE HIGH, AND MOST MIGHTY EMPRES, ELIZABETH, BY THE DIVINE PROVIDENCE,
QVEENE OF ENGLAND, FRANCE, AND IRELAND, POWERFVL PROTECTOR OF THE FAITH, AND
VNDOVTED RELIGION OF THE MESSIAH, THE MOST COMFORTABLE NVRSING MOTHER OF THE
ISRAEL OF GOD, IN THE BRITISH ISLES.

HER HIGHNESS LOYAL SVBIECT JOHN NORDEN, IN ALL HVMILITIE, CONSECRATETH HIS
SPECVLVM BRITANNIAE.

royal blazon or coat of arms E R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE SEMPER EADEM

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR WILLIAM CECILL KNIGHT, LORD BVRGHLEY, Lordhigh
Treasurer of England, and of her Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel.
Having by your Honorable mean (my good Lord) obtained, at the hands of my
sacred SOVEREIGNE, gracious pass, and privilege, for mine intended labors,
the description of famous ENGLAND. I cannot but, in duty, render unto your
Honor, condign thanks, and withal diligence, and dutiful endeavor, proceed
therein: hoping, that although (in regard of my long sickness and other
impediments) this beginning carry not so absolute perfection, as in your
wisdom may be required: yet may I enjoy your patient directions, and gracious
assistance, I shall effect the residue more fully to answer Honorable
expectation.

Your Honors in all duty, IO. NORDEN

TO THE CONSIDERATION OF THE HONORABLE, WISE, AND LEARNED.
ALthough I cannot but confess that I am the vnwoorthiest of many in this
land, (and especially in these days of surpassing knowledge) to undertake
(after other far more deserving) so commendable a labor: which requires
art, industry, learning, countenance, and charge, wherewith I am not so
fully furnished as some other. Yet it may please you (in favor) to accept of
my willingness, and bear with my wants: And the rather for that it has been
held heretofore an excuse (in courtesy) Velle been, though in this age (more
ripe in experience) is expected, Optime perficere: which neither, altogether
escapes without emulation: I, as overcome with a desire to take pains to
profit my Country, rest undoubtful, that the wise, and learned, will not
only tolerate, but in favor accept this simple beginning.

The fruits of my travel tend not alone to my self in private, but to the
public ease of many. In lieu whereof, my hope and desire is, that he that can
reprove, will friendly reform what he finds justly faulty. So shall my
proceedings grow to more perfection: and I by all endeavor will seek to
accomplish what may answer discret affections.

Nihil vbique placet. IO. NORDEN.

Aduertisements touching the use of this labor.
IT is to be noted, that for your ease I have in the list of the Map of the
Shire, set down certain deuisions, letters, and figures: the deuisions are in
steed of a scale of the miles, the lesser co^taining one, the greater two
miles. The letters and figures serve for the present finding of any place
desired in the Map, which places are found in the Alphabet with the letter and
figure that direct to the place desired. A matter of so great facility as
needs no example.

He that desires to know the distance between places in the Map without
compasses, the use of the crossing lines, which serve for a universal scale
through the Map, answers his desire.

Whereas in the collection of the Alphabeticall table, there are here and
there dispersed houses of Nobility and Gentry. I crave favorable
consideration, though I have not so narrowly acquired their interestes, as that
may assure me, that they be all the true ownoures in fee, of the places which
they are resident in, which thing to observe; as it does not merely appertain
to my purpose, So were it a matter intricate, and the more, for that
information (often uncertain) must be of necessity, the chiefest guide
therein. Such therefore as I conceive most doubtful for want of certain
certificat, I have noted with two stars thus, **.

Also in this commencement of my travails, I have observed certain funeral
monuments with the arms (if any thereon rest undefaced) which if it may be
favorably conceived, I shall with more diligence observe the like hereafter,
whereby may be preserved in perpetual memory, that which time may deface, and
swallow up in oblivion. Also by this observation, many may be certified of the
places where their ancestors and allies are interred, and by the coats find
out their unknown kindred.

Negotium ex negotio seritur. JOHN NORDEN.

Io. Nordenivale, ad primam partem sui SPECVLI BRITANNIAE.
VAde liber Speculi caput es, tua me^bra sequentur,
ELISABETHA potens, arxque patrona tua est.
Quid si in te domin umque tuum ruet inuidus audax?
Tu dominusque tuus, tutus inermis eris.
Ito for as, valeasque liber, te forte sagaces
Incultum voluant: caetera culta forent,
Ibis in orb gerens, quamuis tua fata libelle,
Ardua principio, spes meliora canit.
ELISABETHA valens, altissima, maxima, firma,
Auxilium, quando, sceua procella venit.
Haec tibi conductum, non te pericula tangunt,
Digna patrona illa est, spesque, salusque tua.
The Saxon Alphabet.
A b c d E f g H i k l M n o p q r S s t u X x y

a A b b c c d d e e f f g g h h i i k k l l m m n n o o p p q q r r S S s s t
t u u w w X X x x y y

AE AE ae ae Th TH th th th th and and that that

A BRIEF DECLARATION OF THE TITLES, INHABITANTS, DIVISIONS, AND SCITVATION OF
ENGLAND or BRITANNIA mayor: a necessary introduction to our Speculum Britanniae.
NOtwithstanding it rests uncertain, how, when, and by whom, this our
BRITANNIA was first peopled, yet to satisfy such as expect the judgments, and
opinions of some ancient writers concerning the same: Berosus in Chald. ant.
Annius in Beros. Caesar. Com.
I think it not impertinent to site the affirmation of Some suspect that the
history of Berosus, was but counterfeit, falsely fathered upon hu name, and
therefore held of no great authority.
Berosus, who says that Samothes called also Mesech, brother to Gomer and
Tuball, called also Dis, the sixth son of Iaphet, the son of Noah, came into
this land about 252. years after the flood: who called it Samothea, 3593.
years past: in which name it continued until Albion, the son of Neptune,
(who descended of Cham) entered the same, and changed the name of Samothea into
ALBION. This Albion reigned about 562. Ringman. in des Europae.
years after the flood: in the year of the worlds creation 2219. 3340. years
since. Pliny calls it ALVION. Ptolomey (...).

Strabo Munster, and others, Munst. Cosm.
will have it ALBION ab albis rupibus, of the white sea clifes, which are in
the south coast of the land:

Some others will have it come of the Greek word Olbion, Olbion. Cowp. in
Dict.
which signifies felix happy, in regard of their happiness belike that first
atchiued it. So does Strabo call Albania, Strabo lib. 4.
wherein he places the people Caucasiae: felicem habitatu regionem, a happy
country to dwell in. So is Gothia in the country language ierra bona, a good
country. Some will have it ALBION of Albina Dioclesians daughter, which has
no probability. Caxton.


It continued in the name of ALBION 608. years, until Brytus or Brutus
Julius, arrival, who conquered the same about the year of the worlds
creation 2828. 2734. Brutes arrival. Galf. Monum. Bale Cent. 1.
This Brute changed the name of ALBION into BRYTANE, and the people Albionds
into Britans; or after some BRVTAYNE of the same Brute ^y, being turned into v.

Some will have it BRITANNIA of Brytona a nymph of Greece: Britanniae.
others rather hold that it should take that name of a separation, as M.
Twinus in Com.
Twine in his Commentaries, who says, Britannia is so called, for that it is
Locus diuorsio separatus ab eo cui adhaeserat: a place severed from another
whereunto it was annexed: and the more to fortify his reason, he coniectureth
that this Britannia (now an apparent Island) was sometime Peninsula annexed
unto the maine of France; which no doubt is true, but not since the general
inundation, (by probability) whereby infinite channels were eaten in the earth,
with the rage of so violent a flood, and consequently many Islands dispersed as
we see in the main Ocean, and middle earth seas: for surely if it had been
Peninsula, or Istmus since the flood, Pliny.
Pliny who lived near 1500. years before M. Twyne would have as well
mentioned such a conjunction, as that part of the sea which runs between
England and Calleys, which he calls Mare Gessoriacum, Mare Gessoriacu^.
and which Ptolomey calls Oceanus Britannicus. But it seems that M. Twyne
stands upon the opinion of Antonius Volscus a Poet, who dreameth of a passage
five miles in breadth between England and France: from whom also Seruius
Honoratus seems to say, Seruius Honoratus.
that BRITANNIA was Olim iuncta continenti, our Brytaine was joined to the
maine continent: which secrets pass our apprehension.

Sir Thomas Eliot will have Britannia to be Pritania: Humfrey Lloyd also
seems to say it should be Prid-caine which signifies beautiful or white of
color, S. Th. Eliot. Humf. Lloyde.
though the c be omitted for more easier pronunciation, which makes it
Pridaine.

Again, some will have it come of Brith a british word, which signifies
painted, which conjecture I take to come of Caesar's words, where he says,
Caesar Com. lib. 4.
Omnes Britanni glasto se inficiunt, all the Brytons besmere themselves, and
stain their bodies with oade: of which word Brith and tania a Greek word
which signifies Regnum a kingdom, it is supposed to be aptly called
Brithtania, the country or kingdom of the Brithtons or depainted people.

Goropius Becanus seems to hold another opinion, that it should be Bridania,
Goropius Becanus. M. Camden.
whereof M. Camden makes construction, that Bri in Bridania should be free, and
so to make it Fredania, or Free-denmarke.

Thus is our Britannia forced to sustain sundry titles under one truth, The
several titles of Brytaine.
as Brytannia, Pritania, Prid-caine or Pridayne, Brithtania, Brutania,
Bridania, and such like: according to as many sundry men's conceits. But were
not Brute so generally rejected in these our days, I could very easily be
drawn to assure me that it might be most truly Brutania of Brute the supposed
conqueror, and that Greek word tania a kingdom, though Brute were no
Greek, yet might he fitly conioyne this word tania unto his name Brute, and
so conclude it Brutania, Brutania.
Bruti regnum, the kingdom of Brute, u being now turned into i, as in other
words, Pessumus is now written Pessimus, so are many other Latin words.
Many of late years reject the history of Brute, among others, an Abbot
sometime of S. Albons, John of Wheathamsted, Io. de Wheathampst.
who wrote about the year of Christ, 1443. who says plainly, that Totus
processus de Bruto illo, est Poeticus, potius quam historicus: The whole matter
of that Brute is Poetical, (fabulous) rather than a true history. This author
living of late days affoordeth reproof of the most ancient. But what
antiquity has left, and we by tradition have received, Ipse sciolus, dare
not absolutely deny, upon any man's bare conjecture.

It is at this day called ENGLAND, Anglorum terra, England.
the land of Angles, or Englishmen, the Latins call it Anglia, and the French
Angle terre.

The Angli or Englishmen inhabited part of Germany whom (as I take it)
Ptolomey calls Angili: Angili. Ptolomey.
and places them between the Casuari, and the Chemae, near the river
Visurgis, now Weser, in that country which is now Westphalia: Caes. Com.
who (as Caesar says) Praedae ac belli inferendi causa, ex Belgis transierunt,
came out of Belgia the low Countries, to seek relief, and to war with the
Britons: inuading most especially that part of the land which borders upon
the south east, or German sea, as Kent, Sussex, and Essex. Beda.
The Angles or Englishmen inhabited Cambridgeshire, Isle of Elie, Norffolke and
Suffolk; all which was called Eastanglia, and the people East Angles, The
Saxons which came also with the Angles were dispersed and seated in other
quarters of the land, as by the division, and Heptarchie it will appear.

The Saxons and Angles drove the Britons into Wales, Aun. dom. 620.
and Cornwall, and other places of refuge. And Egbert king of the west Saxons
became sole Monarch of the whole land, and called the same England, of that
part of Germany whereof he was, wherein the Angili or Angles inhabited.

Some other will have it England of Anglia, Anglia.
the name of a Queen, sometime of this Country. But what, whence, or when she
was they seem not to report.

Others will have it Anglia, scytuate as it were in Angulo in a corner, or
newke by it self. Which opinion is not altogether to be rejected, for that
Julius Solinus says, Julius Solinus.
that the sea coast of Gallia had been the end of the world, but that the
Isle of Britain, (which stands alone as it were in an angle) for the
largenes thereof, deserves the name of another world, being separated from
the rest of the earth, as Virgil says, Penitus toto diuisos orb Britannos.
Josephus in the oration of king Agrippa says, Ios. lib. 2. cap. 26, bell. Iud.
The Romans sought another world, beyond the great Ocean, sending their
hosts into Britayne. And Aegispus says, The Romans by strength gat another
world beyond the Ocean in Britain far from them. Allgis. lib. 2. de excid.
Hier. Ant. Volsc.
Antonius Volscus affirms, Peloponesum to be Vltimum orbem, Britanniam vero
alterum orbem: So that it may be said it stands in Angulo, yet it seems
not thereof to be called Anglia.

This our famous BRITANNIA (of it self another world) for the firtilitie and
pleasantnes thereof, has been sought for, conquered, and inhabited of many
sundry nations.

The first as some dream were Aborigines such people as the earth it self,
Aborigines.
without human propagation brought forth: who belike follow Ovid, Ovid
metamor.
who says, Caetera diuersis tellus animalia formis. sponte suo peperit, etc.
But to say that men should spring of the earth since Adam disagreeth from the
word of God, whereby we learn that God created them male and female, to
increase and multiply, and to govern all other earthly creatures. There were a
people in Italy, Aborigines in Italy.
and they of very great antiquity: yet not begotten or sprung of the earth,
but because they were Vagi, and Sine laribus, wanderers upon the earth without
house or home, void of all civility; and because they were unknown from whom
they descended, they were accounted Nullorum filii, the children of no fathers,
as the Romans who blush not to say they are Deorum filii, descended of the
Gods. Such might be in this land at the Britons ariuall; Giants in England.
Britons. Ann. mundi 2855 Deuteronomy. 1.28.
which might be counted Indigenae, Vagi, uncivil, and therefore called
Giants, as were the Anakimes mentioned in the Scripture.

But to leave these unknown people; Yuand. Do. Tolos. lib. de genel. Iapheth.
Yuandus writes that our Britannia was inhabited first by Babylonians: But it
is not to be denied that the Britons, (whereof soever so named) were the first
that under civil regiment possessed this land. Romans.
After them the Romans, whom Julius Caesar first conducted hither: and after
him Claudius the Emperor came into this land with his Romans about Anno
Christi 40. Julius Caesar. Claudius imperat. Pictes, Scots. Beede. M. Camden.
Scots afflict the Britons.
After the Romans came the Pictes and Scots out of Scythia (as Beede
reports.) But M. Camden takes them to be Britons which fled into the north
parts for fear of the Romans. The Scots possessing the North parts of
Britain, Albania now Scotland, greatly afflicted the Britons, of the South,
who craved aid of the Saxons, and they with the Angles ariuing: in process of
time subdued the Britons, and possessed the land, driving the Britons into
Cambria now Wales, into Cornwall and other places of refuge, Ann. Dom. 1012.
Danes. William duke of Normandy with his Normans.
about the year of Christ, 430. Then came the Danes, and distressed the Saxons
near 200. years. Lastly the Normans under the conduct of William duke of
Normandy, who under a pretended title subjected this land unto himself about
the year of Christ 1066. by which conquest he is entitled WILLIAM the
CONQVEROR, who enforced all the inhabitants to swear unto him fealty, faith,
and true allegeaunce, and being quietly settled in his kingdom, caused this
land to be described and exactly surueied about the 15. year of his reign,
William Conqueror caused England to be described and surueied. Doomes day book.
wherein he caused to be observed, how many hides of land, there were in his
kingdom, the value of every hide, and who possessed it: which survey rests
in record at Westminster in a book called Doomes day, or the role of
Winchester. The usual account of land at this day in England is by acres,
yardes, carewes, hydes, knights fees, cantreds, baronies and counties.

Xiphilinus divides this land into Britanniam Superiorem, Ex Dione. England
how divided.
and Inferiorem: Ptolomey into Magnam and Paruam: Sextus Rufus, who lived under
the Emperor Valentinian, has Britanniam primam, and secundam flauiam, and
Maximam Caesariensem, another part added called Valentia, remembered by
Marcellinus. It was also divided into Loegria, Cambria, and Albania, called
also Caledonia, which are now England, Wales, and Scotland.

It was divided into seven kingdoms by the Saxons, after, into Provinces,
Shires or Counties, all which were enhabited by people of several names after
Ptolomey, as may appear.

7. kingdoms of the SAXONS.
1. Northanhymbraric. regnu^ Northumbroru^, the kingdom of the Northumbers.
Northumberland and part of SCOTLAND. Brigantes
Westmerland. Cumberland. The Bish. of Durham or Dunelm. Yorkshire. Lancashire.

2. Myrcnaric regnum Merciorum, the kingdom of Mercia. Cornaui.
Cheshire. Shropshire. Staffordshire. Warwickeshire. Worcestershire.
Coritani.
Nottinghamshire. Lincolneshire. Northamptonshire. Rutlandshire.
Leicestershire. Derbishire.
Dobuni.
Glocestershire. Oxfordshire.
Catticuchlani.
Buckinghamshire. Bedfordshire. Part of Hartfordshire.
Herefordshire, part of the Silures. Huntingdonshire part of the ICENI.
3. estseaxnaric, occiduorum Saxonum regnum, the kingdom of West Saxons.
Atrebatii.
Berkeshire. Hamshire.
Belgae.
Wiltshire. Somersetshire.
Durotriges.
Dorsetshire.
Dammonii.
Devonshire. Cornwall.

4. Suthscaxnaric, Australiu^ Saxonum regnum the kingdom of South Saxons.
Regni.
Sussex. Surrey.

5. Centric regnum Cantiorum the kingdom of Kent. Cantii.
Kent.

6. Eastanglaric regnu^ orientaliu^ Angloru^, the kingdom of East Angles. Icen^.
Norfolk. Suffolk. Cambridgeshire. The I Will of Elie.

7. Eastscaxnaric regnum orien. Saxonum the kingdom of East Saxons. Trinobantes.
Essex. Middlesex, and part of HERTFORDSHIRE,


These seven kingdoms contain 39. shires, which are divided into 22.
Bushoprikes in England.
Bishoprics, namely, Caunterbury, Rochester, London, Chichester, Winchester,
Salisburie, Exceter, Bath and Wels, Worcester, Gloucester, Heveforde, Couentrie
and Lichfield, Lincoln, Elie, Norwich, Oxford, Peterborrough, and Bristow, in
number 18. under the Archb. of Caunterburie Primate of England. York, Durham,
Chester, and Carelyle, 4. under the Archbishop of York.

Cambria Wales.
CAMBRIA, WALES, inhabited by the Britea las or WALLI BRITANNI, is divided into
13. shires.
Ordouices.
Flintshire. Denbigh. Mongomery. Merioneth. Caernaruan.
Silures.
Radnor. Brecknocke. Glamorgan. Monmouth.
Dimaetae.
Caermarthen. Penbroke. Gardigan.
Mona.
Anglesey.


The former Heptarchie, or Country of 7. kingdoms, The Heptarchie now a
Monarchy.
now a Monarchy, most happily governed by the sole Empres thereof most
renowned Queen ELIZABETH, was divided into the former provinces, Aluredus
divided the shires of England. H. 8. of Wales.
shieres or counties by ALVREDVS the fourth son of ADOLPHVS, and brother to
ETHELDRED, who reigned in the year of Christ 872. But Cambria, now Wales, was
distinguished by shieres, by the famous king HENRY the eight: all which shieres
were divided into certain parts, which the Saxons called thrihingaf which we
call leths or lathes, Shires divided in thrihingaf or leths. Ridings.
these deuisions are yet in Kent: and Yorkshire at this day is divided into
Rydings, which may be also called thrihingaf, all which parts contain in them
certain Hundreds, in every of which was contained ten teothunges, of us called
Tithings, containing ten men, Hundreds.
whereof it was called also tienmentale, a college or corporation of ten men,
Teothongs.
and the officer of this Tithing the Saxons called teothungmon, of us
(especially in the West) a Tythingman: in some places, as in Northamptonshire,
a Therdbarrow: Therdbarrowes.
so that ten of these Tithings yielded a 100. men, whereof the English call it
at this day a Hundred (though the number of the men be now uncertain) the
Latins call it Centuria. In steed of Tithings, (especially beyond Trent,)
they have Wape^taches, Centuriae. Wapentaches.
which the Saxons called eontacs, which took that name of the view of weapons,
and where the Tenaunts delivered up their weapons unto their Lords. Boresealdor.
The officers of these petite deuisions or Tythings, are in Kent called
BorHesealdors, the chiefest or eldest pledges as M. M. Lamberde.
Lamberde most expert in the Saxon tongue affirms.

The word Shire comes of the Saxon Verb Scyran, Shire why so called.
which signifies to cut or to divide. Every of these Shires in time past was
governed per Comitem, whom we now call Earl, who was quasi praefectus regius,
the kings Lieuetenant, who of the Saxons was called Eorle, of whom every Shire
is called a County, a Comite, Counties why so called.
of the Earl. But of later time there have been, and are yearly chosen in
every shire, an officer by the Prince, which in Latin is called Vicecomes, as
one appointed vice Comitis in the Earls steed, The Sheriff what and whence so
called.
we call him the Sheriff, the Saxons called him Scyregerefa, the Reeue of the
Shire, for gerefa is an officer to collect rents, and other revenues, and to
execute things under, and for another, the Germans at this day have
Burgreeue of the Saxons ortgerefa, Many sorts of Reeues.
the Mayor of a Town, Margreeues, whom we call Waterbaylifes: a Landsgreue whom
we call the Reeue of a Manor.

Pliny, Gildas Solinus, and Martianus do agree, that this our BRITANNIA MAYOR
is 800. The length of Brytaine and the breadth.
miles in length, including also Scotland: and Martianus says, it is in breadth
300. miles: in which dimensuration they seem to account after the Italian
measure, which is less then our miles: The supposed breadth and length of
England by statute measure.
yet were England measured according to the true and exact mensuration provided
and allowed by statute, it would appear to be of greater length and breadth,
then these authors account. An Italian mile contains mill passus maiores, or
Geometricos a 1000. A mile A furlong. A perch.
paces of five foot to the pace, which is also a fadome. And our English mile
is eight furlongs, every furlong 40. pearches, every perch 16. foot, and
half, which makes 5280. foot, which is more then the Italian mile by 56.
paces. But our ordinary mile exceeds both the Italia^, and true English mile.

The form of this land is Trianguler, The fertility of England.
much like Cicilia an Island in the middle earth sea. The center of this land
which I take to be about Titburie castle, has latitude about 52. degrees, 50.
minutes, and longitude 21. degrees 28. minutes. This our BRITANNIA for the
fertility and fruitfulnes thereof, matcheth the best, yielding such general
commodities, and in such abundance, that it may be said: Albion emporiis,
tellus opulenta marinis,
fertilis omnigenum rerum:
Another says, Anglia non segetes effundit diuite vena?
Pascua non pingui fertilitate tument?
In gremio fluuiis riui miscentur amaenis,
Gurgitibus rapidis and vada pura meant.
Nobilis antiquo nutat cum robore quercus.
Et nemorum grato spirat odore viror.
Visceribus mediis errant pretiosa metalla,
Diuitiae crescunt intus, opesque foris.


It were too long to recite the particular fruits, and rare commodities it
yields, all which are known to the world, as the Cosmographicall Poet
says, Omnia sunt famatotu^ vulgata per orbem.

And above all other blessings it has greatest cause to rejoice in the free
use of the true knowledge of Christ, England most happy in the use of the
Gospel.
wherein it triumphs above all other kingdoms or Countries of the world,
most happily therein maintained, (under the mighty king of kings, celestial
lehouah) by the sacred hand of the most imperial Queen ELIZABETH, the fruits
of whose happy reign who can enjoy, and not unfeignedly commend her safety,
and happy continuance, unto that all sufficient God, who beyond expectation,
in favor, commended her to us? in regard whereof our England may be truly
called OLBION a happy Country.

SPECVLVM BRITANIAE.
The first part, containing a brief Historical and Chorographicall
description of MYDDLESEX.
Having thus briefly touched the general, I purpose to proceed to the
particular descriptions of this out BRITANIA: wherein (imitating the artificial
Painter, who begins always at the head, the principal part of the body:)
I thought it not unfit to begin my Speculum Britaniae with MYDDLESEX, The
causes why Myddlesex is the first part of Speculum Britaniae.
which above all other Shyres is graced, with that chief and head City
LONDON: which as an adamant draws unto it all the other parts of the land,
and above the rest is most usually ferquented with her Majesty's most regal
presence.

Of MIDDLESEX, and of the Trinobantes.
IT is called MIDDLESEX of the middle Saxons, Myddlesex why socalled.
for that they inhabited that part between the East Saxons, West Saxons, and
South Saxons.

MIDDLESEX was a percel of that country wherein (as Caesar says) dwelled the
Trinobantes whom Ptolomy calls Trinoantes, omitting the b. Myddlesex part of
the Trinobantes. Caesar Com. Ptolomey. Galfr. Moun.
some call them Trinouantes, putting u. for b.

The chief City of these Trinobantes, was then called Trinobantum,
Colchester. London the City of the East Saxons and Trinobantes. Corn. Tacitus.
of some held to be Colchester of some London; Beede says that London was the
chief City of the East Saxons, If so, then of necessity, of the Middle
saxons, and consequently of the Trinobantes; yet Tacitus says, that London was
not Trinobantum; nor the people Trinobantes, near London, and his reason is
that if the Trinobantes had been near London, they would not have suffered
Suetonius to have passed thither; which argument Humfrey Lloyde seems to
confute in this manner. Humf. Lloyd.
The Trinobantes (says he) being Suetonius enemies, would have as well
prevented him in the inner part of the country, as near London, considering
that Suetonius came from the Isle of Anglesey, marching through the whole
country. So that in what place soever the Trinobantes were resident, they
could not be ignorant of his passage.

Polydore Virgile, Pollidore.
a man of no great credit, as touching his history, affirms from some other
that Trinobantum was Northampton, and the Northamptonshire men Trinobantes,
Northampton Tranton.
and his reason is for that the country men in their language called that
place Tranton, which has no such semblable consonance with Trinobantum that
he, or any other, should seek Trinobantum in that part of Britain.

Master Camden, M. Camden.
a singular scrutator of antiquities seems to hold (but not absolutely) that
the Trinobantes should be so called, of the brytish word Trenant, which
signifies towns scytuate in the valley. Caesar.
But Caesar says, they inhabited Prope firmissimam earum regionum ciuitatem,
near the most strongest City in those countries; which as I take was London.

The lymites and principal bounds of MYDDLESEX.
MYDDELSEX is situate in the south east part of this land, bordering upon
the north, upon Hertfordshire. On the east upon Essex, Lea river.
divided thence by the river Lea, and the Mere ditch: on the south upon
Surrey, having the most famous river Thamise, the bound and lymite between
them, and on the West upon Buckingham shire, Colne river and the Shire ditch,
being the division between them.

That famous river which is commonly of us called Temes, is of Ptolemey called
Iamesa aestuarium, Ptolemey. Plin. lib. 2. cap. 3. Iamesa aestuariu^.
of Pliny Iamesais; of Caesar Tamesis. It seems to be compact of two names
of rivers, Tame and Ise, which two rivers meet near Wallingford in
Barkeshire, where after a familier manner, they lovingly conioyne and unite
them selves, and after a kind of Matrimonial order, of two they become one
Tame, Thamise of Tame and Ise.
and Ise, becomes Thamise holding that name, growing more and more famous,
until with great pride it saluteth the maine sea. The like conjunction of
names is in Palestina or the holy land, Jordan of Ior and Dan.
where that famous river Iardan, is compact of Iar, which rises near Mara,
toward Damascus, and Dan which rises near, and takes name of the City of
Dan, both rising out of the mountains Lybanon, and meet at Caesaria Philippi,
where, these two Iar, and Dan, become Iardan, as the Poet says. Hunt. Cosm.
Iordannisque sacer geminis e fontibus ortus.

The river of Thamise ebbeth and flows as far as Richmond, sometime
farther, some time not so far, near sixty miles from the maine sea.

It has been observed and affirmed by some that this river does not easily
increase with land waters. Sit experientia Iudex.

The river Lea, of the Saxons lig a is a proper river, heretofore, Lea river
nauigable in time past
(as some affirm) nauigable, and that shipping passed through the same, from
the Thamise to Hartford. Barges have of late passed that way, to Ware, which
was granted by Act of Parliament about the eighteen year of the reign of
Queen ELIZABETH, but for some causes of late discontinued. This river for the
most part deuideth MIDDLESEX and Eastsex. But there is a ditch called the Mere
ditch, about two miles and a half in length, Mere ditch.
between Waltham abbey, and Higham hill bridge which is cut into the mershes
and passes through the same, for a distinction of the bounds between the two
shires.

Colne river is the division between MIDDLESEX and Buckingham shire, But that a
ditch called the Shire ditch, Colne river. Shire ditch.
which seems to have been forced into MIDDLESEX, about two miles in length,
north of Colnebroke.

Through this river as some affirm, have passed shipping to Saint Albans.
Minime credendum.

The nature of the soil and fertility of MYDDLESEX.
MYDDLESEX is a small Shire, The length and circuit of Middlesex.
in length not twenty miles, in circuit (as it were by the ring) not about
70. miles, yet for the fertility thereof, it may compare with any other shire:
for the soil is excellent, fat and fertile and full of profit: it yields
corn and grain, not only in abundance, Middlesex sertile.
but most excellent good wheat, especially about Heston, which place may be
called Granarium tritici regalis, Heston.
for the singularity of the corn. The vain of this especial corn seems
to extend from Heston to Harrow on the hill, between which as in the mid way,
is Periuale, more truly Pureuale. Piriuale or pureuale.
In which vale is also Northold, Southold, Norcote, Gerneford, Hayes, etc. And
it seems to extend to Pynner, though with some alteration of the soil. It
may be noted also how nature has exalted Harrow on the hill, Harrow on the
hill.
which seems to make ostentation of it situation in the Pureuale, from
whence, toward the time of Harvest, a man may behold the fields round about,
so sweetly to address themselves, to the siocle, and since, with such
comfortable abundance, of all kind of grain, that the husbandman which
waits for the fruits of his labors, cannot but clap his hands, for joy, to
see this vale, so to laugh and sing.

Yet does not this so fruitful soil yield comfort, to the wayfairing man in
the wintertime, by reason of the claiesh nature of soil: which after it has
rasted the Autumn showers, waxes both dyrtie and deep: But unto the country
swain it is as a sweet and pleasant garden, in regard of his hope of future
profit, for The deep, and dirtie loathsome soil,
Yields golden gain, to painful toil.
The industrious and painful husbandman will refuse a palace, to droyle in
these golden puddles.

This part of MYDDDLESEX may for fertility compare with Tandeane, Tandeane.
in the west part of Somersetshire. But that Tandeane, far surpasses it for
sundry fruits, and commodities, which this country might also yield, were
it to the like employed: but it seems they only covet to maintain their
ancient course of life, and observe the husbandry of their fathers, without
adding, any thing to their greater profit.

This shire is plentifully stored, Middlesex bewtified with fair buildinges.
and as it seems beautified, with many fair, and comely buildinges,
especially of the Merchants of London, who have planted their houses of
recreation not in the meanest places: which also they have cunningly contrived,
curiously beautified, with diverse devises, neatly decked with rare invencions,
environed with Orchards of sundry delicate fruits, gardens with delectable
walks, arbers, allees, and great variety of pleasing dainties: all which seem
to be beautiful ornaments unto this country. But who so turns his eyes unto
the stately and most princely palaces of Queen ELIZABETH in many parts of
this shire most sweetly situate, garnished with most princely delights,
beholding also the houses of Nobility, may say as Vadian of a fruitful and
pleasant place in Egypt, Facies istius terre pulcherima est, Vad Cosns.
etc. The face or superficies of this country, is most beautiful, the fields
fresh and green, the valleys delightful to behold, the towns villages and
stately buildings enterlaced with the pleasant woods are glorious to be seen.

Of the Ecclesiastical and Civil government of this Shire.
FOr matter concerning Church government, and order, this shire is under the
jurisdiction of the bishop of London; which See sometime did belong to the
Archbishop, until S. Augustines time, who was called the Apostle of England,
he turned the Archbishops See from London to Caunterburie, where it continues.

And whereas all other shires within this land, for the most part, have a
particular officer yearly elected by her Majesty, called a Sheryfe
Shere-Reeue, Sheriff of Middlesex.
or Reeue of the shire: this shire by charter made by King JOHN, Quinto Iulii
anno regni sui 1. is in that point, under the high officer of the Citic of
London the MAYOR: who by force of the same charter, yearly constituteth a
Sheriff, within the same: who also is accountable unto the said City for all
matters appertaining to his said office.

Every Alderman that has been Mayor of London is Justice of peace in
MYDDLESEX.

Hundreds within MYDDLESEX distinguished with these letters in the MAP.
A Edmondton or Edelmeton. Hundreds.
B Goare. C Oselston. D Istlewoorth. E Elthorne. F Spelthorne.
Market Towns in MYDDLESEX.
Westminster. Market towes.
Brentforde. Stanes, Vxbridge, Harrow on the hill, was a market town in the
time of Doct. Bordes perigrination as appears by a little Treatise of his in
writing.
It is to be noted that this shire has in it many Chapels of ease, that have
the name of parish Churches: as Vxbridge a market town belongs to great
Hellingdon: Brentford a market town belongs to great Eling, many mo there
are within this shire which to express would be too tedious.

Houses of Law. THere are two houses of Judges and Searieants, called
Seriantes Innes, the one in Fleestreere the other in Chauncerie Lane.
Innes of Court are four. Inner Temple. Middle Temple. Lyncolnes Inn. Greyes
Inn.
Innes of the Chauncery 8. Clyffords Inn. Dauydes or Thauyes Inn. Furniuals
Inn. Barnards Inn. Staple Inn. Clements Inn. New Inn. Lions Inn.

Battles in MYDLESEX noted thus
Near Barnet in Enfielde Chase, Polid vir. Tho. Walls.
was a battle fought between EDWARD the fourth, and the favorites of HENRY
the sixth. Near Brentforde was a conflict between Edmond Ironside and the
Danes. Tho. Walls.

Parkes of her Majesty's within MYDDLESEX. THis Shire is plentifully furnished
with her MAJESTY'S Parkes, for prinecly delights, exceeding all the kingdom of
France, wherein are not so many, (if the discourse be true which is made of a
debate between an Heraulde of England, and a Herald of France) where it is
affirmed that there are in all that Region but two Parkes: In MYDDLESEX are ten
of her MAJESTY'S.
S. James Park. Hyde Park. Marybone Park. Hanwoorth Park. Kenton Park.
Hampton Court Parkes, two. Enfielde Parkes, two. Twickenham Park, disperked.
Hills of name.
Harrow hill. Hamsted hill. Highgate hill.
map of Middlesex MYDDLESEX
Caracters distinguishing the difference of places
^ Market towns ^ Parishes ^ Hamletes or villages ^ Howses and Palaces of Quen
Eli ^ Howses of Nobility Howses of Knights, Gent. etc. ^ Castles and fortes ^
Monasteries or religious howses ^ Bushops Seas ^ Hospitales Places where
battles have been ^ Decade places ^ Lodges in forestes chases etc. ^ Mylles.


Ioannes Norden Angl. descripsit 1593


Old and ancient highwaies now unaccustomed.
THe old and ancient high way to high Bernet, Port Poole.
from Porte-Poole, now Grayes Inn, as also from Clerkenwell, was through a
lane, on the east of Pancras Church, called Longwich lane. from thence, leaving
Highgate on the west, it passed through Tallingdone lane and so to Crouch end,
Tallingdon lane.
and thence through a Park called Harnsey great park, to Muswell hill, to
Coanie hatch, Fryarne Barnet, and so to Whetstone, which is now the common high
way to high Bernet. This ancient high way, was refused of wayfaring men, and
carriers, by reason of the deepenes and dirtie passage in the winter season: In
regard whereof it was agreed between the Bishop of London, and the Country,
that a new way should be laid forth through the said Bishops parks,
beginning at Highgate hill, to lead (as now is accustomed) directly to
Whestone: for which new way all carts, carriers, packmen, and such like
travelers, yield a certain tole unto the Bishop of London, Highgate tole.
which is fermed (as is said at this day) at 40. li. per annum. and for that
purpose, was the gate erected on the hill, that through the same all traueilers
should pass, and be the more aptly staide for the same tole.

Another ancient high way which did lead to Edgworth, and so to Saint
Albons, was over Hampsted heath, and thence to, and through an old lane, called
Hendon want, near Hendon, Hendon want.
through which it passed to Edgwoorth, whence it passed over Brokeley hills,
through part of Hertfordshire, by Radnet, Colnestreete, Saint Stephens, and
Saint Mychaels, leaving Saint Albons, half a mile in the east. This way of
some is held to be Watlingstreete, one of the four high ways, which Bellinus
caused to be made, and leads (as some affirm) through Watlingstreete in
London.

An Alphabet of the Cities, Towns, Hamlets, Villages, and howses of name
within MIDDELSEX, contained in the Map of the Shire, with necessary
annotations upon sundry of them. The use of which Alphabet is set down, before
to the Reader.
A.
Ascot. E. 8. Augustines lodge. H. 18. a lodge in Enfield chase. Acton east F.
14. Acton west G. 14. Baron of Burford buried.
The Barron of Burford died there, as he passed from London, and is covered
with a Marble stone, in the year of Christ 1527. Ashford I. 8. So called of
the brook or ford through which men pass at that place. Astleham I. 8.
B.
Breakespeare. E. 4. The house of George Ashby Esquire. * Brockenborrowes E. 6.
There dwells Gomersale Gentleman. Brownswell E. 4. a Well in the high way
from Highgate to Bernet, the water whereof is a sweet refreshment often times
to weried and thirsty poor travelers, of late reedified by some well
disposed. Burye street B. 20. a Hamlet of Enfield. Bulls lodge A. 18. a lodge
of Enfield chase. Belsise E. 16. the house of William Wade Esquire, one of the
clerks of her Majesty's preuy Counsel. Brentstreete E. 14. So called of the
river or brook called Brent through which it runs. Brent river.


It is to be noted that at this (...) street many years since dwelled the
Brents, among who^ (...) John Brent who died Anno Christi 1467. whose
ancestors before him had there, their residence,

This John lies buried at Hendon under a marble stone, with his picture and
the time of his discease: whereby it seems that the street took name of the
Brentes, and the brook of the street, and hereof also does,

Brentforde H. 12. commonly called new Brentford or Brayneforde, or Market
Brentforde take name, for that Brent brook passes through the town. This
Brentford is a market town, yet no parish, but belongs unto great Elinge. It
is called new Brentford as I take it of the late purchase of the market which
was in the time of king Edward the sixth: Brentford why so called.
for the chapel argues it of greater antiquity then the other, which has the
name of old Brentford. of the river Brent, which runs on the west part of
the town, and between it and Syon enters into the Thames.

This word Brent among the country people, of those parts, signifies,
Brent, the word how the people take the signification.
and is taken for all brooks, rivers, and currants of water, therefore is
every small brook called the Brent among them.

Near unto this place Edmond Ironside, Edm. Ironsides conflict with the Danes.
assaulted the Danes which he had driven from the siedge of London, and there
put many of them to the sword, and put the residue to flight, about anno
Christi 1016. the place appears by this carracter.

Brentford old H. 14. a little thorowfare. * Bushoppes hall F. 22. the house of
the Lord Wentwoorth. Blackwall, G. 22. near which is a harbor in the Thamis
for shipping, Blackwall why so called.
the place takes name of the blackenes or darkness of the water banks, or
wall at that place. Brompton G. 16. ** Boston G. 12. where dwells Iherome
Halley Esquire. Bedfont west H. 6. Bedfont east H. 8. * Brumfielde C. 20. the
house of Skeuington Esquire.
C.
Cannons D. 10. Crowch end D. 18. * Coanie Hatch D. 18. there dwells Trot
Gentleman. Clapton E. 22. ** Canburie or Cannonburie E. 20. a house in the
hands of Atee Gentleman. It was builded by prior Bolton prior of Saint
Bartholmewes in Smithfield in the time of H. 8. Childs hill E. 16. Chalcot or
Chalkhill E. 16. Cowley F. 6. Chelsey G. 18. Chelsey why so called.
So called of the nature of the place whose strond is like the chesel which the
sea casts up of sand and pebble stones. Thereof called Cheselsey breefely
Chelsey, as is Chelsey in Sussex, north of Chychester, which stands upon the
very edge of the sea, as this * Chelsey on the Thamise. Queen ELIZABETH has
there a fair house: The Lord Dacres has there a fair house. Cheswicke H. 14.
belonging to a prebend of Paul's now in the hands of Doctor Goodman Deane of
Westminster, where he has a fair house, whereunto (in the time of any common
plague or sickness) as also to take the air, he withdraws the scholars of
the college of Westminster. * Colham, Collumbe, or Colneham, G. 6. a house of
the Earl of Darbies, which takes name Colneham of the scytuation thereof so
near a branch of Colne stream. Colbrooke or Colnebroke G. 6. one little part
whereof is in MIDDLESEX as far as the bridge, the rest is Buckingham shire.
Craneford H. 8. It is so called of the forde or brook called by the name of
Crane. Carleton or Charleton K. 8.
D.
Dalis D. 14. Dryuers hill D. 14. * Durance B. 20. the house of Robert Wroth
Esquire. ** Durhams B. 14. Lacye Gentleman.
a house in the hands of Daleson hill E. 14. Dormans well F. 10. the house of
the Lo. Dacres. * Drayton G. 6. a house late the Lord Pagets.
E.
Edgeworth D. 12. consisting of one maine street, the west side whereof
belongs to little Stanmer called also Whitchurch the other part has a church
in it self. orth
orth in the Saxon tongue signifies a place fruitful, and fit in regard of
the apt scytuation thereof to be inhabited this orth standing on the very edge
of the shire may be called Edgeworth, of some but corruptly Edgeware. East end
D. 16. a member of Finchley. Edmondton or Edelmeton C. 20. In the Church
whereof, are sundry ancient monuments, the most of them defaced, among which is
a tomb of gray Marble circumscribed thus.

Hic iacent corpora Thomae Carleton cuiusda^ dni. Thomas Careleton buried.
istius villae qui obiit 21. die Februar: Anno Do. 1447. and Elizabethae vxo
ris eius. filiae Adae Francis militis per quam habuit dominium, whose arms are
these.

blazon or coat of arms blazon or coat of arms

There is also one John Kirketon Esquire, John Kirketen buried.
whose monument is of white free stone erected in the south wall of the Church,
and seems as ancient as the Church it self, but there is no record of the
time of his decease, his arms are these.

blazon or coat of arms

There is a fable of one Peter Fabell that lies in the same Church also, Peter
Fabell buried.
who is said to have beguiled the Deuell by policy for money, But the Deuell
is deceit it self, and hardly deceived.

There lies one whose name I cannot truly learn, his toumbe is very
ancient, covered with a fair Marble stone, his body figured in brass, armed
with a gorget of Mayle, under his feet a Lion cowchaunt, at his helm, there
seems to be figured a Lion with his two fore paws raised toward his mouth,
his hinder parts as it were mantuled, it is defaced and much obscured, his
wife is there also intombed, on the monument are these arms blazon or coat of
arms blazon or coat of arms blazon or coat of arms

Edmonton street C. 20. Enfield B. 20. sometime parcel of the land of the
Duke of Lancaster now Queen Elizabeth's. The chase called Enfield chase takes
name of this place.

It is called of some Enfen and so recorded, Enfen.
in regard of the Fenny scytuation of some part thereof upon the marshes or
meerish ground, which (though now brought to be good meadow and profitable
pasture) it has been in time past fenney: thereof taking the name Enfen or
Infen, now Enfielde. But these fenney grounds are now on the east, as the chase
in the west, profitable neighbors not only unto Enfield, but to many other
poor inhabitants near.

Elinge called great Elinge G. 12. Thomas frowike buried.
In the Church whereof lies buried Thomas Frowike sometime owner of
Gunnersbury or Gunwelsbury an ancient seat within the same parish. blazon or
coat of arms Eueney H. 6. a ferme house belonging unto the Deane and chapter of
Westminster. Enfielde house A. 20. Queen ELIZABETH'S, builded by an Earl of
Worcester.
F.
Frith called also New hall D. 14. sometime the Therlebyes now Richard Weeks
Gentleman, Lord Frowike.
by purchase. Finchley D. 16. In the Church whereof lies the Lord Frowyke,
Lord chief Justice of England, in the time of H. 6. under a Marble toombe
where has been his picture and arms in brass, with circumscription about
the toombe, but now defaced, his arms only remaining in the chauncell window
in this manner.

blazon or coat of arms

There is also another Marble stone having the picture of a woman whereon is
inscribed thus.

Joan la feme Thomas de Frowicke gist icy, and le dit Thomas Pense de giser
aueque luy. There lies also buried under a Marble stone in the Chauncell of
the Church one Thomas Aldenham Esquire sometime Surgeon to King Henry the
sixth who died in Anno 1431. Thomas Aldeuham.
his arms.

blazon or coat of arms

Fryarne Barnet C. 18. ** Fryarne Manor C. 18. Sir John Popham knight Lord
chief Justice of England, sometime makes there his abode. ** The Fold B. 16.
the house of Fulham H. 16. of the Saxons called fullonham (which as Master
Camden takes it) signifies Volucrum domus, the habitacle of birds or the
place of fowls, fullon and fuglas in the Saxon tongue do signify fowls, and
Ham or Hame as much as home in our tongue. So that fullon Ham or fuglasHame is
as much to say, as the home house or habitacle of foul. It may be also taken
for Volucrum amnis the river of foul, for Ham also in many places signifies
Amnis a river. But it is most probable it should be of land foul which
usually haunt groves, and clusters of trees, whereof in this place it see-meth
has been plenty.

* There is an ancient house belonging to the sea of London moated about.
Henry the third often lay at this place.

The host of the pagan Danes in the time of K. Alphred did winter there, in
the year of Christ 879. the woods, Galfr. mon. Greg. inpast.
and apt scytuation of the place, for passage by water (no doubt) moved them
thereunto.

Feltham I. 8. Feltham hill I. 8.
G.
Gernford F. 10. a very fertile place of corn standing in the pure vale.
Gunnersbury or Gunwelsbury G. 14. an ancient house well scytuate for wood,
water, and air sometime the Frowickes now belonging to the ** Corbets, S.
Gyles in the field F. 18. erected by Matylde Queen to H. 1. Rex. E. 3.
for leprous people about Anno 1117.
H.
* Harefield E. 4. There Sir Edmond Anderson knight, Lord chief Justice of the
common plecs, has a fair house standing on the edge of the hill. The river
Colne passing near the same through the pleasant meddowes and sweet pastures
yielding both delight, and profit. Highwood hill D. 12. a member of little
Stanmer. Hendon D. 14. of the Saxous Highendune, Hendon why so called.
which signifies Highwood of the plenty of wood there growing on the hills. *
Hendon house D. 14. the manor house of Hendon, Sir Edward Herbertes knight:
where now is often resident John Fortescue Esquire, one of her Majesty's most
honorable privy Counsel, when he takes the air in the Country. Hollicke,
D. 18. there are noted the foundations of ancient buildings, affirmed by some
aged men that it has been a Town. but oftentimes, Immensa cani spirant
mendatia folles. Harnsey, of some Hornesey, D. 20. a parish standing near the
Bishop of Londons woods or parkes, which of that place heretofore had and yet
retain the names of Harnsey parkes.

The Church of Harnsey is supposed to be built with the stones that came from
the ruins of Lodghill.

Hadley, B. 16. Holway the lower, E. 20. Holway the upper, E. 18. Highgate, E.
18. a hill over which is a passage, Highgate why so called.
and at the top of the same hill is a gare through which all manner passengers
have their way; the place takes the name of the highgate on the hill, which
gate was erected at the alteration of the way, which (as is said before) was
on the east of Highgate.

When the way was turned over the said hill to lead through the park of the
Bishop of London as now it does, there was in regard thereof, A tole at
Highgate.
a tole raised upon such as possed that way with carriage. And for that no
passenger should escape, without paieng tole by reason of the widenes of the
way, this gate was raised, through which of necessity all traueilers pass.
This tole is now fermed of the said Bishop at forty pound per annum.

At this place is a free schole builded of brick by sir ROGER CHOLMELEY
knight, A free school.
sometime Lord chief Justice of England about the year of Christ 1564. The
pencion of the master is uncertain: there is no usher, and the schole is in
the disposition of six governors or feffees.

Where now the schole stands, An heremitage at Highgate. A Cawsway between
Highgate and Islington.
was an Hermytage, and the Hermyte caused to be made the causway between
Highgate and Islyngton, and the gravel was had from the top of Highgate hill,
where now is a standing ponde of water.

There is adioining unto the schole a chapple for the ease of that part of the
country, for that they are within the parish of Pancras which is distant
thence near two miles.

Upon this hill is most pleasant dwelling, yet not so pleasant as healthful,
for the expert inhabitants there, report that diverse that have been long
visited with sickness, not cureable by Physic, have in short time, repaired
their health by that sweet salutarie air.

** At this place CORNEWALLEYES esquire, Cornwallis esquire
has a very fair house from which he may with great delight behold the
stately City of London, Westminster, Greenewich, the famous river of Thamyse,
and the country toward the south very far.

Hamsted, E. 16. stands under a hill, in a very healthful air, having
London in very pleasant perspect. In the church thereof lies M. ARMIGELL
WAADE esquire, in a fair monument of Alablaster raised in the wall of the
Chauncell with this inscription.

Memoriae sacrum.
Optimis and charissimis parentibus ARMIGELLO WAADO e Brigantium antiqua
familia oriundo, Armigell Waad Esquire buried.
HEN. 8. and EDW. 6. Regum Secretori concilio ab epistolis, and in agro
Middlesexiano Eirenarchae qui in maximarum artium disciplinis, prudentiaque
civilly instructissimus, plurimarum linguarum callentissimus, legationibus
honoratissimis perfunctus, and inter Britannos Indiarum Americarum explorator
primus. Ex duabus coniugibus, blazon or coat of arms ALICIA PATENIA, and ANNA
MERBVRIA, 20. liberos progenuis, tandemque post vitam, honorifice and
pientissime defunctam anno virginei partus 1568. Mensis Iunii die 20. in domino
placide obdormuit. Et ALICIAE PATENIAE quae patri 17. libros peperit, e quibus
duo mares and tres femellae, adhuc in viuis existunt quae vita castissime and
temperatissime transacta, anno salutis humanae 1568. animam pientissimam
Redemptori reddidit.

GVLIELMVS WAADVS filius maeximus natu, and here is, Idemque diuae ELIZABETHE
Reginae concilio Secretori ab epistolis, hoc monument um posuit.

Harrow on the hill, E. 10. standing very high, in a place both pleasant and
ftuitefull, and though loftely mounted on a hill, yet in reasonable sort
watered.

In the i will of the church lies buried M. WILLIAM GERARD Esquire and DORATHEY
his wife, William Gerrard esquire buried.
who dwelled at Flamberds, so called of the Flamberdes, who sometime possessed
the same, this WILLIAM GERARD deceased the 15. Apr. 1583. Flamberds.
and they both lie in a tomb of white marble, raised in the wall.

blazon or coat of arms

Diverse of the Flamberds of Flamberdes a hamlet in Harrow, are interred in the
same Church, among whom is one JOHN FLAMERDS, on whose tomb is thus inscribed.

Ion me do marmore numinis ordine flam tumulatur.

Barde quoque verbere stigis e funere hic tueatur. John Lions his gift to the
erection of a free school.


There is a school in Harow, as yet not a free school, but intented to be,
and one JOHN LIONS Gent has given (after his decease to be employed toward
the erection and founding thereof,) 300. pound, and 30. pound per ann. for a
Master, and 10. pound for an Usher (as it is informed) a president good to be
followed of the able.

Hellingdon great F. 6. Lord Strange burted.


In the church lies buried under a tomb covered with a marbell stone, the
Lord STRANGE whose tomb is circu^scribed thus, Sub hac tumba iacet nobilis
JOHANNES dominue le STRANGE, Dominus de Knocking, Mahun, Wasset, Warnell, and
Lacy, and Dominus de Colham, vna cum pictura IAGNETTAE quondam vxoris suae:
quae quidem IAGNETTA, fuit soror ELIZABETHAE Reginae Angliae quondam vxoris
Regis EDW. 4. qui quidem JOHANNES obiit. 15. die Octobris Anno regni Regis EDW.
4.17. quam quidem tumbam IOHANNA Domina le STRANGE filia and here is predicti
IOHANNIS and IAGNETTAE, vnacu^ pictura IOHANNAE ex sumptibus suis propriis,
fieri fecit 1509.

* Hayes, F. 8. belongs to the Lord Dacres, and Lord North. Harlestone
green, F. 14. Hockesdone, F. 20. belonging to a Prebend of Paul's. Hackeney or
Hacquenye, F. 22. In the church thereof lies buried, Christopher Vrswyke
buried.
one CHRISTOPHER VRSWYKE whose chief monument is erected of white free stone,
in the north side of the Chauncell, yet was he interred in the middle of the
same Chauncell, covered with a fair graie Marble stone; pictured in brass
with this subscription.

blazon or coat of arms

CHRISTOPHERVS VRSVVICVS Regis HENRICI septimi Elimosinarius; vir sua aetate
clarus, summantibus atque intimatibus charus, Ad exteros reges vndecies pro
patria legatus, Deconatum Eborum Archidiaconatu^ Richmondiae, Deconatu^
Windesoriae habitos, viuens reliquit, Episcopatum Norwicensem oblatu^
recusauit: Magnos honores, tota vita spreuit: snugali vita contentus, hic
viuere, hic mori maluit: plenus annis obijt, ab omnibus desideratus, funeris
pompam, etiam testamento vetuit: hic sepultus, carnis resurectionem, in
aduentum Christi expectat: obijt Anno Dommini 1521, 24, die Octobr. The men of
our time, who more greedelie thirst for high and great preferments, then for
the diligent execution of their callings, and feeding of Gods people; may by
this godly man's example be moved, something to mortefie their greedy
affections, and onioying only a sufficient portion, to endeavor rather the
building of the Church of God then their own glory, And in time to cast away
those things that hinder their going one, in a sincere course of life.

In the same chauncell is the coat armor, shild garter and crest of the Earl
of Northumberland. Earl of Northumberland.


In the Church in the north I Will thereof is raised a most fair and famous
monument of Marble and Alablaster, very curiously contrived, whereon lies
very neatly figured, the picture and corporal proportion, of the Lady Lucy,
daughter to the Earl of Worcester, The Lady Latymer buried.
wife unto fir John Neuell knight Lord Latymer, who deceased at his manor of
Snape in Yorkshire. The said Lady deceased Anno 1582. having issue, four
daughters, Katherine the eldest married Henry Earl of Northumberland, who by
her had issue Henry Lord Percie, Thomas, William Charles, Richard, Allyn,
Iossalyne and George, Lady Jane, Lucy, and Elinor.

Dorathy the second daughter married sir Thomas Cecill knight, who by her had
issue William, Richard, Edward, Christopher, and Thomas, Katherine, Lucy,
Myldred, Mary, Susan, Elizabeth, Dorathy, and Frances.

Lucy the third daughter married William Cornwallys Esquire by whom she had
issue, Thomas and John, Ione, Frances, Elizabeth, and Katherine.

Elizabeth the first and youngest daughter married sir John Danuers knight, by
whom she had issue Charles and Henry, Anne, Lucy, Elienor, and Mary.

One Heron Esqire founded Hacquenie Church, and lies buried in the north I Will,
Heron Esquire buried.
in a toombe of white free stone his arms appear engraven in stone in every
pillar of the same Church thus,

blazon or coat of arms

In the same Church in the south I Will was buried Roe knight, Roe Alderman buried.
sometime Mayor of London, his monument is of marble and Alablaster.

Hamersmith, G. 16. Hamersmith hospital, G. 16. Harlington, G. 8.
Harmeswoorth, or Harmundeswoorth, G. 6. Heston, H. 10. a most fertyle place of
wheat blazon or coat of arms yet not so much to be commended for the
quantity, as for the quality, for the wheat is most pure, accounted the
purest in many shires. And therefore Queen ELIZABETH has the most part of
her provision from that place for manchet for her Highness own diet, as is
reported. Hounslow or Hunslow, H. 10. belongs unto two parishes, the north
side of the street to Heston, and the south to Istlewoorth: But there is a
chapel of ease, which belonged unto the fryerie there dissolved, which friery
after the dissolutio^ was by exchange given to the Lord Windsore, by King Henry
the eight. Afterward it came to Auditor Roan by purchase who has bestowed
the same chapel, and 40. shillings per annum upon the inhabitants to the
end and upon condition that they by farther contribution shall maintain a
minister there.

* There is a fair house erected where the friery was: belonging to the heirs
of Auditor Roan.

In the chapel was buried sir George Windsore knight in a monument of white
free stone, raised with four pillars. Sir George Windsore buried.
In that place lie many other of the Windsores.

Hanworth I. 10. a house of her Majesty's. Hampton Court K. 12. an honor of
Queen ELIZABETHES, a most regal palace stately raised of brick after a most
princely form, by Cardinal WOVLSEY most pleasantly, scytuate upon delightsome
Thamise. Queen ELIZABETH has of late caused a very bewtifull fountain, A
fountain erected at Hampton Court.
there to be erected, in the second court which graceth the palace, and
serves to great and necessary use, the fountain was finished in Anno 1590.
not without great charge.

It is called Hampton Court of the parish of Hampton, Hampton Court why so
called.
which stands not far thence: and Court comes of Curia, which was the place
where the Senate of Rome assembled, and was taken for the Senate it self, And
thereof grows our word Court, which signifies all assemblies either for
trial of controversies, or consulting of matters of state, as also it is
amongst us used as an adiunct, to diverse houses in this land of greatest
antiquity, as the most ancient house in a manor called the Court house. But
this word Court is hereunto added neither in regard of antiquity, nor head
house of a manor. But in regard of the Majesty and Princely beauty thereof,
fit for none but for a King or Queen, whose residence in any place draws a
Princely assembly, which is called the Court, for where her Majesty is resident
there is the Court of state. This word Court is a most common adiunct to places
of antiquity in Artetia, as also in diverse provinces of France and else where
as Haplincourt, in Normandy, Bonlayn Court in Champaigne, and Hallcourt near
Amyens.

There are belonging to this princely palace two parkes, Parkes at Hampton
Court.
the one of Dear, the other of hares, both environed with walls of brick, the
south side of the Dear park, excepted, which is paled and environed with the
Thamise.

Hampton K. 12. Hanuerde or Hanforde K. 8.
I.
Ickenham E. 6. Islington or Iseldon E. 20. belonging to a prebend of Paul's.
S. Ieames G. 18. her Majesty's, a very stately house, built after a
quadranguler form, by the famous King Henry the eight.
K.
Kyckesende B. 16. Kingsland E. 20. Kentishtowne E. 18. Kylbourne or
Keelebourne, Kylbourne why so called.
E. 16. seems to take name of Keele, and bourn which signify cold water: It
is called in some records Kullebourne. In the time of H. the 1. Herbert abbot
of Westminster, by permission of Gylbert bishop of London, and by consent of
the convent, granted to 3. Maids the Hermitage there which one Gorbone
builded, with all the land of that place. Kingesburie, E. 12.
map of London LONDON
coats of arms ^^^^ers Grocers Drapers. Fishmongers Goldsmiths. Skinners.
Merchantaylors Haberdashers Salters. Ironmongers Vintners. Clothworkers




Pieter Vanden Keere fecit* 1593.
(...) one of the for^^^^ 12 Compaines (...) Lo. Mayor (...) Cite comenly (...).

a. Bushops gate street. b. Papie. c. Alballowes in the wall. d. S Taphyns. e.
Sylner sheet. f. Aldermanburye. g. Barbican. h Aldesgate street. i
Charterhowse. k Holborne Conduct. l. Chauncery lane. m. Temple bar. n.
Hobourn. o. Grayes Inn lane p. S Androwes. q. Newgate. r. S. Jones. s. S Nic
shambels. t. Cheap side. u. Bucklers bury w. Brodestreele. x. The stocks. y.
The Exchanng z. Cornehill 2. Colmanstreete. 3. Bassings hall. 4. Honnsditche.
5. Leadon hall. 6. Gracious street. 7. Heneage house. 8. Fancshurche. 9. Mark
lane. 10. Minchyn lane. 11. Paul's. 12. Easteheape. 13. Eleestreete 14. Fetier
lane. 15. S. Dunshous. 16. Themes sh treete 17. London stone. 18. Old Baylye.
19. Clerkenwell. 20. W^nchester (...) 21. Battle hriage 22. Bermodsoy street


Ioannes (...) descrips^^^



Kenton, E. 10. Knightesbridge, G. 18. Densington, G. 16. Kingstonwyke, K. 14.
It is a Hamlet near Kingstone upon Thamis, standing in MYDDLESEX, and is so
called, Wike whence derived.
for that it is a row of houses leading into Kingstone, which row of houses
in Lattine is called Vicus, in our tongue Vyke or Wyke, of the Saxons pyc.
Vadianus an excellent Geographer, Vadian Cosme.
says that Vicus in opido via est domorum seriem complexa, Vike is a way or
passage in a town being orderly compact of houses, which we also cala street.
In Rome are diverse of these streets, as Vicus affricus, Vicus ciprius, and
Vicus celeratus, Vicus sceleratus Roma. Kenton, K. 10.
L.
London, F. 20. the most famous City in all Brytaine, which Erasmus upon the
Proverb Rhodii sacrificium, says, is deducted of Lindus a city of the I Will of
Rhodes, Stephanus calls it Lyndonium, the Saxons Londenscaster, Londenbiryg
Londenyc, Ptolomey, Cornelius Tacitus, and Antonius, Londiniu, and Longidinium,
Amianus Londinum: the Welchmen Lundayne, we call it London: Ieffrey of
Monmouth, Troia nova, or Ternouantum New Troy; some call it Luddes-Towne of
Ludde the eldest son of Helie: Leland takes it to be Trenouans, new Town,
for that in the british tongue Tree signifies a town: M. Camden seems, in
some sort, to yield that it should be called London of the British word Lhwn,
which signifies a wood, or else he will have it London or Londinum of the
British word Lhong, which signifies ships or shipping, in regard that our
Thamis yields such apt access for ships even to the city.

There is great variety among writers, who first founded this City: Some will
have Brute the Trojan to be first builder of it, but Brute, and his history,
is merely rejected of many in our days. It was reedefied by Lud, in the
year of the worlds creation 5131. Bale.
who builded the walls about it, and erected Ludgate, who also changed the name
of Trenouant into Luddestowne, now London, for which alteration of Troy to
Luddestowne, Gildas. Galfrid. Monuni. ponticus Brit. hist. lib. 1.
great contention arose among the Britons, as reports Gildas and others. But
our late writers will not consent heereunto: Insomuch as this famous City
lacks the truth of it foundation, as many other famous monuments also do. But
it now reteineth the name of London, famous through the whole world. A City
of great Merchandise, populous, rich, and beautiful;

This City was burned and greatly wasted by the host of the pagan Danes, in
the time of king Alphred, Greg. in past. London burned.
as reports Gregory in his Pastorale about the year of Christ 872. London
reedefied.
This Alphred about the year 886. in the 35. year of his nativity reedefied
this City, beautifieng the same with fair buildings, and committed the
custody thereof to Alphred Earl of Mercia, Fabyan.
as the same Gregory reports.

A great part of London was again burned about the year of Christ 981. At
what time it had most buildings, from Ludgate toward Westminster, and little,
where the heart of the City now is, but buildings scattered here and there
out of form and order: So that it seemed inferior to diverse other Cities of
this land, as Lincoln, Canterbury, York and others, as by the role of
Winchester appears. But after the conquest it was reedefied, and by the
conqueror greatly increased, So that by degrees it is become a most ample and
stately City, far excelling all other in this land.

This City was (before the conquest) made by William Duke of Normandy)
governed by Portreeues, called of the Saxons portgerefas whom the Germans call
Burgreues, The government of London.
which government Richard the first altered, and appoimed two baylifes. Who in
the time of King John and by his command were discharged, for a time, by 35.
elders or heads of the City, for a contempt against the King. But they were
not long in disgrace, but through their submission and the discreet handling
of the matter by these 35. heads or elders of the City, the King not only
forgave the baylifes, but granted unto the City by his letters pattents, that
they should yearly choose unto the mselues, a Ma yor which usually is of one
of the 12. companies, mentioned in the Map of the City, and two Shirifes who
have been accustomed to take their oath upon Saint Mathewes day, nine days
before Michelmas, and upon Michelmas day to take their charge, but it is now
otherwise. The first Mayor was chosen in the tenth year of King John, The
first Mayor of Lodnon.
Anno 1209. Every May or was wont to be presented to the King wheresoever he
was in England, until Henry the thirds time, about Anno 1242. and before the
King to be sworn; after that it was referred to the Barons of the Exchequere,
and so continues to this day. Sir John Allin knight, twice Mayor of London
gave a collar of gold to be successively worn by the Mayor Anno 1544. In the
time of H. 3. also the Aldermen of the City were or deined, Alcermen of London.
who took rule of the particular wards thereof, 25. in number, and these
Aldermen were yearly changed as are the Shirifes, but now it is otherwise,
which wards and the parishes in them are these.

Tower ward.
S. Olafe. Alhallowes at Berking. S. Dunstane.
Billingsgate ward.
S. Botolph. S. George in pudding lane: S. Androw in Eastcheape. S. Margaret
Pattens. S. Mary hill.
Dowgate ward.
S. Laurance Pountney. Alhallowes the more. Alhallowes the less.
Bridgestreete ward.
S. Bennet of grace Church. S. Leonard in Eastcheape. Newfishstreete.
S. Margaret in Bridgestreete. S. Magnes in Bridgestreete.

Walbrooke ward.
S. John in Walbrooke. S. Mary B. S. Swythyn in Candlewikestreet. S. Stephen in
Walbrooke. S. Mary Woulchurch in the Poultrie. S. Sith in Bucklersbury.
Candlewikestreete ward.
S. Martyn Orgor. S. Clement. S. Michael in Crooked lane. S. Mary Abchurch.
Langburne ward.
Alhallowes Stains in Lumbarestreet. S. Gabriell. S. Dionis in Fanchurch
street. S. Edmond. S. Nicholas Acon. S. Mary Wolnoth in Lumbare street.
Algate ward.
S. Androwes Undershaft. S. Katherines by Christeschurch. S. Katherin Colman.
Port Sowkin ward.
S. Botolph without Algate.
Lymestreete ward.
S. Mary Na^^.
Bushopes gate ward.
S. Botolph at the gate. S. Alborgth. Alhallowes within S. Helines.
Cornehill ward.
S. Michaell. S. Peter.
Brodestreete ward.
S. Martyn Outwich. S. Bennet Finck. S. Bartholmew the little. S. Christopher.
S. Peter the poor. S. Alhallowes on the wall.
Colmanstreet ward.
S. Sthephen. S. Olafe in the Jury. S. Margares in Lothburie.
Cheap ward.
S. Laurence in the Jury. S. Marie Bow. Alhallowes in honey lane. S. Marie of
Colchurch. S. Myldreds in the Pultrie. S. Bennes Shorehog. S. Martyn Poniers.
S. Martyn in Iremonger lane. S. Maryes.
S. Marie or Aldermarie. S. Anceline. S. Pancras.
Queenehyth ward.
S. Mychaell. S. Mary Somerset. S. Mary Mowthaw. S. Nicholas Olafe. S. Nicholas
cold Abbey. S. Peter.
Bredstreete ward.
Alhallowes in Bredstreete. S. Myldred. S. Mathie. S. Io. Evangelist. S.
Augustine at Paul's gate. S. Margaret Moses. S. Botolph. S. Margaret in Friday
street.
Vintry ward.
S. Martyn. S. Mychaell College. S. Thomas Apostole. S. James on Garlikehyth.
Trinity in Knightriderstreete.
Beynerdeastle ward.
S. andrew. S. Bennet. S. George. S. Mary Magdelene in old fishstreete.
The ward of Farringdon infra.
S. Euan. S. Nuholas in the Fleshshambles. S. Faithes in Paul's. S. Martyn
within Ludgate. S. Mychaell at Querns. S. Fauster in Fauster lane. S. Peter at
the cross of Cheap. S. Gregory in Paul's Churchyard. S. Genyn within S.
Martin le graunde.
The ward of Farringdon extra.
S. Dunstane. S. Bride. S. Androw in Holborne. S. Pulcher without Newgate.
aldresgatestreet ward.
S. Botolph without Aldresgate. S. Anne. S. John Zachary. S. Leonard in
Fauster lane. S. Marie Staining. S. Matthew in silver street.
Bassinghall ward.
S. Mychaell.
Creplegate ward.
S. Mary Magdelene. S. Marie in Aldermanburie. S. Michaell in Hogginlane. S.
Albons in Woodstreete. S. Elsinge spittle now a parish church. S. Olafe in
Syluerstreete. S. Gyles without the gate.
Wards 25. Parishes. 113.
Other Churches there are within this City not mentioned in the wards, nor
used as parish Churches: whereof the first is Paul's, Paul's builded.
a most stately temple, builded by Ethelbert king of Kent, anno, 610. who
consecrated the same unto S. Paul. It was afterward augmented by Mauricius
bishop of London, anno 1107. Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, builded the south
cross I Will, and was there buried anno 1310. It is a Cathedral Chruch the
bishops Sea of London; sometime the archbishops Sea, but removed thence to
Caunterburie, by the means of S. Augustine, at the request of the Citizens of
Caunterbury. Paul's steeple.
In the middell of this famous temple, is a Tower most artificially raised upon
strong pillars, very admirable to be considered, for that the foundation of
the same maine Tower can not be deserned in the body of the Church, and yet
ascends in great altitude, as it were in the center of the church, not
(without curious view) to be seen, how it is supported: upon this Tower was
raised a Piramis or (as we commonly term it) as Steeple, covered with lead,
which is said to have been in altitude equal with the church in longitude,
the height thereof is recorded to be 534. foot from the ground: which stately
piramis or steeple was thrice consumed with fire: Paul's steeple burned three
times.
first in the year of Christ 1087. which was not long after newly erected:
and burned again anno 1444. after that raised and again consumed with fire,
by unknown means (the judgment of God inkindling it) in the year of Christ
1561. to the terror of the whole City: remaining as yet wihtout that stately
ornament.

There lies buried Sebba king of the east Saxons who died anno domini 633. in
a coffin of marble with cover of the same, his arms these.

blazon or coat of arms

There also lies buried Etheldred king of England, King Etheldred burted.
the son of Edgar who died anno domini 1017. in a coffin of marble with cover
of the same.

There lies also John surnamed Plantaginet in a stately monument, 10.
Plantaginet buried.
artificially raised of white free stone, whose style is thus there recorded.

Illustrissimus iacet hic, Johannes cognomento Plantaginet, Rex Castiliae, and
Legionis, Dux Lancastrie, Comes Richmondiae Lecestriae, Lincolnie and Derbiae,
locum tenens Aquitaniae, magnus Senescallus Angliae obiit anno 22. Ric. 2.
Annoque Domini 1399.

Also there was a Church at the Crotched friars now converted to other use.

A Church at Augustine friars founded by Humfrey Bohune E. of H^^tford, 1253.


A Church called Tho. of Acris near the great conduct in Cheap founded by
Thomas fitz-Theobald in the time of H. 2. who gave the same Church to the
Mercers for a piece of money, Rec. E. 3. Anno 19.
at the suite of sir Richard Gresham knight, and is now used for the Mercers
hall.

The Temple within Temple bar, The Temple.
whose founder is not certainly recorded, yet some hold it to be that which
was called Templum pacis or Concordiae, builded by Dunwallo Mulmutius, about
the year of the worlds creation 4748. and therein was buried the same
Mulmutius and also Gorbomanus and others. Galfr. Mon.
But some take the Temple of peace to be that which is now Blackwell-hall.
There are in this Temple, many very ancient monuments of famous men, shaped in
Marble armed, their legs cross, whose names are not to be gathered, by any
inscription, for that, time has worn it out. The form of this Temple, in the
west, is made circuler, loftely raised with Marble pillars, set also
circule^ly, so that it serves, the students of the house for a walk most
necessary, and that, for a multitude without disturbance of one by the other,
by reuerting. Some say it was founded by the kings templers which were in
England about the year of Christ 1185. but it seems that this Temple is
far more ancient.

There was annexed unto the Stilliarde an ancient Church called the Temple
also, and after the dissolution thereof, A temple near the Stilliarde.
it was given to the students of the Law, bearing the name of White hall, White
hall.
which belike in regard of the distance from the other houses of Law, it was at
the length neglected and forsaken, which house seems to be of the number of
the houses of Chauncery, in the time of Henry the sixth, when Master Fortescue
compiled his book of the Laws of England, wherein he affirms that there
were in, and near London, ten Innes of Chauncery, now but eight, in which
number of ten, was accounted this White hall, and the Strand Inn, which stood
within the compass of Somerset house near the Strand.

The Stilliarde (called of the Goths the Haunse) signifies a place of meeting
of the people, Stilliarde why so called.
and especially the Merchants of many Countries, and Cities: as of England,
France, Denmark, Muscouie, Brabant, Flaunders, and many other, where they
enterchanged Merchandise by the sundry priueleges and freedoms of many Kings,
Dukes, and Princes, which of late years has by little and little
discontinued. It is not against reason, to think that these ancient Temples
were erected by the Pagans wherein they offered sacrifices to their country
gods. Galfr. Mon.
For it appears by the history of Ieffery of Monmoth that while C. Alectus
Captain of the Roman host, was thus busied in his Pagan sacrifice M. Aur.
Asclepiodotus duke of Cornwall whom the Britons had elected to be their King,
came to London, and besieged, and entered it; between whom was a hard conflict
and Asclepiodotus vanquished the Romans and after beset Gallus another
Captain of the Romans who remained in the city, and overcame him, who with
his Romans being put to the sword the chief Captain Gallus was cast into a
brook, which then, and long since, ran through the City, whereof it is
supposed to be called of the ancient Britons, Walbrooke.
Nantgall of the Saxons galenbourne, and of us at this day Wallbrooke, which
runs near London stone which stone is near in the mid way between Ludd
gate and the Tower posterne gate.

There are about this City 11. Gates of name, whereof four are toward the
north, as Aldersgate supposed to be so called of the Alders which grew there,
and some hold it to take name of Aldricius the Saxon, it may be so called of
the antiquity thereof, Aldestgate in the comparatiue degree as Aldgate,
Newgate, in the positive. Creplegat, So called for that it was the house for
halt and lame, a hospital for creeples and impotent people, it has been of
late reedified by Edmond Thaa in the year of Christ 1490. Moregate so called
for that it was the passage into a moorish, merish, or watrie ground, which is
called Moore field, though now brought to be more firm, by the industry and
charge of a Mayor of London about 180. years past. Bushopes gate builded by
certain Marchantes which traueled into German belonging to the old Haunce:
But it seems by the adiunct that it should be builded by a Bushop.

There are upon the Thamis three gates, though two of them seem rather ports
or havens for shipes and boats then gates for passage, only the Bridge gate
is a thorough fare, or passage by horse and foot, but Billingsgate is a harbor
or kaye for shipping, yet has the name of a gate, for that it was erected
first like a gate, Galfr. Mon.
by Bellinus, and of him called Bellines gate, in the top whereof he caused to
be erected a Pyramid and on the top of it a vessel of stone, wherein he
appointed the ashes of his brent body to be put after his death. There is also
Dowgate or Dourgate that is Watergate

On the east is one gate called Aldegate, so called of the antiquity thereof,
as M. Camden and others suppose.

On the west are two gates Luddgate or Luddesgate, of LVDD the supposed
founder, who is said to lie interredin the Church of S. Martins within the
gate. Anno ante Christum 66.
This gate was of late years newly builded and made a most stately gate about
the year of Christ, 1586. to the great charge of the City. Galfr. Mon.
Ieffrey of Monmouth reports, that the image of CADWALLO was in brass
artificially fixed on a brazen horse, set on the top of this gate, Cadwallo
buried
in token of a victory had against the Saxom: whose body was also buried in S.
Martynes church within the gate.

There was between London and Southwarke long time passage by ferrie until
the Citizens caused a bridge of wood to be erected: Lonlon bridge.
after that, in the time of R 1 c. 2. anno 1176. they began to build a bridge
of stone, which in the time of king JOHN they most artificially finished, anno
1209. contriuing it of 20. at ches, and in the midst a draw bridge, and upon
the same bridge on either side, the houses so artificially combined, that the
whole bridge seems not only a main and fair street, but men seem to
pass under a continual roof; the bridge is in height 60. foot, in breadth
30. foot, the arches are in sunder 20. foot, there are under the north arch
of this bridge, most artificially erected certain wheels or tide miles, which
rise and fall according to the ebs and floods, and they raise the water by
pypes and counductes so high that it serves such citizens houses in all places
of London, as will bestow charge toward the conducting thereof: The buildings
upon this bridge, on either side were consumed with fire Anno 1208. Pollid.
Virg.


There is near the three Cranes, a Church called now S. Michaels, sometime
Whittingdon College founded by sir Whittingdon, sometime Mayor of London.

There was in that place which is now known by the name of Blacke-fryers, an
ancient and strong castle, which was called Palatyne, burned in the time of
WILLIAM the Conqueror: in the place of which castle are at this day erected
many fair and beautiful buildings, and here and there the ancient walls and
buildings as yet appear.

On the east part of the City, is a most famous and strong Castle, called the
Tower of London, the maine tower whereof, some suppose to be builded by JULIUS
CAESAR. It is strong and ample, well walled and trenched about, beautified with
sundry builddings, semblable to a little town.

There is in Cornehill a most famous monument, stately erected by sir thomas
Gresham knight, who named it the Burse, The Royal Exchange.
whereunto afterward Queen ELIZABETH gave the name of Royal exchange; It is
the place of the place of the public meeting of Marchaunts, as well English as
foraine, whereunto twice every day they duly resort, the form of the building
is quadrate, with walks round the main building supported with pillars of
marble, over which walks is a place for the sale of all kind of wares, richly
stored with variety of all sorts. It was builded about the year 1568.

Leadenhall near Cornhill was builded by one Sunken Air, Leaden hall.
about anno 1444. a place of provision, or store house for relief for the
poor in time of dearth.

Many things might be spoken of this famous City which would too far exceed
my purpose. The Longitude and Latitude of London.
It has latitude 52. degrees, and longitude 19. degrees 15. minutes. It is most
sweetly seituate upon the Thamis, served with all kind of necessaries most
commodioussie. The air healthful, it is populous, rich and beautiful, be it
also faithful, loving and thankful.

Lodghill D. 16. a hill or fort in Harnesey or Hornesey park, and is called
Lodghill, Lodghill sometime a fors.
for that thereon sometime stood a lodge, when the park was replenished with
Dear, but it seems by the foundation that it was rather a castle, then a
lodge, for the hill is at this day trenched with two deep ditches, now old
and ouergrowne with bushes: the rubble thereof, as brick, tile, and Cornish
slate, are in heaps yet to be seen, which ruins are of great antiquity, as
may appear by the oaks, at this day standing (above 100. years grouth,) upon
the very foundation of the building. It did belong to the bishop of London, at
which place have been dated diverse cuidences, some of which remain yet in the
bishops regestrie (as is said.)

This park has been replenished with stately timber trees in great
abundance, now with the famous fort fallen to the ground as the Poet says,
Euum cuncta rapit furtiuaque temporamutant.
Naturam, fortem, Nominaque and faciem.


** Ludraues, b. 18. a fair house scytuate in a valley near Enseylde chase,
belonging unto Lymehouse, G. 22. Lalam, I. 8. Littleton I. 8. in regard of the
quantity it may be called Linletowne. Linluon.

M.
More hall, E. 4. Mylhill, D. 14. Muswell hill, D. 18. called also Pinsenall
hill: there was a chapple sometime bearing the name of our Lady of Muswell:
where now alderman Roe has erected a proper house, the place takes name of
the Well and of the hill, Mousewell hill, for there is on the hill a spring of
fair water, which is now within the compass of the house. The Lady of Muswell.
There was sometime an image of the lady of Muswell, whereunto was a
continual resort, in the way of pylgrimage, growing as is (though as I take
it) fabulouslie reported, in regard of a great cure which was performed by this
water, upon a king of Seats, who being strangely diseased, was by some divine
intelligence, advised to take the water of a Well in England, called Muswell,
which after long scrutation, and inquisition, this Well was found and performed
the cure; absolutely to deny the cure I dare not, for that the high God has
given virtue unto waters, to heal infirmities, as may appear by the cure of
Naaman the leper, by washing himself seven times in Jordan, 2. King. 1.14.
John 5.2.
and by the poole Bethesda, which healed the next that stepped thereinto, after
the water was moved by the angel. * Mockings, called also the manor of
Mockings, D. 22. an ancient house, of the Lord Comptons, moated about.
Morehatch, A. 20. a hamlet of Enfeylde. Marybone, F. 18. Meerstreete, F. 22. a
member of Hackney.
N.
Northend, C. 16. a hamlet of Finchley. ** Newington, E. 20. there, the Earl
of Oxforde is sometime refident, in a very proper house. Neesdon, or Neusdon,
E. 14. a house sometime the Elringtons. Northolt lodge, F. 6. Northolt, F. 8.
it sounds Northwood, for hols in the Germayne tongue signifies wood. Norwood,
or Northwood, F. 8. Norcote, or Northcote, G. 8.
O.
Old forde, F. 22. a village taking name of the forde or passage at that
place, over the river Lea in time past. * Osterley, or Oysterley, G. 10. the
house now of the lady Greshams, Osterley builded.
a fair and stately building of brick, erected by sir Thomas Gresham knight,
Citizen and Merchant aduenturer of London, and finished about anno 1577. It
stands in a park by him also impaled, well wooded, and garnished with many
fair ponds, which affoorded not only fish, and foul, as swanes, and other
water foul: but also great use for milles, as paper milles, oil milles, and
corn milles, all which are now decayed (a corn mill excepted.) In the same
park was a very fair Heronrie, for the increase and preservation whereof,
sundry allurements were devised and set up fallen all to ruin.
P.
Prnner, E. 8. * Pymmes, C. 20. a proper little house of the right Honorable
Lord Burghley, Lord high Treasurer of England. Ponder sen, B. 20. a hamlet of
Enfeylds. Potters bar, A. 16. Preston, E. 12. Peryuale, or Pureuale, F. 10. of
this place is spoken before in the nature of the soil of MYDDLESEX.
Paddington, F. 16. Paddingwyke, G. 14. for the the signification of Wyke see
Kingstonwyke. Pancras Church, Pancras Church very ancient. F. 20.
stands all alone as utterly forsaken, old and wetherbeaten, which for the
antiquity thereof, it is thought not to yield to Paul's in London: about this
Church have bin many buildings, now decayed, leaving poor Pancras without
company or comfort: yet it is now and then visited with Kentish town and
Highgate, which are members thereof: but they seldom come there, for that they
have chapels of ease within themselves, but when there is a corpse to be
interred, they are forced to leave the same in this forsaken church or
churchyard, where (no doubt) it rests as secure against the day of
resurrection as if it lay in stately Paul's. Pancras as dessolate as it
stands is not forsaken of all: aprebrend of Paul's accepeth it in right of
his office. Parsons green, H. 16.
R.
Riselip E. 16.
S.
Syon. H. 12. was built by HENRY the 5. sometimes a house of munkes, Syon
builded.
but this king expelled them, and int heir place established certain virgins
of Bridgets order; and appointed of them so many with priests and lay brethren,
as were equal with the number of the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, namely
of virgins 60. priests 13. deanes, 4. lay brethren 8. which made 13. Apostles,
and 72. Disciples of Christ, upon whom having bestowed sufficient revenues for
their maintenance, he made a law that they should not accept of any other
gift, but content themselves with his contribution: and to bestow on the poor
whatsoever was above that which might reasonably suffice them.

It is now a house of her Majesty's, standing most pleasantly upon the river of
Thamys. It was called Syon in remembrance of that hill in Jerusalem, which was
called the Holy hill, the mount of the Lord, the City of David, Mouns Syon.

** Swakeleys, E. 6. sometime a house of the Brockeyes, now fir Thomas
Sherleyes. Stanmer great, D. 10. Stanmer little, called also Whytechurch, D.
10. South mymmes. A. 14. there is a fair warren of conies of the Lo.
Windsores. Shackelwell, E. 22. Shordich, F. 20. Stretford on the bow, F. 24.
the bridge over the river lea, Ree. E. anno 22.
is the Bow, and thereof is called Stratford on the bow, near it, is an old
church, founded by HEN. 2. Stepney, or Stybenhyth, Sir Henry Collet knight
buried
or Stibonbeath, F. 22. In the church thereof is buried sir Henry Collet
knight, twice Mayor of London, who was father to John Collet, sometime Deane of
Paul's, who alone builded Paul's school, his arms these.

blazon or coat of arms

There lies also the Lady Anne Wentworth wife to Thomas Lord Wentworth,
Stepney. Lady Wentworth buried.
and daughter to Henry Wentworth Esquier. She died the second of Sept. 1571.

blazon or coat of arms

Sir Thomas Spers knight sometime Controler of the shipes to H. 8. Dame
Margery, Sir Thomas Spert knight buried.
Dame Anne, and Dame Mary his wives, lie in the Chauncell there, he deceased
Anno 1541.

blazon or coat of arms

In the north I Will of the same Church lies William Chaldnam esquire, William
Chaldnam Esquire buried.
and Joan his wife he died the 27. of Sept. Anno 1484.

blazon or coat of arms

Strond, called the Stroud H. 4. a hamlet near Cheswyke, and called the
Strond, for that it bordereth so near the Thamys. Southholt, signifies
Southwood, G. 8. Sypson, G. 6. ** Stanwell H. 6. there was the ancient house
of the Windsores. Stanes Church, H. 6. Stanes town, I. 6. it is called in the
Saxon tongue. Stana. It stands upon the Thamis, A market town kept on the
Friday weekly, it is governed by two Cunstables and four Headborrowes: the
town is her Majesty's land, and the officers chosen by her Highness Steward.
It stand eth from the church half a mile, and the Church stands upon a
little hill by it self, at if it were banished the town.

Some affirm it to be called Stanes of the Stakes called Coway Stakes, Coway
stakes.
which were fixed in the Thamys by the Brytons, to prevent Julius Caesar, of
passing his army through the river. There is a town called Stanes upon the
frontires of Italy in Tyroll, upon the river Inn. Bunn meadow.
There is a meadow near Stanes called Bunn meadow, where king JOHN had parley
with his barons, and where were sealed between them certain writings of truce.

Sunburye K. 10. Nicasius Yetsworth esquire, Nicasius Yetsworth buried.
sometime secretary of the French tongue to Queen ELIZABETH: And marie his
wife, daughter to Ieames Bowser esquire, lie buried in the same church.

blazon or coat of arms

There was also buried Daniell Rogers Esquire sometime Clerk of the Counsel
to Queen ELIZABETH a man of excellent learning, Daniel Rogers buried.
and knowledge of toongs, and often imploid in Embassage into Germainie,
Denmark, Low Countries, etc.

blazon or coat of arms

Shepperton K. 8.
T.
Tottenham or Totheham D. 20. In which Church is buried George Heningham
esquire sometime servant, and greatly favored of K. Henry the eight he founded
there a little hospital or almeshouse for three poor widows.

* At this place the Lord Compton has a proper ancient house.

Tottenham highcrosse D. 20. a hamlet belonging to Tottenham. and has this
adiunct Highcrosse of a wooden cross, there loftly raised on a little mount
of earth. Tottenham street C. 20. Twyforde west E. 12. So called of two little
brooks or fordes that pass near it. It is a parish but it has but one only
house thereunto belonging, which is one John Lions Gentleman. Twyforde east E.
12. belonging to a prebend of Paul's. Touen Court F. 18. belonging to a prebend
of Paul's. Turnham green G. 14. Thistle worth or Istleworth H. 12. a place
scytuate upon the Thamis, not far from whence, between it and Worton, Copper
and brass
is a copper and brass mill, where it is wrought out of the oar, melted and
forged. The oar, or earth, whereof it is contrived, is brought out of Sommerset
shire from Mendip hills, the most from Worley hill, many artificial devises
there are to be noted in the performance of the work. Twickenham I. 12 a
parish seytuate upon the Thamis. Twickenham why so called.
So called either for that, at that place the Thames seems to be divided into
two Rivers by reason of the Islandes there, or else of the two brooks which
near the town enter into the Thamis, for Twicknam is as much as Twynam, quasi
inter binos amnes situm, a place scytuate between two rivers. Tuddinton I. 12.
V.
Vxbridge or Woxbridge F. 4. a market town upon the edge of the shire, it is
no parish of it self, but is amember of great Hellingdon, but they have a
Chapel of ease buylt by To. Oliver, Thomas Mandin, John Palmer, and John
Barforde of the same town. In the fix and twentieth year of Henry the sixth.
The market is kept on the Thursday. it is governed by two Baylifes, two
Cunstables, and four Tythingmen called also Headborrowes, or as the Saxons
call them Borhesealdors the chiefest or head pledges. Vxenden or Oxenden E. 12.
W.
** Woodhall E. 8. the house of * Wirehall E. 20. the house of Leeke Esquire.
Waltham cross A. 20. the farthest part of this shire toward the north, goes
to the Spittle there. Whitweb A. 20. Whetstone C. 16. Wilsdon of the Saxons
iuerlsdune E. 14. Wembly hill E. 12. West bourne F. 16. West water. Winchmore
hill B. 20. Westminster G. 18. Sometime called Thorney of the Saxons thorney of
some Dorney but (as I take it) D. is pronounced in steed of Th. as it is in
many other ancient Saxon words, Dorney for Thorney.
as Fader, Mother, Brother, for Father, Mother, Brother, which error arises
belike of the mistaking of the capital D. abreauiated thus TH. which is as
much as Th. and the little d. thus abreuiated th. for Th. which abreuiations
are often taken for the simple D. and d. by reason whereof it was called Dorney
for THorney.

This Thorney now Westminster was an Island environed with the Thamis, which
divided it self, and one branch passed between Charing cross and
Kings-streete, throrowgh S. Ieames park that now is, Thorney sometime an
Island.
including Tootehill, and was called Thorney Island, for that it was ouergrowen
with briars and thorns; which Thorney place was in the time of King LUCIUS (as
Authors affirm) cleansed, about the year 186. which LUCIUS is said to lay the
first foundation of the great Temple of S. Peter's. S. Peter's founded.
But Authors greatly vary touching the founders of the same Temple. Master
Camden from Sulcardus reports that there was first a Temple in that place,
dedicate to Apollo, which was overthrown by an earth quake in the time of
Antonius Pius. Galfr. Mon.
It is not unlike that such an Idol Temple was, for it is reported by ancient
Authors, that the Troynouantes, or Trinobantes, did sometime sacrifice Bulls,
Bullockes, Stags, and such like to Diana Tauropolia whom the Gentiles called
the Queen of Heaven. Of the ruynes of that Idol Temple, It is said that
SEBERTVS King of the east Saxons erected another Temple for the service of the
living God, and consecrated the same to S. Peter, about the year of Christ
610. near about the time of the building of Paul's. Afterward it was
destroyed by the Danes, Math. Westminster.
and Dunstan Bushop of London, reedified it about the year of Christ 960. and
made there a monastery for 12. Munckes. Fabian says it was builded by the
means of ETHELBERT King of Kent, who also built Paul's in London.

I have heard that there are, or have been, records int he same Abbey, which
declare that it was a Church before the Britons received the faith, of Christ,
which should seem to be that Idol Church of Apollo before LUCIUS time.

This stately and famous S. Peter's, has by degrees come to it present beauty,
many hands have been helpers to the finishing map of Westminster WESTMINSTER
thereof; about the year of Christ 950. Polier. Guido. Virgil. Fabian.
Edgar is said to have added thereunto, then Dunstane, After him EDWARD the
confessor the son of Etheldred about the year 1049. and lastly (as Fabian
says) (in some part agreeing with other Authors) that HENRY the third when he
had pulled down what EDWARD had set up, raised a more statly work, in the
year of Christ 1229. and finished the same in the year 1285. wherein I take
Fabian to be deceived, for by this computation, he argues that the new work
of HENRY the third was 66. years in building, S. Peter's church 50. years in
building.
yet begun and finished, by HENRY the third, who reigned but 57. years. Other
Authors agree it was 50. years in finishing.

After Thorney, it became to be called Westminster, and that in regard of the
scytuation of it west of London: for on the Tower hill was a monastery called
Eastminster, Eastminster.
of the easterly standing thereof, which was called also New abbey, founded by
EDW. 3. in the yeee 1359.

There are within this temple, diverse, and sundry, most rare and princely
monuments: some of great antiquity, some also of later times, increasing
daily, Edward confessor buried.
among the rest there lies EDWARD called also the Confessor, who labored
before in this famous work, and caused his corpse to be interred in the west
part of the Church, which when HEN. 3. had altered, he caused the body of EDW.
to be removed, to the place where now it rests, in the east part of the
Church.

Also there lies HEN. 3. Henry the third buried. Tho. Walsing.
the finisher of this most famous work, whose tomb is there in most kingly
manner erected, by the dutiful endeavor and charge of EDW. 1. son of the
said HEN. 3. and for that purpose, he brought Jasper stones out of France,
wherewith he beautified his fathers sumptuous sepulcher in anno 1280.

Many other Kings and Queens, and persons of high state, have been there
buried, of whom the whole catalogue to resite would be tedious.

There is in this temple a stone, in form of a chair, A stone chair in S.
Peter's Church
sometime serving, as the throne of the kings of Scots, and wherein they were
crowned, which stone was brought out of Scone in Scotland by EDW. 1. son to
HEN. 3. about anno 1297. which stands not far from his fathers monument, had
in no little price at this day.

There is adioining unto this famous temple, A chapel of H. 7.
in the east end thereof, a chapel erected by HEN. 7. which in regard of
the beauty, and curious contrived work thereof, is called of Lelande, Orbis
miraculum: The wonder of the world. In this mirror of art, Orbis miraculum.
and archytect, are many rare and glorious monuments of Kings and Queens, H.
7. buried.
among whom the famous founder HEN. 7. lies under a most regal tomb, framed
and artificially formed of bras, richly gilded with pure gold.

Near this chapel adioining unto the Thamys, was an old famous building,
Old palace.
called now the Old palace, which was consumed with fire, in the time of
EDW. the Confessor.

It was sometime the palace of king CANVTVS the Dane, Old palace king
Canutus house.
also king of Denmark, and where he made his abode about the year of Christ,
1035. after his return from Rome into England, who in regard of his
quadruplicitie of kingdoms, esteemed himself, more than a man mortal: for
his Scicophants had so bewitched him with their inchaunted flatteries, that he
deemed himself no less then a God. The pride of Cauntus.
And in this proud conceit on a day he passed by the Thamys, which ran by that
palace, at the flowing of the tide, and making stay near the water, the
waves cast forth some part of the water toward him, this CANVTVS coniured the
waves by his regal command to proceed no farther: the Thamys unacquainted
with this new God, held on it course, flowing as of custom it used to do, and
refrained not to assail him near to the knees: whereat this high conceited
man as one amazed, begone to tremble, starting back protesting that he was but
a man, though a mighty king. And that he that governed those waters, was only
worthy to be called a king, and all mortal men, most mighty kings, ought to
subject them unto him. A worthy note whereby is seen how the almighty
Jehovah by his weak creatures, makes to stoop the most puissant in his own
conceit. Some part of this old palace is yet standing, as S. Stephens
chapel, and other buildings upon the Thamys, near unto which is a most famous
hall, called Westminster hall, which was so called for that it was Aularegis, a
kings court, but as touching the founder is great variety.

Some affirm that WILLIAM RUFUS builded it: E. S. de. reb. Br.
but M. Camden affirms that Hoc quod nunc habemus pretorim RIC. 2. diruto
vetustiori extruxit suaeque habitationi dicauit. RIC. 2. built it and made it
his mansion house. But me thinks it is to be gathered by the words of Thomas
Walsingham, Tho. Walls. hist. Aug.
that Westminster hall was in the time of EDW. the 2. where he says, Si ipsi
Barons cum suis assentatoribus in aula Westmonasterii and pleno parliamento
venirent etc. whereby it appears that Westminster hall and the place of
parliament there, was 64. years before RIC. 2. But some may say, that the great
Hall that now is, Tho. Walls. Ypodigni. New. page 49.
was not in those days, but the Hall that is now called White hall, where the
Court of of Requests is now kept. To answer that the same Thomas says, Rex E.
1. Celebrauit penticostes in aula magna apud Westmonasterium, whereby he makes
a distinction between those two hals, for the White hall was called also Aula
parva, the little hall: which two hals and other buildings thereunto adioining,
were used by RIC. the 2. who caused all controversies there to be heard, (who
as all other kings) in those days sat in judgment: Kings sat in Court to
hear and determine causes.
and whersoeuer the king was in person, there was the place of hearing, and
determining causes: saving that the common plees were by HEN. 3. appointed to
be heard in a place certain, as appears in magna Charta, where it is said,
Communia placita non sequntur Curiam nostram. Sed teneantur in aliquo loco
certo. But at this day all causes of whatsoever nature, for the most part are
heard and determinable, at this place as a place certain. S. Stephens chappelli


Between Westminster hall, and the Thamys is a chapple of S. Stephens:
sometime very beautiful, though now in the outward show something defaced:
It was reedefied and augmented by EDW. 3. when he came victor out of France,
about the year of Christ 1347.

Westminster had sometime a house of monks, who were removed thence by HEN.
7. and a Deane with certain Prebends established. Westminster a Bushops sea.


In the time of EDWARD 6. it was made a bishops See, but shortly after it came
again to a Deane and Prebends; Again Queen MARIE ordained there an Abbot and
his munkes, who continued not many years, but were again cut off by act of
Parleament: Lastly our most gracious Queen ELIZABETH made it a collegiate
Church: instituting a Deane, twelve Prebends, twelve well deserving soldiers,
and forty scholars: who are thereby termed The Queens scholars, who, as
they become worthy, are preferred to the Universities. All which pupils, as
long as they continue in this college, are under the Deane, now D. Goodman.
Alex. Neuell. Norwic.


Alexander Neuell Norwic. affirms that the Bishops of Caunterburie, in the
time of RIC. the 1. did make their most abode at Westminster, as they do now
at Lambeth, or Lomehith, and had over against the school that now is, a
stately house: Lelande.
yet Lelande affirms the contrary, who says, that the Bishops of
Caunterburie have continued at Lambeth since the Normanes coming into this
land.

There is an ancient monument within the liberty of Westminster, Charing
cross.
called Charing cross, erected about the year of Christ, Tho. Walls.
1290. by EDW. 1. in memorial of the death of Elineor his Queen, who died at
Hardly near Lincoln, and was buried in Westminster.

The liberty of Westminster extends to Temple bar: Temple bar.
so calcalled of the Temple within the same bar, and is called the bar for that
it stops and barreth the Mayor of London, as also the Magistrates of
Westminster, that neither intrude upon other. This bar or gate was thrown
down by the Kentish rebels, in the time of RIC. 2.

Within the liberty of Westminster are four parish Churches, Parish Churches
in the liberty of Westminster.
besides S. Peter's, namely,

S. Margarets

S. Martynes near Charing cross.

The Sauoy Church.

S. Clements, called Saint Clements Dacorum, or Saint Clements Danes.

In the time of superstition there was in Westminster, a place called the
Sanctuary, The Sanctuary.
of an old Mosaical ryte, used among the Israelites, among whom every tribe had
certain cities, and places of refuge, to which malefactors might repair, and
for a time be protected from the rigor of the law.

There was at Westminster kept a staple of wool, The Woulstaple.
and is at this day, called the Woolstaple, established in the time of EDWARD
the 3.

The Sauoye was first built (as M. Stowe has record) by Peter Earl of Sauoy,
The Sauoy.
who was after made Earl of Richmonde, by HENRY the 3. who called it the
Sauoy after his Country. But Poll. Virg. Pollid. Virg.
allows him not Earl of Sauoy, but calls him Petrus sebaudiensis: Peter a
Sauoyan, or of the country of Sauoy, who as the same Poll. affirms, buylt
the same, and called it the Sauoy, of his native Country Sauoye. It was
belonging unto the Duke of Lancaster, in the time of RIC. the 2. in whose time
it was wasted, burned, and spoiled by the Kentish rebels, about the year 1381.
It was reedefied by HEN. 7. by whose last will, it was intended to be finished,
and made an Hospital, for the relief of a 100. poor people, which was
performed by the most famous HEN. the 8. his son, and sufficiently furnished
with land, and revenues, for the maintenance thereof.

Queen ELIZABETH has within the precincts of this City three fair and
pleasant palaces: Howses of Queen Elizabeth's within Westminster.
namely White hall, begun by Cardinal Woolsey, and finished, with many most
princely delights, by HEN. 8. S. Ieames, erected by the same king HEN. 8. and
Somerset house builded by the Duke of Somerset about the year of Christ 1549.

There are other houses worthy to be remembered within this liberty of
Westminster as Burghley house, Burgley house.
founded and erected by the right honorable S. William Cycell knight, Lord
Burghley, Lord high treasoror of England.

Durham or Dunelme house sometime belonging to the Bishop of Durham, Durham
house builded.
it was builded by one Anthony Beck in the time of RICHARD the third. Other
famous houses of nobility are in this precinct, which to mention I omit for
brevity.

Places distinguished in the Map of Westminster by these letters and figures
following.
A. The Abbey. B. Westminster hall. D. Long ditche. E. Theuing lane. F. The
Amnerie. G. The way to Toothill field. H. The Lord Dacres. I. Lord Grayes. K.
Kings street. L. Round Woulstaple. M. The Park lodgings. N. The Tilt-yard. O.
S. Martynes in the field. P. Clements Inn. Q. New Inn. R. S. Clements Danes.
S. Temple bar. V. Drurie lane. Y. The Gatehouse. 2. S. Margarets. 3. S.
Stephens alley. 5. Petite France. 6. H. 7. Chapel. 7. Deanes yard. 8.
Tennies Courts. 9. Way to Hounslow. 10. The Powder house. 11. White hall
Orchard. 12. The Queens Garden. 13. Staple Inn.
This City of Westminster is known to have no general trade whereby relief
might be administered unto the common sort, as by Merchandise, clothing, or such
like, whereby the common wealth of a City is maineteined, and the inferior
people set to work, had they not therefore some other means, the common sort
could nor be sustained. The chief mean whereby Westminster is relieved.


The first and principal mean whereby they are relieved, is her Majesty's
residence at White hall, or S. Ieames, whence if her grace be long absent, the
poor people forthwith complain of penury and want, of a hard and miserable
world. And therefore do the people in manner generally seem to power forth
daily petitions, that it might please God to draw her Majesty to be resident
at one of these places, whereat they rejoice and fare long the better. The like
desire of her Royal presence have other places, where her Majesty's Palaces
are placed. And her Majesty in gracious consideration of their estates, does
visit them as it were Alternis vicebus, by turn at her highness pleasure, more
for the comfort and relief of the poor people, then for her own private
delight. Therefore ye Citizens of Westminster, and other, whatsoever, forget
not to be thankful to the the Almighty for her Royal presence, heartily
praying the King of Kings, to maintain her a prospering Queen long and many
years, and every faithful heart will join with you, having also the benefit
of her blessed inclination.

The second mean whereby this poor City is maintained, The second mean,
the Terms.
and the people relieved, is by the four Terms in the year, for it has
pleased God to establish there, the place where Justice, law, and every man's
right is (God grant it) with equal balance, indifferently administered:
whereunto great multitudes of people, usually flock, whose resort although the
City enioie but in the forenoone, yet yields their presence, many pence to
the poor town.

There was in the time of EDW. 1. a discontinuance of the law, The hearing of
causes removed to York.
in this City, and was thence removed to York, where it continued, seven
years after reduced to the former place. It has been often discontinued by
the disfavor of Princes, and their conceived displeasure against the
inhabitants of the place, for disobedience, as a general punishment. Receive
this ye inhabitants of Westminster, as a necessary premonition, that ye rest
careful and vigilant, least the king of kings move her Majesty to place the
determination of causes else where, which now is unto you no small support.

The third and last mean (though it come seldom) is that great and general
convencion of all the estates of this land, The third mean, the Parliament.
the high Court of Parleament, which draws unto it a great access of noble
persons, and others, to the place of assembly, which is also set most
graciously within this City, which yields no small relief unto the same,
which also (as is recorded in histories) has been holden at diverse other
places in this land.

It is not yet forgotten, The term removed to Hertford.
no doubt, how the God offended, visited not only this City, but also London,
with a dangerous late infection, insomuch as the last Michaelmas Term was
removed to Hertforde castle, which pinched the poor, and made the rich to
complain, in both these Cities: yet a more gentle forewarning of his
displeasure he cannot show, who longing for new obedience in us, calls us by
diverse means, and without speedy and hearty repentance we shall likewise
perish.


The principal high ways from London through Middlesex, and toward what
especial places in England they lead.
THe way noted with this figure 2. leads to Stanes, and thence toward
Sarisburie, Exeter and other places in the west. 3. Leads to Colnebrooke,
toward Windsore, Reading, Bath, Bristow, etc. 4. To Vxbridge, and so toward
Oxford, Gloucester, and south Wales. 5. To Egewoorth, toward Woodstocke,
Buckingham, Warwick, Stafford, Worcester, Chester, and north Wales. 6. To S.
Albans, toward Bedford, Northampton, Leicester, Darby, etc. 7. Toward
Waltham, Hartforde, Bedforde, Huntingdon, Cambridge, into Norfolk: toward
Lincoln, York and the Northen parts. 9. To Stratford on the Bow, and so into
Essex and Suffolk. 10. Leads into Surrey and Sussex. 11. To Kingston upon
Thamis, Guyldford, Farneham, Winchester, Arrondell, Chechister, Southampton,
Portesmouth, etc.
Noblemen, and Gentlemen, for the most part, having houses, or residence,
within this Shire.
A.
sir Ed. Anderson, Lord chief justice of the common plees page 21. George
Ashbie. page 16. George Atee. page 17. George Alleley at Daleson hill. page 18.
B.
L. Burghley, L. High Treasurer of England. page 38. L. Barnes. page 37.
William Burrowes at lyme house. page 36. Richard Bellamy. The Bushop of London.
page 20.
C.
L. Compion page 37. 41. L. Corbet. page 21. L. Cornewell. page 18. L. Cockeram
at Hamsted. page 22 John Cunstable at old Ford. page 37. John Cornewallies.
page 22. John Carle at Maribone park.
D.
E. of Darby at Istleworth. page 17. L. Dacres. page 17. 18. 23.
F.
sir John Fortescue knight, one of her May privy counsel page 21. sir
Fleetewood. page 19.
G.
lady Gresham. page 37. lady Gylman at Twickenham page 41 lady Gomershall,
page 16. lady Gifford. page 37. lady Goddarde at Tottenham personage. page
41. lady Gerrard. page 223.
H.
Jerome Halley. page 17. John Hatrey, at Riselyp. page 38. sir Rowlande
Haywarde knight at Clapton. page 17. sir Huggines at Meerstreet. page 37. sir
Io. Harrington at Stepney. page 39. sir Hare at Pymmes. page 38.
K.
auditor King near Finchley. page 20. alderma^ Kempton at Hadley page 21. Thom.
Kneuet at S. James park
L.
John Lions. page 41. John Leeke. page 41. John Lacye. page 18.
M.
John Middlemore. page 19. sir Richard Martyn knight near Tottenham.
N.
L. North. page 22. George Nicholson at Twickenham. page 41.
O.
earl of Oxforde. page 37. alderman Offley at Clapton. page 17.
P.
sir John Popham knight, Lord chief Justice of England. page 20. Ric.
Peacocke, at Northend. page 37. Ric. Plumbe at Northende by Fulham. Ric. Pain
at Harlstone green. page 23. Ric. Pain near Harnesey. page 21.
Q.
Ric. Quynnye at Chalcot, or Chalkhill. page 17.
R.
Ric. Roane. page 25. Ric. Ryth at Twickenham. page 41. alderman Roe. page 36.
alderman Ryder at Stepney. page 39. lady Isabell Counties of Rutland at
Steyney. page 39
S.
sir Thomas Sherley. page 39. sir Sewell at Cannons. page 17. sir Skenington
near Harnesey page 21. sir Skeuington. page 17. sir Sadler ad Edmonton. page
18. sir doctor Seysar near Tottenham.
T.
sir Trott. page 17. sir Throgmorton at Stepney page 39. sir Thomson at Lalam.
page 36.
V.
sir Vaghan at Littleton. page 36.
W.
L. Wentworth. page 17. John Wallison, at Riselipe. page 38. Robert Wroth. page
17. and 37. William Waade. page 16. Richard Weeks at Hamsteed. page 22.
FINIS.
I crave patience though I have not given to every man his addition of Esquire
or Gent. for that I may easily err therein, without the especial aid of an
expert Herault.

To the right worshipful M. WILLIAM WAADE Esquire, one of the clearks of her
Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel.
SIR, I cannot rest unready in desire, to yield requital of your aid
extended toward the publication of this first part of my SPECVLVM BRITANNIAE:
wherein I must, and do thankfully acknowledge your good inclination not toward
me only, but to all such as endeavor matters tending to public good. In lieu
therefore of a farther faithful recompense, accept, I beseech you, my willing
endeavor, until time afforde ablenes to make better repay.

In magnis and voluisse dat est, I. N.

A I Lettori.
HAspeso molti di per Amor vostro.
A pinger queste carte famigliare,
Citte, castelli, fiume deliniare,
Le terre misurar Nordeno nostro
Non guardate a le carte, ne a l'inchiostro
Perch e vna cosa, che non sa parlare
Guardate pur se l'opra vi puo entrare
Se'l specchio ui piace, che vimostro
Non otiosa ma faticosa impresa
e questo specchio del Britanno lido.
Non e composto senza molta spesa
Non cercano tal' opr' alcuno nido.
Norden il specchio tuo senza contesa
Risplendera dou'e piu chiaro il grido.
Ar. Oln.

Ingenuo lectori, de opere, and Authore te^rastichon.
QVem tulit is punctum, qui miscuit vtile dulci;
Nordenus tulit hunc, vtile, dulce canens.
Vtile, dulce canit, digni laud ille, liberque:
Nam placet, and prodest, vtile, dulce, canens.
Notitia nobile nomen: Robertus Nicolsonus.

Sur le Miroir de grand Bretaigne, de M. Ichan Norden.
GArdez gentiles, regardez cest' ouurage,
Tres-doctes Dames, and tres-sages, Sieurs:
Moult delectant voz yeulx, voz sens, and coeurs,
Cy fait Plaisir, auec Profit marriage.
Chacun Degree, rumine, chachun Aage,
Ce petit liver, plein de grands doulceurs:
Rend luy louange, qui doulces rend odeurs,
Que chacun fait, qui est scedil;auant ou sage.
Les autres sont autheurs d' Enui', and vice,
Ennemis a virtue, sciens, and Notice,
Vilipendans les oeuures de scedil;auoir:
Mais nobles, doctes, and gentiles esprits,
Qui compte tiennent des elegans escripts,
Hault priseront NORDEN son cler Miroir.
N'ayant espour qu' en Dieu. Robert Nicolson.

Corrections.
In page 11. line 5. for eighteen, read thirteen. In page 21. for Io.
Fortescue esquire, read sir John Fortescue knight. In page 27. for 5191. read
3911. In the same page for Antonius, read Antoninus. In page 47. for Staple
Inn, read Lions Inn.

