THE TRVE Report of the service in Britanie.

Performed lately by the Honorable Knight Sir John Norreys and other Captains
and Gentlemen soldiers before Guingand.

Together with the Articles which the Prince D'ombes accorded to the defendants
of the Town.

fleur-de-lis

LONDON Printed by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop right over
against the great South-doore of Paul's. 1591.

The true report of the service in Britanie, performed lately by the Honorable
Knight Sir JOHN NORREYS and other Captains and gentlemen soldiers before
Guingand: together with the articles which the Prince D'ombes accorded to the
defendants of the town.
A Marshall man principally deuoteth him self to hazard his lims and life in
the service of his Prince and country for honor and crowns: as it were shame
to eclipse him the one, so it is injury to scant him the other: for the surest
whetstone of valor and virtue is renown and glory: in defrauding the
soldier of his pay, you cut his purse and rebate his edge: in deprauing his
honor, you cut his throat and strike him stone dead: whereby I was induced
to publish the renowned service done lately by that honorable knight S. JOHN
NORREYS in Britanie: to the end that neither he, neither the rest of the brave
Captains, gentlemen and soldiers should want their due commendation, that
both they may be encouraged to continue their brave and heroical minds, and
others inclined to advance themselves to the like honorable attempts and
actions. I am the better able to perform this my promise by reason of a letter
I received thence from a gentleman so well qualified, that neither he wanted
skill or wit to record the service with the pen, neither valor and courage to
perform any enterprise with the sword, being a principal actor in the
execution thereof, the copy whereof I present to the reader, that he may be
truly informed of the service, and yield the actors their due commendation.

SIR, by my last letters I advertised you of the safe ariuall of our army in
Britanie, the third of May, continewing about the Abbay of Beauport a week,
for the arming of the soldiers, mounting the artillery and marshaling our
Camp. The tenth, we began our march, and lodged with our troops before
Guingand the 13. Since which time, through the wonderful pains and continual
travel of Sir JOHN NORREYS our L. General, the town is rendered to the Prince
D'OMBES, son to the Duke MOMPENSIER of the house of Burbon, Governor of
Britainie for the King. The report whereof may seem strange to you, for we
our selves do wonder at it, considering the strength of the place by art and
nature, and how greatly the conservation thereof imported Philibert Emanuel,
Duke Mercury of the house of Vaudemont a collateral branch of Lorrayne,
Governor of Britanie for those rebellious Leaguers who murdered his brother
in law the late king his own sisters husband: as well in regard of his honor
and reputation, as of his profit and peculiar interest, the town being his
proper inheritance, in the right of his wife Marie daughter and heir to
Sebastian Duke of Pontheiure, whose father Francis Vicount Martigues of the
house of Luxemburg attained large territories in Britanie, marrying Charlotte
sister and heir of John de Brosse who descended of the house of Ponthieure a
collateral line of the Dukes of Britanie. The duke Mercury notwithstanding he
was thus particularly interessed in the town of Guingand wanting neither
sufficient garrison, munition or victuals, having Don Joan de Lagula in a
readiness with four thousand Spaniards at Pontiguy besides his own troops:
yet suffered this defensible place to be lost without blows upon
dishonorable and base conditions, whereby we may see how God rebateth the edge
of rebels hearts, daunteth their courages and ranuerseth their actions with his
by blows or vnlookedfor counterbuffes.

That the particularities of the matter may be better known unto you, you are
to understand that the town of Guingand is strongly waled round about environed
with a large ditch and a deep counterscarfe, extending it self in length from
the South Southeast, to the North Norwest. Upon the South end of the town where
was sometimes an old castle, there is now a very strong bulwark with three
Flankers, and in the midst thereof a Cauallero which commands the whole
town. Not far from it Eastwarde is the gate of the town, of it self very
strong, and before it a very great Rauelin within the counterscarfe of the
ditch: at the bottom whereof there is a most dainty Sallye, insomuch as a
thousand men may issue out at the same, and not one be discovered until their
heads appear above the counterscarfe. And above them are two drawn briges
for the Saliants, the one for horse, the other for foot, and right before the
Raueling is a pretty conceited Turnepike or Barricado to check the throng and
multitude of pursuers. From this place Northwarde the wall is embowed like a
horn with three Flankers upon it, and so ranforced within with earth, as it is
accounted a Terra-pleyn. The West has a very deep ditch full of water: neither
could any aproch be made that way by reason of the marrishis. The North end of
the town has many Flankers and a deep ditch, yet somewhat dry and fast by
an Abbey of Iacopins which the villains them selves pulled for the most part
down, lest it should any way distress the town, standing within less then
eighty paces of the town wall. Notwithstanding this their provident malice,
the rebels left as much standing for us as served to cut their own throats.
My Lord General having quickly found that this part of the town was fittest
to receive a breach, made show to the quite contrary part thereof, as at the
South part he caused trenches to be cast, and passages to be made through the
walls of old houses, even to the very counterscarfe of the ditch, a long
trench was likewise cast very near the walls of the East side of the town,
and in the midst thereof a platform of earth to be erected to some reasonable
height, as if the canon should have been placed there: in the mean time all
travel was used in making of a Mine according to our Generals direction, near
to the intended breach, and the ways made for the bringing and dressing of the
places fit for the Canon to play upon, which was performed in so good sort as
that by the 20. day of this month our artillery was brought down to the
Iacopines cloister, and there placed within loss then an hundredth paces of the
wall. And this was one of our greatest combars both in respect of travel and
hazard, to both which how my L. did expose himself truly I could not but
wonder, and in my heart was angry to see it, and yet if he had not so hazarded
himself, I did partly perceive that little would have been done.

On friday the 21. we began our battery, and notwithstanding it continued all
the day, yet by reason of the few pieces of artillery, not able to make
sufficient battery, the days work brought forth no great effect other then
the crushing of two Flankers, and the beating of the perrepet, so that the
breach was very small and the same so repaired continually by the soldiers and
inhabitants within the town, maintaining the rampart with fetherbeds, horse
dung and bags of earth almost to the lowest part of their perrepet. The next
day very early once again we began our battery, and continued it until two
or three of the clock in the after noone, by what time the breach seemed very
fair. Whereupon the French humor urged very hotely to an assault, and so
importuned the Prince D'ombes that he consented thereunto. Our General
although he was hardly drawn to yield his consent, understanding by a Sergeant
of a band whom he had sent to discover the breach, that the rentrenchment
within was exceeding deep, and the mounting up the breach very steep, sliding
and difficult, but especially because the mine was not so forward to be
answerable to the breach: notwithstanding seeing the French men offering to
attempt the place of them selves which had been some disgrace unto us, yielded
to their humor, and most instantly demanded the point and honor of the
assault for the English men, which being granted conditionally that they
should be seconded by the French. Such was the emulation of our commanders
and Captains to win honor, that all being willing to attempt the service,
to avoid contention our General caused the dice to be cast, so that it fell
to Captain IACKSON and Captain HERON to lead the first two hundredth to the
assault, which after their devout prayers recommending them selves to God, they
performed very valiantly, scrambling up with a notable resolution, standing a
long half hour at the push of the pike in the face of a whole storm of the
small shot, especially Captain IACKSON who came to the point of the breach,
but not being thoroughly seconded by the soldiers unable to get up by reason of
the steepenes of the place, yet were they hardly commanded to retire,
performing their retraite with no less good order then their attempt to the
assault, Captain HERON received a shot in the throat, whereof he presently
dyed, and not above twelve others slain: Captain IACKSON sore hurt. Captain
WOLF in the top of the breach had three dangerous wounds in the head, and
others in his body: Captain CATESBYE a voluntary gentleman sore hurt in the
arm. Also Captain WHITTON and Master Paul Wingfeeld with some other young
gentlemen to the number of 30. Which loss can not be thought great in such a
piece of service, considering the great strength within to defend the place.
The second attempt was given by the Baron of Molac Colonel general of the
French infanterie in these parts, and very well answered by himself, and some
few of the French gentlemen, but the common soldiers advancing them selves
coldly to the breach, received the greater hurt, and by that occasion were
slain of them many more then of our nation. Some others straight presented
themselves for a third assault, but the breach being found so difficult, and
resistance within strong and well prepared, it was advised to stay until the
next day that the battery had made the breach more easy. During the time of
the assault Captain DENNIS a brave gentleman being sent with some forces to
make offer of a scalado to one other part of the town, advancing himself too
far, received a Musket shot in the bottom of his belly, whereof he dyed
about twelve of the clock the same night. That night those within demanded a
Parley, which being accorded, certain deputies out of the town repaired the
next morning to the Prince Dombes, and in the end grew to a capitulation, the
copy whereof you shall receive herein enclosed. Which in my judgment would
have been accorded with much more advantage to the Prince, if he had pleased
to have insisted upon it: but being glad to recover the town, which is said
to be the strongest in Britanie, except Nantes and Dinant: withal doubting
least the Duke Mercury with the help of Don Iuan de Lagula should come to the
succor of the town, (which it is likelye had been performed, if the French
had been in so good readiness as the Spaniardes) he would not treat any long
agreement. But all things being accorded on both sides, on Whitsonday the
town was surrendered into the hands of Monsieur Cargomart appointed governor
for the Prince. And Captain GARGANTON which before held the place for the Duke
Mercury, with one other named Contary, sent by the Duke Mercury to assist the
other, departed the town the 24. of May, with an hundred and twenty horse,
and about two hundredth and sixty foot, in all men's judgment able and strong
enough to have kept the place for a much longer time. We had in the town four
Ensigns, one Cornet, one Cannon Perrier, one Demi Culuering, and six Sacres
and Minions, two thousand weight of powder, and great store of victuals. The
having of this town greatly imports the King, for in a manner all base
Britain does depend upon it. The Courts of Parliament, which was ordinarily
held at Reins were by the rebellious Leaguers transferred to Guingand, which
argues in what estimation they held the strength of the town. Thus have I
plainly and truly reported the service of Guingand, and I perceive our General
means to entertain us in action, for we are presently to march against
Morlays a rebellious town coasting upon the sea, whereby I am enforced to
leave my pen, and betake my self to the lance, for the trompet sounds,
mont'a cauallo.

Articles accorded by the Prince Dombes to the beseeged within the town of
Guingand, in Britanie.
1 THe Governor, Captains and Soldiers of Guingand shall render the town
into the Princes hands to morrow the 23. of May, being Whitsonday, before
noone. 2 The Prince will permit that the horsemen shall depart the town with
their horses and furniture, and the footmen with their Harquebuze and swords
by their side. 3 The Cornets, Ensigns, and Drums which are in the town, shall
be delivered to the Prince, and all their artillery and munition of war. 4
All Englishmen and Irishmen, if there be any, shall be put into the hands of
the Prince. 5 All Spaniards shall remain prisoners. 6 The gentlemen who have
no charge of soldiers, who retired themselves to the town for refuge, shall
pay 15000. crowns, and thereby freed to enjoy their possessions and mouables. 7
The inhabitants of the town shall pay 25000. crowns, and thereby shall be
warranted from all pillage, enjoying the kings protection according to his
late ordinances. 8 The prisoners the Kings servants, shall be set at liberty,
and delivered to the Prince. 9 For the assurance of this treaty, they shall
presently give hostages, two for the gentlemen, two for the soldiers, and two
for the inhabitants.
FINIS.

