THE PSEVDO-SCRIPTVRIST. OR A TREATISE WHEREIN IS PROVED, That the Written Word
of God (though most Sacred, Reverend, and Divine) is not the sole Judge of
Controversies, in Faith and Religion. Against the prime Sectaries of these
Times, who contend to maintain the Contrary.

Written by N. S. Priest, and Doctor of Divinity. DIVIDED INTO TWO PARTS.

And dedicated to the Right Honorable, and Reverend Judges of England, and the
other grave Sages of the Law.

An Haeretici diuinis Scripturae testimonijs vtantur? Vtuntur plane, and
vehementer quidem: Sed tanto magis cauendi sunt Vincent. Lyrinens. lib. aduers.
Haer.

Do Heretics cite the divine testimonies of Scripture? They do indeed, and that
most vehemently: But therefore are they so much the more to be taken heed of.

Permissu Superiorum. M. DC. XXIII.

THE CONTENTS OF THE several parts of this Treatise.
IN the first part (besides a brief refutatio^ of the private spirit first
prefixed thereto) it is disputed Categorice, and absolutely, that the Scripture
is not the Judge of Controversies. And this euicted from the difficulty of the
Scripture, in regard of its Subject, several senses, and phraze of the style;
as also from Reason, testimony of the Fathers, Doctrine of Traditions etc.

In the second Part it is disputed Hypothetice, that supposing for the time,
that the Scripture (as it is simply considered in it self) were the judge of
Controversies; yet it is proved, that of all the different kynds of Sectaries,
that ever were, the Protestants can with the least reason insist in it, as
Judge. And this is made evident by three several ways.

First, because the Protestants cannot agree among themselves, what Books are
true Scripture, and consequently do not agree in assigning, which books do
concur to the making up of this Judge; some allotting more books to it, some
fewer; and so they make it of greater or lesser extent, then (even according to
their several opinions) it should be.

Secondly, because even of those Books, which the Protestants jointly embrace
for Canonical Scripture, there is not (in their judgments) any one entire true
Original, either Hebrew or Greek now to be found, neither are there any
traslatio^s of them now extant, but such as are (by the Ptotesta^ts assertions)
false, corrupt, and impure: And so by obtruding the Scripture for Judge, they
obtrude (at least by their own Doctrine) a false, corrupt, and impure Judge.

Thirdly, and lastly, because even of those particular books only, or parts of
Canonical Scripture, whose Originalls in them yet extant are true, and whose
translations in those passages are admitted by the Protestants for true and
uncorrupted, the texts and testimonies do make against the Protestants, and in
behalf of the Catholic Roman Religion, if we insist either in the perspicuity
of the letter and words, or in the judgment of the ancient Fathers
interpreting the said texts, or finally in the implicit and tacit censure and
acknowledgment of the Protestants themselves. And thus the Protestants by
appealing to Scripture, do wound themselves.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND REVEREND IVDGES OF England: and to the other
grave Professors of the Law.
THERE is no kind of learning (right Honour^ble and Learned) which more
conduces to man's benefit (as instructing him in the way toward heaven) then
the sacred knowledge of Divinity. There is no part of Divinity more expedient
in these our contentions and misbelieuing Times, which threaten shipwreck of
our ancient Christian Faith, then the study of Controversies. There is no
Controversy more to be insisted upon, then the question concerning the Judge of
these Controversies; since the proof of it inuolues within it self, by force
of necessary illations, the proof of all other controuersiall points. For
whereas most of the doubts between the Protestants and us, being conuincingly
demonstrated for certain and infallible; yet such proofs do but force the
judgment of the Reader only in those particulars. But it being here once
concluded and acknowledged on both sides, what, or who is this Judge, it then
ineuitably follows, that all those articles of faith are most true and
Orthodoxall, which are found to be decreed, and defined by the said Judge.
Besides daily experience tells us, that the particular discourse of any
dogmaticall point in Religion, being fortified and confirmed either by us, or
our Adversaries (according to the state thereof differently maintained) with
several authorities of Gods word, does finally resolve into this point, to
wit, who is to judge of the sense and true meaning of the foresaid alleged
testimonies. In so much as that we may justly pronounce the question of this
Judge to be both the Center and Circumference of all other questions; since no
less the lines and deductio^s of all controversies do (for their last
resolution) meet and concur in this one common point; then that it self
being cleared and made evident, does include and contain by demonstrable
inferences, the proof of all the rest, within the capacity and largnes of its
own Orb.

The difference between us and our Adversaries herein is this. That we do
jointly C^ncil. Trident. sess. 4.
teach, that the whole Church of God by the mouth of the chief pastor alone,
or otherwise seconded with a lawful general Council, is ordained in
appealably to define either from Scripture, or from the ancient practice of
Gods Church, what is the undoubted and Orthodoxall faith of Christians, what is
Schism and Heresy. But our Adversaries Luth. praefat. assertionis suae.
Melancthlocis de Ecclesia Calvin. l. 4. Instit. c. 9. Chemnitius in exam.
Council. Tride^t. sess. 4.
do with one consent maintain, that all Controversies of faith are to be tried
by the touchstone of the holy Scripture; so as the Scripture it self is to
become the sole judge, since nothing (they say) is to be received, as an
article of faith, but what has it express warrant from the written Word of
God.

The sentence of the Catholics in his Controversy I forbear to handle in this
Treatise, since it is already discussed very painfully by diverse Catholic
writers, and particularly in several Tract. 1. sect. 4. subd 14. and tract 3.
sect. 7.
passages of that most learned work of the Protestants Apology of the Roman
Church; the very storehouse of reading, or the Armory, wherein are laid up the
weapons used by us, and taken from our Adversaries own sides. Therefore I will
spend these ensuing leaves in refutation of our Adversaries Doctrine, which
consists in making the Scripture the sole judge of Controversies; a subject
not so frequently written off in particular, though otherwise the reprouall
thereof be potentially and implicitly included in the confirmation of the
Catholic contrary Doctrine.

Now (Grave and learned Sages) the reason emboldning me to dedicate this
Treatise (otherwise unworthy your judicial view) to your selves, though of a
different religion from me is the consideration of the subject here discussed,
which is indeed of that nature, as that you may justly seem to challenge a
particular interest therein: for since you are worthily placed in the rank of
those, who (to speak in the Psalmists Psalm. 8.
phrase) In vij institiae ambulant, and in medio semitarum iudicij; And since a
true apprehension of temporal Laws makes way for the better understanding of
Gods eternal and immutable law; those being but as branches deryued out of
this, and as it were certain adumbrations of the same, according to those
words, Vnus Iac. 2.
est Leg slator and index; And since the question discussed in this treatise
consists in the unchangeable law of God, which principally consists in this
sacred writ, and disputes who is to judge thereof, and to determine
difficulties according to the square of the same: Therefore who can better
judge of this point (speaking of the Laity) then you, who are Judges? Or who
can with a more clear and impartial eye discern the may ne absurdities
attending on our Adversaries Doctrine, then you, if you will but vouchsafe to
glass the same, or like (by supposall only) in the speculation of your own
laws?

1. You (for example) acknowledge, and therefore for your particular worthiness
are deputed to the honor and dignity of Judicature, that in regard of the
ambiguity of your own law, there must be an external Judge or Interpreter
distinct from the law it self, for the manifesting of it true sense: Our
Adversaries Luth. Calvin. Chemnit. etc. vt supra dicitur
do constitute the Scripture, not only as the law, according to which all
controuersiall points of faith are to be decyded, but withal as Judge; so
confounding the law, and the Judge.

2. You not only grant, that there ought to be a judge or interpreter of the
law, but also you mayntaine, that this prerogative of judging, does not belong
to every private man, but only to certain selected and public persons,
appointed to the same end: Yea you (no doubt) are assured, that if liberty were
given to each man to interpret the national laws of England, that suites and
contentions would never be determined by the said laws, every one interpreting
them in favor of this own cause. Our Adversaries teach, that every private
Man Whitaker. Controu. 1. q. 5. c. 3. and q. ^. c. 11. Calvin. Instit. Brent. in
Prolog.
, which they style the revealing spirit, and with whom we may well expostulate
in the words used to Moses Exodus 2.
, Quis constituit te Iudicem? enjoys the privilege of having the undoubted
sense of the Scripture infallibly revealed unto him, and so is to become his
own expositour; from whence it follows (as being warranted by all experience
and reason) that different spirits (by this their Assertion) differently
interpreting the Scriptures, can never come to any final atonement or
reconciliation.

3. You deliver, that in a well ordained Commonwealth, the Judge ought to be
such, as every Man may have free access unto him, as also to have power not
only to interpret the law, but also to have a coactiue authority to force the
delinquent to subscribe and obey under pain of severe chastisement: and (which
is more) you would hold it ridiculous, to constitute that as judge or law, to
the which all delinquents (still continuing delinquents) would chiefly covet to
repair, as to their best refuge, fort, and sanctuary: Our Adversaries
constitute the Scripture for Judge, to which many cannot have resort, since
many cannot read; It cannot impose any obedience to the erroneous party, since
it is the proper scene of all Heretics to maintain their errors, after their
appeal to the Scripture, more pertinaciously, then ever before: finally it is
that, wherein (as herafter shall be proved in this treatise) all Heretics This is
confessed even by Tertul. de praescript. Hierom epist. ad Pauliuum. Vincent.
Lyrinens. aduers. haer.
have accustomed to repose their chiefest confidence and refuge, according to
that of Tertullian vbi supra.
: Obtendunt Haeret^ci etc. Heretics do pretend Scripture, and by their
boldn^s, in the conflicts of their disputes, they weary the strong in faith,
the weak they overcome, and the wavering they dismiss with scruples.

4. You, I know, cannot be persuaded, that the laws of this Realm are able to
prove themselves, from themselves alone, to be the laws of the Realm, without
any further warrant or attestation of history or other authority. Our
Adversaries avouch, contrary to the Fathers, Aug. Tom. 6. contra ep. Fund.
Vincent. Lyrinens. aduersus haer. and Aug. tom. 7. contra Croscon.
that the Scripture (wherein is contained the law, of God) can prove it self,
out of it self alone, to be true and undoubted word of God (among so many
other obtruded and counterfeyted wrytinges) without the explication of the
Church of God.

5. You hold it most dissonant to reason to justify, that when you unfold and
deliver the meaning and sense of the law, you in so doing, are above the law,
but you do willingly acknowledge, that the law is law, whether your sentence
be given of it or no; only by your learned Demurres, you pronounce your
judgment, not that thereby, that which before was not law, should by your
sentence given become the law, but only that others not learned in the law,
should by such your Reports, take notice and distinguish the true meaning of
the Law, from all obtruded and mistaken senses thereof: Our Adversaries Luther.
l. de Concilijs, Illyricus l. de norma and prax. Council. Tride^t. Chemnit. in
exam. Council. Trident.
do idly charge us in great estuation and heat of speech, that we do advance
the universal Pastor of Gods Church, or a lawful general Counsel above the
Scripture, because to them both we ascribe a definitive authority, for setting
down which is Scripture, and which is the true and undoubted sense of it. And
hereupon they auerre, that the Pope, or a general Council by assuming this
prerogative, presumes to make that Scripture by such their declaration, which
before was not Scripture; and to disauthorize that for not Scripture, which
before was Scripture; and lastly to impose that sense of Scripture for the
meaning of the holy Ghost, which before such their imposition was not his
meaning: whereas indeed all that the supreme Bishop or general Council performs
(both which reverently submit themselves to the Scripture) is, to declare
Canonical Scripture from Apocryphal and forged wrytinges; and among many
adulterate and false senses of confessed Scripture, to manifest which is the
genuine and true sense of it; all which prerogatives that the Church and her
Head do enjoy, is evident both from the words of our Savior Math. 18.
, and from his great Apostle S. Paul 1. Timoth. 3.
.

6. You voluntarily confess, that besides your laws left in writing, our
Realm enioyes (as all other good States and Commonwealths do) certain
unwritten and customary laws (as I may term them) which receive their force
from an vndiscontinued practice and long hand of time. And you cannot be
induced to think, that the customs not crossing your written laws, do by
their being, in any sort indignify the same laws: Our Adversaries Calvin.
Instit. 4. Chemnit. in exam. Council. Trident. besides almost all others.
do so admire the written Word of God, as that they reject and betrample all
Apostolical Traditions whatsoever, though they in no sort impugn the sacred
Scripture, boldly pronouncing that all such traditions do mightily wrong and
dishonor the said Scripture. So forgetful they are of those words of an
ancient Father Tertul. vbi supra.
touching traditions: Id verius quod prius, id prius quod ab initio, id ab
initio quod ab Apostolis.

7. To conclude you would repute it most strange, to find any man, that should
affirm the present laws of England to be the only square, according to which
all suites ought to be decyded, and yet the same person withal to auerre, that
at this time we enjoy no true Original, or Translations of those laws, all of
them being by his censure depraved with many falsifications and alterations;
since from this it would follow, that not the true ancient laws of the
Realm, but certain falsified laws and constitutions should adiudge all
depending causes: Our Adversaries mayntaining the Scripture for sole Judge of
Controversies (as often we have said) do withal maintain (so wonderfully does
innovation and nouelty in Religion darken the very light of reason) that at
this day, there is neither Original of the holy Scriptures, Se heerof Beza in
resp. Castal. Carolus Molinaeus in sua transl. part. 12. fol. 110. Castalio in
defensio. transl. p. 117. Whitaker against Reynolds p. 2^5. The ministers of
Lincoln diocese in their book. p. 11.
or translations of them into the Greek, Latin, or our own vulgar Tongue,
which are not by their express assertions and wrytings fraught with diverse
corruptions and deprauations, as most largly we will demonstrate in this
ensuing discourse.

Now the matter standing thus, as that you are able even out of the grounds of
your own profession (in regard of the great resemblance found between it, and
the question here disputed) particularly to discern the absurdities and
gross inconveniences attending the Doctrine here impugned, to whom may this
discourse more justly seem to be presented, then to the mature and grave
Judgments of your selves? And thus much concerning the peculiar inducements of
this my dedication And yet before I remit you to the perusal of this small
work, I will make bold (a boldness humbly undertaken for your own spiritual
good) to put you in mind to have a reserved eye, and intense circumspection
over our modern Pseudoscripturists (so to call them) that is to say, Men who
fasly abuse the holy Scriptures, and who as familiarly and peculiarly interest
themselves in the Scriptures, as if they had begotten them on their own brain
(as the Poets do faigne that Jupiter did Pallas): And yet when these men
understand the Scripture in it true sense (as the devil sometimes has d^^e)
seeing they give credit thereto, not by reason of the Churches authority, but of
their own private conceit, (which ever stands obnoxious to error) what other
thing else do they, then believe a truth falsely? But when they interpret Gods
written Word in a different construction from the universal and Catholic
Church of God, I see not how they can avoid that Dilemma of an ancient Father
Tertul. l. de praescript.
: Si alium Deum praedicant, quomodo eiusdem rebus and literis, and nominibus
vtuntur aduersus quem praedicant? Si eumdem, quomodo aliter? So truly and
deservedly are such men included within the sentence of Saint Austin (a Father
whom of all the Ancients, the Protestants (not liking) yet least dislyke)
Omnes Aug epist. 221. ad Consentium.
qui Scripturas in authoritate etc. All those speaking of the heretical
Scripturists of his time who allege Scripture, for authority make show to
affect the Scripture, when indeed they affect their own errors.

And thus (Grave Judges) in all humility I take my leave, beseeching you, even
for your own souls health, that in your seats and tribunalls of Judicature,
you do so judge, as that hereafter your selves be not judged; especially I
mean when Gods anointed Priests or poor distressed Catholics (guilty only
of treason (if so it must needs be termed) committed in professing the
ancient faith of Christ and his Apostles) shall become the subject of your
judgments: but even the^ remember, that your selves as being herein deputyes to
Gods deputyes, are to give a strict account to that supreme Judge of all: Qui
Genesis 18.
iudicat omnem terram; or (with peculiar reference to terrene Judges) to use
the words of the Prophet David, Psalm. 81.
Qui inter D^os dijudicat.

Yours, in all Christian love and charity. N. S.

THE CHAPTERS OF THE FIRST PART.
THE Catholics reverence toward the Scripture, with the state of the question
touching the Scripture not being Judge. Chap. 1. That the Private Spirit is not
infallibly assured of truly interpreting the Scripture. Chap. 2. The reasons of
the Scriptures difficulty. Chap. 3. The difficulty of the Scripture by reason
of its subject. Chap. 4. The like difficulty in regard of its several spiritual
senses. Chap. 5. The like difficulty in regard of its phrase or style. Chap. 6.
The difficulty of the Scriptures, acknowledged by the Fathers. Chap. 7. The
testimonies alleged by our Adversaries out of the Fathers, for the Scriptures
sole Judge, are answered. Chap. 8. The same difficulty acknowledged by our
Adversaries. Chap. 9. The insufficiency of Scripture for determining doubts in
Religion, proved by arguments drawn from Reason. Chap. 10. That it cannot be
determined by Scripture, that there is any Scripture, or word of God at all.
Chap. 11. That Heresies in all ages have been maintained by the supposed
warrant of Scripture. Chap. 12. That our Adversaries do confess it to be the
custom of Heretics, to fly to the Scripture alone; and that diverse of them
therefore do appeal to the Church, as Judge. Chap. 13.
THE CHAPTERS OF THE Second Part.
THAT the Protestants cannot agree, which books are Scripture, and which not.
Chap. 1. That the Protestants allow not the Original Hebrew of the old
Testament now extant, for authentical and uncorrupted. Chap. 2. That the
Protestants allow no Original Greek Copy of the new Testament now extant, as
uncorrupted. Chap. 3. That that Protestants reject the Septuagints translation
of the old Testament, as erroneous. Chap. 4. That the Protestants reject the
vulgar Latin Translation, commonly called S. Hieroms translation. Chap. 5. That
the Protestants do condemn all the chief tra^slations made by their own
brethren. Chap. 6. That the English Translations are corrupt, and therefore not
sufficient to determine doubts in Religion. Chap. 7 That supposing the
Scripture for Judge of Controversies, yet the letter thereof is more clear and
perspicuous for the Catholics, then for the Protestants. Chap. 8. That the
Texts of Scripture are expounded by the Fathers in the same sense, in the which
they are alleged by Catholics, for proof of their faith. Chap. 9. That the
Textes of Scripture objected by the Protestants in disprouall of our Religion,
are otherwise expounded by the Fathers, then in that sense, wherein our
Adversaries do urge them, and that such their expositions do agree with ours.
Chap. 10. That the Scripture is clear for proof of our Catholic Faith, ever
in the implici^e and tacit judgments of our Adversaries themselves. Chap 11.
The Conclusion. Chap. 12.
THE FIRST PART OF THE PSEVDOSCRIPTVRIST,
The Catholics Reverence toward the Scriptures: with the state of the
Question, touching the Scriptures not being Judge. CHAP. I.
BEFORE we enter into any particular redargution and reproual of the
Protestants doctrine touching the subject of this Treatise, I must put them in
mind with what slanderous calumniations (for detraction is ever accustomed to
tread upon the heels of truth and integrity) they wrong us Catholics for our
supposed contempt of the holy Scriptures; their chief reason thereof (besides
others) being, because we deny to them that facility and easines, as that they
ought to determine all doubts of religion, before the true sense of them (among
so many, that are forced and adulterate) be delivered by the Pastors of Gods
Church. And heerupon they teach, that we in effect reject the Scriptures, and
do advance men's doctrines and judgments above them: So deep are their pens
steeped in gaul against us; and so deservedly may they be ranged with those
mentioned by the Isa. c. 32.
Prophet: Fraudulenti vasa pessima sunt, vsque ad perdendos mites in sermon
mendacij. But how easy is it to dissipate and dissolve this cloud of suggesting
malice? For we teach not, that the Church is to judge, whether that which the
Scripture says, be true or false (since the Scripture is Scripture, and most
true, whether the Church should so judge of it or not) but our doctrine is,
that it being first acknowledged for an infallible principle, that the words
of the Scripture are most true, the Church does only teach (amongst many
interpretations) which is the true sense and meaning of the said words. And in
this sort it follows not, that the Church is above Gods Word (for it is only
a vigilant Depositary and Guardian thereof) but above the judgment of
particular men interpreting his Word; which men do commonly make their private
and revealing spirit, to become (as it were) their Mercuryes-rod, therewith to
chase away all construction of Scripture, not sorting to their phantasyes.
Neither does the Scripture, receive any strength and force (which before it
wanted) from this sentence and judgment of the Church, but only our
understanding is strengthened and confirmed thereby: which sentence of the
Church is not merely the Word of man (which is liable to error and
uncertainty) but in some sort it may be termed the Word of God (as being
delivered by the assistance of the Holy Ghost) in regard of those infallible
promises made in the Scriptures to the Church, that she Luc. 21.
should not err. Act. 15.


2. But to proceed further in acknowledging our due respect to the Scriptures,
we grant most freely, that they are the spiritual conduits, whereby are
derived to us the highest misteryes of our faith; that the blessed penners of
them were so directed by the holy Ghost, as that they neither did, nor could
err in any one letter; that they transcend in worth and dignity all humane
writings, as far as an infallibility of truth surpasses a possibility of
error. Lastly that the sense of them is a most powerful and working physic
against the poisonous receitps of all heretical distillations, if so it be
delivered by the appointment of our spiritual Physician. So venerable and
reverent respect (we see) the Catholics do bear to the sacred Scripture, as to
one chief means ordained by God for our eternal health and welfare; yet
withal they teach, that true faith is to be found not in leaves of the words,
but in the roole of the sense; thus making the true and indubious
interpretation of Gods word to be a rule to the Protestants imaginary rule:
since it is to ouerule and control the private spirit of every particular
Sectary.

3. But now in the next place, to enter more particulerly into the state of
this point, touching the Scriptures supposed Judge of faith, we are to
conceive, that whereas our Sectaryes do generally maintain, that the written
Word of God is the sole and infallible Judge, as also the only rule and square
of the articles of Christian Religion, thereby rejecting not only any other
Judge, but also all other points touching faith, which have not their express
proof or necessary inference in the said holy Scriptures; The Catholics on
the other side (running one and the same line of faith with all antiquity)
teach as follows.

4. First that the holy Scripture is not the Judge of all Controuersyes of
faith.

Secondly they teach, that it is norma infallibilis, an infallible rule or
square of faith, that is, that nothing contrary to the Scripture is to be
admitted; but they say not, that it is the only rule of square, and therefore
they affirm, that besides the Scripture there are Apostolical traditions and
other definitions of the Church. Thus we grant, that the written word is,
regula partialis, but not regula totalis, of faith and Religion; and therefore
we admit some things praeter Scripturam, but nothing contra Scripturam; that
is, we approve some things not expressly sound in the Scripture, but not any
thing contrary or repugnant to the Scripture.

5. Thirdly, they hold, that granting the Scripture to be the rule or square
of most articles of religion, yet it follows not, that it is the Judge of the
said articles, since Regula, and Iudex are in nature things different; for even
in civil matters the law is the rule and sqare, according to which, suites and
contentions are determined; and yet the law is not the Judge of them, but the
Magistrate himself expounding the law, though sometimes the Law is called
improperly and Metaphorically the Judge.

6. Fourthly, and lastly, they deny not, but that the Scripture may in a
restained sense be termed the Judge of all Controversies in faith; because it
Matthew. 16. and 18. and 23. Ioa^. vlt. Luc. 22. Act. 15.
appoints and sets down, who is that Judge (to wit the Church,) as also
they grant, that in the like reserved construction the Scripture may be said to
deliver all things sufficiently which belong to faith and religion: And this
not only, because it delivers evidently al those articles of faith, which are
simply and absolutely necessary for all men to know (as the Articles of our
Creed, the Decalogue, and those Sacraments which are more necessary) but also
in that all other points whatsoever, concerning either the true exposition of
the written word, or faith and religion in general, are warranted by the
infallible authority of the Church. which infallible authority is proved and
commended to us by the holy Scripture. And thus on the one side, the Scripture
warranting the Churches authority, and on the other, the Church setting down
and approving the true sense of the Scripture; it may hereupon be justly said,
that both these (I mean the Church and the Scripture) do interchangeably
receive their proof, out of the proof they give. Therefore all impertinencyes
laid aside, the touch of the question here between our Adversaries and us
rests in this: Whether all things, which necessarily belong to religion, are
so fully and abundantly delivered in the Scripture, as that they are either
expressly contained therein, or else without the Churches authority interposed,
they may particulerly be necessarily deduced from the Scripture; and so in
regard heerof, whether the Scripture is to become the only Judge of such
arti^les, or no. In which question we hold (as is said) the negative part,
but our Adversaries the affirmative. So fair different in opinion are our
Sectaryes from the judgment of Vincentius Lyrinensis, touching the
interposition of the Churches authority in the exposition of Scripture, who
thus writes In suo Commonitorio.
heerof: Multum necesse est etc. It is very needful in regard of so many
errors proceeding from the misinterpretation of Scripture, that the line of
Prophetical and Apostolical exposition, should be directed according to the
rule of the Ecclesiastical and Catholic sense.

7. Now that the Scripture is not the Judge of Controuersyes in the sense above
set down, shall be proved two ways. First Categorice, and absolutely, that so it
is not, nor cannot be; which shall appear in the first part of this Treatise.
Secondly Hypthetice, and of a supposall, that though the Scripture (as
considered in it self) were this Judge, yet cannot our Protestant Adversaries
justly urge it, or pretend it for the same, which shall be the subject
demonstrated and made good in the second part hereof.

8. Yet before I enter into any particular dispute thereof, I intend to discover
and lay open the weakness of one main retraite or sanctuary, whereunto our
Adversaries are accustomed to fly in their maintayning the Scripture for Judge;
for when they are pressed with the abstruse difficultyes found in the Scripture
in regard of the several obtruded interpretations of it, and doubtfulnes of the
true meaning of the Holy Ghost therein, their common refuge then they make to
the private spirit, which spirit D. Whitaker Controu. 1. q. 5. cap. 3. and ^1.
and Controu. 1. q. 2. cap. 3.
thus speciously entitles: An inward persuasion of truth from the Holy Ghost,
in the secret closets of the belieuers heart. This spirit (say they) infallibly
instructs them in the true understanding of the Scripture, so as by the
assistance heerof they are enabled to pick out (among so many false
constructions) the true and undoubted construction, and according to the same
to determine and judge the point or Controversy, for which such passages of
Scripture are produced by them; and thus the end of all is, that the private
spirit interpreting the Scripture, is to be the sole and supreme Judge of al
Controversies of faith. Now this their chief hold or strength (being indeed
their last most despayring evasion, thereby to decline the authority of the
Church) I will ruinate, and overthrow in the next Chapter following, which
Chapter may serve as certain Prolegomena, to the ensuing Treatise; The force
of this their refuge I will prove to be most uncertain, yea false and
erroneous, and this, first from Scripture, and secondly from force and weight
of natural reason.

That the private spirit is not infallibly assured of truly interpreting the
Scripture: proved out of the Scripture, and from natural reason. CHAP. II.
IF we will take a view of what is said in Gods Word concerning this point, we
shall find it most plentiful, in absolutely denying this power of judging or
interpreting to belong to the private spirit. And first, what can be more
pregnantly said to convince this phantasy, then those words of the 1. Cor. 1.
Apostle? To one is given by the spirit the word of wisdom, to another the
word of knowledge according to the same spirit etc. to another Prophesy, and to
another interpretation of tongues. Where we see, that the Apostle plainly, and
as it were of purpose, refelleth this doctrine, since he teaches, that the
gift of interpreting the Scripture is not given to all the faithful; contrary
to the practice and experience of our English Puritanes, who, how ignorant
soever they be, presuming that they are of the number of the faithful and
elect, do most confidently vaunt of the gift of expounding the Scriptures.

2. And that we may better here observe, how the two chief Apostles do second
one the other in this question; I will allege S. Peter's own words, as
perspicuous and clear for our purpose as may be, who 2. Pet 1. Omnis propheti^
Scripturae, propri^ interpretatione non fit.
says No prophesy of the Scripture is made by any private interpretation; In
both which places and texts, by the word (Prophesy) is meant (as our
Adversaries do acknowledge) the true understanding and interpreting of the holy
Scriptures.

3. Another place we will produce out of S. John, ^* Joan 4.
who says thus: Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the
spirits, if they be of God. By which words we are taught, that the spirit of
others are to be examined, if they proceed from God or not. This admonition
cannot be understood of the spirit of the whole Church, since then it should
follow, that there should be none left to try the said spirit of the Church
(every particular man being included therein.) If then it is to be understood of
private me^ (as of necessity it must) it follows, that a private spirit
cannot be this Judge, since it self is to undergo (by the former text) the
judgment and examination of some other. If it be replied, that the Scripture
is to examine this spirit, this avails nothing, especially if the point,
wherein the private spirit does exercise it self, be of the sense and meaning of
the Scripture. Therefore it remains, that the spirit be tried by the
co^formity, which it bears to those, whom, it is certain, to have the true
spirit indeed: and this is the whole Church of God it self, being the pillar
Tim. c. 3.
and foundation of truth. A point so clear, that Luther Lib. de potestate
Papae.
(convinced by euidency of the truth) is forced to say: De nullo priuato homine
certisumus etc. We are not certain of any private person, whether he has the
revelation of the father or no (meaning hereby the revelation of the sense of
the Scripture) but that the Church has it, we ought not to doubt. What
answers now will our Adversaries bring to the former texts of Scripture? Will
they seek to avoid all these by putting us in mind, that it is written: Luc.
c. 11.
Pater vester dabit spiritum bonum petentibus se: and therefore every private
man, that will ask this spirit of God, may have it? Let them remember that
(besides these words are not understood of the spirit of interpreting, but of
the spirit of faith, hope, and charity) it is also written Jacob. 4.
Petitis and non accipitis, eo quod male petatis. And therefore many may implore
of God the gift of this spirit, and yet not obtain it; since they perhaps
demand it not with that due disposition of mind, and in such sort, as God
exacteth at their hands

4. This then being so, who in all likelihood is further of from fruitfully and
effectually praying for the same (to the gayning whereof humility and
resignation of judgment, even by our Adversaries Luth. praesat. assertio^is
(...). a Leone Pontif damn^tor.
acknowledment, is, among other things, necessarily required) then this
alcensuring spirit, which is ever drunk with a self lyking, and which is
arrived to that height of pride and elation of mind, as it houldeth it more
reasonable, that all authorityes should pass under the fyle and polishing of
his own approbation? It cannot assure us with In prolegom. contra Pe^^u^a ^oto.
Brentius, that it belongs to every private man to judge of the doctrine of
Religion, and to discern the truth from falsehood. It is in like sort of force
to coin and stamp this position with Lib. 4. Instit. c. ^.. 8. 12.
Calvin, and Exam. 4. sess. Council. Trident.
Kemnitius, as a received Axiom, to wit, that the definitions and sentences,
even of general Counsels, are to be poysed by the balance of each man's
private judgment; though with such a one (especially if he be ignorant and
unlearned) gilded apparances of reason do for the most part preponderate, and
weigh down reason it self: such is the Tarquinian and insupportable pride of
this spirit, since by such transcendent speeches and actions it warranteth,
that the sheep is to guide or direct their Pastor; the subject to determine
the sentence of his Prince; and the delinquent most insolently and petulantly
to judge his own Judges.

5. But to pass from the testimony of Gods word written by the Apostles and
Evangelists, unto the inward testimony written by himself in the book of
each man's understanding: we shall easily find, that even Natural reason is
able to convince of falsehood our Adversaries former assertion.

6. And first, what greater oversight can be, then to acknowledge that for
Judge of Controuersyes (for thus our Adversaries do, when they give an
infallibility of interpreting to the private spirit) which is not of power and
ability to determine any Controversy? And this insufficiency we find to be in
such private spirits; for we see by experience, that in the explication of
these four words only, This Matthew. 26. Marc. 14. etc.
is my body, as also for the texts Matthew. 12. Act. ^. Romans 10. Ephesians. 4. etc.
urged for Christ's descending into hell; wherein the Lutherans, and Caluinists
do so differ, as that their mere contrary and irreconciliable Constructions do
not only manifest the untruth and error of the one of them; but also the
doctrine, for which the said textes are urged, is, after their long
disputations and different sentences pronounced, as much doubted of (if not
more) then it was in the beginning: And yet both the Lutherans and Caluinists
do challeng alike to themselves the guist of this expounding spirit, withal the
necessary conditions attending the same, as Prayer, Humility, Skill in the
tongues, Conferences of several passages of Scripture, the one still obiecting
to the other the clearnes and perspicuity of Gods word in their own behalf.

7. Secondly it necessarily conduces to the being and perfect nature of a
Judge (as we find in the practice of all Controuersyes whatsoever) to have
power and authority, thereby to force (even upon coertion and constraint, if
need require) both the different parties to subscribe to his sentence once
pronounced (since otherwise his judgment and definition would prove both
bootles and in auailable.) But we cannot find, that a private man's spirit can
justly assume to it self any such coactiue power; since it cannot threaten any
Ecclesiastical and spiritual censure to one for not admitting his judgment,
determination, and exposition of Scripture.

8. Thirdly, seeing that the doubts of Religion do rise amongst men, who are
visible and known one to another; how can it be imagined, that the Judge, who
is to take up and compound al these differences, should be such a one, as can
neither be seen nor heard by any of the contending parties? For the spirit,
which is in this man, suppose it did infallibly interpret aright, yet can it
not be seen, heard, or acknowledged for such, by another man, in that he
cannot be undoubtedly assured, that the same spirit is warranted from God,
since false teachers do ordinarily mask themselves under the borrowed veil of
Gods Ministers, and false ^. Cor. cap. 11.
Apostles (after they once have ascended the Thabor of the revealing spirit,
vainly talking of Elias and Moses) tranfiguring themselves into the Apostles
of Christ: All who notwithstanding do equally vaunt of this spirit, and yet
nevertheless do cast in the mould thereof, most uncertain, and oftentimes
repugnant doctrines; seeing then the rule or judge of Faith and Religion ought
to be both known and certain; for if it be not known, it can be no Judge (at
least) to us, and if it be uncertain, it can be no Judge at all; therefore it
is evidently euicted, that the reauealing spirit (as being most unknown and
uncertain) can in no case be erected as Judge amongst us Christians.

9. Fourthly our Adversaries do teach, that this spirit is given not generally
to all, but particularly to some, to wit, to the Elect and the faithful, as
Calvin Instit. 1. c. 7. 5.
affirms; from which doctrine it follows. First, that God has left no
certain and general rule, or guide in his Church, whereby all men may arrive
to the true knowledge of him, but only some few and particular men. Secondly,
since we cannot infallibly know, who is of the Elect and faithful, therefore
we cannot be undoubtedly assured (as is above touched) to whom this spirit is
given, as D. Whitaker Contro. 2. quest. 5.
confesses (and consequently it avails no man but him who only enjoys it,)
seeing every one of our Adversaries do in like manner obtrude themselves into
the number of the Elect. And therefore seeing that Luther and Calvin did
indifferently challenge to themselves the like illumination of this spirit, and
yet taught contrary doctrines concerning Canonical Scripture and the Real
presence: And seeing it is cortaine, that both were not inspired with the holy
Ghost (for he teaches not contradictions) and that the one had no greater
illumination then the other; it therefore necessarily follows, that we ought
to give no greater credit to the one, then to the other; and so since we cannot
believe both, we ought (according to all force of reason) to believe neither.

10. Fifthly, this spirit (whereof they make such ventitation, as that we ought
not to entertain any other sense of Gods word, then what the influence of the
said spirit may seem to exhale) either is absolutely infallible, or else at
some times, and in some things fallible and subject to error; if the later,
then it proceeds from the Devil, since the spirit of God never erreth: if
the first, then how can there be any contention or Controversy amongst the
faithful, enjoying this spirit? And yet diverse both have been and are amongst
the Caluinists, and Lutherans. It may be, they will reply heereto, that this
spirit is ever infallible, when it speaks according to the sense of the holy
Scripture. A goodly priuiledg; for so the spirit of the Devil is infallible,
as long as it follows Gods sacred word; furthermore who must judge, when it
speaks according to the sense of the holy Scripture? And thus is the
difficulty made as intricate as before.

11. Six^ly and lastly, the falsehood of the Protestants doctrine herein is
euicted from the Protestants doctrine in another point (thus is heresy become
the sword, which wounds heresy) to wit, that General Counsels may err; for
if such Synods (being aduantaged with many privileges above any one private
man) may want the assistance of the holy Ghost in interpreting the Scripture or
defining what is heresy; how can we probably assure our selves, that this or
that particular Protestant infallibly enjoys the gift of expounding truly
Gods sacred written word? And because this inference is much prejudicial to
our Adversaries, therefore I will dissect every particular vein and sinew of
all such circumstances, which may afford advantage to the one part above the
other.

12. Thus then, if an Ecumenical and general Counsel indicted and confirmed
by lawful authority, representing the majesty of Gods Church, as being the
supreme So does Augustine term a General Council, epist. 162.
Tribunal thereof; assured by Where two or three are gathered together in my
name. Matt. 18.
promise of Christ his assisting presence; warranted with the first example of
that kind by the blessed Act. 15.
Apostles; highly reverenced and magnified by the Aug. vbi supra, and lib. de
Baptis. c. 18 Anast. ep. ad Epictetum. Basil. epist. 78. Amb. epist. 32. Leo
ep. 53. Hier. lib. cont. Luciferianos.
ancient fathers; acknowledged and received by our learnedest The Lutherans
receive the first six Counsels, and most of the Protestants the first four.
adversaries; consisting of several hundreds of most venerable Prelates,
conspicuous for virtue, readiness in the Scriptures, varieties of tongues, and
infinitenes of reading; gathered from the most remote and opposite regions of
Christendom, and therefore the less probable upon their such sudden meeting
jointly to embrace any one point of innovation; battering daily upon their
knees at the ears of Almighty God with most humble and feruerous prayer,
seconded with most austere fastinges, and other corporal chastisements; and
all this to the end, that it would vouchsase his divine goodness, so to guide
and stern this reverend assembly with his holy spirit, as what expositions
they give of the Scripture, or what otherwise they determine for undoubted
faith, may be agreeable to his sacred word and truth. Now, notwithstanding this,
if such a celebrious concourse and confluence (I say) of Pastors (being the
Mart, or Rende-uous of virtue and learning) shall so fail therein, as that
they may, and have sundry times most foully erred (as our supercilious Calvin.
lib. 4. Instit. 9.. 8. Luth. lib. de Council. Kemnitius in exam. Council. Trident.
Sectaryes avouch) in their Constructions of Scripture and resolutions of
faith, though all such their decrees be otherwise warranted with a judicial
conference of Scripture, the general practice of Gods Church, and the
conspiring testimonies of all antiquity: If this (I say) may happen (the best
means thus producing the worst effects) what shall we then conceive of an
obscure Sir John (a man engendered in the ^lyme of pride and ignorance) who
acknowledges no other Apostolical Sea, then his own Parish Church, and who in
some points ever subdeuideth himself from the rest of his As appears by
their books written against one another; of which point, See Co^eius, and
Hospintan^s,
brethren, so as he is truly condemned of heresy, even by the lying mouth of
heresy: A man for the most part depraved in manners, but competent for
learning, not having any warrant from God for his proceeding, nor president
from his holy Church: Yea one to whom God Hatly No prophesy of Scriptur is of
any private interpretation. 2. Pet. c. 1.
denies this presumed certainty of expounding Gods word; and (further) of
whose spirit we are commanded Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit but try
the spirits.
to doubt, and (which is more) of whose seducing These things I have written
unto you concerning those which deceive you. Joan. 1. c. 2.
we are most cautelously premonished.

13. Now, if this man being in his Pulpit upon the Lords day, in the presence
of his ignorant and psalming auditory (a fit Pathmos for his ensewing
revelations) and there opening the Bible (for thus falsehood is forced to beg
countenance from truth) and undertaking to expound some text or other for the
establishing of his late appearing faith (though contrary to the judgment of
all ancient Counsels) affirming himself to be secured by special
Euthysiames and illuminations from God for the better judging the point
controuerted, rising from his own explication of Scripture: which being don,
what assurance may we have of the truth of this his all-iudging spirit? And is
there not great reason to expect more errors, then sentences to drop from this
man's mouth? And what madness then is it, to allow to such an one (and but one)
that infallibility of spirit in expounding Gods sacred Write, and answerable
determining the articles of faith, which himself denies to a general
Council? Yet such is the forward blindness of our enchanted Nouellistes heerin,
who (for example) prefer in this case, under the pretext of the revealing
spirit, before the mature and grave resolutions of all antiquity and Counsels,
the ignorant, rash, and sensual positions and interpretations of an incestuous
revolted Luther.
Monk, or stigmaticall Calvin.
fugitive; intimating hereby, that many virtuous and learned men gathered
together for the disquisitio^ of truth, must necessarily err; one sole,
obscure, lateborne, illiterate, irreligious Scripturist cannot err. O
insensa^i Galat. cap. ^.
Galatae, quis vos fascina^it etc?

14. But at this present I will stay my pen, proceeding no further in the
demolishing and battering down of the weak fortress of this private spirit.
That which is already delivered, may serve as a preparatiue to the Reader, the
better to apprehend the force and weight of the ensewing arguments and reasons.
I will now hasten to the maine subject, and will first begin with the reasons
of the Scriptures difficulty.

The reasons of the Scriptures difficulty. CHAP. III.
WHY the Catholics do absolutely deny the Scriptures to have this
inappeachable sovereignty of resolving all doubts in religion, there is no
reason (amongst others) more forcible, then that which is drawn from the
difficulty of true understanding the said writings; for though our Adversaries
do pretend the easines of them to be such, as that any how ignorant soever (if
so he be of the number of the justified) may withal readiness pick out the
true sense, for the approbation, and fortifying of any point of Faith
whatsoever: Yet he who looks into this matter with a cleare-sighted
judgment, shall find them to be inuolued with so many ambiguityes, as that
aforehand he shall have need to repair to some Act. 9.
Ananias or other, to remove from his eyes the scales of partiality, ignorance,
and other imperfections.

2. Therefore let such, whose state (through want of learning or otherwise) is
not to intermedle with those sacred writings, remember the punishment
inflicted to the 1. Reg. 6, 6.
Bethsamites, for curiously behoulding the Arc, which belonged not to them;
yet we see the consideration of this danger, and of far greater, is not
powerful enough, to control the ignorant Sectary in his expounding the
Scripture; who being once placed upon the high pinnacle of his revealing spirit,
undertakes to view al ages and Countries of the Church; and ouerlooking the
judgments of private Fathers, interpreting Gods written word (as low and humble
vales) extends his sight to the summity and height of general Counsels
therein, still behoulding with a feuere eye, whatsoever stands not right in
the line of his own exposition.

3. The chief and primitive reasons of their abstruse hardness are three, to
wit: The Subject, handled in those writings: The mul^iplicity of the senses,
contained in the words: And the Method, or manner of the phrase, and style.
And if but any one of these three do happen, though in an inferior degree of
intricatenes, in human writings, yet we see by experience, that it does so
entangle the Reader in such a labyrinth of mistakings, as that he will freely
acknowledge this ignorance in not apprehending aright in all places the
authors mind; what shall we the^ think, when all these three do meet
together in Gods sacred Book, and that in the highest degree of any
writtinges ever extant; as it shall appear in the subsequent Chapters.

Of the subject of the Scriptures. CHAP. IIII.
TO begin with the subject of the Scriptures; we are herein to observe, that it
as farpasseth in depth and prosundity the contents of man's wrytinges, as God
(the author thereof) ouergoeth him in wisdom and power. For whereas the matter
of all such humane labors, is ever such, as that the natural wit of man is
suitable and proportionable thereto, both for the delivering or apprehending
thereof: and the reason hereof is, because the understanding, being as it were
the sum of our little world, ever keeps it self within the Tropicks of
natural reason, and consequently is not of force to deliver or apprehend any
thing, which may not be confined within the same compass; whereas if we look
into the subject of these celestial and divine writings, we shall find the
height of many things entreated therein, to be such, as that they transcend
all natural reason.

2. I could here insist in the Creation of the world of nothing, whereof these
holy Scriptures assure us, though contrary (in outward show) to all Philosophy,
which teaches, ex nihilo nihil sit: I will pass over the infinite prophesies
recorded therein, which ever of their own nature are hardly to be understood: I
will in like sort pretermit to speak of the nature of the Angels, entreated of
in the said book of Life, whose essence being merely spiritual, and endued
with diverse great privileges above man, can but imperfectly be comprehended
with our fleshly understandings: finally I will forbear to speak of the
eternal predestination and reprobation of man (how and by what means they are
wrought) of the external working of God within our souls, with his grace or
otherwise: of the Sacraments, the Conduits of his grace; points whereof we are
instructed in the holy Scripture, and such, wherein we may truly glass the
weakness of man's understanding, and the depth of Gods wisdom and power.

3. But I will insist a little in those two incomprehensible and astonishing
Articles of Christian faith, revealed to us out of those former divine
Scriptures, to wit, of the Trinity, and of the Incarnation; wherein, in the
first (to omit diverse other stupendous difficulties) we are taught by ^he said
Oracles of God, that one and the same Nature (to wit the Godhead) is in three
persons really distinct; and the same Nature is really and formally identifyed
with each of the three persons. In like sort, in the article of the
Incarnation, (where besides that the Creator of al things is become a
Creature, and the father the daughters son) we receive from the same
fountain, that in one Hypostasis or person (to wit in the person of Christ)
are two perfect natures very far different, and that this Hypostasis is
altogether really and formally identifyed with the divine Nature, and
nevertheless is most in wardly united with the humane Nature, which humane
nature does really and formally differ from the divine nature. And thus much,
but to skim over superficially this point of the subject and matter of the
Scriptures; which if it were handled according to the fulness and largnes of it
self, would justly require a Treatise of no small quantity.

Of the diverse senses of the Scripture intended by the Holy Ghost. CHAP. V.
IN speaking of the multiplicity of the senses in the Scriptures, we are to
call to remembrance, that Gods sacred written word differs from all humane
writings (besides in many other points) especially in this; that whereas al
such have but one sense or meaning properly intended by the author, this is so
fertile therein, as that (like a shel (if it were possible) containing within it
several kernels of different tastes) it carries in many places (besides the
immediate literal sense) three diverse spiritual senses, and all warranted by
the holy Ghost. These three are the Allegorical, Tropologicall, and
Anagogicall.

2. The Allegorical sense ever bears reference of a spiritual and secret
meaning to Christ, or his Church. So we read that Abraham having truly and
really two sons, the one borne of the freewoman, the other of the
bond-slaue, did figure out the two testame^ts of God, even by the exposition of
Salat. 4.
S. Paul.

3. The Tropologicall is directed to instruction of manners or conversation of
life. And answerably to this we find that text, Deuteronomy. 25.
Thou shall not m^ss^^ the mou^h of the Ox, that treads out the corn, to be
interpreted S. Paul 1. Cor. 9.
of Gods preachers, who are to be maintained at the charges of their ^lock.

4. The Anagogicall sense implies a construction to heaven or eternal
felicity; and hereupon we find that verse of the Psalm 94.
prophet, I swear in my wrath, if they shall not enter into my rest; to be
interpreted (besides the literal meaning of the Land of promise) by the Heb. 4.
Apostle of eternal life.

5. Now then there being, besides the literal sense, so many mystical senses
of Scripture, here the difficulty arises, that seeing some texts are to be
understood only l^terally, others both literally and mistically, how we may
know which are the texts, that admit only a literal construction, and which
both a literal and spiritual; and if a spiritual interpretation, which of the
former three is to be asigned to them, since every text is not capable of all
the three spiritual senses. And which is yet more, there are some passages of
Scripture, where in one and the same sentence, one and the same word (being
twice repeated) is in the one place taken literally, in the other figuratively
or mystically, as in those words of Christ, Let the dead bury the dead. All this
must be known, before we Matt. 8.
can d^aw any forcible argument from any such texts; in regard of which
difficulty it may not seem strange, if sundry of the a^ncient doctors did err
in their comments upon the Scriptures, some of them affecting so much the
literal sense, as that they did spoyl^ it of all mystical construction; others
through their nyce and wholly spirituallyzed imaginations, would so streyne the
Scriptures, as that for the most part they neglected the letter, and would
extract nothing else, but spiritual, and (as it were) certain Chymicall senses
through their own ^ue^ curious sub^ mation of the said divine Scriptures, as it
is ^u^dent out of the expositions of diverse passages of Scripture given by Vt
tes^a^ur ^ie^^n. praf. lib. 18. in Isa. v^ in ^. 3^. Ezech. and Aug. lib. 20.
de ^iuit. Dei cap. 7.
Tertulian and Hier. ep. ad ^^machium.
Origin.

6. In regard then of the impregnable truth of the Scriptures di^nculty, (both
in re^pect of the many senses thereof, as also of the phrase and style, as
hereafter shall appear) it is a wo^ld to observe, how idly and impertinently
our Adversaries do object d^uers passages of it to prove its own perspicuity.
To this end where the Scripture does often inculcate, that the Commandments
and will of God (being once known) do become a light to the soul for the
gu^ding of her self; these testimonies (I say) our Sectaryes most violently
force, to prove that the Scripture is, in regard of the understanding of it
self, of that light and perspicuity, that the true sense and meaning of it, is
most obuious and facile* Thus do they urge those words of the Psalm. 19.
Prophet: ^raeceptum Domini lucidum illuminaus oculos. The commandment of the
Lord is clear enlightening the eyes: As also that other Psalm.
Text: Lucerna pedibus meis verbum tuum. Thy word is a lantern to my feet. And
finally that of the Cap. ^.
Proverbs: Mandatum lucerna est, and lex tu^ etc. Thy Commandment is a lamp,
and thy Law a light. In like sort we find, that they strangely rack certain
Texts, which only concern the facility and easines of the D^^alog^e or ten
Commandments to convince the easines of the Scripture in general, as that place
of Lib. 4* contra Marcion^*
Deutronomy (to omit others) Mandatum, quod ego praecipio tibihodie, non supra
te est etc. The Commandment which I command the^ this day, is not about thee*
neither is it far of, interpreted of the easines only of fulfilling the
Co^mandments of the Decalogue by Tertullian, as also by Ambrose, Chrysostom,
and others upon the tenth to the Romans.

7. To conclude this point where the Apostle 2. Cor. 4. particulerly means,
that our belief in Christ (to wit that he was borne, suffered, and did rise
from death for man's salvation) is so evident and clear, as that if it be hid
from any, it is only from such, as do perish, and whose eyes the God of th^^
world has blinded; which interpretation is necessarily confirmed by comparing
with this text the Chapter before in the said Epistle, where the Apostle
teaches, that all points touching Christ were seen in the law obscurely in
shadows and figures only: yet will our Adversaries have that place to be meant
of the euidency of clearnes and understanding the Scripture; which passage
notwithstanding is to be interpreted in the sense above mentioned, and
whereunto those words of Tertullian may seem to allude: Christo moriente nata
est haereditas nostra, Christo resurgente confirmata est, Christo ascendente in
Caelos permanet in eternum.

Of the Phrase, and Style of the Scripture. CHAP. VI.
NOW to come to the third point, to wit the phrase and manner of writing;
which does (as it were) apparel or cloth those hidden and divine Mysteries:
We are first in general to consider, that the style thereof is far different
from the writings of any man that ever lived, as appears by the judgment of
all learned men. It is also in that respect inimitable unto man; which
circumstance must of necessity import an unusual strangenes of the phrase
thereof in man's ears, and consequently a great difficulty in perfectly
understanding the same. Secondly (and more particulerly) we are to observe,
that there are to be found not many humane writings, which do flow with greater
store of figures and schemes, then the holy Scriptures do, in so much, that it
were an infinite labor to set down all the Metaphores, Allegoryes,
Hyperboles, Ironies, and other such Tropes, which do occure almost in every
other text thereof; which kind of speech being unaccustomed to an ignorant
ear, cannot but occasion diverse misconstructions.

2. But besides these kind of figures common to every language, there are in
the said heavenly writings diverse Anima mea in manibus men's se^per. Psa^m. 118.
And again, Thronus eius sicut dies caeli. Psa^m. 88. with infinite such others.
phrases peculiar only to the Hebrew tongue (in which language the chiefest
part of them was first written) and consequently with great difficulty they are
to be understood of those, which are ignorant of the same tongue. If those
which are skillfull in the Greek do deservedly attribute a great hardness
thereof to the diversity of dialects, to wit, of Atticisme, Eolisme, Ionisme,
Beotisme, and the like, all these being Idiomes proper to the Greek tongue;
what hardness then must we imagine, that ear will find, when it shall read the
Scriptures in some one tongue or other, and yet much thereof in a phrase or
speech altogether different from that tongue, wherein he reads them, and
peculiar to another strange language, whereof he has no knowledge at all?

3. To pass on further, the Scripture in diverse passages is delivered in very
ambiguous, imperfect, and broken sentences, which are such as must greatly
increase the doubtfulnes of the meaning of the Holy Ghost; And to exemplify but
one amongst many, where the Joan. 8.
Jews demanded of our Savior: Tu quis es? And he answered: Principium, qui
and loquor vobis. Which answer of his is so obscure, as that it hardly
stands with good construction, especially in all Greek copyes, wherein we find
the greek word signifying, principium (viz. (...)) to be of the accusative
case; and therefore no marvel if the Fathers, as we find in their
commentaryes, did much labor in the exposition of these very words.

4. Lastly to convince demonstratiuely the difficulty of the holy Scriptures
concerning the Letter, the Holy Ghost (who is truth it self, and cannot leave
written contrary and repugnant things) has nevertheless thought good, for
our greater humility, in acknowledging the abysmall obstrusenes of those
writings, to pen the same in such manner, as that there appear diverse
sentences, which at the first sight and reading, seem mere contradictory; in
so much that if the one be true, it follows, in the judgment of the
illiterate Scripturist, who rests, only in the naked word; that the other is
false. Infinite examples might be alleged, but these few following shall
suffice.

5. Dominus ^. Reg. cap. 1^.
precaepit Semei, vt malediceret David. Our Lord commanded Semei, that he would
accurse David. In like sort it is said: Romans 1.
God delivered them up to a reprobate sense, to do those things which are not
convenient: both which actions no man will deny, but to have been sins. And
yet weread elsewhere: Nem^^i Eccl^s. 1^.
mandauit impie agere: God has commanded no man to do wickedly.

6. In l^ke sort in one place we read: Et ne nos inducas intentationem: And
lead us not into temptation; which prayer seems to be superfluous, if God did
not sometimes tempt men; and yet to confront (as it were) this text Cap. 1.
S. James says: Let no man say, when he is tempted, I am tempted of God; for
God tempts no man. Do we not read after the same manner, that the Luc. c. 1.
Evangelist gives most honorable commendation of Zacharias and Elizabeth in
these words: Both were just before God, and walked in all the Commendements
and iustifications of our Lord without blame. And yet we find it registered in
Cap. 7.
Ecclesiasticus: Non est homo iustus in terra, qui faciat bonum and non peccet;
There is not a just man upon earth, which does good and sins not: as also in
another Iac. 3.
place, In multis offendimus omnes; We all offend in many things. Which later
sentences seem plainly to recall that justice and piety, which in the former
words were attributed to those two virtuous persons.

7. Lastly, it is said in Cap. 20
Exodus: Ego Deus Zelotes etc. I am a jealous God, risiting the sins of the
parents upon their sons unto the third and fourth generation: and yet Cap. 18.
Ezechiel affirms: Filius non portabit iniquitatem Patris, sed anima quae
peccauerit, ipsa morietur; The son shall not bear the iniquity of his
Father, but that soul alone which has sinned, shall dye. Now what greater
diametrical contrariety can lie in sentences, then seems to be in all these
former, if nakedly we consider the bare words (for the unlearned can proceed
no further) though in themselves they are reconciliable, and so declared to be
by the Commentaryes of the learned, since otherwise Scripture were to be
alleged against Scripture, and this were to make truth to lie. ^ut to end
this point of the Scriptures obscurity, we do heerin see in what a sea of
diff^cultyes that man is tossed, who attempteth to understand the Scriptures by
the sole help of his own judgment; whether he looks into the subject or
matter whereof they entreat, or into the variety of senses appearing therein,
or finally into the style or phrase wherein they are written.

8. Now let our verse and lyne-cunning Scripturist, or other Sectary, who so
strikes his adversary with the scabard of the Scriptures (as one Doctor
speaks) as that he never wounds him with the blade; let such a one I say,
(skillfull chiefly in yelling out a Geneua Psalm) venditate the Scriptures
facility, affirming that they are more illustrious for proof of any
controuersiall point, then the Sun beams. Let him insult over the
Ca^holikes, in mantaining that Paul and Peter with the rest, as they commonly
speak (for it were overmuch to style them Saints) are out of his own
knowledge, and reading, so clear in such and such places against the Papists,
as that they need no explication or comment whatsoever, and that he laments the
blindness of such, who wilfully do charge Gods word with supposed
obscurityes. Let him go on in this sort, since the grave and learned may justly
smyle, to see how comically such a naturalized Heretic does lay open to the
world his pride, ignorance, and foolery; especially when they read of such men,
as Origin and Tertullian were, to have lain drowned perhaps to the eternal
ship wrack and perdition of their souls) in the vast Ocean of the Scriptures
profundity.

9. Thus we see the bare letter of the Scripture being only stood upon does
often seem to maintain an error, which is mainly impugned by the true sense
once drawns from the said Scripture; like as the Physicians observe, that the
gross substance of some drugs or Minerals being taken, does occasion some
diseases, which are after cured by the spirits extracted from the former drugs.

CHAP. VII. The difficulty of the Scriptures acknowledged by the Fathers.
IT is a strange thing to observe the inconsiderate pride of our Adversaries in
justifying the Scriptures perspicuity, when as the ancient Fathers (to whom
our Men are infinitely inferior in all good parts of literature) are not
ashamed to acknowledge their wonderful depth and obscurity; which sentence of
theirs is manifest two several ways: First by their own Commentaries written
upon the Scriptures: Secondly, by their express and plain words directly
confessing so much. And concerning the first, what greater proof can be
thereof, then to see so many, and such as they were, to spend the greatest part
of their lives in illustrating and explaining diverse parcells of the said
Scriptures, and in digging through the most stony and hardest passages thereof,
with their written Scholies? wherein they have most elaborately dissected (as it
were) and anatomized text after text, to the great ease and perspicuity of the
reader; whose most commendable and painful labors in that kind, had been no
doubt but needles, if the true exposition and sense of the Scriptures were so
obuious and facil, as our Adversaries seem to pretend.

2. To come to the second point (I mean to the direct sayings of the fathers)
I will content my self (for greater expedition) with the testimonies of those
four prime Fathers, and chief pillars of Gods Church in her purity, who are
able to over balance in authority so many thousands of our new Gospellers
teaching the contrary, and to whom by a certain prerogative, and as they say
antonomasticos, that title was given. S. Gregory Hom. ^. in Eze^h.
then says: Magnae vtilitatis est ipsa obscuritas eloquiorum Dei etc. The
obscurity of Gods word is of great profit, because it does exercise the sense,
that so by labor it may enlarge it self; and being exercised, may comprehend
that, which the idle are not able to attain unto: besides it has a greater
benefit then this, which is; that if the sense of the holy Scripture should be
clear in all places, by this means it would be smally prized, and therefore
the sense of the difficult passages thereof being once found, does so much
please the Reader with greater sweetness, by how much the search thereof did
afflict his mind with more labor. Thus far S. Gregory.

3. S. Augustine Lib. 2. doctrine. Christian. cap. 6.
speaking of those, who were acustomed to read the Scriptures, affirms thus
of them: Sed multis and multiplicibus obscuritatibus etc. But such men are
deceived with many obscurityes and multiplicityes, who do rashly read the
Scriptures, apprehending one thing for another, and not finding those things
therein, which they falsely expected to have found: In so thick an obscurity
and darkness are some things (there said) inuolued. But all this, I doubt not,
proceeded from divine providence, hereby to tame pride with labor, and to
withdraw our understanding from all fastidious misprisall, which often comes
thorough an over easy, and facile search of things. The same learned Father is
not ashamed (far different from the assuming Insolency of our Sectaryes) to
acknowledge in another place his ignorance in these words: In Epist. 119. c.
21.
ipsis sanctis Scripturis multa nescio plura, quamscio: I am ignorant of many
more things in the holy Scriptures, then I know. And which is more he Lib. de
fide and operibus cap. 1^. and 16.
confesses particulerly of that place to the Cor. Si 1. Cor. c. 3.
quis autem superaedificat super fundamentum etc. That the sense thereof was
ever most difficult unto him: so pretermitting the true sense thereof in
silence, like Painters, who veil that over, which they cannot delineate by Art.

4. S. Hierome in one of his Epist. ad Paulinu^
Epistles, whereof the chief subject is the difficulty of the Scriptures,
teaches that we are not able to understand the Scripturs without some special
instructour, and as presuming this ground he passes on further in exemplifying
several difficultyes, which are found in each particular book of them. And in
another Epist. ad Algasiam q. 8.
place speaking of the Epistle to the Romans, he says thus: Ep^st^la ad
Romanos nin^^s obscurita^ibus innol^^ae est; The epistle to the Romans is in
^olued with over many obscurityes.

5. To conclude, S. Ambrose Epist. 44. ad Constantium.
blusheth not to say thus of the Scriptures: Mare est Scriptura diuina, habens
in se sensus profundos; The holy Scripture is eue^ an Ocean or Sea, having
within it most deep and profound senses and meanings: If then in this learned
Fathers judgment, it be a Sea of obstruse profoundityes, what remains but
that whosoever would securely pass through this Sea, should imbark himself in
S. Peter's ship, taking his successor for his Pilot (who is stearned by God to
stearne us) through whose skill, avoiding al shelfs and sands of private and
new glosses (which often threatens ship wrack of faith) he at length may
arrive to the safe Port of the most true, ancient and ^uer received m^aning of
the holy Ghost.

6. And here now we may observe the great modesty of these and many other
ancient Fathers in this point, since each of them acknowledging his own
insufficiency in understanding exactly the Scriptures, could be content to pray
with the Prophet: Da ^salm. 11^.
m^hi intellectum, and scruta^or legem tuam: give m^a^ understanding, and I
will search forth thy l^^: as also, Reuela ^hidem
oculos meos, and considerabo mirabilia de lege tu^: Open mine eyes, and I will
consider the wonders of thy Law* If any of them had been demanded, whether he
did understand all what he read, he would not have been ashamed to have
answered with the Eunuch: Q^omodo Act. ^.
poss^nt, n^si al^quis ostenderit mihi? Briefly he would have confessed with ^.
Pet. v. (...).
S. Peter, that not only in the Epistles of S. Paul, but in many other passages
of Gods sacred write, there were, quaedam difficilia intellectu, quae indocti
and instabiles deprauant; Certai^e things hard to be understood, which the
unlearned and unstable do wrest and deprave. So clear it is, that
notwithstanding the profoundnes of learning in these former times, devout
humility with a full acknowledgment of a self insufficiency, was (as I may
t^arme it) the Genius of reverend Antiquity.

7. Which point being so, who will not admire the petulancy of an ignorant, and
lateborne Sectary, who dare withstand and ouerballance in his private opinion
touching the Scripturs difficulty, the ever reverenced authorityes: of whom?
Of Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine, Gregory and the like, those iudginge witnesses
of an ^iquity. Where is humility? Where is the 2. Cor. c. 10.
Apostles precept of captiuating our judgment? But it is exi^ed, and in it room
are stepped in assuming Pride, and blushles ignorance: his assertions bewray his
ignorance, his control of the Fathers his pride.

The testimonies alleged by our Adversaries out of the Fathers, for the
Scriptures sole Judge, answered. CHAP. VIII.
THOUGH it ^orteth not to my intended breuity, to answer at large all such
wast testimonies, as our Adversaries by most strange detortions of the Fathers
writings are not ashamed to produce; notwithstanding I hold it convenient
here to set down certain animaduersions and cautions discovering in general
the Fathers true minds and driftes in such their passages (diverse of which
ca^tions are implicitly included in the state of the question already set down
in the first Chapter.) So may the obseruant Reader take notice how rouingly all
such authorityes (wherein our Adversaries touching the Judge of Controuersyes do
chiefly insist) do aim at their designed mark. And for the greater
perspicuity, I will range these their sentences under three peculiar heads.
One sort then of them are those, which may seem to insinuate, that the
Scripture is the Judge and rule of Controversies; which sense of the Fathers is
bounded with some of these ensewing restrictions.

2. First, their meaning sometimes is, that certain Articles only of our
belief are most expressly set down in the Scriptures, in this sort Aduersus
Hermog. page 350.
Tertullian proving against Hermogenus, that God created all things of
nothing, and not out of any presupposed matter, and with particular reference
to those words in Genesis: God made heaven and earth, thus writes: Adoro
Scripturae plenitudinem etc. I do adore the fullnes of the Scripture, which
manifests to me the maker of all things, and the things made. Let the
shop of Hermogenus teach, that it is written; If it be not written, let him
fear that (Vae) to such as do add or detract etc. Which sentence of
Tertullian, though delivered only of one Article of our belief, our Sectaryes
nevertheless do stretch out to al points and Controuersyes of faith whatsoever:
Thus most inconsequently arguing affirmatively from the Particular to the
Universal. Another like place to this they object out of Lib. 3. de Trinit.
Hilarious touching the doctrine of the Trinity.

3. Secondly, the Fathers sometimes ascrybing great honor and reverence to the
Scriptures (the which we Catholics most willingly admit) do teach, that the
Scripture is an infallible rule; not heerby intending, that it is the only
square of our faith (as our Adversaries seem fondly to suggest) but that
whatsoever the Scripture proves, is most infallibly and undoubtedly proved by
the same; and consequently, that nothing is to be admitted, as matter of faith,
which does cross and impugn the Scripture. And thus (besides that place of
Lib. 1. cap. 1. page 37.
Irenaeus, where he calls the Scripture in the former sense, Cancnem
immobilem veritatis; as also the like of De fide l. c. 4.
Ambrose, where he appealeth from the writings of particular fathers to the
Scripture, as also of in Cor. 7. hom. 13.
Chrysostom, where he calls the Scripture, Guomonem and regulam) we find
that in Epist ad Galat. cap. 5.
S. Hierom man taining, with all Catholics, that nothing is to be received
contrary to the Scripture, and that therefore general Counsels are to be
examined thereby, thus writes: Spiritus sancti doctrina etc. The doctrine of
the holy Ghost is that, which is delivered in the holy books, contra quam,
against which doctrine if the Councels do ordain any thing, let it be reputed
as wicked. But what Catholic allows any thing against Scripture? And how
extrauagantly then is this testimony objected against us by our Aduer saryes?
Many such places of other Fathers are urged against us, and yet they only
convince, that nothing is to be accepted as an article of faith, which
impugneth the Scripture (such is their wilful misapplication of the Fathers
wrytings:) It will be sufficient only to make reference of diverse such
passages. See then Cyprian contra epistolas Stephani, Lactantius Institut.
divine lib. 5. cap. 20. Basilius epist. 74. ad Episcopos Occidentales,
Chrysostom hom. 49. in Psalm. 95. Epiphan. Haer. 63. and 76. Cyril. de recta
fide ad Regin. besides many others.

4. Thirdly, the Fathers disputing with certain heretics, who denied all
authority of the Church and Counsels in determyning of Controversies (with
whom the Nouelistes of our age do altogether interleague and conspire) were
forced in their disputes to provoke those heretics of the holy Scripture; not
because the Fathers (but those heretics) disclaymed from the Churches
authority in this point; and therefore the Churches authority being rejected by
them, the Fathers were driven to insist only in the written word. In this sort
Justinius in Triphone disputing with a Jew, who admitted not the Church of
Christ, appealed willingly to the Scripture only. Augustine Contra Maximinu^
lib. 3. c. 14.
contending with the Arian Maximinus (who admitted not the Council of Nice)
professed, that he did not expect to have his doctrine tried by that Counsel,
but only by the Scripture, and therefore said: Nec ego Nicaenum proferam etc. I
will not produce the Nicen Council etc. Let the matter be tried by the
authority of Scripture. Finally S. Basil Epist. 88. ad Eustochium.
disputing with certain Heretics touching three Hypostases, and one Nature in
God, and they contemning the authority and custom of Christ's universal
Church therein, was compelled to recall them only to the Scriptures, tearming
the Scripture in this Controversy, Arbiter, and Index; but in what does this
testimony (much insisted upon by our Adversaries) disadvantage us, since we
here see the reason, why Basil appealed to the Scripture? Again, what
^^^ation is this? Basil thought that the doctrine of three Hypostase and ^ne
Nature in God, was expressly proved out of the Scripture; Therefore he thought,
that all other points of our faith necessarily to be believed, have their
express proof in the Scripture, without the Churches authority interposed in
the exposition thereof. Inconsequently and vnschollerlikely concluded.

5. Fourthly, the Fathers teaching, that the proof of the Churches authority
is euicted from Scripture (as is elsewhere showed) and they also acknowledging,
that the Church is to judge of all Controuersyes of faith and religion, do
thereupon, and only by reason of this inference, sometimes in their writings
affirm, that the Scripture judges sufficiently of all Controuersyes, not
meaning, that the Scripture immediately of it self, is inappealably to
determine of all articles and doubts of religion (as our Adversaries
calumniously pretend) but that it may be said so to do, because the Scripture
proves to us the infallible authority of that (to wit, the Church) and
remitteth us to the same, which has power definitiuely to end all
Controversies. In this sense we find, that Lib. cont. 2 ep. Pel^g. l. 3 c. 4.
Augustine teaches, that every Controversy is in some sort sufficiently proved
out of Scripture; meaning, Mediante authoritate Ecclesiae, Through the means
of the authority of the Church: which authority for the last resolution of
doubts of faith is most sufficiently and abundantly proved from the Scripture.
Other like sentences of this nature concerning the fullnes of Scriptures (but
ever to be understood by the mediation of the Churches authority) are to be
found in Tom 3. contra Iulianum.
Cyrill Epist. 5. ad suos discipulos.
Clemens the first Pope, and in some other Fathers.

6. A second branch, whereunto other obscure testimonies of the Fathers
(usually urged by our Sectaryes for the patronizing of the Scriptures sole
judge) may be addressed, De doctrine Christ. l. 2 c. 9.
is drawn from the perfection, which the Fathers seem to ascribe to the
Scripture; in regard of which perfection they yield to it a great sufficiency
for several respects and ends, though our adversaries most fraudulently
omitting the scope and drift of such sayings, will needs wrest this
sufficiency, as intended of the Scriptures sufficiency for the immediate and
final determining of all Controuersyes in faith whatsoever, without any
restraint or exception. Sometimes therefore the Fathers meaning is to show,
that the Scripture is sufficient to prove expressly the chiefest Articles of our
belief, and of which every man is bound to have an explicit and clear
knowledge: such are the articles contained in the Creed, and those Sacraments,
which are more necessary; which kind of sufficiency we also admit. In this
sense Augustine writes (as the contexture of the passages there do show) that,
what points concern our faith are clearly to be found in the Scripture:
another like saying of the said Father, and to be thus expounded, is found in
Tract. 49. in Ioannem.

7. The Fathers at other times do teach, that the Scripture is of that
perfection, that the certainty of the truth of it, in regard of it self alone
(though not in respect of us) is sufficiently proved from it self, without the
help of any other probation, as being penned by them, who were immediately
assisted by the holy Ghost. In this sense Athanasius Contra Genti^es in exordio.
calls the Scripture, (...), Scripturas sufficientes. Iren^us Lib. 2. c. 47.
in like sort says, that Scripturae perfectae sunt, The Scriptures are
perfect; and then immediately follows this reason: Quippe a verbo Dei and
spiritu eius dictae, Because they are indicted by the word of God and the holy
Ghost: The Fathers also are in their writings accustomed to ascribe a great
perfection to the Scripture for recording such miracles of Christ, by the which
he is sufficiently proved to be the son of God (which is the general
doctrine also of the Catholics) which testimonies our Sectaryes are not
ashamed to allege in proof of the Scriptures fulness for warrant of any
article of Religion whatsoever. Thus we find that In Joan. l 12. c. 68.
Cyrill writing of the miracles of our Lord says (with reference to the words
of S. John The number of our Lords miracles were great, yet those, which are
related, Sufficient ad plenissimam fidem attente legentibus fa^ienda^, meaning
that they were sufficient to prove, that Christ was the son of God and
Savior of mankind.

9. Lastly the Fathers acknowledge in their writings mostfully, that the
perfection of Scripture is such, as that it is sufficient to dissuade man from
vice, and persuade him to virtue; a point which we al willingly grant, both in
regard of the ten Commaundments expressly set down (which every one is obliged
to observe) as also by reason of many most eminent and remarkable examples of
virtue and vice, recorded in the Scripture, and the inestimable rewards
promised to the virtuous, and the most dreadful comminations and threats
thundered against the wicked. Now of this sufficiency Theophilact speaks in c.
2. ad Tim. 3. where he says, that the Scripture is of force to make, Vt nihil
bonorum desit homini Dei, That no virtue be wanting in the man of God, and the
same interpretation, a place Authoris In Mat. 22. hom. 41.
imperfecti, admits. And here now by these short explications it appears,
that none of these former passages of the Fathers (whether they concern the
perfection or sufficiency of the written word either in regard of exhortation
to virtue, or of demonstrating Christ to be the Son of God, or of proving the
Scriptures certainty from it own worth and dignity alone, or finally of
expressly containing the chiefest Articles of our belief) can in any sort
prejudice our Catholic doctrine handled in this discourse, and therefore the
wrong of our Adversaries toward their followers is the greater, in seeking to
abuse their ignorance and credulity by such idle and trifling allegations.

9. The third and last head of those misapplyed sentences of the Fathers in
this question, does concern the perspicuity of the Scripture, which word is
not here to be taken in that sense, as if the Fathers taught, that the
Scripture were in it self absolutely so easy, perspicuous, and clear, as that
(without the help of the Churches authority in the exposition thereof) every
illiterate and mechanical fellow were able to judge of the true sense thereof,
and consequently by the only means of it to determine and end all
Controversies: for they fully acknowledged it to be as (Ezechiel Ezech. 2.
styled it) The enrolled volume written within and without, as also to be, that
hidden book, described by the Evangelist Apoc. 5.
to be clapsed with seven seals. But their meaning herein is, that the
Scripture is perspicuous in two constructions.

10. First that the histories, similitudes, and other matters of fact recorded
in the Scripture, as also some principle Articles of our belief are there
clearly and perspicuously set down: But what is this to convince that the
Scripture is in general easy for the truth of any abstruse, speculatiue and
dogmaticall point, or article of Faith whatsoever.

11. Of this first manner S. Austin lib. de operibus monac. c. 9.
speaks, when he says, that the Scripture is most perspicuous and clear to
prove (which no man denies) that Christ ordained, that those who did preach
the Gospel, should be maintained by the Gospel; and thereupon showing, that
this is clearly and evidently set down in the Scripture, he thus writes; Quid
hoc apertius? quid clarius? That the Fathers do in like sort sometimes
restrain this euidency and clearnes of the Scripture to some chief articles
of Christian Religion, appears (as before I have showed) that they in like
sort attribute a perfection and sufficiency of the written word of God to the
same end. Thus does Irenaeus lib. ^ cap. 46.
writing against certain Infidels (denying that there was one only God)
affirm, that for the proof of this verity: Vniuersae Scripturae and
propheticae and Apostolicae etc. The whole Scriptures both Prophetical and
Apostolical are evident, and without any ambiguity: Which words being spoken
only of that particular point, hurts us nothing at all: Yet our Sectaries
slight in deprauing the Fathers wrytinges, is such, as what words are spoken
for the perspicuity of the Scripture for one only article, they shame not to
stretch them, as spoken in proof of all.

12. The second sense or construction of the Fathers words touching the
perspicuity of the written word, is, that the Scripture is clear and evident,
in that it does illuminate and enlighten the mind of the reader, understanding
the Scripture (a verity which we acknowledge, as elsewhere is showed) as it is
explained by the spirit of God, which spirit speaks in the voice of his
Church. And in this sense (to omit the like sentences of diverse other Fathers)
Epiphanius Contra Aetium l. 3. tom. 2.
writes, that in the Scripture omnia lucida sunt, all things are clear, in
conceauing this clearnes (as I said before) only in respect of the mind, which
by truly understanding the Scripture is enlightened, cleared, and much freed
from all spiritual darkness and ignorance.

13. To the former two senses, wherein the Fathers do call the Scripture
perspicuous, clear, and facill, I will add a third reason, which moved them
sometimes so to call them. This is taken from a certain abuse of the common
sort of people in those times, who framing to themselves a greater difficulty
in the Scripture then there is, altogether forbear the reading of it, and in
place thereof gave themselves (more then was convenient) to the behoulding of
profane spectacles and sightes. Now, to bereave the people of this abuse and
negligence, and the sooner to inuit them to the reading and hearing of Gods
word, the Fathers thought good, in an Oratory and amplifying manner to suggest
to the^ an easines of the Scripture. This course S. Chrysostom in diverse of
his homilies and sermons took, the sooner thereby (as is said) to win the
people to the reading of Gods holy word, as in Joan. homil. 1. in Thesal. 2.
homil. 3. With the same intention does Athanasius In Epist. ad Ephesians. c. 6.
relate to the people the facility of the Scripture. And thus far of the
Fathers supposed defense and maintaining of our Sectaries Doctrine in this
question of the Scriptures sole Judge: where we see, that though the places
urged by our adversaries out of their wrytings, at the first sight, seem to
carry a fair and specious gloss or grain, yet being after fully weighed and
considered, they give no satisfaction (for proof of what they were alleged)
to a perfect and true judgment, being like unto those flowers, which best
pleasing the eye, do commonly least please the smell.

The like difficulty of the Scriptures, confessed by our Adversaries. CAAP. IX.
ALTHOUGH our Adversaries do usually pretend the easines of the Scriptures (and
therefore do obtrude it as sole Judge and Vmpier) thereby to avoid the grave and
pressing authorities of the Counsels, Fathers, and the practice of Gods
universal Church, urged in any controuersiall point between us and them; yet
sometimes diverse of them can be content, both in their actions and words (so
forcible is Truth, as that she can extort sufficient testimony even from her
own enemies) to acknowledge the Scriptures obscurity, as containing in it
self a Ianus of construction, the sense looking one way, the letter another.

2. And first concerning their actions crossing this their Assertion; if there
were such perspicuity in them, as the Protestants do bear their followers in
hand, why have our adversaries themselves labored so much in explaning the
said Scriptures? Why has Luther, Calvin, Beza, and others written several
books in paraphrazing and illustrating of them? Or why have they made so many
different translations of them? And if the Scriptures be hard and difficult,
why do they with such obstinate pertinacity maintain the contrary? So
illustrious this verity is, concerning the Scriptures intricate hardness, as
that our adversaries own labors and actions do convince their own error
therein.

3. Now to come to the second point, which is, how themselves do write thereof
expressly at unawares, as if they had forgotten, what at other times they had
taught with such feruorous obstinacy: Luther In praefat. in Psalm.
himself (although the Day Star of the Ghospels light) confesses, that
neither he nor any other, is able to understand the psalms of David in their
true and propersense. Yea he speaks more generally saying; Ibidem infra.
Scio esse impudentissimae temeritatis etc. I acknowledge it to be a sign of
most shamles temerity and rashness, for any man to profess, that he truly
understands in all places, but any one book of the Scriptures.

4. Chemnitius Exame^ 4. sess Council. Tride^t.
affirms, that the Church is now endued with the gift of interpreting the
Scriptures, in such sort as in it first times, it enjoyed the gift of doing
miracles, to wit, that neither the one nor the other, was granted to every
particular man, but only to some persons elected theerto by God. Brentius In
Cofess. VVittember.
(who at other times freeth the Scriptures from all difficulties) is forced to
dismaske himself, and to confess thus in the end: Non est obscurum etc. It is
manifest, that the gift of interpreting the Scriptures, is a gift of the holy
Ghost, and not of humane wisdom, and that the holy Ghost therein is free, and
not tied to any certain kind of men, but bestows this gift, as best seems
unto him. The Magdeburgenses Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 4. col. 52.
do plainly grant, that the Apostles themselves were of opinion, that the holy
Scriptures could not be truly understood without the help of the holy Ghost, as
an interpreter. Neither shall we find this Doctrine strange among our homeborne
Sectaries, since D. Field l. 4. c. 15.
(a late appearing Comet in our Protestants sky) does thus say; There is no
question, but that there are many difficulties of the holy Scriptures,
proceeding partly from the high and excellent nature of things therein
contained, which are without the compass of natural understanding, and so are
hidden from natural men etc. partly out of the ignorance of tongus, and of
nature of such things, by the comparison whereof, the matters of divine
knowledge are manifested unto us.

5. And now, if after the voluntary acknowledgment of so many markable
Protestants in this point, any of them would seek to retire back, and recall
all what they have said, by teaching, that though they grant some passages of
Gods word to be hard and difficult, yet those places, being compared with other
like sentences and texts, receive from thence a clear and plain explication.
Yet this refuge of theirs is of no strength; the reason hereof being, because
as any one text in Controversy is doubtful, and capable of diverse
constructions, so likewise are the other places and testimonies of Scripture as
ambiguous in sense and interpretation, wherewith the said text is to be
conferred, and by which conference it is to receive it illustration. And thus
we see by experience, that the doubt of any one place of Scripture is often
more increased by that means (to wit by conference of texts) by the which it
was first hoped to have been extinguished. And therefore the former English
Doctor l 19*
pronounces of the weakness of this answer in this sort: We confess, that
neither conference of places, nor the consideration of the Antecedentia and
consequentia, nor looking into the originalls, are of any force, unless we find
the things, which we conceive to be understood and meant in the places
interpreted, to be consonant to the rule of faith.

6. And thus much concerning the difficulty of the Scriptures acknowledged by
the plain testimonies and co^fessions of our adversaries themselves (though at
other times impugning the truth herein) which point we are the less to marvel
at, if we remember that it proceeds through his will and permissions, who
commanded 2. Cor. 4.
the light to shine out of darkness, and can cause truth to be confirmed by the
maintainers of falsehood.

The insufficiency of the Scripture, for the determining of points of faith,
discovered by force of Reason. CHAP. X.
MANY arguments might be produced from reason, for the confirming of this
verity, but I here content my self with some few of the chiefest. And first,
if our adversaries Position were true, concerning the Scriptures being judge of
our faith, then must they understand hereby either their whole Canon and body
of Scriptures taken jointly together, or else every particular book thereof, as
it is considered by it self alone. Not this later, both because it would
follow, that if any one book alone were a competent Judge of all articles of
our faith, that then all the other parcels of Scripture were superfluous and
needles, which were most profane to imagine; As also in that, every particular
Gospel, or any such part thereof, does omit many chief articles of our
Faith, without any mention had of them at all; And thus we find that the
Annuntiation, the Nativity, the Circumcision of our Lord (besides many other
points) are not as much as once touched in S. John's Gospel; in like sort
neither does S. Matthew mention the Circumcision, nor S. Mark the Presentation.

2. Now, our Adversaries Doctrine herein is no more iustisiable, if they will
here understand the whole body of all the Canonical books of Scripture,
jointly considered together, to be this Judge (which assertion they for the
most part maintain;) And the reason thereof is this; In that diverse Canonical
and undoubted parcels (even by the Protestants acknowledgment) of both the old
and the new testament, have been lost for the space of 1500. years, and never
yet found again: And therefore it ineuitably follows, that if all the sacred
books of Scripture taken together should be this judge, and that diverse of them
for so many Centuries and ages have been, and still are lost; that then during
so long a time, we never enjoyed a sufficient and competent Judge, and such a
one, as was proportionable to that faith left to us by the Prophets, Apostles
and Evangelists; but in lieu thereof we have had a maimed, imperfect, and
defective Judge. Which to affirm, were to impugn Gods care and providence,
which he bears toward his Church.

3. Now, that diverse parcels of both the Testaments have perished, it is most
clear, and our Adversaries cannot deny it. And first touching the new
Testament, it appears out of the Epistle to the Colossians, c. vle.
that Saint Paul wrote an Epistle to them of Laodiced, which neither we nor the
ancient Fathers have proved ever to have been extant since the Apostles time.
In like sort S. Paul may seem to intimate in his first Epistle to the
Corinthians cap. 5.
in these words; Scripsi vobis in epistola etc. that before the writing of the
said Epistle, he had written to the^ another Epistle; and yet we cannot find,
that the Church ever had any such Epistle.

4. Now, it is no less clear, that diverse parts of the old Testament have
been, and are as yet lost, at least for the said former space of time. And to
omit the testimonies of S. Chrysostom Hom. 9. in Matthew. and hom. 7. in prior.
ad Corinth.
affirming so much, we read in the books of Kings, 3. Reg. 4.
that Solomon wrote many Parables and verses, which now we have not; for thus
there it is said: Locutus est Solomon tria millia Parabolarum, and fuerunt
carmina eius quinque millia: After the same manner we find it also registered of
David Paralip. vlt.
in these words: Gesta autem David priora and nouissima scripta sunt in libro
Samuel Videntis, and in libro Nathan Prophetae, atque in volumine Caiad
Videntis. All which wrytinges here mentioned are neither at this present, nor
have for many former ages been extant in Gods Church: So clear thus we see it
is, by the force of this argument, that the Scripture neither as it is wholly
taken together, nor severally by particular books, can be the judge for the
determining of all doubts of faith.

5. Another reason for the incompetency of the Scripture as Judge, may be taken
from the nature of a judge (as is else where touched) constituted in every well
governed Common wealth. For it clear, that every Judge first ought to be able
of his own authority to take notice of the Contentions and Controversies
rising in the state. Secondly, he must have power by interpreting the law to
give his censure against the party offending. Lastly, he is to compel and
force the delinquents to obedience under the pain of feuere punishments. None
of which points can be effected, except there be (besides the written law) a
visible judge. Seeing then (by application of what is here said to our present
purpose) that the Scripture cannot of it self take notice of Controversies
rising in matters of religion, nor evidently declare to the Litigants the true
meaning of such passages, of it self warranting or condemning the points in
question; nor finally can constrain the adverse party to relinquish his
errors impugned by the written Word, (as we find by the daily experience of
Heretics flying to the Scripture as Judge;) Therefore it is most perspicuous,
that the Scripture cannot be erected as a competent Judge in the decision of
articles of faith among Christians.

6. Neither is it any satisfiable answer to reply, that God himself sees all
Contentions in doubts of faith, and in some sort by means of the Scripture
pronounces his sentence in condemnation of the heresies impugned. This (I say)
is not sufficient, and the reason hereof is, because God does not so evidently
deliver his sentence by the mediation of the Scripture, as the party convinced
thereby will acknowledge it for his sentence; And consequently if the question
should be, whether the Scripture be the word of God or not, God could not
clearly give his judgment only by the help of Scripture. Therefore it
follows, that we must have a visible judge, and such as his final decrees
being once manifested, the party maintaining his errors, will acknowledge them
(as they proceed from the Judge, whether justly or iniustly) to be clearly and
evidently condemned by the said judge, which we see falls not out in
obtruding the Scripture; for it is observed, that the Anabaptist or any other
acknowledged heretic, will never confess his heresies to be impugned by the
Scripture, or himself condemned thereby.

7. And of the like feeblenes is that other answer of some hereto, who
(courteously) do grant, that there may be acknowledged indeed an external
public judge of all doubts in religion, meaning the general voice of gods
Church; but yet this judge (teach they) is limited in it definitions, and not
absolutely infallible, but only so far forth, as it treads the tract and
path of Gods written word, and which declining from thence, runs headlong
into certain deuiations, and by-ways of most foul^ errors.

8. This answer salueth not the doubt: for once gra^ting a true Judge, it
follows, that this Judge (though depending of God) is to have authority in
compounding of Controversies absolutely infallible. And the reason hereof is
this: for if his authority were not infallible, then might it be inferred, (an
absurditity little sorting to the sweet providence of God) that the whole
Church by force of such a delegated authority to it by God himself, might be
led into a general error; since even moral Philosophy and the light of reason
assure us, that granting a Magistrate (who may err) to have public authority
in his censures and decrees, then are the subjects or inferior persons (who
are interressed in the said definitions) bound to embrace those errors. Which
if they were not obliged to do, then should it follow, that the Magistrates
state were no better in defining, then the subjects, since they were not bound
to stand to the ce^sure of their Judge, but only when they did know his
sentence to be evidently most true; and consequently it might be likewise
inferred, that the Magistrate has no power at all in defining; and yet all
Philosophy instructs us, that even in a point doubtful, where it is not
evident the opinion of the Judge to be clearly false, the persons acknowledging
obedience to the Judge are (in regard of the former reasons) obliged to follow
his doubtful definition, though perhaps erroneous.

9. To the former reason may be adjoined this following (as is also before
touched;) That even the light of reason teaches us, that every Judge in any
Court of Controversies ought to be such, as all conte^ding parties without
exception may for the appeasing of their debates, have easy access unto him.
Which access is found to be in the Church, but not in the Scripture: from
which it unavoidably follows, that the Scripture cannot be this judge,
whereunto each man is to repair; but that the church may be, and is the said
Judge. That every man at his pleasure, may come to the Church for resolution of
doubts, we see it is evident by the practice of all ages.

10. But on the contrary part, every man that maintains different points of
faith, has not this freedom of coming to the Scripture for decision of his
doubts: for first there are diverse Christians, who cannot as much as read the
Scripture, much less understand it; how can such men then expect to have their
Controversies touching religion to be de^ermined by the written word alone? And
as touching those others who can read, yet is their cause little bettred
thereby, seeing many by their reading of the Scripture, do strangely detort the
true sense thereof. Yea we may observe, that diverse Nouellistes of different
religions, who are daily co^uersant in the Scriptures, endeavor even from the
self same passages of it, by their false constructions, to fortify their
repugnant Doctrines. And thus though the voice of the holy Ghost in the written
word, and the leter there read be but one, yet through each man's selfelike
expositions, it seems to speak, as every man would have it; by this means
making the Scripture to be like unto the tongue of S. Peter and other the
Apostles, which being but one, was notwithstanding heard in every man's several
language.

11. Another argument for the conuincing of this supposed Judge, may be drawn
from the Doctrine of Traditions, which have ever been maintained by the
ancient Fathers and the primitive Church. Which Doctrine if it be true, then
may we most consequently deduce from thence, that the Scripture is not to judge
all questions of Faith, since the Doctrine of unwritten Traditions teaches us,
that all the articles and points of Christian Religion, have not their express
proof out of the Scriptures; but that some of them are believed only by force
of Tradition, and of the continued and vn-interrupted practice of Gods Church.
To enter into any exact proof of this point of Traditions is improper to this
place, and would require a reasonable large Treatise alone; and therefore I
remit the Reader to such Catholic writers Hofi^e in 4. l. aduers. Prolegomena
Brentij. Peresius initio operis sui do Traditionib. Roffensis, Canisius,
Bellarmin, besides many others.
as have most learnedly handled this, subject. Only I will here set down (and
consequently prove the said Doctrine a posteriori) certain points of
Christian Faith, which have no clear and conuincing proofs out of Scriptures,
and yet are believed no less by the Protestants themselves, then by us
Catholics.

12. And first against the Anabaptists, both the Catholics, Lutheranes and
Caluinistes do believe, that the baptism of Infantes is lawful, and that they
are not to be rebaptized after they come to ripenes of age, which point (as D.
Field acknowledges, terming it a Tradition) ca^ never be sufficiently and
clearly proved by the Scriptures alone, without the testimony of the practice
of the church, and force of Tradition, as appears by the testimonies of the
ancient Fathers; for we find, that Origin thus speaks hereof in c. 6. epist.
ad Romans Ecclesia ab Apostolis traditionem accepit, etiam paruulis baptismum
dare. In like sort Austin l. 10. de Genesi ad literam, c. 23. Consuetudo matris
Ecclesiae in baptizandis paruulis nequaquam spernenda, and nec omnino credenda
est, nisi Apostolica esset Traditio.

13. D. Bancroft teaches, that Confirmation is an Apostolical Tradition, as
appears in his conference before the King. All we, do believe that our
blessed Lady dyed a Virgin, and do account Heluidius an Heretic for houlding
the contrary; and yet no text of Scripture does confirm it to us, but rather
through misconstruction may seem to insinuate the contrary in regard of those
words: Non cognouit virum, donec peperit filium suum.

14. D. Whitguift In his defense. page 539.
acknowledges, that now, during the time of the new Testament, we are to
celebrate Easter upon Sunday (contrary to the custom of the Jews) a point of
such moment even in the primitive Church, that the maintainers of the contrary
were then reputed for Heretics, and styled Epiph. haeres. 50. Aug. haeres. 29.
Tertul. de praescript.
Quartadecimani. And yet for this change of observing Easterday we have no
warrant from the holy Scriptures, but may say with Tertullian: De corona
militis.
quod non prohibetur, vltro permissum est. D. Couel in his book of examination
teaches the word Archbishop to be a Tradition. M. Hooker in his Eccles. polic.
sect. 7. p. 118. in general defends the Doctrine of Traditions, and
answers diverse testimonies out of the Fathers alleged by Carthwright, and
others.

15. Again both Catholics and Protestants do believe, that there are
certain divine wrytinges, which are the true and undoubted word of God, and
first penned by the holy Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists: Yet we cannot
conuincingly and demonstratiuely prove so much out of the Scriptures
themselves; which point since it includes within it self by necessary
illation this question of the Scriptures being Judge, it shall be more fully
discussed in the Chapter following. Now of this point, as also of the former,
believed without the written word warranting them, we may say: Harum Tertull.
de corona ^ilitis.
discipl^narum Traditio tibi praetenditur auctrix, Consuetudo confirmatrix, and
Fides obseruatrix.

16. The last argument here urged for the refelling of our adversaries
Doctrine herein, may be taken from the practice of both the ancient and
modern heretics, who ever for the warranting of their heresies (heresies I
mean even in the judgment of our adversaries) have ever fled to the
Scriptures, and have most seriously taught, (thereby to avoid the authority of
the Church) that the Scriptures alone ought to Judge and defyne al doubts of
Faith whatsoever. And therefore to the end, that the reader may see, what wicked
heresies have been proseminated, and have sprung from this so false and
heretical a principle, I will exemplify this one point somewhat at large in a
Chapter following, there showing how many devilish heresies have been
countenanced by their Patrones, with the misapplyed testimonies and authorities
of the holy Scriptures; which abuse of the Scriptures well shows, that the
Doctrine hereof never proceeded from God; Tertull. de fuga in persecut.
Quid diuinum non bonum? quid bonum non diuinum?

That it cannot be determined to us by Scripture, that there is any Scripture,
or Gods word at all. CAAP. XI.
FOR the more particular handling of this point, I am to demand of our
adversaries these three things following, which are (as it were) the three
steps, whereby we rise to the graduall difficulties of this question here
entreated of. First, how they can prove out of Scripture the particular
Gospel of S. Mark, or of any Evangelist, to be the same, without all
corruption, which the said Mark, or the other did write? considering that it
is granted, even by our adversaries, that diverse parcels of the Scriptures have
been foully corrupted and mangled by the Additions, Translations, and other such
like deprauations of the ancient heretics. Secondly, if it be granted them,
that any one Gospel, or other part of Scripture, is the very same untouched
and undefiled, as the author thereof did first write it; yet if we should
demand of them, how the Scripture can assure and determine this point, to wit,
that such a Gospel (as for example that of S. Mark) is true and Canonical
Scripture, and yet that the obtruded Gospel of S. Thomas is a false and
profane writing, since both these Ghospells have indifferently in the
beginning their several prefixed titles, the one but of an Evangelist, and yet
accepted, the other even of an Apostle, but rejected; what could they say?
Thirdly if it were agreed upon, which were the particular books, which maks up
the Cano^ of Scripture, yet if any prophan Atheist should arrive to that height
of impiety, as to deny flatly, that there were any such divine wrytinges at all,
as to be counted Gods sacred word or Scripture; how could our Adversaries
convince him herein by the Scripture it self? It were idle for them to reply,
that the Scripture tells him, that the books of the Prophets and the
Apostles are divine wrytinges, since the Atheist would not believe the
Scripture so saying, until it were proved to him (which cannot be out of the
Scripture) that this Scripture (affirming so much) is Scripture, that is, a
divine, supernatural and sacred writing; no more then at this present, we
Christians believe that the Jews Thalmud is divine Scripture, though it be
countena^ced with the title of Gods undoubted word.

2. This point so presses our Adversaries, that diverse of them (and such as
are of no mean rank) have been forced to confess, that it cannot be proved
out of Scripture, that there is any Scripture at all; neither that this
Gospel is true, that forged; nor lastly that we now enjoy any one, or other
parcel of Scripture, free from all manner of corruption, and as the Prophet,
Evangelist, or Apostle, guided by the holy Ghost, did first pen it. Hence it is
that Chemnitius Exame^ Council. Trident. entreating of Tradition.
and Brentius In prolegomenis.
do teach, that this one sole unwritten Tradition remains in the Church of
God: to wit, that there are certain divine wrytings or Scriptures. But Hooker
In his treatise of Ecclesiastical policy.
in treating of this point, passes on further, and iumpeth with us in the
reason thereof, for thus he says: Of things necessary, the very chiefest is,
to know what books we are bound to esteem holy, which point is confessed
impossible for the Scripture it self to teach. And then afterward he
warranteth his Doctrine with this reason: For if any books of Scripture did
give testimony unto all, yet still that Scripture, which gives credit unto the
rest, would require another Scripture to give credit unto it: neither could we
ever come to any pause, whereon to rest our assurance this way; so that unless
besides Scripture, there were something, which might assure us that we do well,
we could not think we do well, no not in being assured, that Scripture is a
sacred and holy rule of weldoing. So far we see this learned Protestant
(whose calamity is the more to be deplored, in that retayning diverse Catholic
grounds, he forbear to build a faith answer able thereto) was from making the
Scripture to be the sole judge and vmpier of all articles of Faith, since by
his Doctrine the Scripture could not determine out of itself, that there is
any Scripture at all, which is the Basis, or foundation of the rest, by our
adversaries own assertions.

3. Others of our adversaries, who will not acknowledge the truth in this
point, labor to salve the matter with diverse weak and insufficient answers.
And first we find that Calvin l. 1. Instit. c. 7.. 1. and 2.
says: That the true and holy Scriptures are discerned from the false and
profane, with the same facility that light is discerned from darkness, and
sweetness from bitterness. Which answer if it were true, how came it to pass
then, that Luther rejects the Epistle of S. James, which Calvin himself
reuerenceth as Apostolical, both of them being able to discern the material
light from darkness and the sweet from sower?

4. The same Calvin, whom our more modern Sectaries in most points do follow,
as beasts follow the first of their heard, affirms also: That the majesty and
voice of God does so present it self to us in the sacred Scriptures, as that it
secureth us of the infallible truth thereof. Against which, first I urge, that
the Majesty and voice of God speaking in the Scripture is not distinguished
from the Scripture it self, but is the same; eue^ as the Commandment of a
Prince expressed in his law, is the same which his law is. Secondly, that we
cannot be assured, whether this representation of the Majesty, voice, or
authority of God speaking in the Scriptures, be but a mere illusion of the
devil, or some vehement apprehension of our own phansy; which may well be
doubted of, considering that all our adversaries will avouch (no doubt) the
Majesty of God in those books, which they acknowledge for divine Scripture;
and yet we see by the example above, that one of them seems to find the
authority and Majesty of God in such a book, which himself acknowledges, the
which another of his brethren for want of the same Majesty utterly rejects.
Again, let our adversaries yield some sufficient reason (if they can) to
assure us, that there appears a greater Majesty of God in those books of
Scripture, which they all jointly acknowledge for Canonical, then in those
others, which the Catholics do receive, and themselves reject.

5. Others (among whom is also Calvin Inst. 1. c. 7.. 5.
for he is most various and irresolute in saluing this difficulty) to answer
the former doubt, come finally to this point (which indeed is the Center of all
their answers) to wit, that God gives to the elect and faithful that
inspiration or illumination of spirit, as that thereby, they are made able to
discern, which is the true word of God, and which is forged, and adulterated;
and consequently that they are assured, that there are certain divine wrytings
left to his Church: And thus they fly to the private spirit already refuted.
To this ten our D. Field l. 4. c. 8.
thus says: After we are enlightened by the spirit, we do no longer trust
either our own judgment, or the judgment of other men, that the Scriptures are
of God, but above all certainty of humane judgment we do certainly resolve, as
if in them we saw the Majesty and glory of God. Thus we see, how our
adversaries not resting themselves upon any firm resolution, but replying now
this, now that, and so running in and out, are most far from satisfying the
difficulty here propounded, with these their Meandrian, and wynding euasions.

6. Now, the weakness of this last answer is discovered several ways, and
first (besides all those reasons and arguments above urged in refutation of the
private spirit) in that, if they be demanded to prove, how they are assured of
this supernatural illumination, they endeavor to prove it out of the
Scriptures; since they cannot say, it is believed for it self, seeing it then
would follow (contrary to their own ground) that something is to be believed,
which has not his proof in Scripture. And if again they be required to
prove, that there are Scriptures, they allege for proof thereof this their
illumination: which kind of reasoning every young Logitian knows to be a
vicious circulation; since both these several points (to wit the certainty of
the Scriptures, and the certainty of their illumination) may be questioned
doubted of alike by them, with whom they are to deal. Secondly, the former
answer is insufficient, in that this their supernatural inspiration (whereby
they discern the Scriptures) is nothing else but an Act of Faith, and as it
seems, is so acknowledged to be by D. Field lib. 4. cap. 13.
, who calls it: Apotentiall hability, the light of divine understanding, and
the light of grace; all which things are included in Faith: and therefore our
Adversaries do generally teach, that the illumination of this spirit belongs
to all the faithful. Now we know that it is their own ground and principle,
that Faith ryseth only out of the Scriptures.

7. These two things then being thus, by the Protestants assertions (to wit,
that this illumination is an act of Faith, and that Faith proceeds only from
the Scriptures) I see not, that it can be possibly conceived, how this their
illumination of Faith, which is later, both tempore and natura, then the
Scriptures, as proceeding (by their Doctrine) from reading and giving credit to
the said Scriptures, should be the means and guide to direct them in
discerning, that there is any Scripture at all, or which is the true word of
God, and which Apocryphal, and profane; since they ought to have this
illumination, before they begin to censure and judge of the Scriptures. And
thus far concerning this question, whether the Scripture is able to prove, that
there is Scripture. And since it cannot, it consequently follows, that it
cannot be the judge of our faith, in that (besides it is an Article of our
Faith, that there is Scripture) it is not able to prove that from which (by our
Adversaries Doctrine) all the rest is deryued.

That Heresies in all ages have been mayntained by the supposed warrant of
Scripture. CHAP. XII.
NATVRE (the seal of Almighty God impressed in these Elementary bodies) is not
only endued with a generatiue power, thereby to eternize or perpetuate herself;
but has withal this annexed privilege; to wit, that every individual body
which is produced, bears a great resemblance, as we see both in man, and
other creatures (if so the secondary causes be not found defective) to that
body, by the which it was begotten. And this secret or mystery of producing the
like to itself, is extended even to arts and sciences; hence it proceeds,
that in Logike (the artificial refiner of reason) true Propositions ever beget
true Conclusions, and out of false premises result false and erroneous
illations. Neither does this ground rest here, but passes further, it being
in like sort justifiable in all general Axioms and principles, which are the
Basis, or foundation of any Doctrine; which Principles being true, good, and
expedient, then must all that, which as necessary effects are engendered
thereby, be of the same nature. But if they be false, wicked and pernicious, the
rest then, which is builded thereupon, participateth of the same quality. So as
to take a Synopsis, or view in general of the state or nature of such grounds
and principles, it shall be sufficient (without recurring particularly to them)
only to rest in the speculation of such propositions and other points of
Doctrine, which thence do deseend, and are (as it were) propagated by them.

2. Now then it being thus, that we are able to glass the Fathers look in the
childs face, the premises in the conclusion, and the causes in the effects; I
doubt not, but whosoever will call to mind some few of those blasphemous and
wicked heresies, which have been engendered, hatched, and nourished by this
Principle and ground: That the Scripture interpreted by the private spirit, is
the true and sole judge of Controversies; will at length have just reason to
pronounce, that the said heresies are the deformed and prodigious brood of so
ugly and monstrous a parent, since there was never yet any heresy but it could
support it self for the time, by misconstruction of Scripture. And therefore no
marvel if every Sectary did so much covet to make his refuge to Gods sacred
word: Hoping that in this sort (by disclaiming from all other proofs
whatsoever) he was able so to varnish over his heresies, with some misapplyed
and forced texts thereof, as that to a credulous and mistaking eye, the grain
of them should appear most fair, specious and regardable.

3. But let us particularize this point in some few examples: who knows not
that the Arians Test. Epiphan. haeres. 69.
who labored to overthrow in effect the whole frame and Systema of Christian
Religion, by teaching that Christ was not God, did with this their blasphemy
invade, and ouerrunne whole countries, through the supposed warrant of many
texts of the holy Scriptures, themselves still perverting the sense thereof? He
that doubts of this, let him consider the texs here Pater mayor me est.
Joan. 14. and 18. Descendi de caelo, non vt faciam voluntate^ meam, sed eius
qui misit me. Joan. 6. vt agnoscant te solum ve^u^ Deu^, and quem misisti Jesus
Christum Joan. 17. Nobis autem vnus est Deus Pater. 1. Cor. 18. vide etiam 1.
Cor. c. 15. and 1. Tim. 2. and Act. 2.
noted in the margent which they (among many other like places) alleged. So
shall he grant that these heretics pressed Scripture against him, who is the
author of Scripture. In like sort Eutiches Apud Leonem epist. Flauiani, and
epist. Leon^ 97.
who taught, that our Savior had but a fantastical and imputative body,
through the conversion of his divinity into his flesh, was not altogether
deprived of all proofs through his misconstruction of Gods Verbu^ caro factu^
est. Joan 1. As after the same phrase we read, Aqua vinum facta est. Joan. 2.
wherein we find the water to be made wine by a true conversion of the one into
the other.
word. Nestorius Eu^grius l. 1. c. 2. and Theodoret. l. 4. haeret. fabularum
prope finem.
the former heretics diametricall enemy in Doctrine (so easy it is for this
private spirit, by misconstruction, to extract both fire and water, from one
and the same word of God) so divided Jesus from Christ, as that he affirmed
Jesus to be only pure man, and him who was borne of the blessed Virgin, and
suffered death, but Christ to be the Son of God. This man neither wanted diverse
passages In similitudinem hominum factus, and habitu inuentus vt homo. Phi. 2.
Est sine matre, sine genealogia. Heb. 7. where Christ is thus described. Deus
meus vt quid dere^quisti me? Math. 27. And else where it is ^ayd: Pater
clarifica me hac hora. Joan. 12. Both which sayings might be taught to be
disagreable to the form of God.
of holy Scripture interpreted by his own spirit, for the enamiling of this
his execrable blasphemy.

4. Wicliffe Thomas VValdens. l. 2. Doctrine. Fidei. c. 81.
and Husse as appears out of the Council of Constance. sessione 15.
to the great prejudice of secular Princes, taught that temporal Magistrates
committing any mortal sin, did, ipso facto, cease to be Magistrates, and
being in that state, might be deposed by their subjects. Which false and
wicked Doctrine they were not afraid to confirm with certain usurped
testimonies of Gods word. The Ipsi regnauerunt and non ex me principes
extiterunt, and non cognoui: argentum and aurum suum fecerunt sibi idola, vt
interimere^t. Osee 8. Regnu^ a gente in gentem transfertur propter iniustitias.
Eccles. 18.
Waldenses (Luthers Prodromi, and precursors) and the Anabaptists They are
charged here with even by Calvin lib. 4. Institut. 2. 20.
would not brook, that christian Magistrates should make any laws, either to
punish the wicked, or to appeal to any court of justice for redressing of
wrongs; affirming, that such proceeding did take away all Christian liberty:
and these fellows made in like sort the holy Scriptures Si quis voluerit te^um
iudicio contendere, and tunicam tuam tollere, da ei and pallium. Math. 5.
Delictum est in vobis, quod iudicia habebitis inter nos, cur non magis fraudem
patimini? quare non magis iniuriam accipitis? 1. Cor. 6. Dictum est antiquis,
oculum pro oculo, dentem pro dente; ego autem dico vobis non resistere malo.
Math. 5. Omnes qui acceperint gladium, gladio peribunt. Math. 26. Si quis te
percufferit in vn^m maxillam, praebe ei and alteram. Math. 5.
their sanctuary: So da^gerously they erred herein, through a vicious
affectatio^ of overmuch patience and innocence. These (lo) and such like, are
the adulterate offspring (of which I spoke before) engendered and brought forth by
that former principle of the Scriptures sole Judge; sucking from the same
ground (tanquam ex traduce) all that falsehood and impiery, which is found in
them. In which point, we see, how sollicitous and careful the chief Patrones
thereof were (as it were) to legitimate them, with so many detorsions and
misapplyed testimonies of Gods sacred writ. Thus have the Scriptures (through
the want of the true sense) occasioned heresies, as the Sun through absence
of it heat, may be said to be the cause of cold; which heresies, according to
Tertullian Tertul. de Pudicitia.
dum sunt, habent posse, and dum possunt, habent esse.

6. And here now I would demand of our Adversaries, who acknowledge (at least
in words) all the former opinions for damnable heresies, what prerogative and
privilege themselves may take, whiles they make their sole recourse to the
Scriptures, as the supreme Judge, in defense of their late appearing faith,
which the former Here^^kes may not with the like freedom, and with as just
she^ of reason challenge to themselves? Will they object to the former heretics
want of Scripture for proof of their Doctrine? We have seen, how luxuriant
and ryotous (as it were) they showed to be in alleging the same for the better
dogmatizing of their errors; in so much, that for justifying of some of their
heresies (if we respect not the sense, but the number) they were able ^uen to
vye text for text against the orthodoxall Doctrine. Will they say, they were
ignorant in the primitive tongues, and used not conference of Scripture; the
two acknowledged means conducing to the true understanding thereof? Concerning
the first, diverse of them had some of the tongues even from their cradle; and
as for the other, they were so studious and painful therein, as that they spent
a great part of their life in diligent searching, comparing, and applying of
several passages of the Scripture.

6. To conclude, will they reply, that notwithstanding all this, they wanted
true humility and prayer, which (they say) with the former conditions are (as
it were) the Media wherein the Species of the high mysteries of faith are
multiplied, before they can enter into the eye of our understanding, and
consequently enjoyed not this revealing spirit, whereof themselves are assured?
they would, if in their life time, they had been accused herin have labored to
have quyt themselves (as well as our Sectaries do in these times) from that
imputation, and would, as fully charge all other with the like wants, who
should interpret the former alleged texts diversely from their constructions,
and did no doubt, as boldly, when they were living, vaunt of the certainty and
infallibility of their spirit, as any of our Protestants can do at this
present. Seeing then, that our Adversaries, as flying to the Scriptures alone,
can allege nothing in their own behalf, for the patronizing of their
Caluinian faith, but that the former recorded Heretics actually did, and might,
as well, and as truly apply unto themselves, for the defense of their
impieties: It may therefore be de^^^^red as a most certain and infallible
Position, that it is impossible, and repugnant no less to the providence of
God, then to natural reason it self; that truth of faith and religion (the
which the Protestants profess to mayntaine) should be seated upon those
grounds (and only those grounds) which every heresy may with the like reason
and probability indifferently assume to it self.

7. Add hereto, as a resultancy out of the whole contents of this Chapter,
that seeing (as we have showed) it is the proper Scene of the Heretics, ever
to fly to the Scripture (under the wings thereof to shroud their wicked
Doctrines) that therefore by the Scripture they are not sufficiently condemned,
and consequently that the Scripture is not the proper judge of Controversies:
since no man, that this guilty of any fault, does willingly appeal to that
judge, still remaining in his former sentence, by whom he was before clearly
and evidently convicted.

That our Adversaries do confess it to be the custom of Heretics to fly to
the Scripture alone: and that therefore diverse of them do appeal to the Church,
as Judge. CAAP. XIII.
BUT to end this point touching the custom of Heretics in flyeing only to
Scripture, I hold two things worthy to be presented to the consideration of
the discreet Reader; both which shall be proved from the frequent
acknowledgmentes of our Adversaries: first, that not only experience warranteth
(as appears above from so many exemplifyed heretics) but also that our
Adversaries themselves ingeniously acknowledge, that it is the custom of
heretics ever the fly to the Scripture, for the patronizing of their
heresies. Secondly, that diverse of our learned Adversaries do absolutely abando^
this course of making sole refuge to the Scripture, as houlding it a course full
of uncertainty, and not able to affoard any secure and warrantable determining,
or ending of Controversies. And touching the first (to omit the like censure of
old Vincentius Lib. aduers. haeres. printed Lugduni. 1572. Fortassealiquis
interroget an Haeretici diuinis Scripturae testimonijs vtantut? vtuntur plane
and veheme^ter quidem: nihil vnqua^ pene de suo proferunt, quod non etia^
Scripturae verbu^ adunbrare conentur, sed tanto magis cau^ndi and pertimiscendi
sunt.
Lyrinensis (who lived 13. hundred years since) given against the custom of
the heretics of his time, and to restrain our selves to our English
Adversaries) we find, that D. Bancroft In his survey cap. 27.
charge Cartwright to seem to defend his errors by the supposed warrant of
only Scripture, and within the same proceeding this Doctrine includes even
Beza Ibidem page 219.
.

2. M. Hooker speaking of the Anabaptists, thus wrytes of them: The book of
God they (viz. the Anabaptists) for the most part so admired, that other
disputation against their opinions, then only by allegation of Scripture, they
would not hear. In his Ecclesiast. policy in the preface.
In like sort the Brownistes In their Apology printed 1604. page 103.
of Amsterdam, being confessed heretics, writing against D. Bilson, profess
to fly in their disputes only to Scripture. Finally the Author of the
Treatise entitled: A brief answer to certain objections against the
descension of Christ into hell, printed at Oxford by Joseph Barnes,
reprehendeth his Adversary Protestant, in these words: Where you say, you must
build your faith on the word of faith, tying us to Scripture only; you give
just occasion to think, that you neither have the ancient Fathers of Christ's
Church, nor their sons succeeding them, agreeing with you in this point.

3. Now as touching the second point, it is evident, that Beza himself is
produced by Hooker In his preface to his book of Ecclesiast. policy.
(as weary of the former course, begetting nothing but uncertainty) to abandon
all trial by Scripture only, and to submit himself to a lawful assembly or
Council. D. Sutcliffe, In his reuiew of his examination of D. Kellisons sur,
uey printed 1606. page 42.
as not allowing trial by Scripture only, thus writes: It is false, that we
will admit no judge, but Scripture, for we appeal still to a lawful general
Council.

4. M. Hooker in his foresaid preface of his former book speaking of
disputation and trial by Scripture only, thus discourses: What success God
may give to any such conference or disputation, we cannot tell; but we are sure
of this: that nature, Scripture, and experience have all taught the world to
seek (for the ending of Contentions) to submit it self unto some judicial
and definitive sentence. And the same learned Protestant (as is else where
alleged) showing, that the Scripture (which one question potentially
contains within it self all other questions) cannot judge, which is
Scripture, thus writes: lib. 2. Eccles. ^olic. sect. 4. p. 162.
It is not the word of God, which can assure us, that we do well to think it
is the word etc. This very point of acknowledging another Judge, then the only
Scripture, is taught by D. Bancroft in his sermon preached 8. Feb. anno 1588.
The same also is maintained by D. Couel in his modest examination p. 108. and
by D. Field in his treatise of the Church in the epistle Dedicatory to the
Arcbishop, who, giving a reason of this his Doctrine, thus writes: For seeing
the Controversies of religion in our time are grown so many in number, and in
nature so intricate, that few have time and leisure, strength and understanding
to examine them: What remains for men desirous of satisfaction in things of
such consequence, but diligently to search out, which among all the Societies
of men in the world is that blessed company of holy ones, that household of
faith, that spouse of Christ, and Church of the living God, which is the pillar
and ground of truth, that so they may embrace her communion, follow her
directions, and rest in her judgments? So Catholic like we see this Doctor
speaks in this one Controversy whereon all the rest depend, and so earnestly
he defends it with strength of reason. But to end this point: if these
acknowledgme^ts of so many of our learned Adversaries proceed from their settled
judgments therein, then have we the point controuerted granted by them, who
should oppugn it. If calumniously they admit this Doctrine of the Churches
Soueraingty in matters of lesser moment, with intention to restrain it only to
such, and deny it in greater and more weighty Controversies; then are they
truly interessed in the words of an ancient Father: Tertul. contra Praxeam.
Affectauit diabolus aliquando veritatem defendendo concutere.

6. Now the reason, why the Scripture alone (though in it self it be most
reverend, certain, and infallible) does occasion such uncertainty in the
decyding of Controversies, is no less fully acknowledged by our learned
Adversaries: For since it is not the show, but the sense of the word, (as
Doctor Reynolds In his conference with Heart. p. 63.
acknowledges) that must decyde Controversies; and seeing the Scripture
immediately of it self performs not the same; as not having viuam vocem (as
D. Whitaker De sacra Scripturae p. 221.
confesses) wherewith it speaks, but by the help of certain means on our
part to be observed: And seeing, that the means are these following, to wit:
the reading of the Scriptures, the Conference of places, the weighing of
Circumstances of the text, their skill in tongues, their diligence, prayer, and
the like; furthermore seeing as these are generally acknowledged by our
Sectaries So teaches D. Reynolds in his Crnference p. 83. and sequentibus. And
D. Whitaker Controu. 1. q. 3. c. ^1. and q. 5. c. 10.
to be the ordinary means, so are they confessed by others of our most learned
adversaries, to be but humane, and most subject to error and mistaking, as
appears even by the example of many Protestants, who though using the former
said means, have yet most foully erred (even in the judgment of their own
brethren) in the interpreting of Scripture: Therefore from hence it necessarily
follows, that all private interpretation of Scripture proceeding from these
means, is most ambiguous and uncertain. But to conclude this point, I will
here set down D. Whitakers Whitaker vbi supra.
inference or collection in his own words, drawn from the former premises:
thus then he argues: Look what the means (speaking of interpreting the
Scripture) are, such of necessity must the interpretation be; but the means of
interpreting obscure places of Scripture, are uncertain, doubtful and
ambiguous; therefore it cannot otherwise be, but the interpretation must be
uncertain: And if uncertain, then may it be false. Thus far the former
Doctor, which shall serve for the closure of this point, and likewise of the
first part of this Treatise.

THE SECOND PART.
That Protestants cannot agree, which Books be Scripture, and which are not.
CHAP. I.
IN the former part it being proved, that the Scripture is not the Judge of
Controversies, by reason of the diverse arguments there alleged: It now
follows here to be declared, that if for the time we should grant ex
hypothesi, that the Scripture (as it is absolutely considered in it self) were
this only and true judge, yet our Adversaries, of all sorts of Christians ever
being, are most exempted from pretending it for judge, and this for three
special considerations.

2. First, because they do not agree among themselves which several books
ordinarily contained within the printed volume of the Bible, are Scripture, and
which are not. Secondly, in that they do not acknowledge any original copy now
extant to be true and incorrupted only of such books, as they all jointly
receive for Scripture; as also in that they condemn all Translations of
confessed Scripture (as false and erroneous) either into Greek, Latin, or
English. Thirdly, because the confessed and incorrupted Scripture more clearly
makes for the Catholics, then for our Adversaries, if we insist either in the
perspicuity of the letter, or in the expositions of the Fathers, or in the
implicit judgments of our Adversaries themselves. Which three points, being
justified and made good (the proof whereof shall be the subject of this Part)
it cannot be conceived, how they should defend (with any advantage to
themselves) the Scripture to be this Judge.

3. And intending to begin with their dissentions in acknowledging or rejecting
certain books of Scripture; we are first particularly and attentively to
observe, that whereas all Controversies of faith are to be determined (as our
Adversaries hold) by the Canonical Scripture, which is the only written word
of God: And seeing they are at endless strife one with another, which is this
Scripture; one acknowledging such and such books to be this sacred word, which
another discanoneth as apocryphal and profane: Therefore they in no sort can
pretend the Scripture to be the judge of Controversies, as not being yet
resolved amongst themselves, which those books be that are to be counted
within the body and Canon of holy Scripture; and consequently not agreed with
themselves, which is this judge. For except this last point be first
acknowledged on al sides, it follows, that if a Lutheran against a Caluinist,
or one Caluinist against another, do urge a place or text of such a book,
which the one acknowledges to be Scripture, the other condemning it; the
urging of such a place can be of no force for the judging of the question
controuerted; since it will be replied, that the Canonical and true Scripture
alone is to defyne all doubts of faith; but that book, out of which such
places and texts are alleged, is no part of Gods written word, and therefore is
not of authority for proof of any point.

4. Now that our Adversaries cannot agree hitherto what books are true
Scripture, and what are not, it will appear most evidently even out of their
own wrytinges. And first to begin with their disagrements in opinion touching
the books of the old Testament; in which point I will speak nothing of
certain parts of Daniel, and of Ester, neither of the books of Toby, Judith,
of the book of Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, and the Machabees; since our
Adversaries with a full and joint consent have thrust al these out of the Canon
of the Bible (though if they be to deal with Catholics, and will needs have
the Scripture only to judge of all questions, they ought to acknowledge al
those books to be parcel of Scripture, which the Catholics do take for
Scripture:) But I will restrain my self only to such, the which some of them
do reverence as Canonical, and others reject as Apocryphal; from whence it
follows (as I said before) that, they disagreeing among themselves, what
books are parts of the holy Scripture, and consequently of their supposed
judge, cannot with any show of reason, maintain, that the Scripture ought to
determine (at least among them) al doubts of Religion whatsoever.

5. First then the book of Job, though it be acknowledged and received by most
of the Caluinistes both here in England and other Countries, yet Luther In
Conuiuialibus ser. titul. de Patriarchis and Prophetis.
says plainly, that he does not believe all those things, which are reported
therein. Nay he proceeds so far, as that he is not ashamed to affirm: Ibidem
titul. de libris veter is and noui Testam.
That the argument thereof is a mere fiction, invented only for the setting
down of a true and lively example of patience.

6. In like sort (or rather a more scoffing manner) he says Ibidem titul de
lib. veteris and noui Testam.
, (to debase thereby the authority of the writer) that the book entitled
Ecclesiastes, seems to him, to ride without spurrs or boots, only with bare
stockinges, though the said book is generally acknowledged by the Caluinistes:
With such scurrilous insolency Heresy is ever accustomed to vent it self
forth, against Gods saered word and truth.

7. The book of the Canticles, which is the true portraiture or delineatio^ of
the church, or according to some, of our blessed Lady, or after others, of a
perfect soul not contaminated or defiled with the pitch of mortal sin: This
book Castalio Castal. in translat. Latin. suorum bibliorum.
defends to contain only matter of sensual or wanton love; and for the same
he is deeply charged and reprehended, even by Beza Beza praefatione in Iosue.
himself.

8. The book of Baruch is in like manner condemned as Apocryphal by Calvin
and Chemnitius, In Exam. 4. sess. Council. Trident.
though acknowledged for Canonical by most of our other Adversaries; which to
be true, appears in that we do not find in their wrytinges (and the same may
be said for the acknowledgment l. 3. Instit. c. 20.. 8.
of the former books condemned by some others of their brethren) that it was
rejected by them. And thus much concerning the parcells of the old Testament.
Now if we will cast our eyes upon our Adversaries behavior toward the new
Testament, we shall find their disagreements therein no less (if not greater)
then they were in their approbation or condemnation of the books of the old
Testament.

9. And first touching the Evangelists, we read that Luther, Praefat. in nou.
Testamen. and lib. de Scripturae and Ecclesiae authorit. c. 3. and in
septicipite. c. 5. vt Cocleus notat.
as soon as became a Protestant (so instantly does the forsaking of Gods holy
word accompany the forsaking of his holy Church) of our four Ghospells would
at one blow cut away three; affirming that the Gospel of S. John is the only
fair and true Gospel, and by infinite degrees to be preferred before the
other three; adding withal, that the general opinion of the being of the
four Gospells is to be abolished; potesting further, that himself gives more
reverence and respect to the Epistles of Saint Paul and Peter, then to the
other three Evangelists. Whereby we may clearly see, that he condemns the
exposition of al Antiquity, interpreting that the four Evangelists were
figured in the four beasts showed to Apoc. cap. 4.
S. John. Luther Prolego. epist. ad Hebr.
also rejects the Epistle to the Hebrews, affirming it, neither to be Saint
Paul's, nor any of the Apostles, since it contains (says he) certain things
contrary to the Apostolical Doctrine. With Luther in condemning this Epistle do
agree Brentius, Confess. Wittenberg. c. de sacra Scriptura.
Chemnitius, Exam. 4 sess. Council. Trident.
and the Magdeburgenses Cent. l. ^. c. 4. col. 55.
: Yet Calvin, Instit. impressa anno 1554. c. 8. 216.
acknowledges it to be a true Apostolical Epistle, and condemns the
Lutheranes for rejecting of it. In like sort it is received by the Caluinist
Ministers Confess. Pissiacens. artic. 3.
for Canonical in one of their public Confessions, as also by the present
Church of England.

10. The epistle of S. James is denied to be Canonical by Luther, In prolego.
huius epist.
who says, that it is straminea epistola, an epistle of straw, and unworthy
altogether an Apostolical spirit. In like sort it is condemned by Brentius,
Chemnitius, and the Magdeburgenses, as appears out of the places of their
writings alleged before. For the disproof of the Epistle to the Hebrews,
Erasmus (for the Catholics do disclaim from him, as any of theirs) says of
this Epistle, that it does not taste of any Apostolical gravity. Yet Calvin,
and the Church of England acknowledge it as a parcel of Canonical Scripture.

11. Does not Annotat. in hanc epist.
Luther, Brentius, Chemnitius, and the Centuristes in the places above alleged
condemn in like manner the Epistle of Jude, and the second Epistle of Peter?
and of the second and third of John, rested they not doubtful? And Erasmus
Prolego. ad ha^c epist.
says plainly, that the second and third Epistle of John are not be taken, as
his Epistles, but as written by some other man. Nevertheless Calvin receaueth
all the said Epistles, and the Caluinist ministers, as appears in their
foresaid Confession Confession. Pissiacens. art. 3.
. So does also the Church of England: Of whose acknowledgment of all the former
books condemned by Luther, see the Bible printed anno 1595. and also the last
edition.

12. To conclude, to come to the Apocalips (which Dionysius Eccles. Hierarch.
cap 3.
does call arcanam and mysticam visionem dilecti discipuli: The secret and
mystical vision of the beloved disciple of our Lord, Luther ^n prolego. huius
lib.
professes openly, that he does not acknowledge this book to be either
Prophetical or Apostolical: Brentius Locis vbi supra.
and Chemnitus subscribe to Luther therein, (whose condemnation of this Book we
do less marvel at, since it is not strange, if the Eagle in his high to wring
flight therein, did so lessen his shape, as that he could not be discerned by
their fleshly and sensual eyes) notwithstanding Calvin Vbi supra.
the Magdeburgenses, and the Church of England maintain it to be Apostolical,
and written by S. John himself. Neither here can it be replied, that though
the Lutherans do dissent from the Caluinistes or Sacramentaries in rejecting or
allowing of Scripture, yet the Sacramentaries (which are the pillars of the
true reformed Churches, and with whose Doctrine the church of England does
principally conspire) do jointly with one accord agree of the books of
Scripture, and consequently that at least among them so agreing, the said
books are to judge and determine doubts of faith. This refuge avails
nothing, since their assertion therein is most false. For who knows not (to
instance only in some few) that Musculus Muscul. locis communibus c. de
Iustificat.
a Sacramentary rejects the Epistle of S. James, and Beza Beza.
the history of the adulterous woman recorded in the Gospel of S. John. c. 8.
In like sort Bullinger So charged by Laure^tius Valla.
a Sacramentary rejects that addition to our Lords prayer, vz. For thine is
the kingdom, the power, and the glory etc. though all these parcells be
acknowledged and received for Scripture by other Sacramentaries.

13. And thus much may serve for our Adversaries open and great contention
concerning the approving or rejecting of several books of both the
Testaments. From whence it most necessarily follows, that though it might be
dreamed for the time (as I said above) that the Scripture might be judge of
Controversies among them which acknowledge with one consent such and such
books only to be Scripture (since all they agree, what books those be, which
are to be this judge:) Yet our Adversaries wherewith we now deal, cannot
possibly maintain the same for judge; for they disagreing with themselves of
the books which are Scripture, must needs disagree, which is this judge, and
how far it reaches; every one of them either extending it beyond it limits,
or straitning it within to narrow a compass. Therefore it is no more possible,
that the Scripture should decyde all Controversies with the Protestants (so
long as they continue in their contrary sentences about the authority of diverse
books thereof) then it can be conceived, how a suite depe^ding between two, is
to be decyded by a certain limited company of men (as there is a limited
number of the Canonical books of Scripture) or else not to be tried at all,
and yet the one of these Litigants should disclaim from diverse of the said
deputed Judges, as altogether imcompetent and insufficient, and the other in
like sort from sundry of the other judges. Can it be conceived (I say) how this
matter should be ended, both the parties still perseuering without change in
their several auersions, against the several persons of the intended Judges;
especially if the judgment of the matter were not to be undertaken, but with
this condition, that both the Litigant parties should freely and voluntarily
agree aforehand in the number and in the particular persons of those judges, by
whom they would have their question and Controversy determined? And thus it
just fares with our Protestants, as long as they disagree what books are the
Canonical Scripture, and yet will they have this Scripture alone to determine
and resolve all points of faith and religion.

14. To this argument drawn from their uncertainty of acknowledging what
books are the word of God; Our Adversaries can only reply, that though there
be some particular books (as these above mentioned) of which they are not
absolutely resolved, whether they are to be accounted as parcells of Gods word
or no: yet since they all agree in acknowledging the rest of the books to be
Canonical; all those other books so jointly acknowledged by them for
Scripture ought to be taken for this judge of Controversies. Which answer of
theirs is most weak and relieues them nothing at all, and this for several
reasons.

15. And first, seeing there are many books both of the old Testament and of
the new (not speaking of those books in the old, which are jointly condemned
by the^ all, and acknowledged by Catholics) which are impugned by some of our
Adversaries and defended by others: And that by all probability, yea moral
certainty, some one or other of those books so impugned by some of the^ is
(though not so acknowledged) Gods sacred word; which being so, it must needs
then follow, that the Protestants teaching the Scripture to be the judge and
square of all doubts and Controversies, and attributing this prerogative not to
any one book a part, (since any one book or other is not able to decyde all
doubts, which may arise, in that it entreats not of all points which may come
in question) but to the whole body and Canon of the Scripture:) It must follow
(I say) that this supposed judge of theirs is maimed and imperfect, as wanting
some one book or other, which (being rejected by some of our Auersaries)
should concur to the (...), and full perfection or accomplishment of it
self. And therefore I conclude, that if any such one book of sacred Scripture
be exempted from the number of those, which should make up this Judge (as in
all likelihood some one or other is, since there are greater proofs for the
authority of them all, then for condemnation of any one) it demonstratiuely may
be inferred, that our Adversaries cannot pretend (as long as they thus contend,
which books be Scripture) the Scripture to be this their judge; it being
taught by our Adversaries, that fides is not obiectum adaequatum, to any one
book or parcel of Scripture, but to the whole Canon it self.

16. Secondly, if only such books, which are jointly received by all our
Adversaries, are to make up this Judge, and no others; then would it follow,
that there are diverse points of Faith, which by their own acknowledgment are
necessary to be believed, and yet cannot be proved at all, or at least clearly
enough, out of such parcells of Scripture, as they all acknowledge to be
Scripture, though most evidently proved out of those parts, which are rejected
by some of the^. As for example if the three first Gospels are to be rejected
(as Luther teaches) we shall find, that there are diverse points touching our
Saviors Incarnation (and particularly that he was borne of a Virgin) as also
his life, and conversation hereupon earth, which are to be believed, and are
found in some of these three Gospells; and yet the Gospel of S. John (only
which is acknowledged by Luther) makes no mention of them, neither are they at
al touched in any other acknowledged book of Scripture.

17. Thirdly, though it were supposed, that only those books of Scripture,
which all our Adversaries do jointly acknowledge for Canonical were to decyde
and judge all points of Faith, yet could not those books perform so much,
except it were first agreed among them, that there were some certain original
copies or some translations now extant of them, which our Adversaries would
acknowledge for true and uncorrupted (since otherwise not the true word of God,
but the word of God as it is corrupted, should become the judge of our Faith.)
But there are no Originals nor Translations of the Scripiure (speaking even of
those books which themselves do jointly acknowledge) that are now extant,
which they do not charge with sundry corruptions and falsifications, as it
shall appear most evidently in these Chapters following: So manifest it is,
that even those books only, as are acknowledged by all our Adversaries, cannot
become the judge of Controversies.

18. But before we come to the Translations, it follows, that as we have
showed above, that our Adversaries do reject many books of undoubted and
Canonical Scripture; and consequently, that they cannot pretend the Scripture
as judge: So we will in this place observe the carriage and comportment of the
Protestants toward the Evangelists and the Apostles; whom diverse of our
Sectaries have not been afraid to charge with foul errors in manner and
practice or exercise of their faith. And first, it is clear, that D. Whitaker
De Eccles. contra Bellarm. controu. 2. quaest. 4. page 223.
thus writes: It is manifest, that even after Christ his Ascension, and the
holy Ghosts descending upon the Apostles, not only the common sort, but even
the Apostles themselves erred in the vocation of the gentiles etc. Yea Peter
also erred concerning the abrogation of the Ceremonial law etc. and this was a
matter of faith etc. he furthermore erred in manners, and these were great
errors.

19. Answerably hereto Brentius In Apolog. Co^fess. c. de Concilijs. p. 900.
(an eminent Protestant) writes, that S. Peter (chief of the Apostles) and
Barnabas after the holy Ghost received, together with the Church of Jerusalem,
erred. D. Fulke Against the Rhemish Testam. in Galat. 2.
speaking upon the said point. says; Peter erred in ignorance against the
Gospel. Iewill In his defense of the Apology. page 361.
affirms, that S. Mark did erroneously allege Abiather for abimelech; and
S. Matthew with the like oversight did write Jeremy for Zachary. Conradus In
Theolog. Calumist. l. 2. fol. 40.
Schlusselburg (a famous Protestant) charge Calvin to maintain, that the
Apostles alleged the Prophets in other sense, then was meant. Zuinglius Tom.
2. Elench. co^tra Anabap. f. 10.
most wonderfully abaseth the wrytings of the Apostles and the Evangelists in
these words: This is your ignorance, that you think the Commentaries of the
Evangelists, and the Epistles of the Apostles to have been then in authority,
when Paul did write these things; as though Paul did attribute then so much to
his Epistles, that whatsoever was contained in them, was sacred etc. which
thing (he says) were to impute immoderate arrogance to the Apostle.

20. D. Bancroft In his survey of the pretended discipline. page 373.
alleges out of Zanchius his Epistles, that one of Caluins Scholars said: If
Paul should come to Geneua, and preach the same hour that Calvin did, I would
leave Paul and hear Calvin. Calvin In his Co^mentar. in omnes Pauli Epistol.
p. 510.
himself charge S. Peter with error, to the Schism (as he says) of the
Church, to the endangering of Christian liberty, and the overthrow of the grace
of Christ. The Century writers Cent. 2. l. 2. c. 10. ^ol. 580.
thus reprehend S. Paul: Paul does turn to James the Apostle, and a Synod of
the Presbiters being called together, he is persuaded by James and the rest,
that for the offended Jews he should purify himself in the Temple, whereunto
Paul yields, which certainly is no small sliding of so great a doctor. In
which one testimony, we see that not only Paul, but the rest of the Apostles
are charged by the Centurists with error in faith. And to close this point
with that incestuous and revolted monk (I mean Luther) we read, that, besides
the several books of the new Testament (as it above showed) denied by him, as
also besides the reprehending of Peter, of whom he thus says: Peter In epist
ad Galat. c. 1. after the English transl. fol. 33. and 34. and Tom. 5.
Wittenberg. of anno 1554. fol. 290.
the chief of the Apostles, did live and teach extra verbum Dei, besides the
word of God: he thus inueigheth most scurrilously against Moses himself:
Moses Luther. tom. 3. Wittenberg. in psalm. 45. f. 423. and tom. 3. german. f.
40. and 41. and in colloq. mensalib. german. f. 152. and 153.
had his lips unpleasant, stopped, angry etc. do you collect all the wisdom
of Moses, and of the heathen Philosophers, and you shall find them to be
before God, either Idolatry or Hypocryticall wisdom, or (if it be Politic)
the wisdom of wrath etc. Moses had his lips full of gaul and anger etc.
away therefore with Moses.

21. And thus far of this point, from whence we conclude, that the
Protestants in charging the Evangelists and the Apostles with errors of faith
in their words and actions, do withal labor to take away the infallible
authority due to their wrytings and books (for grant they erred in the first
way, how can we be secured, they erred not in the second, seeing their pens had
no greater privilege from God of not erring, then their tongues and other
their actions had) and consequently they cannot allege their wrytings (as
being subject to error by necessary inferences drawn from their own grounds)
for the final decyding and determining of all doubts, arysing in matters of
faith and religion.

That the Protestants allow not the Original Hebrew of the old Testament now
extant, for authentical and uncorrupted. CHAP. II.
ALTHOVGTH our Adversaries do give it out in their wrytings and sermons, that
the Hebrew Original, which now they have, and as it is at this present poynted
with pricks, is pure and free from all corruption, and therefore that we ought
in any text of the old Testament to recurre to the Hebrew, as to the touch
stone of truth, and to a clear and untroubled fountain: Yet that this is but
a mere gloss and false vaunt of them (invented only to quit themselves from
that reading of the text, altogether favoring the Catholic Doctrine, whereunto
both the Greek and Latin Fathers, and the whole Church of God for so many ages
have been accustomed) it is most evident. For it is most certain that in
diverse places, themselves do forsake the present Hebrew, and do read, as the
Septuagint, or as the Latin Interpretour does read, both who differ much from
the present Hebrew. Some few texts for example I will here set down.

2. First then, that prophesy of David Psalm. 8.
concerning the Apostles, the Septuagint, S. Paul, Romans 10.
and the Protestants themselves do read thus: In omnem terram exiuit sonus
eorum: Their sound went out through all the earth: and yet the present Hebrew
has instead of these words: (sonus eorum) linea, or perpendiculum eorum, so
insutable with the other words, as that it is hard to collect any good and
perfect sense thereof.

3. The Psalm 22. affoards a most notorious prophesy of the particular manner
of our Saviors death in these words: They have peirced my hands and feet: for
so the Septuagint, the Catholics, and the Protestants in their Translations
do read, and yet the present Hebrew (so much magnified by the^) has instead
thereof these words: as a Lion my hands and my feet; frustrating thereby so
remarkable a prophesy of our Saviors particular suffering and death.

4. The Hebrew says in one Reg. 24.
place: Zedechias his brother, meaning thereby the brother of Ioachim; and yet
the English Bible translated anno 1579. reads thus: Zedechias his fathers
brother, according to the Greek and Latin translation therein.

5. Likewise in another place, Par^lip. 2.
the present Hebrew says Achaz King of Israel, and yet our Adversaries reject
this reading, and translate Achaz King of Judah; following therein the
Septuagingts translation, and the Latin interpretour.

6. I let pass the eight verses alleged out of the psalms Psalm. 11.
by S. Paul, Romans 3. and Sepulchrum patens est guttur eorum. Linguis suis
dolose agebant etc.
and translated by the Protestants, and yet all the said verses are not to be
found in any Hebrew text now extant, as now they lie in S. Paul. And thus much
(passing over diverse other places) to show, that the present Hebrew is not even
in the opinion of our Adversaries that same pure fountain, of which they at
other times so much boast of, (and consequently not of that absolute truth in
it self, as to become the judge of Controversies) but that the cristaline
stream thereof is troubled with some mud of corruption; rising either from the
negligence of the Printers in regard of the great likeness and rese^blance of
many Hebrew letters, which might easily occasion a mistaking of one another; or
partly through the ignorance of the Rabbis, who have added pricks, since the
Hebrew first wanting pricks might be read several ways; or lastly partly from
the malice of the Jews, as being desirous to read the Hebrew, in that sense,
which might seem least to favor Christian religion.

That the Protestants allow no Original of the new Testament now extant, as
uncorrupted. CAAP. III.
IN the next place here comes to be examined the Greek Original of the new
Tement: of which either all, or the chiefest part was first written in Greek
by the Apostles and Evangelists: This has been since in diverse places so
corrupted even by the acknowledgment of the Protestants, as that we cannot
appeal securely thereunto, as to account it (such as now it is) the pure and
uncorrupted word of God. All such places to note is not needful, therefore some
few shall suffice.

2. And first we will exemplify that place of the Apostle, Romans 12. for in the
Greek it is not (...), but (...), that is te^pore sernientes.
where we read: Be fervent in the spirit serving the Lord; for so do the
Catholics and Protestants even in their later editions translate; and yet in
all Greek copies it is: Be fervent in spirit serving the time: Which first
manner of reading, that it is the more true, appears out of Origin,
Chrysostom, Theophilact, and other Greek Fathers, who ever read and
explicated this place in their wrytings and Commentaries, as the Catholics and
Protestants do at this present.

3. Again the Greek text reads in the first to the Corinthians: 1. Cor.
cap. 15. (...). that is; Secundus homo Dominus de caelo.
The first man is of the earth, earthly: the second man is the Lord from
heaven; But the Latin tanslation has, Secundus homo de caelo, caelestis, which
translation even Calvin C. 7. Instit.. 21.
acknowledges, and condemns the other, since it is clear, that the first
reading proceeded from the corruption of Marcion, as Tertullian l. 5. in
Marcione^.
witnesses.

4. I pass over the words adjoined in all Greek copies to the end of our
Lords prayer (since they are acknowledged by our Adversaries, as part of the
true Greek) the words be these: For thine is the kingdom, the power, and
glory etc. though it is manifest, that this sentence was added by the Grecians
to the text; both because the Crecians in their Liturgies do recyte the said
words, but not as continuing them with the Lords prayer: as also in that
Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose, Jerome, and Austin (all who understood the Greek
tongue) do not make any mention at all of the former sentence, which doubtlesly
they would not have omitted, if they had found it joined with the said prayer
in any authentical Greek copy.

5. And thus much concerning our Adversaries rejecting of the Greek Original
in such places, where it is certain, that it is erroneous. Now we will add a
place or two, wherein our Adversaries do disclayme from the Greek, though most
pure and uncorrupted. In the genealogy of our Savior, Beza leaves out one
descent in his translation, which we find in S. Luke cap. 3. (...) qui fuit
Cainan.
in all Greek copies; speaking thereof after this accustomed Lordly manner: Non
dubitamus expungere, that is; we make no scruple to put it out.

In like sort, where S. Matthew gives a prerogative to S. Peter, in saying,
Cap. 10. it being in the Greek (...).
The first Peter; though it be thus in all Greek copies, yet Beza In his
Annotations upon the new Testament, set forth anno 1556.
affirms, that the Greek text is here corrupted by some one, who taught that
Peter was the chief of the Apostles: and the corruption (says he) consists
in adding the Greek word (...), to the text. Lastly to avoid prolixity, I
will end with that vnswerable place of S. Luke: c. 22.
It being, in all Greek copies without exception: (...), Hic calix nouum
testamentum in sanguine meo, qui (vz. calix) pro vobis funditur: that is, This
Cup being the new Testament in my blood, which (vz. Cup) is shed for you; This
is the true translation in that the participle (...) must of necessity agree in
all Greek co^struction, with the Greek substantive, signifying the vbi supra.
Cup, and not with the Greek substantive the blood, it being of a different
case from it. Now Beza seeing, that by the construction of the Greek, it
follows, that the Cup was shed for us (meaning thereby the thing contained in
the Cup) but wine was not shed for us, but the blood of our Savior: Therefore
his blood was in the Cup, when he said these words of consecration. Beza, vbi
supra.
(I say) foreseing this inevitable illation, pronounces plainly that the
Greek text is corrupted (meaning thereby all Greek Editions, that ever were in
his time) and the Greek word forcing this construction, crept out of the
margent into the text, so making these words mere surreptitious. And this now
may suffice to show, that the Greek Original is neither so absolutely
authentical in it self, nor at least so acknowledged by our Adversaries, as
that all other translations, or doubts rising in points of faith, may
infallibly be tried thereby.

7. Now to reflect somewhat upon our argument, drawn from the acknowledged
corruptions of the Originalls of both the Testaments: How can our Adversaries
with any show of common understanding, pretend the Scriptures to be the only
judge with them, when by their own confessions, they have no true and
authentical Original of such books only as themselves jointly acknowledge
for Scripture? What can our Adversaries reply hereto? Will they answer that
such corruptions, wherewith the Originalls are stained do happen only in such
places, as are not controuersiall, (and therefore the less material) but that
al those passages and texts of Scripture, which do precisely touch any point of
Chrystian religion, are most free from all such escapes? This answer fails
several ways.

8. First, because we are bound by the Protestants own principles to believe
nothing, with is not expressed in the Scriptures: But we read not in any place
or text of them, that God will ever preserve his written word, free from all
corruptions in essential points of Christian faith, and yet suffer it to be
generally depraved in matters of lesser moment; Neither can it be replied, that
God* sweet providence and care over his Church requires, that the Scripture be
free from all such main corruptions; This (I say) cannot satisfy us
Catholics, who do teach, that Gods pouidence and care toward his Church does
not chiefly consist in preserving his written word, since faith (for which end
the Scripture was first written) may be preserved in the Church only by
external preaching and force of tradition: and answerably hereunto we read,
that the church of God in the time of Nature for the space of 2000. years
enjoyed no Scripture or written word at al: in like sort Irenaeus (l. 3. c. 4.)
writes that there were some Christian countries, which believed and lived
well, only by help of Traditions, without any written word.

9. Secondly it is false, that the said corruptions do chance only in such
places of indifferency, as concern not doubts of faith; since the contrary is
manifest (to omit diverse others which might be alleged) by the two former
produced examples out of S. Matthew cap. 10.
and S. Luke cap. 22.
where we see, that the corruptions wherewith our Adversaries do charge these
two texts, do fall just upon the touch and point of two chiefest Controversies
of this time, to wit the Supremacy of Peter, and the Real Presence.

10. Thirdly if by our Adversaries acknowledgment all the Originalls now extant
are corrupted in places not pertaining to matters of faith, how can we be
infallibly assured, that they are not in like sort corrupted in texts of
Controversies of this time, or of such doubts, as hereafter may rise? Since a
certainty of an error in one place does imply a possibility of error in any
other place? And yet this infallibility we ought to have for otherwise we build
our faith upon such passages of Scripture, which we do but think only to be
the true and uncorrupted word of God, and consequently it is not faith, that is
builded only upon a bare moral persuasion of the Scriptures integrity; And if
this be not so, let our Adversaries show some privilege and warrant, which the
Scritpture has to be freed from the corruptions of one kind more then of
another: If they say, that the Analogy of faith expressed therein does
demonstrate, that it is not corrupted in any such fundamental places; this is
ridiculous: for seeing that faith (by our Adversaries grounds) rises only out
of the Scripture, and in that respect is quidda^ posterius and tempore and
natura, (as the Philosophers say) that is, later both in time and nature then
the Scriptures, as before is showed; therefore it follows, that the Analogy of
faith cannot be the square or rule to measure the integrity and incorruptio^ of
the Scriptures thereby, but it self is measured by the Scriptures, even by
their own principles.

11. And thus much to discover the weakness of their first answer made to our
Argument drawn from their acknowledged corruptions of the Originalls of both
the Testaments. Or will they frame a second answer to the said argument
saying, that though the Originalls be corrupted, yet there are certain
translations (allowed by them) which are most pure and agreeable to the first
Originalls, before they were corrupted, and by these al doubts and
Controversies of faith and religion are to be determined? This shift is more
feeble then the former: first because it was impossible, how the corrupted
Originalls should be corrected in their translations, there not being in the
Protestants judgments in the universal world any one true copy, by the which
their translations might be amended, since all translations now remaining were
long after any true Original was to be found, the vulgar Latin, and the 70.
only excepted. Secondly this answer satisfyeth not, in that there is no one
translation made in Greek, Latin, or our vulgar tongue, but our Adversaries do
tax it with errors and corruptions; Which point shall most evidently and
particularly be made manifest in the Chapters following.

12. Thus we see how forcible and unanswerable is our reason drawn from their
confessed corruptions of their Originalls for the conuincing of this their
imaginary judge of Controversies. One thing only here is to be remembered, that
where, in the former Chapters, not only the Protestants, but also the
Catholics do hold the present Originalls of both the Testaments for
corrupted; that this assertion, though proceeding alike from them both, does
mightily prejudice the Protestants, but the Catholics nothing at all. Not us,
in that we acknowledge the vulgar Latin translation (which is altogether
rejected by our adversaries) to be most sincere and agreeable to the true
Originalls before their corruption; And hereby we maintain, that we have, and
enjoy the true Scriptures. But the Protestants are disaduantaged by their
former assertion, because they refuse not only all Originalls (now to be had)
as impure and contaminated, but also all translations, and consequently having
in their judgments no true Scripture at all, they cannot prostitute the
Scripture for their Judge of Controversies.

That the Protestants reject the Septuagint Translations, as erroneous. CHAP.
IV.
NOw follows here to set down the dislike which our Adversaries do bear to
all the Translations of the holy Scripture; And first we are to begin with the
famous translation of the Septuagint, who being Hebrews borne, translated the
old Testament out of Hebrew into Greek; This translation was so generally
applauded by the ancient Fathers, Irenaeus, Eusebius. Cleme^s Alexandrinus,
Epiphan. Chrysostom. Tertull. Aug. and the rest.
as that they did jointly pronounce the said 70. to be guided particularly by
the Holy Ghost in that their translation; And yet our Adversaries do reject it
in many places as false and erroneous: and even there where they cannot pretend
the least suspision of any corruption. And intending to show some few places
thereof disalowed by them (for to particularize all were over laboursome) I will
restrain my self only to such texts, as do belong to some particular
Controversy of this time, (which course I will also hold for the most part in
the other translations here following:) That thereby it may the more clearly
appear, how insufficient all translatio^s are for the decyding of
Controversies, when their presumed corruptions are found to rest principally in
the texts urged for the confirming or disproofe of the questions co^trouerted
at this present.

2. And first concerning that text, which touches our Saviors descending into
Hell, the Septuagint do translate: Thou Psalm. 15. (...): aximam in inferno.
shall not leave my soul in hell: The Protestants do read: Thou shall not
leave my soul in the grave, they meaning here, by the word Soul, Life, or
Person, teaching hereby that Christ was not at all in hell (and consequently,
that he did not deliver the Patriarchs from thence) but only in the grave. Now
that this translation does differ from the translation of the 70. it is most
manifest, and chiefly by the signification of the two Greek words used by the
70. in this translation, to wit (...), signifying anima, the soul: and (...)
Infernus, hell: a thing so clear, that Beza, first translating this text, as
the Protestants do now read, did after through the apparent falsehood thereof
leave the said translation, and instead thereof read with the Septuagint: Thou
shall not leave my soul in hell. I will not much dwell upon in showing the
falsehood of the Protestants translation therein (neither in the other texts
following) my meaning only being to show, how they tax the 70. translation for
erroneous, and consequently that they cannot pretend to examine and defyne by
it all doubts arysing in faith and religion.

3. The Septuagint do in like sort translate: I have Psalm. 118.
inclined my heart to keep thy iustifications, or commandments for reward;
The Greek words used by the^ for the words (for reward) being (...),
signifying even by the acknowledgment of all Grecians, propter retributionem,
for reward; Yet because this place (so translated by the 70.) might seem to
imply merit of works, therefore our Adversaries in regard of the Hebrews
ambiguity herein, do translate thus, I have inclined my heart to fulfill the
statutes always even to the end, the Hebrew words signifying indifferently
either for reward, or otherwise, to the end.

4. The famous place out of Daniel Dan. cap. 4.
to the King, vz. Redeem thy sins with Alms, being so truly and literally
out (...). El^emosynis redime.
of the Septuagint translated; Yet our Adversaries controuling them herein do
translate thus: Break of thy sins by righteousness; for seeing the Hebrew does
affoard both significations, they for the avoiding the Doctrine of
Satisfaction, have made choice of this other construction.

5. Again, where the Septuagint do read: Psalm. 138. (...)*
Thy friends (o God) are become exceeding honorable, their princedome is
exceedingly stre^gthned. Yet because this place seems in their opinion to
countenance overmuch the blessed souls in heaven, (whose honors our Sectaries
can hardly brook) therefore they leaving the 70. translation herein, do pick
out of the Hebrew another translation, reading thus in their bibles: How dear
are thy Counsels (or thoughts) to me, o God, o how great is the sum of them?

6. Now here it is to be remembered that our Adversaries in these and many
other places (which to avoid tediousnes I omit) do not condemn the present
Greek of the old Testament, as corrupted, and much differing from the Greek
translation thereof made by the Septuagint themselves, (though to the scope and
end of our alleging of the translations it is all one:) but they acknowledge
this present Greek translation to be that translation made by the said
Septuagint, without any change or alteration; And yet we see, they charge it as
false in such places, where the ambiguity of the Hebrew may minister any other
reading more suitable to their faith and Doctrine. So far then are our
Adversaries of from granting that all differences of faith and religion ought
to be decyded by the Scripture of the old Testament (speaking of such points,
only as may receive their proofs from thence) as now we find it translated in
Greek by the Septuagint.

That the Protestants reject the vulgar Latin Translation. CHAP. V.
THOUGH the vulgar Translation of the whole Bible has been reverenced above
all other Translations, for the space of more then a thousand years, since the
Church during so many ages used it only; the great respect had ever thereto also
appearing from the testimonies of S. Austin l. 18. Ciuit. Dei. c. 42. and
epist. 10. ad Hieronym.
, S. Gregory lib. 20. moral. c. 24.
, S. Isidore lib. 6. Etymol. cap. 5.
, and diverse other ancient Fathers: Notwithstanding our Adversaries do
altogether and jointly disclaim from it, because (they say) it favors to much
the Papists; And therefore we find it absolutely condemned and written against
by Calvin, l. aduers. Council. Trident.
Chemnitius Exam. Council. Trident.
, Titelmanus Heshusius, as also generally rejected by our English Protestants,
in so much, as I hold it but lost labor to insist in further proof hereof.

2. Now then the Translation of S. Hierome being by them discarded, and no
other ancient and authentical translation now extant, which they allow for the
defining thereby of matters in religion, what course will they take herein? No
doubt they will follow some one translation of their own men, which they with
general consent acknowledge to be most true, sincere, and answerable to the
meaning of the holy Ghost. Nothing less. For here begins the Aegiptian Isa. 19.
to fight against the Aegiptian; De sexce^tis errorib. Po^tific.
And here is now figured out the Confusion of Babylon, since among so many
translations of the holy Scripture being made by our Adversaries, they shall
not be able to show any one, which their own men do not traduce as false,
erroneous, and heretical; Which thing shall evidently appear in the Chapters
following. Thus our Adversaries (like lines meeting in a point, and then
instantly breaking of) have no sooner iumped together to condemn all former
Translations, but that presently they dissent among themselves in appruoing or
rejecting their own Translations.

That the Protestants do condemn all the chief Translations of their own
brethren, as false and erroneous. CAAP. VI.
TO undertake the setting down of all such places, as in our Adversaries
several translations, are charged with corruption by some of their own
brethren, were over laboursome, and not much needful, and therefore in this
Ocean and sea of their own dissentions (wherein we find drowned the credit of
every particular translation made by any of them) I will sail by a more narrow
Cut; to wit, I will deliver only the judgments of their own brethren passed
upon every such translation of theirs (our English translations only excepted)
whereupon I will stay the longer, and enlarge my discourse more particularly for
some peculiar reasons.

2. To begin then with Luther, who translated the holy Scripture: would all the
Protestants (think you) rely upon that translation? you shall therefore hear
Zuinglius lib. de Sacram. f. 412. See him also respons. ad Confess. Tugurinorum.
his Encomion and praise both of him and his translation, styling him: A foul
corrupter, and horrible falsisier of Gods word, one that followed the
Marcionites and Arians, that razed out such places of holy writ, as were
against them. Neither is Bucer dialog, contra Melancthon. See Lindan. dub. 84.
96. 98.
dumb in censuring Luthers said translation as erroneous: Besides both which
censures of him, you find (to touch only one particular) that he inserteth
words of his own into the text it self, as though they were written by the
holy Ghost; as for example, translating that text, A man is justified by faith
without the works of the law: he inserteth in (contrary both to the Greek and
Latin) the words (only) to explicate, as himself says, more plainly the
Apostles meaning, against the Justification of works done in the time of grace.

3. The same task of translation was undertaken and performed by Calvin, but
with what dexterity he carried himself therein it appears (to say nothing of
Illyricus co^demning thereof) by the testimony of Carolus Tract. Testamnoui
part. 11. fol. 110.
Molineus, a younger brother of his own house, who writes of Caluins
translations in this sort: He made the text of the gospel to leap up and
down at his pleasure, and he used violence to the same, and added of his own
to the very sacred letter, for drawing it to his own purpose.

4. Oecolampadius (so truly entitled per Antiphrasin, as infecting Gods house
and church with the darkness of heresy) by the help of his brethren of Basil,
would needs busy himself with the like labor: Yet was their translation so
distasteful to Beza In respons. ad defens. Castalion. vide etiam praefat.
Testam. noui anno 155^.
, as that he charge them al, with great sacrilege and impiety, in corrupting
of the sacred word it self.

5. Neither will Beza pass over (as uncontrolled) the translation of Castalio,
tearming his proceeding with Gods word to be bold, pestilent, sacrilegious, and
Ethenicall, and speaking else where Annot in act. 10.
of Castalio in this point, he says, It comes to pass, that whiles every
man will rather freely follow his own judgment, then be a religious
interpreter of the holy ghost, he does rather pervert many things, then
translate them. Beza himself translated the new Testament, but with what
applause his work was entertained you shall hear, for (besides Castalio his
reciprocal testimony of condemning the same) Illyricus much impugneth it, and
Molineus In t^a^slat. noui Testament. part. 64. 65. 66.
plainly charge Beza, Quod de facto textum mutat: that actually he changes
the very text of Gods word it self, for the patronizing of his Doctrine.

6. Good God, would any think (if their own writings were not as yet extant
to charge them therewith) that such men as these, being indeed the Antesignani,
the most choice and eminent Doctors, and as it were, so many Oracles or Suns
of their new Gospel, should no sooner divide themselves by open Apostasy from
the unity of the Catholic Church, but that they begin to inueigh one against
another in great acerbity and bitterness of speech, concerning their different
translations? Plainly discovering by their mutual reproualls and
recriminations herein, that though they all conspire to make head against the
Catholic Faith, yet do they presently thereupon broach forth different
Doctrines among themselves, and each one glad to fortify their opinions by
impugning all other translations, which are not made suitable to their new
stamped Doctrine.

7. Wherefore a company of men falling from the body of the Catholic Church,
may be well resembled to some mighty fall of earth from the body of a huge
mountain, (and this mountain even by Esaias himself figureth out Christ's
Church) which great clod is no sooner disparted from the rest, but it crimbleth
it self into innumerable small parcells. But herein we are to admire Gods
providence, who is able to use the actions of the Churches enemies, as
handmaids to the Churches preservation; no otherwise then the betraying of Genesis
^* 45. and 50.
Joseph by his brethren to the safety of the Israelites. For seeing the division
of heresy is not mathematical and infinite, but determinate and limitable,
therefore every heresy, though at it first appearance, it draws men's eyes upon
it (like blazing stars, which seem high but are low, shine no longer, then
their matter endures) yet at the length consumes and wastes away by subdiuiding
it self, and striving to make it own part good against al others; so as it
falls out, that the Catastrophe and Conclusion of all such proceeding is
this, that it may be truly pronounced: The war of Heretics to be the peace of
the Church, and their divisions her union.

8. But to return, for I had almost lost my self in our Adversaries former
disagrements touching their translations; where we are to observe, that though
some of their translations came nearer to the vulgar Latin translation then
others; yet each of them (as is said) mainly dissents one from another; like two
faces, which bearing some resemblance to a third face, have notwithstanding no
likeness between themselves.

That the English Translations are corrupted, and therefore not sufficient to
determine doubts in Religion. CHAP. VII.
THE Hebrew and Greek Originalls of the holy Scriptures, as also the Greek
and Latin tra^slations of the same being examined, and found defective by our
Adversaries assertions, we are to descend to our English translations, and to
show that they are fraughted with many corruptions, and that our Adversaries
cannot justify the said translations to be true and exact only according to the
Originalls, out of which they are made; and consequently, that the said
translatio^s cannot with any show of judgment or reason, be exposed for the
infallible judge of Controversies. That these translations are most corrupt and
erroneous, may be proved two ways: first from the translations themselves;
Secondly from the Confession of our English Protestants.

2. And concerning the translations themselves, three things are found in
them, which may assure all men of their impurity; first the adding of diverse
words unto the text, which words are not to be found neither in the Hebrew nor
in the Greek Originalls, and the words added are of such nature, as they make
only for the better mayntaining of the Protestants religion.

3. I could instance this in many textes of their tra^slations, but one or two
shall be sufficient at this time: as for example in the first Chapter of the
Acts, our English translations speaking of the election of Matthias the Apostle
read thus: He was by a common consent counted with the eleven Apostles, to
prove out of this place, that all Ecclesiastical functions ought, or at least
may be made by a popular election, which diverse reformed Churches of the
Caluinists do hold at this day: Here these former words to wit, with a common
consent, are plainly added by our Adversaries, since the Greek word (...)
here used, signify only: He was reckoned, numbered, or accounted: neither is
there any other Greek words in the text, which they can, or do pretend to
signify any such kind of election.

4. In like sort in their Bible printed anno 1577. in the ninth of the Acts,
we read thus: Paul confounded the Jews, proving by conferring one Scripture
with another, that this is very Christ, to which text our Adversaries did add
this sentence vz. by conferring one Scripture with another, since no one word
hereof is in the Greek, which might be thus translated through any mistaking
or supposed ignorance: But this was done to make the ignorant reader believe,
that S. Luke said, that conference of Scriptures is the only mean to
understand them, rejecting thereby all commentaries and expositions of Fathers
and Councels.

5. The second point, which manifests the corruptions of our English Bibles,
is taken from the conferring together of several textes of Scripture
translated in them, in which several textes one and the same Greek word (for
here I speak chiefly of the new Testament) is diversely translated. My meaning
here is this, that in textes concerning points of faith between us and the
Protestants, the Greek word is translated by them in a forced or secondary
sense, preiudicing our Catholic faith; the which same word being found in
other textes, which touch not any Controuersiall point, they are content to
translate in it true, immediate, and ordinary signification, since they see,
that in such places they cannot disadvantage us at all by any false translation.

6. Two examples (instead of many scores which I could produce) shall
illustrate my meaning herein The first shall be touching the Greek word, (...),
which is very notorious, for whereas it signifies to be made worthy indeed,
they translate it only, to be counted worthy, in such texts wherein is included
the worth and merit of good works, meaning thereby, that we are not made worthy
indeed, but only so reputed by God. Thus for example they translate in the
Gospel of S. Luke. c. 21. Watch therefore at all times, praying that you may
be counted worthy to stand before the son of God, the same translation (to
wit, to be accounted worthy) they give of the former Greek verb in the said
Gospel of S. Luke c. 20. and in the second to the Thessalonians c. 1. and in
diverse other places, in all which the merits of works are signified. Now in
other passages of Scripture, which do not concern merit of works, and wherein
the foresaid Greek word (...) is used in the Original, they can be content to
translate it with us Catholics in it true and proper signification, to wit, to
be worthy indeed, and not only to be counted worthy: for example (to omit other
places) they thus truly translate in the tenth to the Hebrews: O how much
sorer punishment shall he be worthy of, which treads under foot the son of
God.

7. Another example of this second kind of discovering the falsehood of the
English translations shall be specifyed touching Traditions. For the better
apprehending of which slight the reader is to conceive, that in the new
Testament there is mention made of two sorts of Traditions; the one being
Judicial, profane, and dissenting from the word of God: The other godly and
such, as the Apostles themselves did leave to the Church; both which sorts of
Traditions are expressed by the Apostles and Evangelists in one and the same
Greek word vz. (...), which (coming of the Greek Verb (...), in Latin
Trado) signifies as properly Traditio, as domus in Latin signifies a house.
Nowhere I say our Adversaries falsehood intranslation does lie, in that in their
Translations they suppress the word Tradition, in all such textes, where
mention is made of godly and Apostolical Traditions, using instead thereof the
words, Ordinances, or instructions; And accordingly thereto we find that thus
they translate the first to the Corinthians c. 11. I pray you brethren, that
you be mindful of me, and as I have delivered unto you, you keep my
ordinances, being notwithstanding in the Greek, (...): You keep my
traditions. Again in like sort thus they translate in the second to the
Thessalonians: Therefore brethren stand, and hold fast the instructions (in
Greek, (...), traditions) which you have learned either by word, or by our
Epistle. To be short the same translation of the said Greek word they use in
the foresaid epistle to the Thessalonians c. 3. where it is spoken of
Traditions in a good sense.

8. But now on the contrary side (which point conuinceth our Adversaries of an
unanswerable corruption and iniustifiable fraud in their Translatio^s) in
those textes, where traditions are mentioned in a bad and wicked sense, they
ever translate the foresaid Greek word (...), in it true and natural
signification, to wit Traditio, Tradition. As for instance sake in Math. c. 15.
Why do you transgress the Commaudements of God by your traditions? in which
very Chapter mention is made three several times of Jewish and wicked,
traditions, in all which textes they can be courteously content to translate
the word (...) (being found in them all) with us Catholics, Traditions, and
not Ordinances, or Instructions; And though the Greek word (...) may in a
secondary and strained signification be extended sometimes to signify
Ordinances or Instructions; yet the slight and subtilty of our Adversaries
herein is this, because they would have the ignorant reader to find the word
Tradition in Scripture ever in a bad sense, and never in a good sense, thereby
the more to alicnate and withdraw his mind from the Doctrine of Traditions
maintained by the Catholics.

9. A third Consideration of displaying the false translations of our English
Bibles may be taken from the multiplicity of their translations made heretofore
in several years, and yet one of them crossing another in many controuersiall
points of faith between the Protestants and us. Now from this contrariety in
translation (and especially in points of Controversies) is necessarily euicted
a falsehood of their translations: for supposing one translation for true, it
unavoidably follows, that all other translations, which are made absolutely
contrary to that one must needs be false and erroneous. This contrariety they
use in infinite textes of Scripture, but I will instance it for great breuity
only in two. Well then, their Bibles printed anno 1562. do thus read in 2. Cor.
c. 6. How agrees the temple of God with Images? Again in 1. Cor. c. 10. Be
not worshippers of Images, as some of them are. In like sort 1. John c. 5. the
same Bible thus reads: Babes keep your selves from Images: Al which
translations being supposed as true, prohibit and forbid all religious use and
reverence to Images whatsoever. But now in all their later translatio^s made
since that time, in the former three places and texts instead of the word,
Images, they translate and read. Idols: restraining the former prohibition to
those Images only, which are made Idols, and worshipped instead of God. In like
sort touching Christ's desce^ding into hell, the Bibles printed anno 1562. and
1577. do read thus: Thou shall not leave my soul in hell: which translatio^s
prove Christ's descending into hell contrary to the Doctrine of the present
Church of England. But the later translation, to wit made in the year 1579.
1595. and 1600. do read, Thou shall not leave my soul in the grave;
understanding the former text of the grave only, and not of hell.

10. Now here I say that, in regard of this multiplicity and variety of English
translations (one mainly impugning and crossing another) we may most strongly
conclude, that some of these translations must needs be false: and which of
them is true, an ignorant judgment (since it has no more reason to approve one
then another) cannot well censure. And thus far touching the three several
kinds of discovering the English translations as false and corrupted, the
Consideration whereof does affoard an unanswerable argument, that our English
translations in regard of their impurity, cannot, nor ought not to be pretended
as judge for the final determining of doctrinall points in faith and religion.

11. There rests a second way (as I said) for the greater manifestation of
the falsehood and corruption used in the translation of our English Bibles, and
this is taken from the frequent Confessions of the Protestants themselves in
this point, whose acknowledgme^ts herin are so full, as they take away all
means of euading. And first answerably to this my assertion, we find that
diverse Puritan In a treatise entitled, A treatise directed to her excellent
Majesty.
ministers with one consent, speaking only of the translation of one part of
the Bible (to wit, the Psalms) pronounce in this sharp manner: Our
translation of the psalms compared in our book of Common prayer, does in
addition, substraction, and alteration differ from the truth of the Hebrew in
two hundred places at least. But other of our Adversaries do not rest in
censuring only one part of the Bible, as falsely and corruptedly translated, but
absolutely do give the like censure of the whole. Thus we read, that the
Ministers In the abridgme^t of a book delivered to the king by the said
ministers. p. 11. and 11.
of the Lincoln Diocese do speak of the English translation in this sort: A
translation that takes away from the text, that adds to the text, and this
sometimes to the cha^ging or obscuring of the meaning of the holy Ghost. They
vbi supra.
further saying of it, A translation which is absurd and sensles, perverting in
many places the meaning of the holy Ghost.

12. In like manner M. Burges In his Apology Sect. 6.
(one of our English Protestants) speaks in this sort of our English
translation: How shall I approve under my hand a translation, which has many
Omissions, many additions, which sometimes obscureth, sometimes peruerteth the
sense, being sometimes senseles, sometimes contrary? Another of our English
Carliel his book, that Christ descended into hell. p. 116. etc.
Sectaries does in these words wound their own translations saying: The
translators thereof have depraved the sense, obscured the truth, and deceived
the ignorant, in many places they detort the Scriptures from In his answer to
M. Reynoldes. p. 225.
their right sense: and finally they show themselves to love darkness more then
light, falsehood more then truth. Thus he: This matter touching the corrupt
translations of the Bibles in English is so evident, that D. Whitaker (though
willing for the credit of his Church to extenuate and lessen the deprauations
of their English translations) is forced notwithstanding thus to speak of
them: I have not said otherwise, but that some things (vz. in the English
translations) might be amended. Again Parkes in his Apology concerning Christ's
descending into hell.
another of the^ speaking of the English Bibles with the notes of Geneua thus
says: As for those Bibles it is to be wished, that either they may be purged
from those manifold errors, which are both in the text and margent, or else
utterly prohibited.

13. To conclude this point, and to relate the like reprehension and dislike
given by Broughton, the great Protestant Hebritian against the English
translations, who in his advertisement to the Bishops thus writes: The public
translation of the Scriptures in English is such, as it peruerteth the text of
the old testament in 848. and it causes millions of millions to reject the new
Testament, and to run into eternal flames. Thus Broughton. In like sort we
find that at the Conference at Hampton Court, before the King D. Reinoldes with
the rest of the ministers following his part and side, there openly avouched:
That they would not subscribe to the Communion book, because (said they) it
warranted a corrupt and false translation of the Bible. So evident it is, that
the English translations (both in regard of the impurity of themselves (being
above several ways discovered) as also of the like voluntarily
acknowledgments of our English Sectaries) are full of many soul deprauations
and errors; and therefore are not competent and sufficient in themselves for
the trial of all doubts and questions arysing between the Catholics and
Protestants, or between one Protestant and another; for how can those
translations of Scripture, which are corrupt, absurd, senseles, differing from
the Hebrew, and perverting the meaning of the holy Ghost (as we see the English
translatio^s are styled and confessed to be) be a rule, square, or judge, to
measure or pronounce, what is the meaning and sense of the holy Ghost,
concerning the abstruse mysteries and articles of Christian Religion? Thus it
is brought to pass that our English Sectaries by their translating of the
Bible in some places truly, but in diverse places, most corruptly and falsely,
do make the Scripture (though in it self most pure, divine, and in
contaminate) by this their abusing of it, to seem like to the Statua of
Nabuchodonasor, of which part was gold, part silver, and part brass, so
consisting of more or less precious matter.

14. Now here it is to be observed, that what has heretofore been deliured of
our English translations, are chiefly to be understood of such translations,
whose years of Editions are particularly set down, or at least which have been
published before the death of the late Queen. Yet that the reader may see,
that our Adversaries Doctrine touching the Judge of Controversies, is nothing
furthered (but rather much disaduanted) by the last translation made and set
forth lately since the King came to the crown; I have thought good (omitting
many other textes of the present Controversies between the Protestants and us,
wherein for the most part they iumpe with the former corrupt English
translations for the impugning of our Catholic Faith) to set down the
several courses observed by the translatours thereof in some chief textes
only, in the displaying whereof I will somewhat enlarge my self,

Matthias, they leave out the words: By common consent, fraudulently inserted
in some of the more ancient English translations, In like sort Acts 9. where
it is said, that Paul confounded the Jews, in proof of the Messiah already
then come, they leave out these words: by conferring one Scripture with
another, added herefore to the text in some of the former translations. So
again Romans 8. touching the certainty or uncertainty of our salvation, they
translate the Greek verb (...), I am persuaded, and not, I am assured, or I
am certain. The like course (I mean to translate as we Catholics do) they
are content to take in some other few textes, where either they can have no
color of truth to translate otherwise, or else where by their true
translating, they think they do not much endanger, in an ignorant ear, their
new Doctrine thereby.

is, for the advantage of Priests marriage, though in the said translation, both
the textes going before and coming after (wherein one and the said verb is
understood) are translated by them in the Imperative mood. Again Cor. 2. c. 5.
they falsely translate these two words: Iustitia Dei, the righteousness of God,
which is in him, thereby to intimate to the ignorant reader, that not inherent
righteousness is in man. In like sort Col. c. 1. they translate (according to
their former brethren) the Greek adjective (...), meet, and not worthy, (as
every young Grecian knows the signification to be) thereby to eneruate the
Doctrine of the merit of works. With the like fraud and intention they
translate Luke 21. and 2. Thessal. c. 1. the Greek verb (...), to be
accounted worthy, which word signifies to be worthy indeed. Finally Genes. 4.
they translate (touching Cain and Abel) his desire, instead of it desire, and
thou shall rule over him, in place of over it, thereby to take away free will in
man.

Thy faith has made thee whole, they in like manner so translate with us, in
Luke 8. and Mark 5. Yet Luke 18. where the same Greek word is, to wit, (...),
and used upon the same occasion they translate (in favor of justification by
faith only) Thy faith has saved thee, and not, has made thee whole. This they
do (as is to be presumed) that if they be charged with false translating of
some textes, that they may reply, that such textes are not purposely and
determinatly so translated against the truth, seeing in other textes and places
they translate the said words (and used upon the like occasion) as we do: So
subtle is Heresy for the more cautelous patronizing of her self. And yet they
must needs grant, that if they translate one place truly, the other (seeing the
intention of the holy Ghost in the Scripture, notwithstanding the several
significations of words, is not capable of contrary and repugnant senses) must
needs be translated by them falsely.

Have we not power to lead about a sister a wife? And then in the margent in
lieu of the word Wife, they set down the word Woman, as we read. So again 1.
Cor. 11. where they falsely translate the Greek word (...) (there taken in a
good sense) Ordinances, they annex in the margent (the better to salve their
credit, being expostulated thereof) these words, or Traditions.

John 1. He gave them power to be made the sons of God, implying herein a
liberty of will, they thus paraphrase the margent, He gave them right or
privilege etc Which second translation is nothing so forcible for the proof
of free will, as the first is. After the same manner in Math. 26. touching
Christ's Consecration of bread and wine, they truly translate the Greek word
(...): when he had blessed: Yet for fear, that the reader should ascribe over
much virtue to this significant words of the Evangelist, they thus write in the
margent: Many Greek Copies, have Gauethankes.

20. And thus far now for some taste of our new translatours several sleights
and collusions in these few textes, the which sleights (though for breuity
omitted) might be instanced in many other passages of Scripture concerning the
Controversies of this time, from al which we may justly infer, first, that
seeing this their last translation (so much prized and applauded) is found most
corrupt and deceitful, and indeed for the most part (as themselves confess in
their epistle dedicatory) more agreing with some one or other former false
English translation in points of Controversies, then with the Catholic
translation: that therefore it cannot with any show of reason be urged as Judge,
for the decyding of doubts in religion. Secondly, we may from hence also
collect, that al these different subtle comportments of our Adversaries in
this their new translation tend but to delude their ignorant followers,
obtruding to them by this means a false construction of Gods written word for
the true sense thereof. And so by these devises and collusions we see the
intended sense of the holy Ghost in the Scripture is concealed from the
Protestant by the Protestant, like as the Sun is hid from the earth, by the
earth.

21. But to proceed a little further touching this last translation: first how
can our translations thereof assure any man of the truth of their translation,
since they acknowledge no Original, or any translation of the Bible (out of
which they did make their translation) for pure and vncorrupt? Secondly, admit
for the time, that this translation is perfect according to the true
Originalls; yet seeing it differs in diverse controuersiall textes and passages
from all former English translations, it therefore from hence follows, that
till now we here in England never enjoyed the true and uncorrupted Scripture in
English, and consequently that till these days the Scripture in English could
not be justly urged to determine and judge Controversies in faith: But a true
and perfect judge is ready, not at one time only, but at all times and seasons
to perform the function of true Judicature.

That supposing the Scripture as Judge; yet the Letter thereof is more clear
and perspicuous for the Catholics, then for the Protestants CHAP. VIII.
NOW after we have proved the incompetency of the Scriptures for resolving all
doubts of faith, and this from the disagrements of our Adversaries either in
approving or discanoning such, or such parcells of the Bible, as also from the
confessed corruptions and falsifications, as well of the Originalls as
translations even of those books, which are jointly acknowledged by them for
Gods undoubted word: for as they do grant that others corrupted the fountains,
so it is most evident, that (among others) themselves have impoysoned the
streams: It will much co^duce to our designed project, if we continue our
dream for the time with our Adversaries, that the Scripture is solely and
finally to decyde all Controversies; since supposing this principle as true, we
shall notwithstanding be able to prove, that the passages of Scripture even of
such parts, as are confessed by our Adversaries to be authentical and
uncorrupted, which the Catholics do allege in defense of their faith, are
more clear and perspicuous for the proof of their Doctrine, then any counter
textes are, which our Adversaries do produce out of the said Scripture, to
impugn the same, in regard of which difference a Catholic may commiserate a
Protestant in the phrase of Tertullian to Marcion: Misereor tui, Christus enim
Jesus in Euangelio tuo, meus est. The reason hereof is double; first, because
the Catholics do ordinarily insist in the literal and immediate sense of the
words, which sense is ever more natural and obuious, then any figurative
acception of them can be; whereas our Adversaries in answer thereto, as also in
alleging other textes, are forced to interpret the said places either
figuratively, or at least, not in that usual and immediate sense, which the
words do import: Which manner of literally expounding the Scripture, is
warranted by the authority of all learned divines, who do jointly teach, that
we never ought to depart from the proper sense of words, except we be driven
thereto, either by some other manifest place of Scripture, or by some vndoubled
article of our faith, impugning the literal sense thereof, or lastly by the
usual explication of the whole Church.

2. The second reason of the greater perspicuity in our proofs, then in those
of our Adversaries is this, in that most of the textes of Scripture (for I do
not say all) which we allege, do fall directly, and (as it were) in a straight
line upon the question controuerted, so as after the sense and meaning of the
words is once acknowledged, they irrefragably and directly prove that, for
which they were urged; whereas our Adversaries testimonies do not (for the most
part) touch immediately, and (as I may term it) primariously the point in
question, but only by way of a secondary collection or illatio^; which
illations being often inconsequent, and at the most but probable, and not
necessary, it follows that though we should grant to them their own
expositions of such textes; yet do they but prove the thing questioned by a
second hand, I mean, only by probable and coniecturall inferences. And this
oftentimes, after their illation is granted, does not light upon the heart of
the question it self, but only upon the flanck or skirtes of the same, I
mean, upon the manner, or some other circumstance thereof which being not
defined, may be holden several ways as probable by the Catholics. But now
for justifying, what I have here set down, let us look into some chief texts
urged by us and our Adversaries concerning some principal Controversies (for
to go through all, were over laboursome) where I doubt not but we shall find in
each of them, at least one, or the two former disparities, between us and our
Adversaries in alleging the same.

Peter's Primacy, the Catholics do allege in proof thereof those words of
Christ to him out of S. Matthew cap. 16.
: Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it, And I will give to thee the keys of heaven
etc. Which words being taken literally and plainly (as the Catholics do
expound them) do directly prove this Controversy, seeing they fall
perpendicularly upon the conclusion of the question it self; for to say, that
Peter is the rock of the Church, is al one in sense, as to say the head of the
Church; And therefore our Adversaries to avoid this pressing authority, are
forced to answer that by the word Rock, is understood figuratively Christ
according to Calvin lib. 4. Instit. c. 6.. 6.
, or every one of the faithful with Erasmus Erasm. in hunc locum.
, or the confession of our Faith with Luther lib. do Potestate Papae.
. So distracted they are among themselves in answearing thereto.

4. But let us view what places our Adversaries do allege to countermand
Peter's supreme authority. First because our Savior said to Peter (as it is
recorded in the said Chapter of S. Matthew:) Go after me Satan, thou art a
scandal unto me etc. As also in that S. Paul Galat. cap. 2.
says of himself, that he resisted Peter in the face. Neither which places
(we see) do directly touch Peter's authority, but only by way of weak
inferences, and such as are not as much as probable, seeing that Peter was not
then the head of the Church, when those words were said to him by Christ: and
concerning this other, we grant that the inferior may and ought to withstand
his superior, for the truths sake, so that he does it with due respect and
regard.

5. To convince that Paradox, that the Pope is Antichrist, the Catholics do
urge the continuance of Antichrists reign set down in the Scripture diversely,
both by years Apoe. 12.
, months Ibidem. c. 11. and 13.
, and days Ibidem. c. 11.
; all which several descriptions thereof, being taken literally (as they
expound them) do precisely make up three years and a half, and consequently
cannot be applied to the Pope. And therefore our Adversaries in answer to the
said places are glad to say, that in all those textes an uncertain time is
figuratively to be understood, though it be expressed diversely by one and the
same continuance of time. To prove, that the Pope is Antichrist, they commonly
urge that of the Apocalypse cap. 17.
, where it is said, that the whore of Babylon does sit upon that City which
has seven hills, meaning Rome. Which words do not directly touch Antichrist,
but only by their supposed inference, that by the whore of Babylon is meant
Antichrist: which they are never able to prove, since thereby is understood Rome
in the time of the heathen Emperors, who then worshipped Idols, and was drunk
with the blood of Gods Saints. In confirmation of the Real Presence, we urge
the sentence of our Savior, recorded by all the Evangelists, to wit, This is
my body etc. Which text being literally taken, does contain expressly the very
conclusion maintained by us, not by circuitions, or ambages, but directly,
plainly, and immediately. So as it cannot be conceived, how our Savior could
speak more perspicuously in this point.

6. Now against the Real presence our Sacramentaries do chiefly object that
saying of Christ Joan. 6.
: It is the spirit, which quickneth, the flesh profits nothing. Which words
do not fall directly upon the question of Christ his Real Presence in the
Sacrament; Neither is so much as Christ his flesh understood hereby, as they
would seem to infer (since then it would follow, that his Incarnation and
death auayled us nothing) but only the carnal conceit of the Jews is cheked
hereby, who thought that Christ would deliver his body to be eaten fleshly,
corporally, and carnally, as other common meats are eaten.

7. To the same end, they o^^^ct those words of Christ: Do this in remembrance
of me: which place by no necessary or probable illation can include the true
absence of himself (which is the point in question) since they have a
refere^ce only to a circumstance of himself, to wit of his death and passion
(which as being past, is absent) in remembrance whereof, he commands us in the
former words to receive his sacred body and blood in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, conformably to that speech of S. Paul 1. Cor. 11.
: mortem Domini annunciabitis do nec veniat: You shall show the death of our
Lord, until he come* the Apostle so interpreting Christ's former words.

8. To prove that Priests in the Sacrament of Penance, (where by putting God
in remembrance of our sins, he soonest forgets them, and in acknowledging
our selves to be sinners, we cease to be sinners:) have power to remit or
retain sins, we allege the plain words of our Savior to them, Math. 18.
whatsoever you shall loose upon earth, shall be loosed in heaven, as also those
words recorded by S. John 20.
: Whose sins you forgine they are forgiven them, and whose sins you retain,
they are retained. Both which places, in plain, direct, and immediate
construction contain in themselves the very touch and point of this
controversy without any inference or circuition at all; since they give a
direct and straight proof of the conclusion it self, to wit, that Priests
have power to remit or retain sins. For denial of Priests authority in
remitting or retayning of sins, our Sectaties are accustomed to produce that
text of the Psalmist Psalm. 50.
: Tibi soli peccauimus, we have sinned only against thee; inferring herby, that
because we sin only against God, therefore only God can remit sin: which
inference if it were true, then should it by the same reason, take away the
virtue of Baptism for remitting of Original sin. They likewise object
certain places of Psalm. 18. and 37.
Scripture, which show, that we are not able to number all our sins, and
consequently not able to confess them to the Priest; which illatio^ is most
weak, since it makes as must against the Confession of ous sins to God, as to
the Priest.

9. For confirming the Doctrine of Freewil, the Catholics do allege (among
other authorities) these following. In arbitrio Number. 30.
viri erit, sieve faciat, sieve non faciat: that is, It is in the choice or will
of a man whether he will do or not do: As also, Optio Iosue 24.
vobis datur, eligite hodie quod vobis places; Choice is given to you, choose
that to day which pleases you. And again: Quoties Math. 23.
volui congregare etc. How often would I gather together thy children, as the
hen gathers her chickens, and thou would not? All which places directly and
flatly teach, that we have frewill to do, and not to do. Now our Adversaries
for denial of this Doctrine are accustomed to allege chiefly such places,
where it is said, that all things are done according to the will and counsel
of God; As for example that of Christ (as if the eternal Word of the Father
came down to destroy that former written word of God) Vnus passer Math. 9.
etc. Not one sparrow shall fall upon the ground without your Fathers will. And
again, Qui Ephesians. 8.
operatur omnia etc. Who works all things according to the Counsel of his
will. Both which texts (besides diverse others of the same nature) conclude
nothing, except first they be able to prove, that the Will, Counsel, and
Foreknowledge of God cannot stand with man's freewill. The contrary whereof is
most clear; as appears by the example of Adam, who by our Adversaries
Calvin. 1. l. Instit. c. 15.. 8. Luther in comment. in Genesis
acknowledgment had freewill to stand or fall, and yet his fall was neither
merely contrary to Gods will, since he permitted the same, nor to his
foreknowledge and providence, since he foreseeth all things.

10. Concerning Justification by works, the Catholics Conclusion and Position
is found literally, and eue^ in those words, wherein they usually express this
their Doctrine; since we read in S. c. 2.
James: That, ex operibus iustificatur homo etc. A man is justified by works,
and not by faith only. In like sort, where our Adversaries do object any place
against us, the very distinction sometimes (such is their scarsity and dearth
of pertinent texts) which the Catholics do use to avoid their argument, is
literally and expressly set down in the words of those texts: Thus we find;
that they urge to this end, those words of the Apostle: Arbitramur Romans 3.
hominem etc. we account a man to be justified by faith without the works of
the law, as also that other vz. Scientes Galat. 2.
etc. Knowing, that man is not justified by the works of the law: In both which
places, the very answer is expressed, which the Catholics are accustomed to
make to such arguments; since in the said testimonies it is set down (and so we
Catholics do teach) that the works of the law of Moses (and consequently all
others done merely by nature and freewill, without the faith, spirit and grace
of Christ) can in no sort justify a man; upon which express distinction of
works in the Scripture it self, it follows, that all other places, which
through a naked resemblance of words may seem to make more literally for the
Protestants in this point, then these alleged, are to be expounded by these
former texts, since the holy Ghost cannot set down contrary and repugnant
Doctrines.

11. For defense of Traditions, we usually allege that place of the
Thessalonians 2. c. 2.
: Brethren hold the traditions, which you have received, whether it be by word,
or by Epistle. Where we see that the Apostles words do immediately and
necessarily (without any help of strained consequences) imply a division, or
partition of his Doctrine, which (no doubt) was Gods word. And that part thereof
was delivered to the Thessalonians, by his Epistle, the rest by word of mouth
only: Which Text contains the very conclusion of the Catholics Doctrine, to
wit, that the Evangelists and Apostles did not write all things touching
Christian faith, but delivered part thereof only by preaching or by some other
such like instruction. Now our Adversaries (to confront this text, and the
Doctrine derived thence) are acccustomed to object the words of S. Paul Galat.
1.
: Sed licet nos etc. But if we, or an Angel from heaven euangelize to you,
besides that we have euangelized, be he anathema: In which words they suppose
two things (and both false) before they can square this text to their purpose.

12. First, that the word, Euangelizare, does include only the written word,
and not verbum traditum, the word left by Tradition, which is implicitly the
matter in question, and as the Sophisters call it, Petitio principij. Secondly,
that the Latin word (praeter) being in this text, has reference to every
thing, which is not expressly set down in Scripture, since indeed it here
signifies as much as contra: meaning thereby all Doctrine contrary to the
Doctrine already delivered by the Apostles: for otherwise S. John should have
had the Anathema pronounced against him, for writing of the Apocalips, after
this Epistle of S. Paul was written: So far distant is this text from falling
directly and plainly upon the impugning of Traditions, since from such false
supposalls as granted, they draw their Illation against the Catholic Doctrine
thereof.

13. In like sort they allege that saying of the Apostle to Timothy: All
Scripture 2. c. 3.
inspired of God is profitable to teach, to argue, to correct, to instruct in
justice, tha^ the man of God may be perfect, instructed to every good work.
Where we see, that this text (as well as the former) is so far from pressing
the Doctrine of Traditions immediately, and without any help of a secondary
inference, as that it does not so much as once make mention of Traditions at
all either in word or sense; neither can any thing be racked against us from
thence, until it be first proved (which never shall be) that the word vtilis,
signifies sufficient; and because a thing is profitable and conduces to
another thing or end, it therefore is sufficient alone of it self, for the
obtaining thereof.

14. Lastly, they bring forth certain places Math. 15. Galat. 1. Coloss. 2.
which do particularly condemn certain pernicious and frivolous Traditions of
the Jews, and the Traditions, which the Catholics do teach to have been
derived from our Savior and his Apostles be all one: So impertinently do our
Adversaries allege these and such like places against our Doctrine of
Traditions.

15. Concerning prayer for the dead, what can be more clear and perspicuous
for proof thereof then those words alleged out of the Machabees 2. c. 1.
(a testimony so evident, as that I cannot forbear it, though it impugn my
former method:) Sancta ergo and salubris est cogitatio etc. It is therefore a
holy and heathfull cogitation to pray for the dead, that they may be loosed
from their sins. Which place we see, does literally and expressly contain the
very conclusion of the Catholic Doctrine therein, and which words proceeded
upon the practice of Judas Machabeus, who sent a sum of money unto Jerusalem
to procure sacrifices to be performed for the spiritual relief and ease of
his dead soldiers. I know that our Sectaries do expunge out of the Canon of
Scripture this book as Apocryphal, yet they are to remember, that it is
reckoned among other divine and undoubted books of Scripture by the third
Council of Carthage Can. 47.
by Innocentius Epist. ad Exuperium.
the first, and by S. Austin himself, who thus l 18. de Ciuit. Dei c. 36.
says: Libros Machabeorum etc. The books of the Machabees are acknowledged by
the Christians, for Canonical, not by the Jews.

16. Now the chiefest places, which our Adversaries do object herein, are
(among others) such as being intended of the general resurrection of the Just,
are calumniously wrested by them, to the particular time of each virtuous man's
death. Thus they allege that sayng of the Psalmist: Psalm. 126.
Cum dederit dilectis suis somnum, ecce haereditas Domini, as also that place
of the Apocalips 14.
: Beatiqui in Domino moriuntur etc. Blessed are they which dye in the Lord,
from henceforth now says the spirit, that they rest from their labors, for
their works follow them* And as concerning this later place Saint John
throughout his whole Chapter speaks of the later judgment, and therefore,
except the Protestants do first confound the particular times of men's deaths
with the time of the general judgment, they can draw nothing from hence in
denial of purgatory; add to this, that some of the Fathers (as shall be showed
hereafter) do interpret this text of martyrs only, who never suffer any pains
in Purgatory.

17. They also produce to the same end the place in Ecclesiastes ^1.
Si occiderit lignum ad Austrum etc. If the tree shall fall toward the Souht,
or toward the North, it shall be in that place, where it did fall. The meaning
of which passage being delivered in Metaphors or Allegories, does the more
hardly convince any thing, since the sense in regard thereof appears the more
doubtful: Notwithstanding the common exposition of this place is, that every
man either dies in state of grace (under which state, are also understood
those, which come to Purgatory) and so falls toward the South, whereby is
meant Heaven: or in the state of mortal sin, and then falls toward the
North, to wit, into hell. And whosoever dies in either of these states, shall
for ever remain in the same. And thus we see how far of, the texts objected
by our Adversaries are from conuincing plainly, literally, and without any
strained deductions, the Doctrine of Purgatory or Prayer for the dead.

18. Lastly to omit the like examples of diverse other Controversies, the
Catholics do produce for proof of Evangelical Counsels, that plain saying
of our Savior Math. 19.
: Sunt Eunuchi etc. There are Eunuchs, who have gelded themselves for the
kingdom of heaven. Which words containing no precept, are so clear and direct
in proof of those Counsels, as that our Adversaries Peter Martyr l. de
caelib. and votis.
(thereby to avoid the force of them) are constrained to say, that by the words:
For the kingdom of heaven, is figuratively meant for the more speady preaching
of the Gospel. So ridiculous and far fetched is this their answer.

19. As clear also are those other words of Christ spoken to the young man for
confirmation of the said Doctrine, being taken literally and plainly vz. Si
Math. 19.
vis perfectus esse etc. If thou will be perfect, Go and sell all, and follow
me. and thou shall have a treasure in heaven. Which text (as also the former)
does immediately and primatiuely without any secondary deductions, touch and
prove the Doctrine it self of Evangelical Counsels.

20. Now against the said Doctrine, they usually object diverse passages Math-
22. Marc. 12. Luc. 10.
of Scripture, where we are commanded to love God with all our soul, and
withal our strength, where we find, that what is collected is by this
supposition, to wit, that the phrases, Toto cord, and tota anima, do signify
all our endeavor possibly in the highest degree: which being false, they
heerupon infer, that there is nothing, which is good, left uncommanded to be
done, and then they conclude there is no place for Eua^gelical Cou^sells, which
are distinguished against precepts: Now what toto cord, and tota anima, or
totis viribus, do signify, shall appear in the Chapter following.

21. To the same purpose they detort those words of our Savior Luc. 17.
: Cum feceritis haec omina etc. When you have done all these things which are
commanded you, say, we are unprofitable servants, we have done that which we
ought to do. Which place, (as it is manifest) in it immediate sense does not
touch the Doctrine of Evangelical Counsels; besides the very words themselves
do expressly show, that it cannot be applied to our Adversaries sense and
meaning; since our Savior speaks precisely of those things, which are
commanded to be done; where the Catholics do teach, that nothing which is
particularly commanded in Gods word, is an Evangelical Counsel.

22. Now, by these few example, set down of the places alleged out of Gods
holy word both by the Catholics and Protestants, we may make a conjecture of
the rest, wherein (as I said before) we see the great disparity between the
several kinds of those texts. Seeing that if we grant the literal, ordinary,
facill, and most natural sense, of the testimonies urged by Catholics, we
necessarily grant the conclusion it self of that Doctrine, for which they are
urged; since they do touch immediately without any ambages, or borrowed
supposalls, the primary and radical point or question controuerted between us
and the Protestants: whereas our Adversaries testimonies out of the said
Scriptures, though they were granted them in their own sense and co^structio^,
yet they presently force not the proofs of their assertions: and the reason
her of is, because they fall not directly upon the question it self, but only
by means of their supposed inferences and deductions, and then sometimes they
but concern the manner, or some other circumstance thereof, which (being only
accessory and subseque^t) even among Catholic Deuines is holden indifferent
and disputable.

23. Thus we see, that these men, though they be much verbally conversant with
the Scripture, yet for any conuincing proofs deduced by them from thence, they
are most needy therein; not much unlike unto those, who have the stamping or
coining of silver and gold, who, though great store thereof come through their
hands, yet commonly are poor, as having no true interest in any part of the
same.

That the textes of Scripture are expounded by the Fathers in the same sense,
in the which they are alleged by Catholics, for proof of their Doctrine and
faith. CHAP. IX.
IT being made clear in the precedent chapter, that the texts of holy
Scripture alleged by the Catholics for proof of their faith are more literal
and perspicuous, as also do touch more directly and punctually the doubts for
which they are urged, then any contrary passages or places thereof objected by
our Adversaries: It now remains, that we show two things, first that the
ancient Fathers have in their wrytings and comme^taries ever interpreted the
said former texts, and others of like nature urged by us, even in the same
sense and meaning, which we do for the justifying of our Catholic Doctrine.
Secondly that they have delivered a different construction from our Adversaries
of those principal texts, which they now produce against us; so as, according
to the Fathers expositions of the said places (which agree with the Catholics
construction thereof) they do nothing at all impugn our Religion. Both which
points being once made good, do mightily prejudice our Sectaries. For what
probability (I might say possibility) can there be conceived to the contrary,
but that the Fathers did interpret both the said sorts of texts (I mean of
such as are produced either by us or our Adversaries) according to the
intendment of the holy Ghost, or at least were much aduantaged above the
Nouellistes of these days for the true construction thereof? When we consider,
that they were men of admirable virtue and piety, of great and extraordinary
learning, such as were not interessed our in Controversies, as neither having
then enemies to cross their present Doctrine (except it were some one or other
confessed Heretic) nor yet knowing what doubts in faith might arise in after
ages; but especially, when we call to mind the times wherein they lived, to with
even then, when by our Adversaries confessions, the Church of God (of which
they were the grave and reverend Pastors and Doctors) had in no one point
departed from the Doctrine delivered by our Savior, and his Apostles. So little
reason we find, has our Nouellist to make his sole refuge, to Gods sacred
word, were it not thereby to avoid the ordinary and usual trial drawn from
all other proofs or testimonies whatsoever, and finally to make himself sole
judge of the said word.

2. But to begin with some chiefest of those testimonies of Scripture, which
the Catholics are accustomed to allege, (reserving the textes objected by our
Adversaries to the next Chapter) where I intend to restrain my self only to
some few texts of every maine Controversy; both because to examine all the
places of every Co^trouersy, according to the exposition of Fathers given
thereof, would not be answerable to my designed breuity, as also, in that by the
examples here set down, it will be easy to make a true conjecture of their
interpretation of the rest; for since they did not contradict themselves in
their own faith and Doctrine, it cannot be imagined, that they did contradict
themselves in the exposition of such texts, as conduced to the maintayning and
justifying of their faith and Doctrine.

S. Peter's Primacy, that place of S. Matthew c. 16.
, vz. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church etc. is
interpreted jointly by the Fathers, that Christ even in those words did promise
to him that supreme authority over his Church, which the Catholics do teach
that after he received, and which the Bishop of Rome at this day inioyeth. This
text I say, is thus expounded by Origin Hom. 5. in Exodus Athan. ep. ad faelicem
, Basil l. 2. in Eunom.
, Chrysostom Hom. 55. in Math. vide Cyril l. 2. c. 12. in Joan.
, Tertullian lib. de Praescript.
, Cyprian Ep ad Quintum.
, Jerome In c. 16. Math.
, Austin In psalm. co^tra par. te^ Donati.
, and others, all whose direct words were over laboursome to set down, and
therefore it shall be sufficient to refer the Reader only to the places, where
thus they write.

4. In like sort that place of cap. 11.
John: feed my sheep, is expounded by the Fathers in the same sense, as we
do expound it, who in their wrytings do plainly teach, that Christ eue^ in
these words did institute Peter the head over his Church, giving him that
authority which in the above alleged place of Matthew he had only promised:
Chrysostom says upon this place: Alijs omissis Petrum dumtaxat affatur,
fratrum ei curam committit: that is, The rest of the Apostles being omitted,
our Lord does in this place speak only to Peter, to whom he commits the
charge of his brethren. Ambrose In cap. vlt. Luc.
expounding the same words, says of Peter: Quia solus profitetur ex omnibus,
omnibus antefertur: Because Peter aloue of all the rest, did only profess
Christ, (meaning at that time, when Christ did ask his Apostles who he was)
therefore he is preferred before them all. Gregory 4. epist. 32
teaching that the care of the Church was delivered to Peter, shows the
reason thereof, in these words: Ipsi quippe dicitur, pasceoues meas, that is,
because to Peter it was said, feed my sheep: See also the clear and pregnant
expositions of the former words in Epiphan. In anchorat.
, Leo Sermon. de Assump. ad Pontif.
, Theophilact In cap. vls. Joan.
etc.

years Apoc. 12.
, months Ibid. c. 11. and 13.
, and Ibidem ^. 11.
days (as is above touched) which places if they be expounded literally, do
make up just three years and a half, and then it follows, that the Pope
cannot be Antichrist, as having reigned by our Adversaries confessions many
hundred of years. And yet we find, that the said places are expounded
literally by the Fathers: Austin l. 20. de Ciuit. Dei cap. 23.
thus writes of this point: Antichristi aduersus Ecclesiam saeuissimum regnum
etc. Though the kingdom of Antichrist shall be most severe and cruel, yet shall
it continue but for a small time, and he which half sleeping reads the
Scripture herein, cannot doubt: for the words, a time, two times, and half a
time, do signify, a year, two years, and half a year, and consequently
three years and a half: besides the same appears by the number of the
days, and months, set down in the Scriptures: Thus far S. Austin.

6. S. Hierome In c. 7. Daniel.
thus also wryreth: Tempus annum significat etc. A time does signify a year,
2. times, two years, half a time, six months, during which period, the
Saints of God shall be subject to the tyranny of Antichrist. See also the like
literal expositions of the former places, in Hippolitus Orat. de consu^mat.
mundi.
Martyr, Cyril, Catech. 15.
, Ireneus lib. 5. in fine.
, Theodoret In c. 7. Daniel.
etc.

7. Whereas to the like end, we produce certain places of Scripture Malach. 4.
Eccles 44. Apoc 11.
, proving that Enoch and Elias are to return personally, and truly in their
own natural bodies into the world at the coming of Antichrist; and therefore
the Pope cannot be Antichrist, in that those two are not yet come, for the
avoiding of which argument the Protestants are forced to expound the said
places figuratively of other men, to wit of their own ministers and
Ghospellers; yet the Fathers do interpret the said textes literally of Enoch
and Elias. Thus we find, that Damascene l. 4. c. 28.
, Hypolytus De mundi co^summat.
Martyr, Gregory l. 4. c. 11. and 12.
, and Austin l 9. c. 6.
commenting upon these places do write literally the personal coming of them
in the time of Antichrist. In like sort does Hierom, and Origin, and
Chrysostom all writing upon the 17. Chapter of Matthew, as also Lactantius l.
7. c. 17.
, Theodoret In vlt. c. Malach.
, and Austin Tract. 4. in Joan.
do prove out of the former passages of Scripture the coming of Elias in his
own true and natural body.

This is my body, Two things are to be observed in the Fathers: first that our
Adversaries cannot produce any one father (among so many as have comme^ted upon
the said words) which does interpret the said text figuratively. Secondly,
that diverse of them have taught most expressly, that the said words are not to
be taken figuratively, but properly and literally: Thus we read, that
Theophilact In hunc loeum.
, Chrysostom In hu^c locum.
, both the Cyrils Alexand. epist. ad Calofirium Hierosolym cateches. 4. mystag.
, Ambrose l. 4. de Sacram. cap. 5.
, Eusebius Emissenus hom. 5. de Paschat.
, Epiphanius In Ancorat.
, and others do jointly teach, that in this point we have need of faith thereby
to declare that, which seems most absurd to our senses. But to understand the
words figuratively, (to wit, that the body of Christ is to be signified by
bread) is neither absurd in sense, neither is there any great difficulty of
faith required thereto.

9. In likesort for the proving of the said mystery and Article of our belief,
we usually allege those words of the Apostle 1. Cor. c. 11.
: Qui manducat and bibit indigne etc. He that eats and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks judgment to himself, not discerning the body of our Lord:
Out of which words we gather, that some are here reprehended, in that they
receive the body of Christ unworthily, but these do not receive it in spirit
and faith, for in so doing they should receive it with profit and worthily;
therefore they receive his body only in body, and not in spirit, and
consequently his body is there really and truly present. And in this sort is
this text expounded by the fathers, vz. Ambrose In c. 11. prioris ad ad
Corinth. and Theodor.
, Jerome In c. 1. Malach.
, Chrysostom Hom. 24. in prior. ad Corinth. and hom. 83 in Matthew.
, Origin Hom. 2. in psalm. 37.
, Basil l. 2. de baptisae. 3.
, and others, which exposition of the fathers being true, depriueth our
Adversaries of all sufficient answer to the said text.

10. That those three places, which the Catholics do commonly urge for proof
of Priests authority in remitting sins, vz. Math. 16. To thee I will give the
keys of heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bynd upon earth shall be bound in
heaven etc. Math. 18. What things you shall bynd upon earth shall be bound in
heaven, and what things you shall loose etc. Lastly John. 20. Whose sins you
shall remit, are remitted unto the^, and whose sins you shall retain, are
retained: That these places (I say) do prove, that Priests have authority
given them truly and really to remit sins in the Sacrament of Penance, and not
only by declaring and pronouncing their sins to be remitted (as our Sectaries
do teach) it appears out of the fathers expositions of the foresaid places,
who expounding them literally with the Catbolikes, do prove thereby the true
authority of the Priests therein. S. Gregory Hom. 26. in Euang.
expounding the words: Whose sins you shall remit, thus says: Principatum
superni iudicij etc. The Apostles do obtain a principality of supreme
judgment, that in the place of God, they may retain the sins of some, and
loose the sins of others. S. Chrysostom l. 3. de sacerd. the scope of which
book is to prove this point.
expounding the former texts, and comparing the authority of the Priests of the
old law over the leprous persons, with the Priests of the new law, thus
concludes: At nostris Sacerdotibus non corporis lepram etc. It is granted to
our Priests, I say not to try them which are purged, but absolutely to purge
and cure, not the leper of the body, but the filth and foulnes of the soul.
See also S. Austin l. 20. de Ciuit. Dei expou^ding those words of the Apoc. Et
vidi seeds, and sedentes etc.
, Jerome Ep. ad Heliodoru^, de vita solitaria.
, Ambrose l. 1. de poenit. c. 2 and sequent.
, Gregory Oratione ad ciues timore perculsos
Naziazene, all which do interpret the former texts literally, and ackknowledge
from thence the said authority in Priests for remitting of sins, which the
Catholics at this day do teach.

11. That place of S. John c. 3.
vz. Except a man be borne again of water and the spirit, he cannot enter into
the kingdom of God: does prove, that the Sacrament of Baptism does ex opere
operato confer grace, and justify a man; which perspicuous and clear
testimony to pervert, our Adversaries are forced to say, that the words are
not spoken of the Sacrament of Baptism, but only of regeneration caused by the
holy Ghost, whose property is to wash the soul, as the water does wash the
body. And yet against this fantastical exposition we are able to produce the
fathers, who do literally understand the former words as spoken of the
Sacrament of Baptism; which exposition of theirs granted as true, does
necessarily force the Cyrill, Austin, Chrysostom and Origin, all interpreting
this place, as also Ambrose l. 3. de spirit. sa^ct. c. 11.
, Cyprian l. 3. ad Quirinum.
, Jerome In c. 16. Ezech.
, and the rest.

12. In proof of Freewill (mong other places) we allege those words of God
spoken to Cain: Nonne Genes. 4.
si been egeris, recipies etc. If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted?
and if thou do not well, sin lies at thy door. Sub te erit appetitus
eius, and tu dominaberis illius, that is, And unto thee it desire (vz. of
sin) shall be subject, and thou shall rule over it. vz. over sin.

13. Now our Adversaries in answer hereto do say, that the words, Sub te erit
appetitus eius, and tu dominaberis illius, ought to have reference to Abel;
meaning hereby, that Abel should be subject to Cain, and that as being the
elder he should rule over Abel. Which construction being most forced, and
indirect, is generally impugned by the Fathers, who in the exposition of the
former words do in both places understand sin, and not Abel. Thus we find
that S. Austin l. 15. de Ciuit. Dei c. 7.
says of this place as interpreting it: Quiesce, ad te enim conuersio eius,
and tu dominaberis illius, numquid fratris? absit: cuius igitur, nisi peccati?
that this: Content thy self (Cain) for it shall turn it self to thee, and
thou shall rule over it: over what? over thy brother? God forbid: over what
then, but over sin? S. Jerome in like sort writes thus, Inquaestion.
Hebraicis.
Quia liberi arbitrij es, mone^ vt non tibi peccatum, sed tu peccato domineris,
(alluding to the words in Genes.) Because thou art of freewill, I do counsel
thee, that sin may not rule over thee, but thou over sin. See also Ambrose
lib. 2. de Cain c. 7.
, Gregory lib. 4. moral. cap. 22.
and Prosper l. 2. de vocat. ge^^ium. c. 13.
, expounding those former words of sin, and not of Abel; all which fathers do
even derive the Doctrine of frewil from their foresaid exposition thereof.

14. For maintenance of Justification by works (for we allow that saying of
the Historiographer, Faith, that is seen is better, then faith that is heard)
we do urge that place of James cap. 2.
(above touched) Do you see, because of works a man is justified, and not of
faythonly? which text is so plain and direct for Justification by works, as
that S. Austin lib. de side and operibus c. 14.
is not afraid to say, that the very scope and drift of this Epistle of S.
James, as also that of Peter, John, and Jude, was chiefly to repress the
heresy then begun about Justification by faith only: so great an impugner was
this ancient Father of our Adversaries sole and melancholy faith; for so I may
well term it, since it will be ever alone, and cannot brook the company of
good works.

15. In like manner, for proof of merit of works (among other testimonies) is
alleged that saying recorded in Matthew c. 20.
: Voca operarios, and read illis mercedem: Call the workmen, and pay them their
hyre, or wages: in which place by the word, hyre, is understood their daily
wages, as appears by the parable it self. Now by this daily wages is
signified eternal life even by the common exposition of the Fathers upon this
place. See also S. Austin lib. de sancta virginit. c. 26.
, S. Jerome l. 2. in Iouinian.
and S. Gregory lib. 4. moral. c. 42.
, all of the^ so interpreting the former words.

16. For proof of Evangelical Counsels, which make a difference between a
Stoics dulnes, and a Christian and Saint Matthew alleged Math. 19.
: There are Eunuchs, which have gelded themselves for the kingdom of heaven:
where the words, for the kingdom of heaven, do not signify (as the Protestants
would have it) for the better and more easy preaching of the gospel, meaning
that some are to abstain from marriage only to that end: but the former words
do truly import so much, as literally they signify, that is, that some forbear
marriage and live in perpetual chastity for the gayning of the joys of heaven:
and thus is this place expounded by Cyprian lib. de habitu virginum.
, Chrysostom In hu^c locum.
, Jerome l. 1. contra Iouin.
, Austin De sancta virginit. c. 24.
, who thus writes thereof: Christo laudante eos, qui se castrauerum etc. Christ
praising them, who have gelded themselves, not for this world but for the
kingdom of heaven, shall any Christian gainsay the same, in affirming that this
kind of gelding is profitable only for this life, and not for the life to come?
For proof of the said Doctrine, we synd that the Fathers do interpret those
words of our Savior: Si vis Math. ibidem.
perfectus etc. If thou will be perfect, Go and sell all that that thou have,
etc. and follow me etc. only as a Counsel, and not as a Precept, as our
Adversaries do teach. See upon this text Ambrose l. de viduis vltra med.
, Jerome Contra Vigil.
, Austin Epist. 8^ q. 4.
, Chrysostom ^n hu^c locum.
, who do jointly teach, that our Savior exhorted and counseled only to
Poverty in his former words, but imposed no commandment and precept thereof;
whose exposition being true, it follows, that who voweth perpetual poverty,
performs an Evangelical Counsel. And of such an one is verifyed that saying
of one Father: Omnia inuenit in Deo, qui propter Deum omnia reliquit.

Psalm. 18.
, to wit, In sole posuit tabernaculum suum: He placed his tabernacle in the
sun: Which place Saint Austin Tract. 2. in epist. Joan.
, does thus expoudd: In manifesto posuit Ecclesiam suam: He placed his Church
in an open and conspicuous place. In like sort according to the expositions of
S. Jerome and S. Austin, the Church of Christ is compared to a mighty huge
mountain, which is ever in sight. See their expositions given upon Isa. 2.
Dan. 2. and Micheas 4. S. Austin l. de vnitat. Eccles. c. 14.
also does expound those words of S. Matthew A city placed upon a mountain
cannot be hid: So clearly did those fathers think, that the said text did
confirm the visibility of the church.

18. For proof of Traditions we usually allege that place of the 1. Cor. 11.
Apostle: Laudo Laudo vos, quod per omnia etc. I praise you, that in all things
you are myndfull of me, and that, as I have delivered to you, you keep my
precepts: Which text the Fathers expounding do constantly teach, that the
Apostle did here speak of unwritten precepts and Traditions: so does Damascene
l. 4. c. 17.
, Basil l. de spirit. sanct. c. 29.
, Chrysostom In hunc locum.
, Epiphanius Haeres. ^1.
, and Theophilact In hu^c locum.
interpret this place.

19. In like sort the Fathers do interpret that other place of S. Paul (above
mentioned) of unwritten traditions, to wit that of the Thessalonians: It aque
fratres tenete etc. Therefore brethren, hold the Traditions, which you have
received either by speech or by Epistle. So does Theophilact hoc loco.
, Damascene l. 4. de si^e c. 17.
, Oecumenius In hu^c locum.
, Basil De spivit. sanct. c. 29.
expound it; And Chrysostom In hunc locum.
thus briefly writes of the former words: Hinc patet, quod non omnia per
epistolas tradiderint etc. Hence it app^areth, that the Apostles did not
deliver all things by their Epistles, but many things also even without
writing, which do deserve and are worthy of as much credit and authority, as
the former things delivered by writing.

Lymbus Patrum, or the place where the souls of the just were before Christ
his Incarnation and death, we are accustomed to allege that place of the book
of the 1. Reg. cap. 28.
Kings, where the soul of Samuel appearing to Saul, was seen to rise out of
the earth. And that it was the true soul of Samuel, appears by the
testimonies of the fathers, so expounding that place, See S. Austin De cure pro
mortuis c. 15.
, Ambrose In 1. c. Luca.
, Jerome In 7. Isa.
, Basil Epist. 80. ad Eustachium.
, and Josephus l. 6. antiquit. c. 156
.

21. That Christ after his death and Passion did truly descend into hell, that
Hebr. c. 2.
so he might destroy through death him, who had power over death, we produce
that plain place of S. Matthew, where it is said c. 12.
: Sicut fuit Jonas etc. Even as Jonas was three days and three nights in the
belly of the whale, so shall the son of man be in the heart of the earth.
Which place that it is not understood of the grave (as our Adversaries do
answer) but of hell it self according to the Catholics Jerome In c. 2. Ionae.
, who thus writes: Sicut cor est in medio animalis, ita infernus in medio
terrae esse perhibetur; that is, Even as the heart is in the midst of the living
creature, so is hell in the midst of the earth: of Irenaeus l. 5 circa finem.
, of Tertullian l. de anima c. 31.
, of Gregory Nissenus ^n ora^. 1. de resurrect.
, and of Ambrose In c. 4. ad Ephesians.
, all which Fathers do understand by those words of Matthew, in cord terrae,
Hell.

22. We also allege for proof of the same article, that saying of the
Apostles: Qui ascendit, ipse est etc. He that ascends, is the same, which
descended into the lower parts of the earth; where the Latin words, inferiores
parts terrae, do not signify the grave (as our Adversaries do interpret) but
hell, and thus we find this place expounded by S. Jerome Omnes hi in hunc locum.
, Ambrose, Chrysostom, and Theophilact, they proving Christ his descending
into hell out of this, and the former alleged text.

Machabees, which is so plain, as that it needs no illustration of the
Fathers) we allege that place of Matthew c. 12.
where it is said, that there are some sins, which neither are remitted in this
world, nor in the world to come: Whereby we Catholics, and the Fathers before
us, do gather that some sins are remitted in the world to come by prayers and
suffrages of the Church, and this Illation is deduced from this text, by S.
Austin l. 21. de Ciuit. Dei. c. 24. and l. 6. in Julian. cap. 5.
, S. Jerome lib. 4. dialog. c. 39.
, Bid In c. ^. Marci.
, and others.

24. Another authority for proof of Purgatory is usually alleged out of S.
Matthew Math. 5. Lu^. 12.
and S. Luke, where it is said: Esto consentiens aduersario tuo etc. Be at
agreement with thy adversary betymes, whiles thou art in the way with him,
least perhaps thy adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver
thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison: verily I say to thee, thou
shall not go from thence, till thou repay the last farthing. Now by the last
farthing, is here mistically and figuratively understood small sins, which
shall be paid for, that is, shall be punished in the fire of Purgatory, and thus
is this place expounded by Tertullian l. de anima c. 17.
, Cyprian lib. 4. epist. 2.
, Origin Hom. 35. in Luc.
, Ambrose In c. 12. Luc.
, and Jerome In c. 5. Math.
, who thus plainly interprets the former words: Hoc est, quod dicit, non
egredieris de carcere, donec minuta peccata persoluas, that is: This he says,
Thou shall not get out of prison, till thou have discharged even thy little
sins.

Jeremy cap. 15.
where it is said: Dixit Dominus ad me, si steterint Moses and Samuelcoram me,
non est anima mea ad populum istum: that is, If Moses and Samuel stood before
me, my mind is not to this people: Meaning that if Moses and Samuel should
the^ pray to God for the people of the Jews, yet God would not hear the^: out
of which place we gather, that Moses and Samuel (the^ being dead) were
accustomed at other times, to pray to God for the^, since otherwise this speech
of God had been indirect and to no purpose. Now whereas our Adversaries to avoid
this argument, do say, that the meaning of this place it not, that if Moses
and Samuel in their own persons, but if any other godly men, (such as Moses
and Samuel were) should pray to God, he would not hear them. Yet
notwithstanding we find this place expounded literally. personally, and truly
(and so consequently against our Adversaries their answer) of Moses and
Samuel, by Chrysostom Hom. 1. in epist. 1. ad These. sal.
, Jerome In hu^e locum.
, and Gregory l 9. moral. c. 12.
.

26. To the same end we produce out of the Machabees 2. Mac. cap. vlt.
, how Judas did see in a vision Onias the Priest, and Jeremy the Prophet (both
which were then dead) praying for the Jews. Now seeing that this book of the
Machabees is accounted true and undoubted Scripture by S. Austin l. 18. de
Ciuit. Dei. cap. 36.
Cypryan l 1. ep. 3. ad Cornelium.
, Ambrose l. 2. de Jacob. c. 10. 11. and 12.
, Gregroy Inorat. de Match.
Nazianzen, and others, it therefore follows, that these Fathers acknowledging
the Machabees for Scripture, and never making any other construction of this
vision, then literal, and such as the words import, do also acknowledge that
this place does infallibly prove, that the Saints do pray for us.

27: Now more particularly that Saints are to be prayed unto, we prove by the
words in Job Job. c. 5.
, where it is said: Voca, si quis est, qui tibi respondeat, and ad aliquem
Sanctorum conuertere. That is, Call if any there be, which may answer thee,
and turn thy self to any of the Saints. Where by the name of the Saints are
understood the Angels according to the exposition of S. Austin In annot. in
Job.
. But if Angels do pray for us, then do Saints the like, since there is one
and the same reason of both.

Melchisedech, of whom it is thus said: Melchisedech Genes. 14.
rex Salem protuli^ etc. that is, Melchisedech being King of Salem, did offer
bread and wine, for he was a priest of the high God. Now not only David Psalm.
109.
, but also S. Paul Hebr. 7.
do so refer this place to Christ, as that S. Paul does plainly say, that
Christ was a Priest according to the order of Melchisedech, and not according
to the order of Aaron. Now if Christ be a Priest according to the order of
Melchisedech; then the reason hereof is, in that Christ is to institute an
unbloody sacrifice under the form of bread and wine, and so we Catholics do
hold, that this he did, when he first instituted the blessed Eucharist. And
answerably hereto, the Fathers do interpret those words of the Psalmist l. 4.
stormat.
: Thou art a Priest according to the order of Melchisedech: and the like words
of S. Paul, to wit, that Christ is therefore properly and truly called a Priest
according to the order of Melchisedech, because he instituted at his last
supper, a Sacrifice under the forms of bread and wine: Thus are those former
places expounded by Clemens lib. 5. demonstr. Eua^g. c. 3.
Alexandrinus, Eusebius l. ^. ep. 3. ad Caecil.
Caesariensis, Cyprian Haeres. ^9.
, Epiphanius lib. 5. de Sacram. c. 1.
, Ambrose Hom. 35. in Genesis
, Chrysostom Epist. ad Marcel.
, Jerome Epist. 95. ad Innocent. Pap.
, Austin Dialog. cu^ Tripho.
and others.

29. A second conuincing testimony in proof of the sacrifice of the Mass, is
taken out of Malachy in these words: Non est mihi voluntas in vobis, dicit
Dominus Exercituum etc. I have not a mind or will in you, says the Lord of
hosts; and I will not take any gift from your hand, for from the rising of
the sun unto the setting thereof, my name is great among the Gentles, and in
every place is sacrified and offered to my name a clean oblation, because my
name is great among the Gentiles, says the Lord of hosts. Which text
contains a prophesy of the sacrifice, which shall be offered to God, by the
Gentiles, after their conversion to Christian religion. And because thus far the
Protestants do acknowledge, they therefore interpret this l. 4. c. 32.
place of spiritual sacrifices (to wit prayers, thankesgiuings and such like)
which the elect and faithful offer up to God. But the Catholics do expound
this said place of Malachy of a Sacrifice, as it is truly and properly taken,
to wit of the sacrifice of the Eucharist. And in this particular sense, they
find this prophesy expounded by Justinius l. 3. contra Marc.
Martyr, who thus plainly says: De nostris gentium etc. Of our sacrifices of
Gentiles, that is of the bread and Cup of the Eucharist. Malachias did then
speak etc. By Ireneus l. cont. Iudaeos c. c. 16.
, by Tertullian In Comment. Psalm. 95.
, by Cypria^, by Chrysostom by Jerome In Comment. Malach.
, and finally by S. Austin l. 1. contra aduers. leg. and prophet. c. 20. and l.
18. de Ciuit. Dei c. 36.
, al which Fathers do directly and in plain words expound this prophesy of
Malachy, of the sacrifice of the mass.

30. I could exemplify, in many more textes, both of these articles and of
others, the Fathers like agreement with the Catholics, in expounding such
passages of Scripture, as we at this day do allege in warrant of our religion.
But the seformer examples, being of the chiefest controversies, and of the most
markable textes objected by us, may seem as a scantling, whereby to measure the
Fathers mind and inclination in interpreting of all such others. And now by
this, which has been already set down, we may gather, how much our
Adversaries are en dangered, by seking to determine all controversies between
us and them, only by the written Word, if therein they would stand to the
iugdgment of the ancient Fathers, whose great distance of a thousand years at
least is the reason (belike) why they appear so little in the eyes of these our
Sectaries, who (we see) do not only believe the Doctrine answerable to the
Catholics expositions of the former texts, but themselves do expound the said
texts and authorities, as we do, and from their own such constructions do
deryue and justify their faith and Doctrine equally maintained by us both, so
as those words of Tertullian lib. de pudicitia.
do rightly concern the Fathers and us: Concorporauit nos scriptura diuina,
literae ipsae glutina nostra sunt: So hard (indeed so impossible) it is to
deuyde the thread euenly between the Fathers and us, but that we both must
jointly participate, either of interpreting the Scripture, according to the
intended sense of the holy Ghost, or else of most fowly deprauing and
adulterating the same, since if we Catholics err therein, we see, how justly
we may insimulate the Fathers within our said error. And yet our Adversaries
(see the subtilty of Heresy) do peremptory call the said points of faith and
Doctrine deduced out of the former constructions of Scripture, Antichristian
and damnable heresies (as they are maintained by us Catholics) which in the
Fathers they allieuate and gentle, by tearming them but Naeuos and Naeuia: idle
and inconsiderate, either heresies in both, or but spots and blemishes in both,
for it is the Doctrine which denominates the person, not the person the
Doctrine: Yet neither dare they justify; since the one, would discover their
open and dangerous breach with the Fathers; the other an over favorable
extenuation of our religion; both an acknowledme^t of their over sight in
retracting that in the end, which hitherto they have so pertinaciously auerred.
But to recall my self and to hasto^ to the next Chapter.

That the textes of Scripture objected by the Protestants in disprouall of our
Religion, are otherwise expounded by the Fathers, then in that sense, wherein
our Adversaries do urge them. And that their expositions of them do commonly
agree with ours. CHAP. X.
NOw after we have showed, that the Fathers do join with us Catholics in
their expositions of the chiefest and most conuincing textes, which we are
accustomed to allege for warrant of our Doctrine; it follows (according to
our former design) that we in like sort do demonstrate, that the Fathers do
deliver far different co^structions (and for the most part the same with us
Catholics) of the principal and main passages of Scripture, objected against
us, from that sense and meaning, wherein our Adversaries do urge them; so as it
is most evident, that in the said Fathers judgment (which in all reason is to
ouerballance the private spirit of any Sectary whatsoever) no one such text
does prejudice our Catholic faith at all.

Supremacy of S. Peter is taken from S. Paul's co^tradicting of him (as we read
in the Epistle to the Galathians cap. 2.
and as it is above touched) yet we find that the Fathers in the exposition of
this place, do so praise the humility of S. Peter therein, as that they take
occasion thereby to intimate his superiority over all the other Apostles* See S.
Cyprian Epist. ad Quintu^.
, S. Gregory Hom. 18. in Ezech.
, S. Austin Epist. 19. ad Hieronym.
, who thus writes of this point: Rarius and sanctius exemplum Petrus etc.
Peter has left a more rare and holy example to his successors, then Paul has
done; since by that of Peter's, they are taught not to disdain to be corrected
by their inferiors; whereas by the other of Paul's, the inferiors are
emboldned to resist their superiors in a charitable manner for the defense of
truth. Thus far S. Austin: who (we see) by the commenting of this place does
strengthen and fortify the Doctrine of Peter's Primacy.

Babylon shall sit on that City, which has seven hills, to wit Rome. Now we
find, that such Fathers as do interpret this place of Rome, do mean thereby
Rome in the time of the heathen Emperors, then worshipping Idols, and
persecuting the Church of Christ. In this sort this place is expounded by
Tertullian l. co^tra Iudaeos and l. 3. contra Marcione^
, and Jerome Epist. 17. ad Marcella^.
. But others of them, to wit, S. Austin (h), and S. Bid In cap. 17. Apoc.
, do understand, by the Whore, in the Apocalips sitting upon the seven hills,
the general all and universal City of the devil, which in the Scripture is
often called Babylon, and by the seven hills is understood the number of the
proud, and chiefly of the earthly kings. So thus we find, that according to
either of the constructions delivered by the ancient Fathers, this former
objected text does nothing at all touch Antichrist.

4. In like manner our Adversaries do urge those words in the second to the cap
2.
Thessalonians: Ita vt in templo Dei sedeat etc. So as he is to sit in the
temple of God. Where the Apostle speaking of Antichrist, the Protestants will
needs have him to mean, that Antichrist shall sit in the Church of us
Christians, forsooth, because the Pope sits therein, as head thereof: whereas the
Fathers do interpret the former words of the temple of the Jews, which once
was the temple of God, and where according to the judgments both of the Fathers
and us Catholics, Antichrist is to sit: and thus is this place expounded by
Chrysostom In hunc locum.
, Ambrose In c. 21. Luc.
Hilary Can 25. in Math.
, Cyril Catech. 15.
Hierosolym. Hippolitus Orat. de mundi. consu^mat.
, Ireneus lib. 5.
and others.

our Savior recorded by S. John (as is before touched) vz. The flesh profits
nothing, it is the spirit, which quickneth. Now that this place is understood
only of the carnal apprehension of the Jews of eating grossly and carnally
Christ's body, appears out of Chrysostom In hunc lo^um.
, Theophilact ibidem.
, Cyprian In ser. de coena Domini
, and Origin l. 3. in epist. ad Romans
. To the same end they produce those words: Non (y) bibam ex hoc sanguine vitis
etc I will not drink henceforth of the fruit of this wine, until that day as
I shall drink it new with you in my Fathers kingdom: Drawing from these
words, which do term the cup wine (as if our Savior had spoken of the Cup
consecrated) that there was no real change of bread and wine into the body and
blood of Christ; whereas we find, that S. Luke cap. 22.
does (x) Math. 26.
make mention of two cups, the one at supper (whereof the former words were
spoken) the other after supper, which our Savior consecrated, and to which the
former words had no reference. And thus we find this place explicated
(answerably to S. Lukes relation) by Jerome in c. 26. Math.
, Bid In c. 22. Luc.
, and Theophilact In cap. 22. Luc.
.

6. In denial of auricular Confession, and of Priests their authority for
remitting of sins thereby, they produce the words of Christ recorded by S.
John cap. 20.
vz. Sicut misit me pater etc. Even as my Father sent me, so I do send you;
But Christ (say they) when he remitted and forgave sin, exacted not any
particular enumeration of them, as appears out of S. Luke cap. 7.
, and S. Matthew cap. 9.
: Therefore we are not bound to any secret confession of our sins. To which
argument we answer, that the former place of S. John is not so to be
understood, that the Apostles, and their successors were precisely bound to do
all things after the same manner, as they were done by Christ (since by that
rule then, the Apostles ought not to baptize in Act. 2.
remission of sins, because Christ without Baptism did remit the sins of
Mary Magdalen, neither to give the holy Ghost by imposition of hands, since
Christ gave it by breathing Joan. 20.
upon the Apostles:) Therefore the former text alleged (according to the
exposition of S. Chrysostom) In hunc locum.
does import, that our Savior said, that he did send the Apostles, as himself
was sent, because he gave to the^ the power of remitting or retaining of
sins, as himself had received of his Father, or according to the
interpretation of S. Gregory Hom. 2^. in Euang.
, because he did send the Apostles to suffer persecution and death, as himself
was sent to undergo. Lastly because (according to In hu^c locum.
Cyril) he did se^d them to perform the said office, which himself was sent
to accomplish; to wit, to reclayme men from sin, to propagate the Church, to
preach the Gospel. And thus (we see) that though the Fathers do sometimes
differ in literal exposition of certain texts, yet they all agree in this (in
which point we here chiefly insist) that they do not affoard any such sense,
wherein the Protestants do urge them against the Catholic faith.

7. To take away auricular Confession they allege those words of Ezechiel c.
33.
: Quotiescunque ingemuerit peccator etc. As often as a sinner shall grieve and
lament, I will not remember his iniquities: Out of which words, they labor to
prove that God only exacteth this repentance and grief of a sinner, for the
remission of his sins, and not any auricular confession of them, or
absolution of the Priest. To which we answer, that neither of them is excluded
by the said words, since no man can grieve and lament for his sins in any
available manner, but that he must desire al those means (as confession
thereof and absolution) which God has instituted in his Church. And in this
sort we find that S. Epist. 91. ad Theodoru^.
Leo does object this very place against himself in this point, and then thus
answers it. Which exposition of his must needs be true, since the former
text, if it should exclude confession and absolution, by the same reason it
should also exclude Baptism, yea faith, and charity, as necessary for the
remission of our sins; since a man may grieve for his sins only by reason
of the temporal loss

8. Whereas against Freewill, they usually object that text of Isay c. 22.
: vz. Omnia opera nostra etc. O Lord thou have wrought all our works in us:
yet we find, that Jerome In comment. eiusdem loci.
does (p) In hu^c locum.
understand those words of Gods chastisements of that people, and Cyril In hu^c
locum.
of Gods miracles and benefits showed to the^. So as neither of the^, nor any
other do understand them in our Adversaries sense.

9. For proof of Justification by faith only, they urge that saying of the
Romans c. 3.
Apostle: Arbitramur hominem iustificari etc. We account a man to be justified
by faith, without the works of the law. Where besides that the very text it
self S. Austin l. de gratia and liber. arbit. c. 17.
does even in the same sense expound this place saying thus: Homines non
intelligen^es etc. Men not understanding what the Apostle here says, did
think that he said faith would suffice a man, though he lived euilly, and had
no works: which God forbid, that a Vessel of Election should so think, who
in a certain place after he had said: In Christ Jesus neither Circumcision nor
prepuce avails any whit, straight added, but Faith which works by love.
Thus S. Austin. In like sort they urge another saying of the said Apostle: vz.
Si Abraham Romans 4.
ex operibus etc. If Abraham be justified by works, he has glory, but not
with God: As also that other: Gratia estis saluati etc. By Ephesians. ^.
grace you are saved through faith etc. and not of works. In both which places
are understood works done by the force of nature, before our vocation and
calling in Christ, as appears out of S. Austin Supra. and praefat. in psalm.
^1.
, and S. Jerome E^ist. ad ^thesiphontem.
expounding the said places. See also Austin expounding the former and other
such like places, in l. de praedest. Sanct. c. 7. and epist. 105. ad Sixtum,
and l. de hono perseueren^iae c. 2.

Beati misericordes, quia etc. Blessed are they which be merciful, for they
shall obtain mercy: which place both S. Austin Epist. 105. and l. de correp.
and gratia cap. 13.
and S. Gregory In psalm. 7. paenitential.
expound thus, to wit, that blessedness and eternal felicity is attributed to
mercy, not because there is not a true reward of merit, but because the merit
it self is given to man by the mercy of God: For a man cannot do any
meritorious work, before he be justified, but he is justified by the grace and
mercy of God.

11. They also urge that place above mentioned, of S. Luke: Cum feceritis haec
omnia etc. When you have done all these things, which are commanded you, say,
we are unprofitable servants, for we have but done what we ought to have done:
which text may seem to make against the merit of works, and against works of
supererogation; yet in the Fathers judgments it nothing impugneth the same, who
though they do give several expositions thereof, yet not any one of the^
makes against the Catholic Doctrine in this point. S. Chrysostom Hom. in
illud, Illatum est cor Oziae.
says, that our Savior did not mean, that we were unprofitable servants, but
that we should so say and think of our selves, thereby to humble our selves,
least a selfeliking and pride might corrupt our good works. S. Austin Sermon. ^.
de verbis Domini.
says, that we may be called unprofitable servants, because when we have kept
all Gods commandments, we have done nothing, but what we ought to have done,
and therefore in rigor and justice, we can expect no reward, but only from the
liberal promise and bargain of God with us.

12. S. Ambrose l. 8. in Lucam.
expounds the former words in this sense, to wit, that we should acknowledge
how weak and imperfect we are of our selves, to do any good work, and that we
are made profitable servants thereto, only by the assistance and grace of God.
Now no one of these expositions (as I said before) does agree with our
Adversaries exposition of the said place, or prejudice the Doctrine of merit.

13. Against actual and inherent Justice, they usually prostitute that saying
of Isay cap. 64.
: Facti sumus immundi omnes nos, and tanquam pannus menstruatae omnes iustitiae
nostrae: that is: We are all made unclean, and all our justice is like unto
the cloth of a menstruous woman. Out of which words they endeavor to prove
all our actions to be bad and sinful: whereas it is certain, that the Prophet
did speak these words, not in the person of himself, or of the just, but
only of the wicked Jews, by reason of whose sins, both their City and the
people were to be delivered into the hands of the King of Babylon. And this
appears out of the word, which a little before he had spoken, vz. Ecce iratus
es, and peccauimus: behold thou art angry, because we have sinned. And thus we
find this place expounded by Cyril In hu^c locum.
. The truth of which exposition appears more clearly out of the words
following the former textes, vz. Non est qui inuocet nomen tuum. There is not
any, which calls upon thy name, which saying must have reference only to the
wicked, and not to the just.

14. To the said end they object David saying: Non intres c. 142.
in iudicium cum seruo tuo etc. do not enter into judgment with thy servant,
because no living creature shall be justified in thy sight. Of which place the
Fathers do deliver several expositions, but all different from our Adversaries
meaning and intention. S. Jerome In hunc psalm.
, Hilary Ibidem.
, Arnobius Ibidem.
do say, that the meaning of David was, that man cannot besayd to be justified,
if he be compared with the purity and sublimity of the justice of God, in
respect whereof the justice not only of men, but even of Angels may be
accounted to be but Injustice and impurity. Lastly S. Gregory In comment. huius
psalm.
, as also S. Austin l de perfect iustitiae.
do refer the said words of David to venial sins, without committing of
which our life cannot be passed over.

15. Concerning Evangelical Counsels, of which our Adversaries are professed
enemies, they therefore do allege those sayings, Math. 22. Marc. 12. and Luc.
10.
where we are commanded to love God with all our forc^, strength, and will (as
is above rehearsed) whereas indeed those words are put down only for greater
efficacy; understanding thereby, that we are to love God sincerly, truly, and
above all other things, and thus does S. Jerome In comment, ad c. 22. Math.
, Chrysostom Chrysostom. ibid.
, and Ambrose ad c. 10. Luc.
expound this place. They also object that saying of Christ, where he Luc. 14.
teaches: That except a man renounceth all the things he possesses, he cannot
be Christ his disciple; concluding from thence, that there are no Evangelical
Counsels: which place notwithstanding S. Austin Epist. 5. and epist 59. q. 4.
does expound with us Catholics, to wit, that our Lord spoke only of our
readiness and preparation of mind for the renouncing of all, which he requires
at our hands, when just occasion is given thereof; which exposition no doubt is
true, because a little before in the said Chapter our Savior did reckon our
wives, and our own bodies among those things, which we are to renounce.

Venit ^ohn. 4.
horae and nunc est etc. The hour comes and now is, when the true worshipper
shall worship the Father in spirit and truth: Where they labor to prove the
words, in spiritu, in spirit, to imply the Inuisibility of the Church, because
such cannot be certainly known and seen, who serve God only in spirit; whereas
Cyril In hunc locum.
, Chrysostom Ibid.
, and Euthymius Ibid.
do oppose the words, In spirit, to the ceremonies of the Jews, as they were
corporal and external; and the words, in Truth, to the same ceremonies, as
they were figures of things to come.

Non Hebr. 12.
accessistis ad tractabilem mo^tem etc. You are not come unto the mount, that
may be touched etc. but unto the mount Sion, and unto the City of the living
God, the celestial Jerusalem etc. Where, by the words, Mount Sion, and the
City of God, they teach that the militant Church is understood, which because
it is spiritual, is opposed in this text, to the mount Sinai, which is
visible. But S. Chrysostom ^n hunc locum.
, Theophilact ibidem.
and others do expound (with the Catholics) that by spiritual Sion, and the
City of God in this place, is not understood the Church militant, but
triumphant, which does consist of the blessed spirits, and therefore it
follows immediately c 9.
after: But you are come to the company of many thousand Angels, and to the
spirits of the just: Which words cannot have a direct reference to the militant
Church.

18. To prove in like manner that the Church of God may utterly fail and
decay, they usually object that prophesy of Daniel: Deficiet hostia and
sacrificium, the sacrifice shall cease; whereas those words are not understood
of the time of Antichrist, but of the overthrow of Jerusalem, and of the
ceasing of the Jewish sacrifices, and thus is this prophesy expounded by
Chrysostom in cap. 24. Math.
, Jerome ibidem.
, Austin Epist. 80. ad Hesichium.
, Eusebius l. 8. Euang. demonst. c. 2.
, Clemens lib. 1. stromat.
Alexandrinns, and Tertullian l. contra Iudaeos cap. 5.
.

19. They also object to the same purpose those words of Christ: Cum Luc. 28
venerit etc. When the son of man shall come, do thou think he shall find
faith upon the earth. Which is not understood, that at Christ his coming the
Church of God shall be extinct, but only that markable and eximious faith, which
is so much commended, shall be found but in few at those later days. And thus
does S. Jerome Dialog. contra Lucifer.
, and S. Austin de Vnitat. Eccles. cap. 1^.
expound this text. To the short, they among other textes do bring forth the
words of the Apostle 2. Thessal. 2.
: Nisi venerit discessio primum etc. Except there come a departing first, and
that man of sin be disclosed etc. Out of which words they labor to prove,
that there must be a general departure from the true faith at the coming of
Antichrist. And the contrary to this sense and meaning diverse of the Fathers,
to wit, Chrysostom In hunc locum.
, Theodoret Ibidem.
, Theophilact Ibidem.
, and Austin l 20. de Ciuit. Dei cap. 19.
do by the word discessio, or departure, in this place understand Antichrist
himself, by the figure Metonymia, as being the cause, that diverse shall depart
from the faith. Others of them, to wit, Ambrose In hu^c loum.
, and Sedulius Ibidem.
, do understand thereby a departure from the Roman Empire; neither of which
expositions do favor our Adversaries at all.

20. To obscure the Doctrine of Traditions they pervert the sense and meaning
of the Apostle Galat. 1
, who says: Sed licetnos, vel Angelus decaelo eua^gelizat vobis, praeterqua^
quod euangelizauimus etc. But though we, or a Angel from heaven preach unto
you contrary to that which has been preached, let him be accursed. Where they
deduce, that al Traditions are herby condemned. But notwithstanding the
Fathers, do expound this place only of such Doctrines, as are contrary and
opposite to the Doctrine there already preached. And therefore S. Ambrose In
hu^c locum.
does expound this place by these words, si contra: in like sort S. Austin l.
17. co^tra Eaustum. c. 3.
si contra, S. Jerome In hu^c locum.
, si aliter, meaning thereby, if not agreeable, but repugnant to the former
Doctrine. In like sort they produce certain places Math. 1^. Col. 2*
(above touched) where our Savior and his Apostles do disprove and reprehend
Traditions in general. Which words being spoken only of certain frivolous and
wicked traditions of the Jews, do nothing at all impugn the Traditions of the
Catholic Church: and thus we find those texts expounded by Ireneus l. 4. cap.
25.
, Epiphanius In haeres. Ptolome^.
, and S. Jerome In c. 8. Isa. and in c. 3. ad Titu^.
.

21. Whereas we hold the unlawfulness of marriage in some persons, and of meats
at some times: our Adversaries to impugn our Doctrine herein, do usually
allege that place of the Apostle, where he says 1. Timoth. c. 4.
: In nouissimis diebus discedent quidam a fide etc. prohibentes nubere, and
abstinere a cibis: In the later days certain shall depart from the faith etc
forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats. Whereas the Apostle
in this place speaks of such who absolutely forbear marriage and meats, as
things altogether unlawful (which cannot in any sort be applied to the
Catholics;) And these were the Tatians, Marcionites, and the Manichees. Thus
is this text expounded by Austin l. 30. co^tra Faustum.
, Jerome l. 1. in Iouinian.
, Ambrose In hu^c locum.
, and Chrysostom In hu^c locum.
.

22. Concerning our Savior they teach several errors; cap. 2.
as other men do, and that he was not filled with grace and knowledge from his
mothers womb. To prove this their Heresy they bring those words of S. Luke:
Jesus proficiebat sapientia, ae^ate, and gratia; Jesus did profit and increase
in wisdom, and grace. But the common exposition of the Fathers is that he
profited in wisdom and grace only in the opinion of men, to whom he daily
discovered his wisdom, and grace more and more. Thus does Gregory In Basinum.
Nazianzene, Cyril l. 20. Thesauri. c. 7.
, Damascene l. 3. c. 22.
, Theophilact, and others expound this place. In like sort to prove Christ's
ignorance, they produce that place where it is said: De illo die nemo Mar. 13.
scit: That day no man knows, neither the Angels, nor the son, but only
the Father. Whereby is not meant, that Christ did not know, when that day should
be, (as our Adversaries do infer) but that he did not know it to tell it to
others. And thus Ambrose l. 5. de fide cap. 8.
, Gregory l. 4. Epist. 42.
, Jerome ^n c. 24. Math.
, Basil l. 4. in Eunomiu^.
, and Austin l. 1. de Gens. contra Manich. c. 22.
expound these words.

S. Hilary Can. 31. in Math.
says, that Christ the^ feared in regard of his disciples, whom he saw would
forsak him: Jerome in 26. Math.
writes that he then grieved for the Jews, in sinning so much by crucifying
him. Ambr. In c. 22. Luc.
and Chrysostom. In c. 26. Math.
attribute his fear, to his natural affection, as fearing the death of his
body.

24. To the vphoulding of the same impiety, they wrest those words of the
Apostle, VZ. Indiebus Hebr. 5.
carnis preces etc. Who in the days of his flesh did offer up prayers and
supplications with strong crying, and tears unto him, that was able to save
him from death, and was also heard, in that which he feared: Our Adversaries
meaning hereby, that Christ did not pray, that he should not dye, but that he
might not be eternally damned; and through this fear he was heard of his
Father. Whereas the true, both reading (according to the (...) propter
reuerentiam eius.
Greek) and meaning is, that Christ was heard of his Father, either because
himself was worthy of all honor and reverence; or in that, he did affect his
Father withal due honor and reverence. And thus do we find this place
expounded by Chrysostom, and Oecumenius, all of them so writing upon this text.

25. To impugn Purgatory and prayer for the dead, they allege the saying of
David: Cu^ Psalm. 126.
dederit dilectis suis so^num, ecce haereditas Domini. When he shall give
sleep and rest to his beloved, then behold the inheritance of the Lord. They
inferring hereby, that all the godly presently upon their death do come to
heaven; whereas indeed this text is menat of the general S. Austin In hu^c locum.
In like sort they produce that place of Ecclesiasticus c. 9.
: Quodcu^que facere potest manus tua, instanter operare: Whatsoever thy hand
can do, do it insta^tly, because neither any work, nor reason, nor knowledge,
nor wisdom is beneth, whither thou hastest: they meaning heerby, that the
dead have no feeling, knowledge nor help of the living. Which place (according
to the exposition of the Fathers) makes nothing against Purgatory; for S.
Jerome In Comment. huius loci.
does interpret these words, either of such, as believe neither heaven nor
hell, nor any thing else to follow after this life; or else of those, who living
wickedly, and so dying, do descend directly into hell, where there is no remedy
nor hope of solace. S. Gregory l. 4. Dialog. c. 39.
applies this place, even to those which come to Purgatory, interpreting, that
a man after he is dead, by himself can make no means of ease and relief, but
if he be helped with the prayers of the living, it is because he has deserved
so to be relieved, when he was alive by his good works and life.

26. Lastly they allege that passage of Ecclesiastes c. 11.
(above touched) the answer whereof, is in the former Chapter but one set
down; to wit, that those which are in Purgatory, belong to the South, that is
to heaven, from whence there is no passage to hell, nor from hell thither. And
thus is that text expounded by S. Jerome In Comment huius loci.
.

27. Against prayer to Saints. They urge that, which the Apostle says: Vnus
1. Timoth. 2.
est mediator Dei and hominum etc. One mediator between God and man, which is
the man Christ Jesus. Which place indeed is understood of a mediator only in
respect of our Redemption, but not in regard of Intercession. In which sense
Cyril l. 12. Thesau. c. 10.
was not affrayd to call the Prophets and Apostles Mediators between God and US,
and Gregory Orat. ad Gregoriu^. Nyss.
Nazianzene the martyrs. To the same end, they wrest those words to the
Colossians Coloss. 2.
: Nemo vos seducat, volens in humilitate and religione Angelorum etc. Let no
man seduce you by humblenes of mind and worshipping of Angels etc. In which
place the Apostle does condemn the heresy of Simon Magus, who following the
Platonicks, did teach, that certain Angels were to be worshipped, as
inferior Gods, and which made the world, and through whose mediation only the
wrath of the great and invisible God was to be appeased, as appears (besides
out of the text it self) from the expositions of Chrysostom Hom. 7. in epist.
ad Coloss.
, Occumenius In hunc locum.
, and Theophilact Ibidem.
of this place. S. Jerome q. 10. ad ^^gasiam.
teaches, that in that former place of the Apostle, those are reprehe^ded, who
did sacrifice to the Angels. They also allege some places, which do seem to
intimate, that the Saints, and such as be dead, do know nothing of the actions
of the living, as for example, Tues Isa. 63.
enim Pater noster, Abraham nesciuit nos etc. Thou art our father, Abraham has
not known us, and Israel has been ignorant of us. To which place is answered,
that Abraham, and others of the old Testament did not know, what their children
and successors being alive, did here upon earth, because themselves were not
as yet blessed. And we grant, that the dead naturally do not know, what the
living do. And thus S. Austin l. de cura promort. c. 13.
expounds this text.

Joan. 29.
Co^summatum est, It is consummated or finished. As if our Savior testified
hereby, that whatsoever was requisite for our health and salvation was
accomplished and consummated by his only sacrifice upon the Cross: whereas his
meaning only was, that all his afflictions and punishments, which he suffered in
flesh, were consummated and ended by his death upon the Cross: and thus do
Austin, Cyril, Theophilact, and Chrysostom teach in their expositions of this
place.

29. This now (among many other like passages of Scripture, objected by our
Adversaries) may serve to discover the Fathers judgments, in the explicating of
al such texts; and how far distant (at least in those learned Doctors
censures) they are from co^tradicting any one point of our Catholic Faith; and
consequently how prejudicial it were to the Protestants in the Fathers
judgments, to make the holy Scripture, the sole and last resort and Tribunal
of Controversies. And here we are to advertise the Reader, that he is not to
expect, that the Fathers should prevent in their books and Commentaries, by
way of explication, the objections, and arguments drawn from all such places
of Scripture, as are urged by our Adversaries; both because they could not
foresee the Heresies of our times; as also if they had, yet could they not be
induced to believe, that any one of learning, professing Christian Faith and
Religion would so pertinaciously, and impertinently rack and force Gods sacred
word for the vphoulding of their Heresies, as the Sectaries of our age have
done.

30. Neither is the Reader to look, that our Catholic Expositions of every
text, which our Adversaries do urge against us, should be warranted with the
authorities of many Fathers, (though most of them have been so fortified) in
that, some such passages of Scripture there are, of which few Fathers did
undertake to make any peculiar Comment or exposition at all. Only it suffiseth,
that we can have our expositio^s of every such sentence of Scripture
strengthened with the authorities of some few of the^. And that the Protestants
are not able to allege so much as one Father interpreting in the Protestants
construction against our Catholic Doctrine, any one of the former alleged
places of Scripture, or any one other text which our Adversaries allege though
here it be not set down. And now having thus dislodged our Adversaries of
their best couerts and places of Retire, for patronage of their strange and
exorbitant Positions and Doctrine; as also, having in the precedent Chapter
fortified and strengthened with the Fathers explications the sense and meaning
of such texs, as we produce against the^, I will herein proceed no further,
referring one point to their own considerations and judgments; to wit, whether
themselves receive greater hurt and damage, by the Fathers erecting their
impregnable Forts of Gods word, from whence they make their issues and sallyes
out in pursuit and profligation of these men's Heresies; then by the said
Fathers raising and battering down, the weak houlds and fortresses of such
misapplyed texts of holy Scripture, wherein our Sectaries are wont to place
their greatest strength and confidence; since by the first, their Heresies
receive most deadly and incurable wounds; by the second, the Catholic Faith is
secured and freed from al dangerous assaults and encounters.

31. But to end this point, (to wit that the Fathes interpreted the Scripture
in general, in one and the same sense with us Catholics) the euidency of it
is such, as that therefore the Fathers are charged by our Adversaries (through
their supposed misconstruction of Scripture) as maintainers of Popish Religion.
The consideration of which assertion of theirs, being for several respects not
to be neglected, and as particularly conducing to our present purpose, induces
me a little to insist in setting down the several reproualls and criminations
of the Protestants bouldly delivered against the Fathers for their defending
of our Catholic Articles and Doctrine. Which point being made manifest, it
then ineuitably follows, that eue^ in our Adversaries judgments, the Fathers
did deliver the said constructions of Scripture, which we Catholik^ do, seeing
the Fathers maintained no Doctrines, but such as were in their own opinions
warranted with the authority of Gods sacred written word, or at least not any
way impugned by the same.

32. And first we find D. Whitaker Contra Duraeum. l. 6. p. 423.
(scornefully traducing the Fathers in a general) to write, thus the Popish
Religion (to use his own words) is a patched Couerlet of the Fathers errors
sowed together.

33. D. Whitguift In his defense of the answer to the admonition page 472. and
473.
(the once pretended Archbishop of Canterbury) in like manner thus charge the
Fathers: How greatly were almost all the Bishops and learned writers of the
Greek Church, and Latin also for the most part, spotted with Doctrines of
freewill, of merits, of Invocation of Saints, and such like? meaning such like
points of our Religion.

34. Peter De votis p. 476.
Martyr speaking of the supposed Popish Errors, thus insimulates the Fathers
within the said errors, saying: As long as we insist in Councels and Fathers,
so long we shall be conversant in the said errors. Malancthon Iu 1. Cor. c. 3.
in like sort inueighing against the Fathers, thus auerreth: Presently from the
beginning of the Church, the anncient Fathers obscured the Doctrine concerning
the justice of faith, increased Ceremonies, and devised peculiar worships.

35. M. Jewel l. de vita Iewelli printed at London. page 212.
most Hypocritically appealing to the Fathers at Paul's Cross, as challenging
them for Protestants, is sharply reprehended for such his idle vaunting by D.
Humfrey himself in these words: He gave the Papists too large a scope, was
injurious to himself, and after a manner spoiled himself and his Church.

36. Beza thus In his preface upon the new Test^ment dedicated do the Prince of
Condy anno 2587.
confidently writes upon the said point: Even in the best times (meaning the
times of the Fathers of the Primitive Church) the ambition, ignorance, and
lewdnes of the Bishops was such, that the very blind may easily perceive, that
Satan was president in their assemblies or Councels.

37. But I will conclude this point with the testimony of Luther, who, as he
was the first in our age; that broached a religion unknown to the Fathers of
the Primitive Church: So he showed himself most insolent in controlling them
for their maintaining of our Catholic Religion, he thus speaking of them
Luther Tom. 2. Wittenberg. anno 1551. deseruo arbitrio page 434.
: The Fathers for so many ages have been plainly blind, and most ignorant in
the Scriptures, they have erred all their life time, and unless they were
amended before their deaths, they were never Saints, nor pertaining to the
Church.

38. Now from all these assertions of our Sectaries it is necessarily gathered,
that their disclaiming from the ancient Fathers, as patrones of our religion,
does implicitly inuolue in it self (as above I have touched) that even in our
adversaries acknowledgme^ts, the Fathers interpreted the Scriptures in one and
the same sense with us Catholics, (for if they had made one and the same
construction of the Scripture with the Protestants, they had then taught the
same Doctrine, which the Protestants now teach) and consequently it appears,
how dangerous it is to our Adversaries to appeal to the Scripture alone, as
Judge of all Controversies, if for the true construction and sense thereof, they
would rest in the judgments of the anncient Fathers.

That the Scripture does make for the Catholics, even by the tacit
acknowledgment of our Adversaries, rising from their maintayning of our
Catholic articles. CHAP. XI.
IN this last place we are to undertake to show, that even by our Adversaries
Confessions, the holy Scripture is most clear for justifying our Catholic
Faith: which point might be proved at large by producing their own words and
expositions of many of the chief passages of Scripture, whereby we are able to
demonstrate out of their own books and writings, that they are interpreted by
them in the same sense and meaning, wherein we Catholics do usually expound
them. But this course I will purposely forbear, partly to avoid the
distasteful iteration of the former texts so often already repeated, but
chiefly in regard of the tedious prolixity, which would necessarily attend the
delivering (in their own words) of our Adversaries expositions of all such
places; and in supply thereof, I will take a more brief (and yet no less
conuincing) method. That is, I will set down ten of our main Controversies
(for example of all the rest) acknowledged, taught, and justified by our
Adversaries, and such who for wit and learning may seem to equal any others
of their own side. Which thing being once performed, it then ineuitably
follows (even from their own Principles) that they acknowledge the
Scriptureto make for the Catholics in the said Doctrines confessed by the^,
since their own general and constant axiom Luther i^ Comment. c. 1. ad
Galat. Calvin. l. 4. Instit. c. 8.. 8. Chemnit. in Exam. Conc. Trident. sess.
4. and in libro quem inseripsit, Theologiae Jesuit. praecip. capit. Brentius in
suis Prologeminis c. de Traditionibus. Ha^melmanus in suo volumine co^tra
Traditiones, and alij permulti.
is, that they are not to believe any thing, as matter of faith, but what has
it warrant in Gods written word. And to proceed yet more particularly, seeing
that for justifying of such Catholic articles, no passages of Scripture can be
alleged more forcibly and pressingly by our Adversaries own censure, then the
texts alleged in the former Chapters, it therefore may be concluded, that those
very particular

1. And first concerning the Primacy of one in the Church of God; we find that
Calvin Alleged by VVhitg. p. 137.
thus says: The twelve Apostles had one among them to govern the rest. D.
Whitguift vbi suprap. 375.
says: Among the Apostles themselves there was one chief. etc. In like sort
Musculus Alleged by VVhitguift vbi supra. p. 66.
says: Peter is found in many places to have been chief among the rest.
Melancthon In his book entitled Centur. epist. theolog. epist 74.
thus writes: as certain Bishops are President over many Churches, so the
Bishop of Rome is President over all Bishops, and this Canonical policy no wise
man (I hope) will, or ought to disalow. To maintain this said Doctrine Iacobus
Andraeas is alleged by Hospinianus Historia sacramentaria part. 2. fol. 589.


2. That the Pope is not Antichrist appears from the testimonies of diverse
Protestants, which teach, that Antichrist is not yet come. So does Zanchius In
epist. Pauli ad Philippens.
teach: the like does Franciscus In his book entitled Antichristus sieve
progno sti^^ mundi
Lambertus affirm: And Done in one of his sermons Of the s^^ond coming of
Christ.
confesses: That some Protestants do make a doubt, whether Antichrist be yet
revealed or no. And here we are to observe, that some other Protestants, who
do teach him to be come, do make the Turk to be him; thus does Mela^cthon (so
urged by Haruey, in his Theological discourse, page 102.) Bucer, and Fox teach,
vz. Act. Mon. of anno. 1577. page 539.

Luther, and the Lutheranes defend it. And therefore it is needles to set down
the particular names of any of them, since the maintainers of this Doctrine
(which are not Catholics) are termed Lutherans, especially because they
chiefly dissent from the Caluinistes in this point.

And by his authority committed to me, I absolve thee from all thy sins.
Which book is therefore reprehended by the book called, the Survey p. 145.
of the book of common prayer. As also the same is proved by Lobechius Disput.
Theologic. page 301.
, who says: That God remits sin immediately by himself, but mediatly by his
ministers. And that the Caluinistes do therefore err in withdrawing this
efficacy from the absolution given by the minister of the word. Thus far
Lobechius. And answerably hereto we find, that Melancthon In Apolog. confess.
Aug. art. 13.
did teach, that Absolution is properly a Sacrament. The like did Spandeburge
In margarit. Theologic. page 116.
, Andraeas In concilat. locorum seript. pugnant. loc. 191.
Althamerus, and Sarcerius Loc. com. hom. 1. de potest. Eccles. fol. 305.
affirm.

5. That the Sacraments of the new Testament, confer grace, ex opere operato,
appears from the judgment of D. Bilson in his true difference, part. 4. page
539 D. Whitaker contra Duraeum. l. 8. p. 662. M. Hooker in his Ecclesiastical
policy lib. 5. sect. 57. Melancthon in cap. 4. epist. ad Roman. Iacobus
Andraeas, in Epitom. colloq. Montisbelgar. page 58. Luc. Osiander in Enchirid.
controuers. etc. p. 272.

6. The Doctrine of Freewill in like sort is maintained by Osiander, Cent. 16.
p. 814. by Siccanus and Hemingius, as Willet does witness in his Sinopsis
printed 1600. p. 808. By Perkins, in his reuelat. p. 326.

merit of works, to wit, that in regard of Christ his Passion and promise, and
as proceeding from faith (all which points the Catholics do acknowledge
Melancthon loc. com. de bonis operib.
, of the Confessions (q) in the Harmony, of Hooker l. 5. Ecclesiast. polic.
sect. 72. page 208.
, and of the disputation holden at Ratisbone p. 509.
.

8. The forbearance of certain meats at set times, and this not for a
politic respect, but in regard of spiritual ends, is justified by Hooker In
his Ecclesiast. polic. l. 5. sect. 72. p. 204.
, who not only condemns Aerius and Montanus for teaching the contrary, but
does also answer the place urged out of S. Paul by our Querimonia p. 31. and
94.
Ecclesiae, printed in London anno 1592.

9. The Doctrine of Evangelical Counsels is maintained by Luther, assertionib.
art. 30.
by Hooker in his Ecclesiastical policy. lib. 3. sect. 8. page 140. and by D.
Couel in his defense of Hooker art. 8. p. 49. 50. etc.

Visible, is proved from the testimonies of Melancthon, who alleging sundry
texts out of Scripture in proof thereof, thus loc. com. de Eccles. p. 354.
concludes: Hi and similes loci non de Idea Platonica, sed de Ecclesiae
visibili loquuntur. D. Field l. 1. of the Church p. 19. and 21.
does affirm the same, and thereupon reprehendeth Bellarmine for proving
needlessly Visibility of the Church, as if the same were denied by the
Protestants. D. Humfrey in like sort justifies the Churches Visibility: and
entreating at large and proving this point, in the end directs his words to
the Catholics in this manner: Cur In Iesuitismo part. 2. rat. 3. p. 240.
ergo anxie and curiose probant, quod anobis nunquam est negatum: that is, why
do our Adversaries so painfully prove that (to wit the Churches Visibility)
which we never denied? Thus teaches the said Doctor.

11. The same Doctrine of the Churches Visibility, is in like sort maintained
by Henoch Clappam In his sovereign remedy against schism p. 18.
, who thus says: Not only all Ancients did hold the Churches Visibility, but
also al learned men of our age.

12. These now ten articles among many other such like Catholic points,
acknowledged by our Adversaries, (as the Reader may fully see in that most
elaborate, learned, conuincing, and unanswerable book, styled, The Protestants
Apology of the Roman Church) may be sufficient to prove, that the Scripture
makes most clear and evident for the justifying of our Catholic Faith in the
former points, at least in the judgments of these (as I may term them)
Agrippian, and half Christians; I mean, in the judgments of the aforealledged
Protestants teaching and acknowledging these Catholic Positions. And the
reason hereof is, in that those who maintain and defend the said former
articles, do nevertheless (as I touched before) confidently teach and avouch,
that, that only (and nothing else) is to be believed in matters of faith, which
is manifestly and expressly warranted, or necessarily deduced out of the written
word. Now this being thus, I see not how our former Protestants can avoid and
divert the danger of this their present Doctrine, which broacheth, that the
written word alone is solely and definitiuely to determine all Ecclesiastical
doubts and Controversies of Religion.

The Conclusion. CHAP. XII.
IT is recorded of a certain Heathen Poet, who endeavoring to discounsell his
Prince and Mecaenas from waging of war (to the which he had been overmuch
inclined) composed a Tragedy, representing therein all those aggreuances and
terrors commonly attending upon wars; as sacking of towns, depopulation of
countries, slaughter of soldiers, murdering of the innocent, and other such
lamentable effects. But instead of his Catastrophe, or last Act thereof, he
caused the Chorus, without any speech at all, to bring forth in a vessel,
certain dead bones of his Princes predecessors, with a paper therein bearing
this (or the like) inscription, (...). That is: Behold here (mighty Prince)
the bonesof such thy ancestors, which were slain and dyed in the wars.
Which deadliuely spectacle being set in the sight of his Lord, spoke (no doubt)
more feelingly and persuadingly) as forcing or inuading his Understanding by
the irresistible assault of the Eye) then the deliverance of words, or any
other external representation could import.

2. The like in the closure of this treatise I think good to observe, for
having labored to withdraw our Sectaries from erecting the Scripture as sole
Judge of Controversies; in the patronizing whereof they war and fight against
Gods sacred word, against the practice of the church in her first purity,
against the uniform judgment of the ancient Fathers, and finally against
Reason it self. And having refuted this their Doctrine, first by discovering
the difficulty of the Scriptures, in regard whereof, every private spirit
(though of such as are predestined and elected) cannot assure himself
indubiously of their true sense and meaning. Secondly by laying down the
inco^petency and insufficiency of the Scriptures in this point, proceeding both
from the Protestants disagrements, which is Scripture, from the corruptions of
all Originalls and Translations thereof now extant, at least by the judgment of
our new Ghospellers; and lastly by showing, that supposing the Scripture to be
this judge, yet it makes in behalf of us Catholics, and not for our
Adversaries, if we insist either in the perspicuity of the letter thereof, or in
the judgment of the Fathers and Protestants passed thereon. The proof of which
passages necessarily forcing, that the Scripture cannot be this determining
Judge. Which being accomplished, it now remains (by allusion to the former
Poet) that in place of an exact and ceremonious Conclusion, I only present to
the view of the Protestants, the yet extant, and (as it were) the vn-entombed
sentences and Judgments of their own ancestors, (I mean of Luther, Calvin,
Zuinglius, and their followers) wherein with great bitterness of speech, they do
anathematize and damn one another for their different opinions rising out of
their supposed revealing spirit, and out of their private interpreting the
Scriptures, as each one does truly charge another; though they all indifferently
maintained with the like fervor this Doctrine, promising infallibly to
themselves in particular the certainty of this spirit, and justifying in like
sort the Scripture for Judge.

3. These censures (I say) I will present to the eye of their judgments, as so
many unburied parcels of their forefathers dead memories, still remaining to
witness to their children, that their said Predecessors in this Doctrine, did
perish in the justifying of this their quarrel, not only by the hands of their
professed Adversaries the Catholics; but also by the bloody wounds, which their
credit and estimation reciprocally received from their severe sentencing of one
another, as often as any of them attempted to practice in their particular
works and labors, touching the making the Scripture sole Judge of
Controversies, which before they all had jointly taught by speculation. And
here it is to be observed, that their interchangable conde^nations are in
several ma^ners and sorts. 1. The Lutheranes with the Sacramentaries (I mean
with the Swinglians and Caluinists.) 2. The Sacramentaries, with the
Lutheranes. 3. The Lutheranes among themselves. 4. The Sacramentaries among
themselves, under whom are comprehended the Protestants and Puritanes here in
England. All which parties notwithstanding equally maintained the Scripture for
Judge, and the infallibility of the private spirit, and therefore upon this
ground and principle (if so it were true) their own spirits (each one
challenging the like privilege therein) should have necessarily conspired and
agreed together in their Doctrine and expositions of the said Scriptures,
since the spirit of God is one, not many. Epist. ad Ioannem Heruagiu^
Typographum Argentinum.
And first I will begin with the judgments of the Lutherans passed upon the
Sacramentaries.

4. Luther These. 2. cont. Louaniens.
himself says: We seriously judge the Zuinglians and Sacramentaries to be
Heretics, and Aliens from the Church of God. And in another place he says:
The Sacramentaries began their opinion of the Sacrament with lies, and with
lies they defend it. As also in third Tom. ^. in def verbor. caenae Domini f.
389.
place he thus writes against them: We will reprove and condemn them (to wit
the Sacramentaries) for Idolaters, corrupters of Gods word, blasphemers and
deceauers, and of them as of the enemies of the Gospel, we will sustain
persecution, and spoil of our goods, and whatsoever they shall do unto us, as
long as God will permit.

5. Neither are Luthers Posthum, or his after-broode (I mean the Lutherans,
whom by the testimony of Doct. Whitaker In his answer to F. Campia^ the eight
reason.
the English Protestants embrace as their dear brethren in Christ) more mild
in censuring the Sacrame^taries, then their Father was: for Luke Enchirid.
cont. Caluinian. c. 7.
Osiander (a Lutheran) speaking of certain wicked assertions of them touching
Christ says thus: But here gentle Reader) behind and above those blasphemous
things, which in the discourse, before, we have heard against the Son of God,
out of the opinion of our Adversaries the Caluinistes, there opens it self a
gulf or hell of Caluinia^ Doctrine, in which, if thou diligently weigh the
matter, God is said to be the author of sin etc. and hence of necessity must
arise in the hearts of men manifest blasphemies against God. The said author
Ibid. in Conclus. p. 267.
in the same book says also thus: Let any godly or friendly Reader whatsoever
think, what deadly poison does power it self into men under the Caluinian
Doctrine, by which al Christianisme almost is overthrown.

6. Brentius In recognit. prophetar.
says: All the Zuinglians works are full of deprauations, cunninges,
deceipts, and slanders. Westphalus Apolog cont. Calvin p. 430. c. 19.
reports: That all the Caluinian works are stuffed with tauntes, curses, and
lies. And he further affirms, that he is able to show certain pages of
Caluins works, of which every one contains above 30. notable lies and
taunts. Conradus Schlusselb. In praefat. theo. Caluinist.
protests; that the Caluinistes do nourish Arian and Turkish impieties in
their hearts, which does not seldom at fit times openly disclose it self.

7. Stankarus Contra Calvin. k. 4.
thus writes to Calvin: What devil (o Calvin has seduced thee, to speak
with Arius against the son of God etc And after the said Lutheran concludes:
Beware (o Christian Readers) and especially all you Ministers, beware of the
books of Calvin, and principally in the articles of the Trinity. Incarnation,
Mediator, the Sacrament of baptism etc.

Hunnius In ^his epist. dedicatory of the Co^fut. of Caluins deprauations.
charge Calvin: That he wresteth the Scripture horribly, from the true sense
to the overthrow of himself and others. And thus passing over the censures,
which the books Caluinus Iudaizans, and Caluino-papismus affoard against him,
as also omitting many other Lutherans writings against Calvin and his sect, and
leaving out of the former Lutheranes (for breuity sake) infinite other most
notorious passages directed to the same purpose; this already set down shall
suffice concerning their condemnation of him, and the Sacramentaries.

9. Now let us see on the contrary side, how the Sacramentaries do bear
themselves toward Luther and the Lutherans, contenting our selves with the
same few places only of their censures, which may serve for a taste of the rest.

10. And first Zuinglius Tom. 2. in respons. ad Luther. confess. fol. 458. and
459.
calls Luther, Marcion; and further says, that he is guilty of high
blasphemy against the nature and essence of God, in that he taught that Christ
dyed according to his divinity. He further thus speaks of Luther, touching
the same point: This can be by no reason explained or excused, for (Luther)
clearly and manifestly confesses, that he will not acknowledge Christ to be his
Savior, if only his humanity had suffered. Zuinglius In respons. ad Luther. l.
de Sacram. fol. 401.
also writing in another place against Luthers Doctrine thus says: Thou
(Luther) shall be forced either to deny the whole Scriptures of the new
Testament, or to acknowledge Marcions heresy.

11. Calvin Instit. l. 4. c. 17.. 16.
speaking of Luthers heresies says: By the Lutherans, Marcion is raised out of
hell: and in another place Admonit. 3. ad VVestphalum.
Calvin says: The Lutheranes are forgers and liars.

12. Ioannes Campanus In Colloq. lat. Luther. Tom. 2. c. de Aduersar.
a Sacramentary says: as certain as God is God, so certain it is, that
Luther was a devilish liar.

13. Lastly (for greater contraction of this point) Oecolampadius affirms
that the Lutherans bring forth only a color or shadow (as Heretics commonly
are accustomed to do) of the word of God. They bring not the word of God, and
yet will seem to Dialog. cont. Me. lancthone^.
build upon the word of God. See with what full and intemperate terms they do
entercha^ge one another. Now as we have seen the Lutherans condemning the
Sacramentaries for their interpretation of Scripture, and these them again: So
neither of these two sects do absolutely approve such, as are even of their
own faction.

14. And first we find that Conradus In Catalog. nostri temporis l. 1.
the foresaid Lutheran places six sorts of his own Lutherans in the Catalogue
of Heretics. So (through the disallowing of one another Doctrine) did first
rise the distinction of Molles and Rigidi Lutherani; so as it is manifest, even
out of their own books and inuectiues, that they hold one another for
Heretics.

15. Now touching the Sacramentaries among themselves: Does not Calvin lib. de
coena Domini and l. 4. Instit. c. 15.. 1.
condemn Zuinglius, for teaching that the Sacraments are bare external
signs? And is not Calvin reciprocally condemned by Zuinglius Zuinglius epist.
ad quanda^ Germaniae ciuitatem fol. 196. and in Commentar. de vera and falsa
relig. c. de Sacra.
again, because he attributed more to the Sacraments then external signs?

16. Castalio In l. ad Calvin. de praedest.
a Sacramentary, charging Calvin for teaching God to be the author of sin,
makes a distinction of the true God, and of Caluins God, and gives a
different description of them both, and among other things he there thus
concludes: By this means not the devil, but the God of Calvin is the Father
of lies: but that God which the holy Scripture teaches, is altogether contrary
to this God of Calvin etc. And then after: The true God came to destroy the
works of the Caluinian God, and these two Gods, as they are by nature contrary
one to another, so they beget and bring forth children of contrary disposition;
to wit, that God of Calvin children without mercy, proud, etc. Thus Castilio.
And thus much of our foreign new Ghospellers for some taste of the bitter
sentences delivered against one another; in which point I acknowledge not to
have set down the hundred part of their mutual accusations.

17. Now if we look here at home, it is easy to show that the Protestants and
Puritanes do as little favor one another for their several Doctrines rising
from making the Scripture sole judge of Religion, as the fore named Sectaries
have done. Hence it is, that the Puritanes will not acknowledge the
Protestants to be true and sincere professors of the Gospel, as appears
by their diverse admonitions exhibited to the Parliamentes, every lea^e almost
therein inueighing against them, as against the Ghospells enemies. So we see
that in one of their books A Christian and modest offer etc. page 11.
they say: That if themselves be in error, and the Prelates on the contrary
have the truth, they protest to all the world, that the Pope and the Church of
Rome (and in them God and Christ Jesus himself) have great wrong and indignity
offered unto them, in that they are rejected etc.

18. Touching the Protestants recrimination of the Puritanes; we find, that
the Protestants Powel in his Consideratio^s.
do censure them to be notorius and manifest Schismatikes, and members cut of
from the Church of God. They are said by another Protestant The Survey of the
pretended discipline 1. 5. etc. 24. etc. 35.
To have perverted the true meaning of certain places, both of Scriptures and
Fathers, to serve their own turns. And again the said Author says of them:
The word of God is troubled with such choppers and changers of it etc. And to
conclude he further affimeth (to leave out infinite other places) That the
later braules, pitiful distractions and co^fusions among the Puritanes,
proceed of such intolerable presumption, as is used by perverting and false
interpretation of holy Scripture. Which severe and bitter condemnations of one
another cannot be understood to be spoken of things indifferent, and touching
ceremonies only, as they are wont to salve the matter, when they be charged
therewith by Catholics.

19. These (lo) are the yet liuing-remembrances of our Sectaries Progenitors
overthrow, occasioned through their waging of war in the defense of so
erroneous a Doctrine; which alone are of force (if all other former proofs and
arguments were defective) to convince our Nouellists of their foul error
therein. But since all these alleged authors were Protestants, and (for the
greater part) acknowledged for men of Piety, and as professing the Gospel, by
the present Church of England; since they all disclaymed from the Churches
authority in defining of Controversies; all ventilated alike the facility of
the holy Scripture, and acknowledged it as sole judge, and warranted their
different Doctrines, from Scripture alone; finally all actually impatronized
themselves of the interpreting spirit: since (I say) they all proceeded thus
far, and were warranted therein with as much reason, as any Protestant
maintaining the same Doctrine at this present, can justly apply to himself:
yet seeing not one of those would affoard any approbation of an others man's
revealing spirit, in the exposition of Scripture, but openly traduced each
others spirit, as erroneous and heretical, and upon their contrary expositions
of Scripture they did beget contrary Doctrines: What then remains, but that
every sober and discret Christian do reject this Paradox, to wit, that the
Scripture is the sole and only judge of Controversies, since it has engendered
in the propugners thereof such a Babylon of confused and tumultuous
accusations? and that with all resignatio^ of judgment he humbly acknowledge,
that Christ his Vicar (assisted with competency of means from the whole
Church) is appointed by Christ himself to be here upon Earth, the sole,
supreme, and inappealable Judge in all matters of faith and religion; often
recalling to his memory, that it is Math. 18.
written: Dic Ecclesiae, and si Ecclesiam no^ audierit, sit tibi veluti
Ethnicus and Publicanus.

FINIS.

