A Bull granted by the Pope to Doctor Harding and other, by reconcilement and
assoyling of English Papists, to undermine faith and allegiance to the Queen.
With a true declaration of the intention and fruits thereof, and a warning of
perils thereby imminent, not to be neglected.

Imprinted at London by John Day dwelling over Aldersgate.

NOueritis quod anno, die, mense et pontificatu infrascriptis: in generali
congregatione etc. pro part Reuerendorum T. Harding, et N. S. et T. P.
Anglorum fuit porrectum memoriale et supplicatio, quae lecta fuerunt etc. Annis
abhinc tr^bus etc. concessit T. H. etc. Episcopalem potestatem in foro
conscientiae absoluendi eos qui ad Ecclesiae gremium (...) Hinc potestati quia
multi non credunt, petimus vt in scriptum aliquod autenticum redigatur. Ac
etiam vlterius (monente nos temporis necessitate) humiliter petimus vt eisdem
concedatur in causa irregularitatis dispesandi potosta^, exceptis ex homicidio
voluntario prouenientibus seu deductis in forum contentiosum, Quibus auditis et
intellectis praelibatus Sanctiss. Dominus noster decreuit quod prenominati
absoluere possint in foro conscientiae Anglos tantum prout petitur, etiam ab
irregularitate incursa ratione heresis et ab ea dependente emergente et annexa,
dummodo absoluendi abstineant per triennium a ministerio altaris. In quorum
fidem and testimonium etc. anno. 1567. die Iouis 14. Aug.

ET quia ego etc. Notarius supradictus copiam ex proprio originali suo
extractam collationaui and cum eodem concordare inueni, ideo subscripsi
signoque meo solito signaui in fidem premissorum rogatus.

Forma absolutionis.
Dominus noster Jesus Christus qui dedit Discipulis suis potestatem ligandi and
soluendi, ipse te absoluat, and ego autoritate omnipotentis Dei and beatorum
Apostolorum Petri and Pauli necnon sanctae matris Ecclesiae, atque autoritate
Papalis indulgentiae, in hac par^e mihi commissa and concessa absoluo te a^
omni irregularitate and sententia excommunicationis maioris vel minoris a i^e
vel ab homine tibi inflictis atque etiam ab omnibus criminibus excessibus and
peccatis tuis co^fessis contritis and oblitis, and ab omnibus casibus sedi
Apostolicae reseruatis. Restituo te communitati fidelium and Sacramentis
Ecclesiae, ac in illam innocentiam and puritatem in qua eras quando baptizatus
fuisti, remittendo tibi omnes poenas Purgatorij propter culpas and offensimes
quas contra Deum and proximum tuum co^misisti, Et plenariam remissionem atque
indulgentiam omnium peccatorum in quantum claues Ecclesiae extendunt in hac
part tibi do and concedo, ita quod sis absolutus hic and ante tribunal Domini
nostri Jesus Christi, habeasque vita^ aeterna^, and viuas in eo in saecula
saeculoru^. Amen. In Nomine patris. etc.

The Bull.
KNow ye that ye day, month, and time of our Bishoprike underwritten, in a
general congregation etc. on the behalf of the worshipful Thomas Harding, N.
S. and T. P. Englishmen, was exhibited a memorial and supplication, which were
read etc. How about three years past, etc. our holy Father has granted to
Tho. Harding etc. Bishoply power in court of conscience to assoile them that
shall return to the bosom of the chirch. To this power because many do not
gene credit, we pray that it be put in writing in autenticall form. And also
further (being occasioned by necessity of time) we humbly pray that to the
same persons be granted power to dispense in case of irregularitie, except in
cases arising of wilful manslaughter, or brought in courts of law. Which
premises being read and understood, our said most holy Lord has decreed
that the said persons may in court of conscience assoile Englishmen only, as
it is prayed, even also from irregularitie incurred by reason of ^resie and
depending and arising upon the same and annexed unto it, so that the persons to
be assoiled do for three years abstain from the ministry of the altar. In
credit and testimony whereof etc. an. 1567. Thursday the viiii. day of August.

And because I etc. the Notarie aforesaid have conferred the said copy drawn
out of the proper original and have found the same to agree therewith, being
requested I have subscribed and signed it with my ^suall sign for credit of
the premises.

Note that the petition was made in the name of three, but it was granted to
four.

The form of absolution.
Our Lord Jesus Christ, which gave to his Disciples power to bind and loose,
he assoyle thee. And I by the authority of almighty God, and of the blessed
Apostles Peter and Paul, and also of our holy Mother the Church, and by the
authority of the Papaie indulgence, to me committed and granted do assoile
thee from all irregularitie and sentence of excommunication both the greater
and the lesser laid upon thee by law or by man, and also from all thy crimes,
transgressions, and sins, confessed, contrite, and forgotten, and from all
cases reserved to the Apostolic sea. I restore thee to the communion of the
faithful and to the sacraments of the church, and into the same innocence
and purity wherein thou wast when thou were baptized, remitting thee all the
pains of purgatory, for the faults and offenses which thou have committed
against God and thy neighbor. And I do give and grant to thee full remission
and indulgence of all thy sins as far as the keys of the Church extend in
this behalf, so that thou shall be absolved both here and before the judgment
seat of our Lord Jesus Christ, and shall have everlasting life, and live in
him world without end. Amen. In the name of the father etc.

The declaration and warning.
BE it known to all the Queens true subjects for their warning, to all false
traitors and Papists for their amendment, and to all the world ^r their
example, that the Pope the common enemy of Christian truth, and of all just
crowns and dignities of kings, has granted to Doctor Harding and other
^etimes the Queen's subjects, now fu^tiues and trompettes of treason, a cer^ne
authority in nature of an indulgence or pardon, to reconcile Englishmen ^o the
bosom of the Roman Chirch, with a form of absolution thereto annexed in ^uch:
sort as here is truly set out. The partie^ to whom and at whose petition the
same is granted are Englishmen, ^ch as they be. The Pope to whom the (...) is
^ade, and by whom it is graunt^, is a forene Potentate, and our Queens (...)
mortal enemy, The effect is to allu^e the Queens subjects with hope of
pardon and promise of the kingdom of ^en, to revolt from acknowledging that
her Majesty's supreme and universal ancient authority in her whole realm
over all her subjects which they have in Parliament and otherwise orderly and
truly recognized, and to render their obedience to the Pope a stranger, by
whom our Queen is not only deadly hated, but also most injuriously and vilely
with prejudice condemned. Some purpose it has had to win some pelting gain
to the pardoners or proctors that make merchandise of the faith and allegiance
of her majesty's subjects. But (good reader) the very principal end, and for
disclosing whereof it is at this time published, appears by the date, by the
form, by the successes that have happened, by the conuenience of time and
matter with the last most tra^terous devises, conferences, conspiracies,
knottes, alliances, attemptes, and assemblies, and by other circumstances that
fall into inseperable consideration with it, to have reached a great deal
further, namely to the dissoluing of the faith, love, and allegiance of the
subjects of this realm toward the Queen our most good, loving, and natural
sovereign, to the encombring of their consciences with necessity of grudging
at her and reuolting from her, and to the assaulting of her majesty's person
(whom God long preserve) her royal crown and dignity, and particularly and
specially to the procuring, raising, aduauncing, and strengthening this late
most vile and horrible rebellion, beside the rest that are daily to be looked
for with wise, ielous, and circumspect expectation.

It came sorth long before the Northren rebellion, as well you wot good reason
it is that the child be gotten before it be borne, or rather that the father be
borne before the child be gotten. It is not unknown how for such
reconcilementes assemblies have been suspiciously made, substitutes have been
deputed, and the like by many exercised, to crepe into deceived subjects
hearts and draw them to be wayling of their supposed miseries, and to a desire
of returning to the fansiefull superstitions of Rome. How famous is the
delivery of badges and tokens (with v. wounds and other superstitious
devises) as it were for marks of a faction? How notorious is their byeword of
their golden day? It is known (for the letters be yet extant in good custody)
how one of their Northren sacrificers wrote to an other of his own faction,
vz. Sir John Plumtree, to be satisfied in a matter that troubled his
conscience, which was, that he had at one of the rebellious Earls
commandment said Mass before absolution obtained from the Pope in such form
as other had it. Appears it not evidently that those receauinges to
reconcilement are with admonitions or rather conditions not to return to true
Christian religion which they call schism, nor to quiet and conformable life
according to her majesty's proceeding, which they term schismatic? And what
was this else, but to prepare men's hearts by secret shriftes, whisperinges,
exhortations, aduises, and traitorous practices, to repent their obedience, to
renounce it, to conceive a purpose of not returning to it, and so after such a
preparatiue of a pardon, indulgence, absolution, or reconcilement, with a
glister of treason to purge them clean of all honest loyalty, faith, and
allegiance. And so the silly abused poor men (be they in worldly respect never
so rich and politic) are by degrees induced, first to abhor the course of
these times and government, wherein they are borne in hand that they are out of
the Chirch, as it were out of the Arc wrestling for life in the mid maine sea
in peril of drowning, and this is their Contrition, which can not be without
lothing those whom they think authors of their danger, of whom ye Queens
majesty is the chief. Secondly they are trained to conference and secret
consultation to make shift for their souls by ghostly counsel, and this is
their Confession, wherein many traitorous devises are agreed upon. Thirdly to
make up perfect penance, for amends they must enter into actual rebellion,
and that is the natural Satisfaction to the sea of Rome, whereby the Queen and
realm are encombred.

But now mark (good readers) now comes the case that ministers good cause of
consideration to you all. If you (good readers) be of great estate or bear
charge in the common weal, as counselors, lieuetenantes, justices, or in any
degree of governance, now listen to matter of your charge, to awaken your care
and put your duties in execution. If ye be meaner subjects without calling in
office, now harken to matter to move ye to prayer to God, to direct their zeal
and travails to whom it apperteineth, or rather as he has hitherto done
miraculously to preserve us. This baggage, and all other of like sort; yea and
some far worse, can not well be said by such fine Italian, subtle, and
ungracious heads to remain or be newly put in practice after the rebellion
suppressed, in respect of the rebellion past, but in hope of things to come.
Such things as were provided as appears by their date long before the
rebellion actually raised, vz. before summer was xij. months, and at this day
watch their times, may not be construed to have regard to time passed
remediless, but to a reach of mischief whose success is not yet seen. Full
true it is that Papistrie has no looking beyond this world, but is determined
within worldly hopes, and therefore their devises must be thought to tend to
worldly politic ends, and so these pardons not propounded for fowls health,
but for hazarding of body and soul to serve a worldly fetch of treason for
advancing of the Popes and Papictes worldly ambition and gain. There is a new
mischief in expectation. God presere our gracious Prince, and her true
Counselors, which shall be the chief defense and safety of us all. Note some
likeliboodes, but with a ielous regard for so precious a jewel as our Queen
is. Our Louanistes for a good while have written no more. What is the cause?
They take them to other weapons, they hang upon expectation of the success of
rebellion or some like mischief, which by their former books they have
travailed to stir up and give occasion. A number of such as finding them
selves to feel some harm or lack by popish obstinacy made suits and gave
some hope a while of toward conformity, now they shrink back, and hold out.
And why so: Forsooth the men are now in hope, and in desire to see the luck of
one chance more. It is well known that some Papicticall fellows that of late
years did communicate and frequent common prayer according to the order of our
Church, do of late time, belike since their reconcilement according to this
wicked order, abstain from communion and common prayer. And what is the
reason? Aliquid monstri alunt, they are put in new courage, and will no more
stoop till they see more how the world will wagge, for a thing that they know,
as they are borne in hand. What makes the late flying of Papists in such
heaps, as those that took shipping ner^ Colchester and other, before and at
other lat^ times, but a trust to return to pleasant fruition of their desired
time upon the proof of the mischiefs that they have brewed, and tonned and
lacks but brochyng. What intention have they that run away, leaving letters
behind them to pray favor of the Queens true officers with an intimation or
inkling of promise, to be likewise good an other day to those that should show
them favor now, but upon a plain reckoning of some ungraciousness in
working, to hasten that day of their victory, triumph, and ability of
recompensing? Papists fly not, stir not, brag not, nor do any thing, nor
leave any thing undone without hope. This gear portendeth much.

But specially wey, why such ungracious gear comes now out that was provided
long ago? Why after the rebellion it comes, that should have had his place
before? Forsooth in the summer 1569. the rebels were not ready, and therefore
the worst of this sort stayed. In the winter following, the rebels were taken
^ort before they were ready, and then in an unseasonable time of winter the
publication of those traitorous Bulls would not help. Why come they now then?
Forsooth upon their hope of that which ought to be our fear. The world is
strange, treasons be venturous, no enemy to be neglected, specially nere and
domestical. There is somewhat in working that ought to move our ialousie, to
awake our head, to sharp our foresight and endeavor, and to make us provide
for prevention, but specially to shield our selves by prayer under his wing
that is able to defend us, and in the mean time not to omit those means of
defense that he puts in our hands.

Wherefore let us all pray for her Majesty, that with courage she follow God
in the course that he has plainly set before her highness for her preservation.
All ye noble counselors go forward in your honorable service to defend that
realm that can not in all likelihode ouerliue the safety of her most royal
person. Ye Lieutenantes, Justice of sheres and other officers look to your
charge, raise up your attention at every occasion, have good eye to rumor
spreders and other forerrunners o^ mischeues, take heed to Popish
conuent^cles, search the bottom where ye find such lewd tokens of Bulls and
other R^mish badges and trash, let slip no opportunities. All ye the Queens
true subjects, look about you, be earnest in prayer, hedefull in
understanding, ready in service, for ye be warned, and suffer no lewd tales to
be carried vndisclosed in place convenient. Ye Papists forsake your mischeuous
intentions for ye be descryed, or if all be not yet foreseen, leave yet your
treasons, least ye be hanged and damned too, which i^ worse. All ye strangers
of nobility and other of foreine parts, where your helpe^ of intelligence or
other good means may do good, omit them not, for to Christians of all nations
the peril is common; and Papistrie is universal and common treason to all
kings and states. All ye in whom it lies to remedy, let not things run
past remedy. Remember noble Scanderbegs proverb, that no beast be it never so
fierce, can live if the head be cut of. Consider that checking without necking
is mate.

God sharpen judgment, industry, vigor and zele, for his glory, for his
noble deputy in this Realm our most gracious Queen, for all the good guides
and the whole body thereof. The Lord be merciful unto us, and hold his holy
hand over us. The Lord of hosts raise fear to susspect what harms may be
attempted, where by dispensations ghostly fear is taken away, and by want of
due and likely revenging, bodily fear is removed. And the same Lord raise
courage to his ministers to dispatch the cause of fear: if they that should do
it do not fear, then boldly because they do not fear: and if they fear, then
necessarily that they may fear no more. And God take from all men of credit
the devises to qualify perils, to wrap ^re under ashes in a perilous place, or
to ^mpech the ser^ng of the bottom of dangers that may break out with new and
doubled flame. Finally God give us grace that we do not by our own negligence
draw upon us hastily the thing that we have cause to fear.

God save our Queen Elizabeth and confound her enemies.
None will make slight account of these heinous threatenings and practices of
Papists, nor move any other to make a laughing matter of them, or to wrappe
them up in negligence, but either such as can be content to laugh at her
Majesty's destruction, or be blindly led to their own undoing, how fair
soever with vain promises they be abused or by other respects their
judgments darkened.

Seen and allowed.

* Imprinted at London by John Day.


