THE GVNNERS DIALOGVE.

With the Art of great ARTILLERY.

BY ROBERT NORTON, Enginier. and Gunner.

LONDON, Printed for John Tap, and are to be sold at his shop at Saint Magnus
Corner. 1628.

diagram

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE the DVKE of Buckingham His Grace, etc.
SEeing that amongst all the Arts (most Excellent Duke) that adorn the life of
Man upon Earth. War is that highest, worthiest, and most commodious Science
that great Princes ought to prefer before all others, were it but for Cicero
his reason, Vt sine iniuria in pace viuamus; Peace being by instinct of Nature
of all men most desired, And war by the greatest Emperors and Princes of the
world ever with Sword and Pen most highly magnified, ingenuously finding
therein innumerable inventions, and diverse subtle secrets, and admirable
devices, Engines and Stratagems to overcome their Enemies with; yet none
comparable to the Art and Practice of Artillery, comprehending in it the
greatest matter of importance of our Militia at this day. And finding also
(Great Duke) many ardent magnanimous minds to cool, for want of speculation to
invent, and diverse Heroike actions to pass by vnatchieued, for want of
practice to perform, I, the meanest of many, having with long practice, and no
small study, and some cost, been somewhat instructed and conversant therein;
and seeing the penury of expert Gunners, and understanding men, and the
weakness of the present means to breed more hereafter, I have for aid
formerly offered my poor Talent, called the Art, and the Practice of
Artillery. And now also depending upon your Graces favor, presume to offer
these few lines, called the Gunners Dialogue, under your Excellencies
Patronage, as well to further others therein, as herein to show some part of my
thankfulness for your Graces favor, that it pleased you to employ my service,
were it but to view and censure other men's works (I being not naturally
scrutinous) wherein I protest I faithfully related to your Grace, my poor
opinion truly, if not iudiciously, the effect, if they be put in practice will
manifest, but certainly clear it was from all partiality or envy, as might
appear by my preferring Salinors Book Lesson, he a Forreiner, before my
Country man Jones his unexperienced inventions, both strangers to my
acquaintance. Accept therefore, I beseech your Excellency, this small unworthy
Present; so shall I be encouraged with your Highness favor and leave, to
publish my Treble Architecture, Civil, Military, and Marine, almost ready for
the Press; if these speed with favor, which will impressed my services, to
attend your Graces future pleasure, and engage me to rest

Deuotedly ready at your Excellencies command, ROBERT NORTON.

THE GVNNERS DIALOGVE.
Question 1.

HOw many things ought a Gunner to understand, and be able to perform, before
he take upon him the charge of Ordnance?

Answer. Very many, as to know the Force and Nature, Refining, Cleansing,
Rectifying and Receipts of the Materials, for the making and renewing of
Gunpowder. The Names, Proofs, Uses, Pore, Length, Weight and Fortification of
every Piece, and each part thereof. The Vent and Weight of all manner of Shot
of any height, Metal, Stone or Receipt named; what quantity of any sort of
Powder is due for the loading of each Piece, for any Shot assigned, to shoot
effectually at any Mark within the Pieces Right Range, called Point blanke, or
Deadrange, or utmost randon Level, Mounted, or Imbased, and many others.

Quest. 2. How ought he to be qualified, and go provided?

Ans. With many good parts and needful things, as reading, writing,
Arithmeticke to cast up proportions, Geometry to measure lines surfaces and
bodies, with Discretion to govern his many affairs and occasions, with
vigilant and diligent care to keep safe his powder and Ordnance from untimely
mischances and dangerous accidents: he should not be amongst his Guns without
his Horn furnished with Priming powder, and his Case with all sorts of Priming
irons, his Sword, Steel, and Tinderbox to light a match at pleasure, ready to
defend himself and his charge from injuries.

Q. 3. What are the names, and uses of our usual English Ordnance?

A. First, the double Canon or Cannon of eight inches high, and the whole Canon
or Cannon of seven inches high in bore, and the Di. Canons, and secondly the
whole and Demi Culuerings, all which are used in Batteries, especially the
Canons, by reason the greater weight of their shots do batter and shake a wall
or defense, more than lighter shot could do; the Culuerings are most commonly
to reach sarre off, and yet to beat into a strong opposing mark or object,
with a large Orafice. Thirdly, the Saker, Minion, Falcon, or Falconet etc.
shooting also iron cast shot (as all the forenamed Pieces do) are to shoot at
strong and hard resisting objects and marks also far off, but the latter
being of lower height in bore shooting lesser shot, do consequently pierce
smaller holes then the former. Fourthly, the Periors, as the Canon Perior,
Periera, Fowler, Port Piece etc. that shoot either stone shot, murdering shot,
or Fire-workes, either Cambred, that is, having a lesser bore backwards,
wherein the charge of Powder is to lie, as the Bambard, Canon Periors, and our
Drakes have. Or else they are chambred, and having Chambers to put in behind
their chases to load them with, as the Fowler Port-peece, Slings, Portingale
Bases have.

Q. 4. What and how many are the Simples or Materials of Gunpowder, and their
qualities, and how are they to be Refined and proportionally Mixed or
Compounded together?

A. The Simples whereof Powder is made and compounded, are only three, namely,
Salpeter, which is the soul, and Sulpher, which is the Life, and Cole, which
is the Body thereof. For the qualities, Salpeeter will rarifie, being fired,
and turn into wind, which causes the force. The Sulpher will kindle, and take
fire quickly; and the Coal will maintain the fire and carry them up together.
Salpeter is best refined, being dissolved in a little water, and boiled and
scummed, being set to congeale, it will in part shoot like Isicles into roch,
which is the best; the rest may be either so refined again, or cleansed from
the Feces of grease, Alum and salt which accompany it. Sulpher is cleansed by
melting it often, and straining it through a strong canuas cloth. The Coal if
it be well burned of Alder, Hazle, birch and young wood without bark or knot,
will also be rectified for the purpose. When a quantity of Powder is to be
made, first resolve of the use, whether it be for Ordnance, Musket, or Pistol,
for Ordnance, called Canon Powder grease, or the Receipt called four, one and
one. And for the Musket, called Hargubusse Powder, and for Pistol fine Powder,
the first is of five, one and one, the latter of six, one and one, by which is
meant four, sieve, or six parts of Peeter, to one part of Sulpher, and one part
of Coal.

Q. 5. How much Powder is it fit to allow each Piece for proof, and for Action?

A. For the Cannons proof and for service of the weight of her iron shot, for
the Culuering and lesser Ordnance, the whole weight of their proper shots for
proof, and for Action for the Culuering, and for the Saker and Falcon, and for
lesser Pieces the whole weight in Action until they grow hot, for then must
abatement be made with discretion. But in proof the small Pieces should have
once and of Powder that the shots weighs.

Q. 6. What if Ordnance Powder of 4.1.1. be wanting, and yet Hargubusse or fine
Powder be in store, how will you then proportion your Charge?

A. For the
4.1.1. 5.1.1. 6.1.1. Canon Double of 8 40 l 37 l 35 l 6 oz Whole of 7 33 l 31
l 29 l 7 oz Demi Cannon 20 l 18 17 l 9 oz Culuering 15 l 13 l 13 l Demi
Culuering 7 l 6 5 Saker 4 3 3 Minion 3 3 3 l Falcon 2 l 1 1 l 9 oz

Cannon Per. of the stone shot in powder with discretion abating 5 li pro Cent.

Q. 7. If Scales and Ladles be wanting, how many Dyameters of the shots height
in powder will make a reasonable charge for any Piece assigned?

A. For the Canon 2, for Culuering 3, and for the Saker 3, for lesser Pieces 4
Diametres of the Cillinder. For 3 Diametres make, and 3 make, and 4 Diametres
and make the whole weight of a cast iron shot, it being corn powder; which
length will also serve for the measure of Cartredges for the like Pieces.

Q. 8. What proportions are between each of those sorts of powder, namely
between 4.1.1. and 5.1.1. and 6.1.1. concerning their Forces?

A. From the first of 4.1.1. to the second of 5.1.1. the proportion is as 6 to
7, viz. 1/7 difference. And from the first to the third of 6.1.1. is as 6 to 8,
which is, and the second to the third, is as 7 to 8, which is in Force
augmentingly more.

Q. 9. What are the usual weights of each shot being either of Lead, Iron, or
Stone?

A. I have here set them severally down in manner of a Table, wherein the
first Column signifies the height of the Diametre of any shot between two and
eight inches height, and the parts proceeding from quarter to quarter
successively.

Inches, Lead, Iron, Stone. 2 1li. 11oz. 1li. 1oz. 0li. 7oz. 2 2 -- 0 1 -- 9 0
-- 9 2 3 -- 0 2 -- 2 0 -- 12 2 4 -- 3 2 -- 14 1 -- 0 3 5 -- 0 3 -- 12 1 -- 4 3
6 -- 9 4 -- 12 1 -- 8 3 8 -- 1 6 -- 1 2 -- 0 3 9 -- 14 7 -- 5 2 -- 7 4 11-5 8
-- 15 2 -- 13 4 15-15 10-10 3 -- 10 4 17-15 12-10 4 -- 3 4 21-5 14 14 5 -- 9 5
24-12 17-5 6 -- 3 5 30 0 20-1 7 -- 8 5 35-10 23-2 8 -- 14 5 39-9 26-6 10-10 6
45-0 30-0 11-4 6 51-0 34-0 12-12 6 57-0 38-0 14-3 6 63-0 42-0 15-12 7 72-0 48-0
17-10 7 79 8 53-0 19-14 7 87-0 58-0 21-12 7 96-0 64 0 24-0 8 106 72-10 26-12

Q. 10. How much is the height of the Bore, length of the Chase, weight of the
Piece, weight of the powder, and length of the Ladle, proper to each Piece?

A. I have here also set them down in a Table for the keeping them the better
in memory, as follows.

Names of the Pieces, Height of Bore, Inches, Length in Diametres, Weight in
Metal, Pounds, Weight of Powder, Length of the Ladles Inches. Cannon of 8 8 15
8000 40li 24 Cannon of 7 7 16 7000 25li 22 Demi Cannon 6 18 6000 20li 21
Culuering 5 28 4500 15li 20 Demi Culuering 4 32 2500 9li 18 Saker 3 36 1500 5li
16 Minion 3 30 1200 3li 15 Falcon 2 42 700 2li 14 Falconet 2 48 500 1li 12
Cannon Perior 9.10.12 8 3500 3li 3li 4li 3 Demi Can Drake 6 16 3000 9li 4
Culuering Drake 5 16 2000 5li 4 Demi Cul. Drake 4 16 1500 3li 4 Saker Drake 3
18 1200 2li 4

Q. 11. How and what is it to Tertiate and measure any Piece, and how much
ought they to be in thickness of Metal at their Touch-holes, Truions, and
Necks?

A. There are three differences in Fortification of each sort of Ordnance, be
they of the kinds of Cannons, or of Culuerings; For they are either ordinarily
Fortified, or lessened, or double fortified, and common or Legitimate Pieces,
Bastard Pieces, or Extraordinary Pieces. For the Cannon double Fortified, has
fully one Diametre in thickness of Metal at her Touchhole, and 11/16 at her
Trunions, and 7/16 at her Neck, whereas the ordinary fortified Cannons have
but at at the Touchhole, and at the Trunions, and but at the Neck. And the
lessened Cannons have at the Touchhole but, and at the Trunions 9/16, and at
the Neck 5/16. Now all the double fortified Culuerings, and all lesser Pieces
of that kind, have one diametre and in thickness of Metal at the Touchhole,
and 15/16 at the Trunions, and 9/16 at the Neck. And the ordinary fortified
Culuerings have like to the double fortified Cannons, but one diametre of Metal
in thickness at the Touchhole, 11/16 at the Trunions, and 7/16 at the Neck.
And the lessened Culuerings have at the Touchhole, and at the Trunions, and at
the Neck but, as the ordinary fortified Cannons have.

Q. 12. What are the difference between the Common or Legitimate Pieces, and
the Bastard Pieces, and the Extraordinary Pieces?

A. Common or Legitimate Pieces are such Ordnance as have a due length of their
Chases proportioned according to the height of their proper Bores, even as they
are expressed in the last precedent Table, Bastard Pieces are such as have
shorter Chases than the proportion of their Bore does require: and
Extraordinary Pieces, are such Ordnance as have longer Chases than the
proportion of the Bore allows. And they are called Bastard Culuerings, and
Extraordinary Culuerings, and so Bastard Saker Faulcons, or Extraordinary
Sakers or Faulcons, etc. accordingly as their Bores come nearest to the
Culuering, Saker, or Falcon Bores, etc.

Q. 13. How will you find whether a Piece of Ordnance be clear from Flawes,
Crackes, and Honey comb?

A. Having first cleansed and cleared the Piece with a Wad-hook and Ladle, from
all loading, foulness, dust and stones, which you may know by putting in the
Rammer head up to the Breech, and with a priming iron put down into the
Touchhole, if it take hold of the Rammer head, it is clear of loading and
stones, then the Ladle and spung will get out the dust. But to know whether any
Crackes, Flawes, or Hony-combes be within her Chase or Chamber, put in an
usual Searcher, made with two or three springs with points like great pinnes
heads, bending outward, which being bended together with your hand, until it
will enter into the mouth of the Piece, and that put up to the bottom of the
Bore, and turned round in the motion of pulling it in and out of the Chase; so
if any Hony-combes be therein, it will stick with the points in the said Flaw,
Crack or Hony-combe. Also in a sunshine day, with a looking-glass, the Sun
beams may so be reflected into the Chase, as that all flawes, crackes and
spungie Honycombes may be discerned. Or if the Sun shine not, a Wax candle
lighted and put upon the end of a half Pike, or a bright Sword, will also
reflect the Sunne-beames, as aforesaid. Now if no flaw be found, you may
proceed to her proof, but if any be therein, that Piece is dangerous for
breaking, and second lading, and had need to be carefully proved, and
respectively handled, lest in Lading the second time, any fire remain therein
to inflame the second Charge. Therefore, if any such Piece must needs be used,
you must notneglect to sponge her well first, with a wet sponge. And also after
spunging, aduisement taken, not to allow such Pieces the ordinary lading of
powder, but with discretion an abatement must be made, more or less, according
as the fault or defect is found to be more or less.

Q. 14. What if the mouth of a Piece be grown wider then the rest of her Chase
within, by means of wearing, how will you choose shot sit for her?

A. I will try with several Rammers heads, or if need be, Face them by little
and little, until I thereby find the lowest bore within the Chase (except the
Camber be Taper-bored, as the Drakes and some Periors are) and then fit my shot
to that lowest bore, always allowing 1/20 of that height for vent.

Q. 15. What if you be commanded to serve with a Piece that has lain long
charged, that either the shot is grown fast to the inside of the Piece with
rust, or the shot being torted too high, or ouall does stick by the way, and
so may be dangerous for Piece, and Gunner discharging it?

A. I will not adventure to discharge a Piece so long loaded, as I may not know
what accidents since have happened, but with a Wad-hooke will draw the Wad, and
try with the Ladle to draw or move the shot; which if I cannot do, I will
first eleuate her, and power warm water in at her mouth (and stop the
Touchhole) to dissolve the Petre, and eight or ten hours after, I will vnbase
her, (setting a vessel under her mouth) to receive the liquor that shall drain
out; then a day or two after I will put in a small quantity of dry powder at
the Touchhole, and try if I can blow out the shot therewith, if not, I will
then power in warm oil and vinegar, and turn her round, so that the upper
side may be side-wise and downwards in that motion; then with her Ladle or
Rammer, or both, I shall doubtless loosen the shot, and so draw it, or blow it
out, otherwise the Piece will be ever after unserviceable without new founding.

Q. 16. What Instruments are most fit for a Gunners use?

A. The Callibre Compasses, Height-boord, Inch sight-rule, Gunners Scale,
Gunners Quadrant divided into ninety degrees, and into twelve points and their
minutes, with a Geometrical square to take mountures, leuels, heights,
breadths, and distances, and a pair of straight pointed Compasses.

Q. 17. How do you dispart a Piece or Ordnance, what is it, and to what end
used?

A. To dispart a Piece, is to find the difference between the Diametres or
thickness in metal before at the Muzle-ring, and abaft at the Base-ring, for
in true bored Pieces the half of the difference of their Diametres is the due
dispart. Those Diametres are readily found by the Callibre Compasses opened and
applied to the opposite sides of those Rings, and to a Scale or Inch-rule of
small equal parts, whereby the difference will soon appear, which halfed is
the dispart found. Their Diametres differences also may be found by guirting
them with a labell of parchment or cord, that will not shrink nor stretch,
dividing the guirt in three equal parts at each time, may be tollerably
accepted for the Diametre. Also in true equal bored Pieces, putting in a
Priming iron at the Touchhole, to the bottom of the bore, and marking a place
upon it equal in height to the Base-rings highest part, which applied upon the
bottom of the bore at the mouth, perpendicularly, will show the length of the
dispart above the highest of the Muzle-ring. Likewise you may find both those
Diametres by laying a rule or straight staff leuelly, making a Tangent on each
of those Rings severally, and on each side of the Piece holding a plummet line,
so that it only touch the sides of the metal of each Ring, the differences
between those Diametres so found halfed, is the dispart sought. It may be
found many other ways, but these being sufficient, I will only answer
concerning the end and use thereof. It serves to direct the shot to the mark,
or so near as is the distance between the two parallels that are made by the
two continued lines, the one the Axis of the bore, the other the visuall line
that passes from the Gunners eye by the highest part of the Base-ring and top
of the Dispart unto the mark. For seeing the Breech of the Piece is of solid
metal, not so transparant that the Gunner can visually apply the Axis of the
bore precisely to the mark, it must suffice to find the other visuall line,
being the nearest that can parallelly betaken thereunto, and accept it, for the
same.

Q. 18. How much will you allow for vent, comparing the height of the shot with
the height of the bore of the Piece assigned?

A. One twentieth part will be sufficient, approved so to be by the best
Gunners of late times, although many Gunners of England generally allow a
quarter of an inch for each shot to be lower then the bore of of every Piece,
which is too little for a Cannon, but too much for a Falcon, and for lesser
Pieces.

Q. 19. What difference is there between shooting by the metal of the Piece,
and by the Dispart, to direct a Piece to a mark level or elevated?

A. Their differences are somewhat uncertain, because there are seldom any
constant proportions held in founding Ordnance, concerning the eminencies of
their Base and Muzle-rings; but in most Pieces they are so, that first laying
the Piece to the mark with a due Dispart, and then by the metal, observing
with a Quadrant, you shall sometimes find that the Piece will be elevated more
by the metal, then by the Dispart, four degrees, five degrees, yea sometimes
six or seven degrees. And so accordingly will the Randons of the metal be
more then the Randons of the Dispart, which (by the Table of dead Ranges for
each degree here annexed, or by the Gunners Scale) may for every elevation be
made certainly known. But on the level the metal rangeth near double the
distance of the Dispart, in most Pieces.

A Table of Randons, or Dead Ranges, for every degree unto the best Randon, or
forty degrees.
Degrees, Paces Degrees, Paces Degrees, Paces Degrees, Paces 1 500 11 1487 21
2225 31 2712 2 610 12 1575 22 2285 32 2747 3 717 13 1655 23 2342 33 2780 Degr.
Paces. 4 822 14 1735 24 2397 34 2810 41 2990 5 925 15 1812 25 2450 35 2837 42
3000 6 1025 16 1887 26 2500 36 2872 7 1122 17 1960 27 2547 37 2195 8 1218 18
2030 28 2592 38 2920 9 1310 19 2097 29 2635 39 2955 10 1400 20 2162 30 2675 40
2988

Q. 20. How shall a Gunner know how the Range of his Piece increases, or
decreaseth, from degree to degree?

A. First, he must find by the Table or Right ranges, expressed in the Art of
Great Artillery, or otherwise; how much the level right range of your Piece
is, which number of paces divide by 25, and multiply the Quotient by 11, and
the product will be the first and greatest digression, which is between the
first and second degrees, which divide by forty the degrees contained between
the first degree and 42 degrees, the best or utmost Randon, and the Quotient
shall be the number of paces that the shot shall lose at every digression from
degree to degree to the best Randon, and contrariwise for their increasing
digression from 42 degrees, the utmost Randon down to the first degree.

Q. 21. At how many degrees of Mounture, will any Piece convey her shot
farthest, called her utmost Randon?

A. At about 42 degrees, nevertheless, that 45 has formerly been generally
taken for the best or utmost Randon, being the middle or mean degree between
the level and the perpendicular, namely, the halse of ninety degrees: But
because the Piece on the level Rangeth a shot about one tenth part of the
utmost Randon, as it does also at 84 degrees of Mounture; therefore it stands
with more reason, and experience also has found, that the utmost Randon of any
Piece should be (being duly charged and discharged) at 42 degrees, the half of
84 degrees of elevation.

Q. 22. How do you direct your Piece to shoot at a warke, being for distance,
within the Straight line, or Right range of the Piece, and lying level with
the Horizon?

A. Having placed the due Dispart upon the Muzlering, as in my 17 Answer before
is showed. Then (both my thumbs being placed close over the uppermost point or
part of the metal of the Base-ring) I will cause the Piece to be trauersed,
and coined more or less, until I epsy (through between my thumbs) the top of
the Dispart and the mark to be in one, and then I give fire and expect a good
and fair shot.

Q. 23. But how will you direct a Piece of Ordnance to shoot at a mark that
lies level, but is further distant then the Piece can reach upon her level
Range, you having only some certain dead range, and the distance from that
Piece to the mark given; what advantage will you take to reach the mark, to
make a fair shot at the first time?

A. Having a certain Dead range for any elevation of that Piece given, I
repair to my Gunners Scale, or to the last precedent Table of Randons or Dead
ranges, with the Rule of Proportion, saying, if the number of the Paces of the
Dead range given, do give the elevation given, what shall the Distance given,
give; multiply the third number by the second, and divide the product by the
first, and the Quotient will be the number of degrees that the Piece must be
mounted unto, to reach that mark.

Q. 24. What if the mark be elevated above the level, and be farther distant
then the Piece upon that mounture can reach in a Right range: How will you
direct your Piece for advantage, having the Distance and some certain Dead
range of that Piece given?

A. First, either by my Gunners Scale for degrees, or by the Table following,
for the six points of the Gunners Quadrant, whereby you may see the uttermost
Dead range being 3000 Paces, that the aspect of the first point cutteth the
Range of the second point at 1880 Paces of the level, and the third Range at
2330 Paces, etc. And that the aspect of the second point intersecteth the Range
of the third point at 1950 Paces.

Ranges Aspects 1 1 2 3 4 5 2 1880 0 0 0 0 3 2330 1950 0 0 0 4 2650 2340 1890 0
0 5 2860 2650 2330 1900 0 6 3000 2960 2500 2090 1650

And the Range of the fourth point at 2340, etc. And that the Aspect of the
third point does interfect the fourth Points Range at 1890, and the fifth
Points Range at 2330, and the sixth at 2500 Paces. And that the Aspect of the
fourth point intersecteth the fifths Range at 1900 Paces, and the sixths at
2090. And lastly, that the Aspect of the fifth point cutteth the sixths Range
at 1650, As the Diagram does also ocularly show.

Q. 25. How make you use of the Scale and Table?

A. As in the former by the Rule of Proportion, saying, if the dead Range give
the Tabular number of dead Ranges proper thereunto, what shall the number of
the Scale Diagram, or of this Table, proper to the Aspect and Range cut, give;
multiply the third number by the second, and divide the product by the first,
and the Quotient will be the number of Paces proper for the Piece and mark
assigned.

Q 26. How will you endeavor to shoot farther then ordinary in one and the same
Piece, with like quantities of powder and shot?

A. First I will gently put home all the Powder, and wad the same; then the
shot being inuolued with paper, leather, okam, or such like, to fill close the
concaue of the Bore, I will drive the shot close to the Powder with a good wad,
putting after it a Tempion of cork, and with a sponge a little moistened with
an oil, I will anoint the vacant Cillinder of the rest of the concaue Chase;
and will so baricado the Breech of the Piece with a Pile, wall, or such like,
as that it shall not reuerse in the discharge: But especially, if I have time,
I will stop the Touchhole, and drill a new one more forwards, which will make
the Powder all to fire, and sooner together, and the Piece reuerselesse, if it
be rightly done.

Q. 27. What Piece would you choose to shoot at a single mark, and what course
will you observe?

A. I would choose such a Piece as I had sormerly practiced to shoot in, and
yet examine her to know her qualities: then in loading her, I will not ram
home her Powder too hard, lest it in taking fire lie first blowing, and cause
the Piece to start from her position, duly directed by a true disparture, that
the Axis of her Bore may precisely respect the mark. And lastly endeavor to
prevent all impedimentall Accidents.

Q. 28. If you were to make a shot in the night, at a mark showed you in the
day, how would you prepare for it?

A. I would first lay the Piece in her Carriage precisely to the mark in the
day, then with a Chalke-line dipped in Gum-water, I will strike a right line on
the upper part of the metal from Breech to Muzle (while the line is yet moist)
upon which I will apply a good and sure Magneticall needle or fly, with a
Chart exactly divided, and note the intersecion, then from the ends of the line
that was marked or stricken upon the metal I let fall plum-lines upon the
Platform, and at the places where they touch, I knock in at each a small
nail. Lastly, with a Quadrant I observe the elevation of the concaue; or else
with some Staff take the perpendicular height of some certain place or mark
made in the metal, as well at the Breech, as at the Muzle above the said two
nails: And so you may again lay the Piece thereby, always to have the
selfsame position, and so shoot as certain at that mark by night as by day.

Q. 29. How would you make a shot at an Enemies light, in a dark night, not
having any Candle, Lantern, or other light by you?

A. I would light two pieces of match, the one as much longer then the other as
the quantity of the dispart of the Piece, and set the longer upon the upper
part of the Muzle-ring, and the shorter upon the upper part of the Base-ring,
traversing or coining the Piece until I have brought the light of the Enemies,
and the lights of the two matches, all three in one; and so I doubt not but to
make a good shot thereat.

Q. 30. How would you choose and order a Piece, to make a good shot at a
moveable mark; as at an enemies Ship under sail, Boat rowing, or Horseman
riding?

A. First would I choose such a Piece (as in regard of the distance, will be
able in a straight line to reach the mark) whose qualities I know. Secondly,
having loaded the Piece, I observe how the Mark moves. Thirdly, I will
observe the wind (if it blow much) whether it be against, or with, me, or
side-wayes, and accordingly take advantage, for the impediment it may produce
otherwise. Then will I, with the Dispart considered, duly observe some cloud,
or mark some point of Landscape that lies in the course of his motion; and
when according to the swiftness thereof, he is come so near it, as I guess
the shot and he may meet at the mark, I so give fire, wherein I may remember
this secret of Nature, that any Piece will shoot further from Sea to Land-ward,
then from Land to Sea-wards.

Q. 31. What say you to shooting at a mark under the level from above
downwards, how would you order matters to make an effectual shot?

A. That kind of shooting is far more uncertain and difficile then any
other, by reason of the smaller resistance the shot makes against the force of
the powder, naturally working upwards, which is toward the Breech, if it were
not there restrained, it therefore of all other ways shoots least distance
in a straight line, unless it be perpendicularly downwards, or nearly so;
besides, no Author or Practitioner else, to my knowledge, has diuulged any
good use or order for the same. But I have observed that the Randons for
Imbasures do somewhat nearly decrease from degree to degree under the level,
with a double proportion to the decrease of the Mortar Pieces mounture, above
from the best Randon unto ninety degrees. Out of which observation and
experience I have framed this Table, and for better help added an example.

A Table for Imbasures.
Degrees, Paces 0 150 1 149 2 147 3 145 4 142 5 139 6 137 7 133 8 129 9 125 10
120 20 90 30 60 40 40 50 18 60 10 70 6 80 1 90 0

The use illustrated by example.

At eight degrees Imbasement a shot at a mark being to be made with a Saker
(for which Piece the Table was made) if the distance were less then 129 Paces,
then the Piece being able to reach the mark needs no advantage: but supposing
it to be 140 Paces, a less Imbasement must be then given, namely, at about
seven degrees, to reach the mark, as reason will conduce.

Q. 32. Can you make a reasonable shot at a mark, which by reason of
interposition of some hill, house, wall, Rampart, or other impediment, you
cannot see it?

A. Yes, with a Mortar Piece it is usual, if it be within her reach. And
although the catriages of other Pieces, will few, admit to mount them so high
as 20 degrees, yet by sapping the Breech of the Piece, that is, by making a
trench for the tail of the carriage to reuerse in, being descended thereinto
the wheels standing alost: or by preparing a Timber-frame, so that the tail
may be suncke, as between two Timber-logs squared, the wheels reuersing upon
them, any Piece may be so mounted to shoot at a mark out of sight, further then
any Mortar Piece can reach, or by taking a Piece out of her carriage, and
mounting her accordingly upon skids at pleasure to the elevation desired; these
may shoot Grenades, Flaming or Venomous bals, and Hedge hegs or such like most
necessarily. But amongst them the Canon Periors, Perieraes and Bombards, are
chiefly to be therefore preferred. Having then the distance given, Stales and
Signals are to be placed, to show where the mark is, which way, and how the
shot lights short, over, or wide, that such error may at the next time be
reformed.

Q. 33. How would you order things, to shoot at a Squadron of the Enemies
Soldiers, and what Pieces would you choose?

A. According to the distance I would choose a Piece that in a straight line
can shoot home, if I may, be it with Demi Culuering, Saker or Falcon, and plant
my Piece as near parallel to the champion Plain as I can, that the shot may
range, and shoot at girdle height, unless the ground be stony, for then would
I place my shot short of them, that grazing amongst the stones, that stones may
do them more spoil then the shot of it self can do, by far; but in no
case would I shoot wide, or over them, for that were both loss and shame also.

Q. 34. At the time of joining of two Armies in Battle, how would you plant
and mount your Ordnance?

A. There are diverse opinions therein; some say it is best to plant them in the
Front, to disorder the Enemy, and cause them to break their Ranks at first;
which others disliking, say, that will hinder their own party from many
advantages, and difficult to retire them: some would plant them in the
Flanckes: And some would have some of them in the Front, and some in the
Flank: And lastly, some would have them behind the Army, that upon a sign
given, their own Squadrons may open a way for the Gunner to play upon the
Enemies Troops or Squadrons. But wheresoever they are planted, care must be
had, that the Musketeers, appointed for guards, nor any other fire arms,
approach within 100 Paces of the Ordnance, lest untimely firing them work
mischief to the party. But having viewed beforehand the place appointed for
the Battle, if any eminent rising-place be there near, to lodge the Ordnance
thereon, they may thence most safely play upon the Enemy in Front, Flank and
Trauers, with wonderful advantage and hope of victory.

Q. 35. Having found the first shot faulty, to the right or left hand, over or
short, how will you at the next amend it, to make an effectual shot?

A. If it were wide, toward the right or left hand, I would place my eye on
the Base-ring, at the next time, a little more to the same side, accordingly
more or less: if it were too high, direct the top of the Dispart under the
mark as much: if too low, lay some small stone or straw on the highest of the
Base-ring, and by that, bring the dispart and the Mark into one with discretion.

Q. 36. What if the Piece by often shooting be grown so hot that it is
dangerous, unless it be rested or refreshed; how will you cool her?

A. If the service be such, as she may not have time to rest, in that case, she
must be cooled with Spunges wet in Lee, which is best, or in vrin and water, or
water and vinegar, or with the coolest fresh or salt water; bathing and washing
her within and without, until she be come to her due temper again; but if I
may, I will rest her one or two hours in twelve, and between whiles cool her
every tenth or twelfth shot.

Q. 37. If the Touchhole be cloyed with spikes, stones or such like, and
necessity requires the use of the Piece, what would you do therein?

A. Not trust to that which some appoint, by beating her on the Muzle with a
wooden mallet, having powered warm oil in at her Touchhole, to expect her
doying to fly out; nor to the setting of her Breech upright, with her mouth
over a fire, until she be red-hot, and then (her metal being soft) to get out
her cloying; but if I cannot blow it out, nor have time to drill another new
touchhole more forwards, I must load her with powder and shot without wadding,
and by a fusee, wet vent, or powder moistened into paste, placed at the mouth,
so as it may fire a train within the Chase that I will there make to fire the
charge, to avoid danger as much as I can, so I will give fire to the vent,
having formerly laid my Piece to the mark, as I have already said.

Q. 38. If you be so driven, that of necessity you must leave your Ordnance to
the Enemy, what would you do either with hope to recover them, or else to
make them. unserviceable, or break the next time they shall be discharged?

A. If I have no conueniencie to hide them so secretly, by burying them under
ground, as that the Enemy shall not find them, or be past hope that we may
never come to the place to recover them: Then would I lay all the Pieces cross
a narrow ditch or trench, filled so with char-coales, or other dry fuel, to
kindle, and heat them thoroughly red-hot a good space, which will cause the
metal to become so britle afterward, being cold, that they will not be able
to endure the due charge of powder to be fired in them, but will break in
pieces at their next discharge; or I can break them either in that britle
place, by applying them with hard strokes of a heavy commander, or by loading
each Piece with more than a double charge, and under and about the shot driving
steel wedges with rammers of hard wood, so that having fired the Piece with a
fusee or slow pyramid of powder moistened like paste; the shot in discharge
running upon the thicker parts of the wedges will constrain the Piece to
break: I know diverse other ways with a touch to break or spoil the Enemies
Ordnance, but I think it not fit to speak of it publicly.

Q. 39. Being besieged, to resist assaults and defend the place, what Ordnance
are best, and where placed, and how used?

A. All Ordnance are useful, but for defense at a breach or narrow passage,
Canon Periors, loaded with Lanthornes, filled with pible stones, Cases of Base
and Burre, old iron trash chaind, langrell, cross bar, plugs, or any other
tearing or murdring shot, or with a mine in their way to blow up and the like;
and planting the Ordnance covert so, as to scower the passage from a Flanker
Cassamat or other defense, or before the Breach. Also my new invented
Murderers, that have long square tapering concaues, which are double or treble
in breadth to their heights, and will spread their murdering shot, Musket or
Pistol bullets, sidewise far, but little up and downwards (without fear of
stop or cloying the Chase, as in equal round Pieces often happens, when they are
charged with small loose shot or trash.) Also I will carefully provide to have
in store, spare Carriages, Axtrees, Wheels, Cordage, Match, Powder, and Shot
sufficient; the rather, because always the Enemy will chiefly endeavor to
ruin our Defenses, embouch our Loops, beat down our Parapets and Defenses,
cloy our Plat-formes, dismount our Ordnance, tear our Carriages, Axtrees and
wheels with their Pieces, by all the means they can possible.

Q. 40. You having beleagerd or besieged a Fort or Town, how would you shoot
to ruin, anney, or take away the enemies Defenses; and what would you chiefly
endeavor to do?

A. First, I would make choice of places to plant my Ordnance, or make my
Batteries so against the weakest parts, to make a Breach in the most convenient
place, bringing them by Trenches, as near as I can, within less then two
hundred Paces; and then having raised and plained the Terraplenes and Parapets,
made the Plat-formes, cut and set out Loopes, or placed the Gabbions the
whilst, and planted Pieces where they may most offend the Enemy, endcuouring
to ruin and embouch their Defenses, plying them so hard, that they may not
have time to repair the old, nor build new, nor retrench, as they else would
do. And also make what slaughter I can, to weaken the Adversary: and from each
Battery fit, to shoot at the place for Breach, as many Pieces at once as can be
brought to bear thereon: and I will observe what Pieces of theirs, most
endammage us and ours, and endeavor to dismount them, and amaze and hinder
their works all I may. The distances of the Batteries must be according as the
situation of the place will permit, but if possible, at eighty, an hundred, or
an hundred and fifty Paces at most, avoiding the danger of the Enemies
Musketeers with convenient Defenses: the number of Pieces and the sorts of
them, are to be according to the place and the occasions to use them; Cannon,
Demi Cannon and Culuering for Breach, and a Demi Culuering or two, to play upon
the Enemies Defenses, with a Field-peece or two for single marks. The Breadth
of a Battery must be according to the length of the Curtin, and the number of
Soldiers that must give the assault, that nine in a rank may at least enter
together.

Q. 41. What Fire-workes are most ordinary and fit for warlike service, to
spoil or annoy the Enemy most?

A. Grenades or hollow breaking balls of several sorts, Fire-balles for
diverse uses, as to enlighten the champion, stick and burn combustible
objects, burn and break poison, or blind the Enemy, burn in the water, or
pierce the flesh to the bone, where it fired, touches, Powder-pots simple and
compound, Armed Trunkes, with Pistols, Fire arrows, barbed Garlands, Rowlers,
Fire-pikes, and such likeinuentions.

Q. 42. Of what materials are the Granado bals made, and what receipts are they
loaded with, and how armed?

A. As they are for diverse ends (though all to destroy the Enemy) so they are
made of several materials, as of Bell-metall, spelter, Iron, or any hard and
britle metal. To be shot also out of a Mortar Piece or Perior, and may also be
thrown with the hand amongst the Enemies: some are made of baked Potters clay,
or of Glass, and some of Canuas coated and armed: The receipts are also diverse,
as Powder four ounces, Sulpher two ounces, Salpetre twelve ounces, finely
beaten and well mixed; sometimes Antimoney and glass, and Scales or Iron: but
let a britle ball be filled with powder, one pound, within two fingers height,
and the rest with Cannon powder four ounces, and Salpetre twelve ounces, mixed
and driven close together, enclose this in Canuas, with the mouth or
priming-hole downwards, and fill it, as a ball, with powder two parts, Sulpher
one part, and Salpetre three parts; pierce a hole to fire at, and put into it a
pin of wood, and coat it with Roch-fire, or Roch sulpher: also Powder li,
Peetre 1 li and, Sulpher four ounces, is an usual receipt: they may be made
of two hollow Demi Globes of wood, bored full of holes almost through, having
thence a touchhole, each hole loaded with a Pistol bullet, the concaue filled
with fine powder, and a pipe of wood coated to reach to the bottom, filled
with slower receipt, they may be loaded with Pistoll-pipes of iron, and powder,
and bullets at each end, and a touchhole in the midst, their coatings may be
stuck full of stones, nails, shot, or such like: These are of great
execution, but must ever be so provided, that the slow fire must be sure to
burn until the ball fired be arrived at the place where it is to do its
execution; of this kind there are infinite diversities and inventions.

Q. 43. What is that Roch-sulpher, and Reeh fire?

A. Receipts of much use; Roch-sulpher is made with one pound of Sulpher molten
on a slow fire, and li of mealed powder, put thereto by little and little, and
stirred well together, and in the cooling put three ounces more of corn powder,
mixing them well together. Roch-fire is made of three pound of Sulpher gross
beaten, and slowly molten, to which put one pound of mutton sewet, and thereto
Powder and Salpetre equally mixed, with these you may cover or coat Grenades,
Pikes, Circles, Balls, Trunkes, and Arrows.

Q. 44. What receipts for Lances, Trunkes and Firepikes use you, and how make
you them?

A. The forms and receipts also are diverse; for one may be of Powder and
Sulpher, of each one pound, Salpetre three pound, Quicksilver molten with
Sulpher four ounces, Glass three ounces, each beaten to powder, and tempered
with Linseed oil, boiled until it will scald a feather, put therein; these put
in Canuas, narrow at both ends, fitting for Pikes or Arrows, must after be put
on, and armed either with Wire or Marline, and coated with Roch-fire, or other
coatings, or Canuas dipped in Pitch and Tallow molten, Sulpher, Rozen, and
Turpentine. Lances are little different, only less; Trunkes are also of many
sorts, most commonly made of wood, armed with iron hoopes, they may be
eighteen inches long, besides six inches bored in for the staff, which is to be
ten or twelve loot long, the eitghteene inches bored, two inches and may be
filled with Sulpher and Powder, of each one pound, Quicksilver two ounces,
Camphere one ounce, which beat with the Sulphere will become powder, mix these
with Linseed oil, boiled as aforesaid, wowld it with Marlin, coat it and fill
it with a handful of this receipt, then with a handful of powder, then with a
button or with small shot; cover the end with a waxed or pitched Canuas, having
a Match or Sulpher thread go through all. Another receipt is Cannon powder
five parts refined, Petre three parts, Sulpher two parts, Rozen one part,
Campheer, Glass, Amber, and Masticke mealed and searced, of each part, well
mixed with oiles of Turpentine, Petre, Linseed, and liquid varnish, of each
part. Another, take Powder three parts, Sulpher one part, Salpetre three parts,
Masticke one part, Vitrioll, white Wax, of each six parts, Amber, Orpiment,
Arsenick, 4 parts, Verdegrease, Salarmoniak, each 2 parts, mixed with oiles of
Linseed, Petre, Varnish, and Aquauitae, of each six parts, and well wrought,
will be a receipt of great vehemency in burning.

Q. 45. What are your Fireballs?

A. They are also of sundry sorts and uses, some to light so, in the night, as
to see what the Enemy works abroad; make a round ball of Canuas, and fill it
either with Powder mealed, Sulpher, Salpetre, and Roch-sulpher, of each one
pound, mixed and pressed hard and close, and made round, it being sewed, armed,
pierced, primed, and coated with Roch-fire, rolled in corn powder, or with
Roch-sulpher molten, 1 li, Salpetre 2 li, Powder 1 li, and, Rozen and
Turpentine each li; these primed through in four places, and shot out of a
Mortar or Perior without wad, will take fire and burn very light. Some balls
are to burn in the water, for which take of Powder 12 oz, Sulpher 6 oz, mixed,
Campheere 1 oz, pasted with boiled Linseed oil, and oil of Turpentine and new
Wax, of each 4 oz mixed with coal 4 oz, Salpetre and Roch-fire, of each 1 oz,
and; this made in a ball, armed, primed, and coated, will not be exstinguished
by Air, Wind, nor Water. Another, for a Mortar Piece, take a stone shot, lower
far then the Bore, dip it in molten Pitch, Sulpher, Rozen and Turpentine mixed
equal parts; then being warm, roll it in corn powder, with a cover of
Fustian dipped in molten Roch-fire, and dip it as at first, roll it and cover
it, until it be of fit height for the Piece: lastly, dip it in Roch-fire, and
roll it in fine corn powder, and shoot it out of the Piece without a Wadd,
loaded with 8/10 of its weight in powder, and priming it down to the shot with
quick powder.

Q. 46. What are Powder-pots, Pluggs and Cressets?

A. Powder Pots are of baked Potters Clay, or thick glass made with four
ears; unto which Matches lighted at both ends are to be fastened, which filled
with powder or quick receipt, thrown among the Enemy, breaks and takes
fire, and makes spoil. Pluggs are to be shot out of Ordnance like billets but
at one end, have barbed heads of iron to stick, and at the other, Ropes dipped
in Sope-lee and dried to fly, and not fire; yet the former receipt placed near
the barbed head, will fire any combustible thing it touches or sticks in.
Cressets are iron hoopes hanged on poles, to be level in all motions, and they
are filled with toosed match, soaked in Sulpher molten 3 li, Salpetre 1 li,
Rozen 12 oz, Olibanum, and Antimony of each li, and Linseed oil to incorpotate
them together; if you will have them resist wind and rain, fill the hollowes
with match well beaten, and soaked in Sulpher and Powder moistened with boiled
Linseed oil, and powder of quick Lime and Campheere mixed; And fired, it
resists wind and water: but to hurt the Enemies eyes, or to poison them, or
make flesh fall from the bones, is not fit here to be published.

Q. 47. What are Fire-workes of Triumph, for pleasure, and how, and with what
receipts and conceits made?

A. The fashions, inventions, and compositions of them are infinite, but yet
they may be doubly distinguished as their actions are double, either in the
air or water: those that make their operation in the air are either moveable
or fixed; the moveable are either simple or compounded: the simple moveable,
are the Rockets, the simple fixed, are the Truncks, Lanthorns and Lights, with
several sorts of each: The moueables compounded, are the Wheels, Trillers,
Courtlaces, Clubs, Targets and flying Dragons: The compound fixed, are the
Towers, Castles, Arches, Cilinders, Pyramides, and others, which of every sort
are as infinite, as the variety of inventions may be infinitely conceived and
wrought. Those that work their effect in the water, either are fired and
placed in it, or kindled by the water it self, and they do either swim on the
surface, as the Rockets, Tumbling-balls, Serpents, Dolphins, Ships, etc. or
else burn at the bottom, as many weighty works do; some of which, when they
are lighted, and become lighter then so much water, they ascend, swim, and
burn above.

Q. 48. How are those that operate in the air, usually to be made and
compounded?

A. The moveable airy Fireworks are either Rockets, or made and contrived with
Rockets, they being the substructure of all the other motions: Rockets are
diversely framed, either of paper six or seven times double, rolled about a
former, or they may be of strong light timber turned hollow, or bored, or they
may be made of Canuas, in length 6 times the height of their hollownesse (if
they be under the weight of one pound) but if they be of more weight then sour
and or five Diametres, long will be better. Also for small Rockets they must
have the quicker receipts, and for great, flower: As for example, the receipt
for Rockets of four ounces, may be of Powder 4 li, Salpetre 1 li, Coals 4 oz,
Sulpher oz; but for Rockets of a pound weight or two, take Salpetre 12 oz, of
Powder 20 oz, of Coal 3 oz Sulpher viue and Scales of iron, each 1 oz, and
Rockets of 8, 9, or 10 li. weight, to 8 li of Salpetre, put 2 li 12 oz of
Coal, and 1 li 4 oz of Sulpher; For in the great ones no Powder must be put,
note that these materials must be finely beaten and sifted through a Searce, and
well mixed and driven into the Rocket hard, and filled almost to the top every
third or fourth driving, dipping your drift in Gum Dragagant, and Campheere,
dissolved and mixed with spirit of wine or good Aquauitae (if the Rockets be to
be fired in three or sour days) but if it must be a month or more first;
then, in stead thereof, dippe the drift so in oil of Petre or liquid Varnish
and Linseed oil mixed; if you would have therein any breakers or Buttons, you
must within one Diametre of the top drive a bottom of leather, or six or seven
double of paper, up to the receipt, and pierce and prime it through, thereunto in
sour or five places; and you must also arm your Cane and bored Rockets lest
they split: and your flyers must have a straight rod fastened so, that within
one or two fingers breadth of the Rocket it may counterpoize the same, for the
Runners swiuels or a Cane fastened is sufficient.

Q. 49. How make you the Stars?

A. Take oz of Gum-dragagant and lap it in Crooked-lane black iron plate, and
roast it in the embers, till it may be beaten to powder, then dissolve it in
Aquauita till it be viscous or slimie, then strain it, and also take 4 oz of
Campheer, steep it 24 hours in other Aquauitae until it be dissolved, mix the
dissolutions together, and by little and little sprincklingly, therewith mix
these, powdered Salpetre 1 li, Sulpher li, Powder 3 li, Coals li, Amber and
Scales of iron, of each 1 li, and mix them all over a gentle fire of
Charre-coales, and make them in balls as big as you would have them, and roll
them in mealed powder and Sulpher: you may without the Gum and Campheere
moisten the same powder, only with liquid Varnish, Linseed oil, or oil of
Petre; but the first, is the fairer fire for Stars. The heads of Rockets may
be loaded with many things, as with powder strongly lapped and armed in Paper
or Parchment, with raining fire, with morcells of Roch-fire or horse-haires
dipped therein molten, Rockets may also be made with Barbes, to stick and
burn whatsoever they light upon, and as a shot, they may by a device be
directed to any place within distance assigned. Now in regard that all moveable
Fire-workes, in Air or Water, have their motions from the force of the Rockets
applied accordingly; I need not speak of them particularly, but leave each
practiser to his own ingenious invention.

Q. 50. What are your compositions or receipts for Water, Fires, to burn as
well at the top, as at the bottom, and of those that water will kindle, or
that will last long fired?

A. Take Masticke one part, white Incence, Gum Sandrach, quick Lime,
Sulpher, Bitumen, Camphere and Gunpowder, of each three parts, Rozen two
parts, and Salpetre nine parts. The Campheer must be beaten either with
Sulpher, Salt, Almonds, or water, else it will not be mealed. This will burn
and feed upon in the water. But to make a receipt to burn at the bottom, fill
a ball with this receipt, Take Sulpher, li, mealed powder nine ounces, refined
Salpetre one pound, and, Campheere beaten with Sulpher and Quicksilver, put
and stirred into the Sulpher a little molten, all mealed and mixed by hand, and
filled into a round Canuas ball, by little and little, and well driven, being
first moistened with oil of Petre, or Linseed oil boiled until it will scald
a feather; then arm the Ball, and prime it, balast it with Lead at the
bottom, that the vent may burn upwards, or a stone to sink it, and (having
fired it well) throw it into the water, and it will burn at the bottom
thereof, and fume and boil up slow. Now for as much as all the before-named
fireworkes, both moveable and fixed, are but by the applications of these or
the like, I shall not need (neither is it possible) to particular all the
inventions and varieties that may be made therein: I will therefore conclude,
omitting also perfumed savors and venomous sents that may be made in
Fire-workes, as not fit to be here revealed. Next for such receipts as the
water it self will kindle, they are made of oil Benedict one pound, boiled
Linseed oil three pounds, oil of the yolks of Eggs one pound, new
Quicklime eight pounds, Sulpher two pound, Campheer four ounces, and Bitumen
two ounces, Or else Roch-Petre one pound, Flowers of Sulpher nine ounces,
Coals of Rotten-wood six ounces, Campheer one ounce and, oil of Eggs, and
oil Benedict sufficient to paste the mixture, with new burnt Lime vnsleyked
two pound, Or vnsleikt Lime, Tutia, Roch-Petre, Loadstone, of each one part,
Sulpher, Viue and Campheer, of each eight parts, put these things in a pot
filled with quicklime in powder and lute, and arm it well with strong wires,
and set it in a Lime-kill a whole burning time, and the materials will become
a stone that any moisture will kindle. A receipt to carry fire always in a
man's pocket, is this; Take Cow Dung steeped sour or five times in spirits of
Wine or Aquauitae, three times distilled, wherein Campheer must be dissolved;
this must be well dried, being made into a Ball and kindled, it will last many
days; it must be covered half an inch thick with vnsleiked Lime, and the
white of Eggs well mixed, and when you will use it, make a hole with a priming
iron, and put a Sulpher match unto it, and it will light: And so Salpetre mixed
with the powder of the coals of Juniper, and the white of an Egg, will a long
time last kindled.

The Practice of Artillery is to be sold by Humfrey Robinson at the sign of
the three Pigeons in Paul's Churchyard.


