A Commentary OR EXPOSITION UPON THE THIRD Chapter of the Prophecy of AMOS.
Delivered In VXII. Sermons in the Parish Church of MEYSEY-HAMPTON in the
Diocese of Gloucester. BY SEBASTIAN BENEFIELD Doctor of Divinity.

2 COR. 12.14. I seek not yours, but you.

LONDON, Printed by John Hauiland, and are to be sold by Hugh Perry at the
Harrow in Britains Burse. 1628.

THE First Lecture.
AMOS 3.1. Hear this word, that the Lord has spoken against you, O children
of Israel, against the whole family, which I brought up from the land of
Egypt, saying,

You only have I known of all the families of the earth: therefore will I
punish you for all your iniquities.


Having heretofore, by the gracious assistance of the Almighty, finished my
Exposition upon the first and second Chapters of this Prophecy of Amos, I do
now adventure upon the third, in a sure hope and confidence, of the continuance
of the same assistance unto me, not doubting, but that the Lord will enable me
to go forward in this course, if he shall see it to be to his glory, and to
the good of his Church.

This third Chapter is Amos his second Sermon against the Kingdom of the ten
Tribes, the Kingdom of Israel. It was made, as it seems, when their then
King, Jeroboam son of Ioash, the thirteenth King of Israel, though wicked for
his life, yet happy in war, had vanquished and subdued many of the Syrians,
and had recovered the coast of Israel from the 2 King. 14.25.
entering of Hamath, unto the Sea of the plain; and had taken Verse 28.
Damascus and Hamath. Then the people of Israel, grown insolent with
victories, and rich with spoils, became lasciuient and wanton, and spurned at
the preaching of the Word of God. It was now high time for Amos to bestirre
himself, and to remember them of the fickle estate wherein now they were. He
was their Prophet, peculiarly sent to them from God; and it lay upon him, to
call upon them. He does it in this his second Sermon.

The parts are three: 1 An Exordium, or an entrance into the Sermon, verse. 1. 2
A Proposition, containing the sum of that whereof he admonishes them, verse.
2. 3 An Enarration, a Declaration, an Exposition, or an Expolition of the
matter in hand, from the third verse. to the end of the Chapter.


We are to begin with the Exordium or entrance to the Sermon. It is an
inuitation to attention: and contains certain arguments of persuasion. Three
they are; all of weight, and in themselves available.

The first is taken from the authority of the Word, to the hearing whereof they
are invited. It is Verbum Iehouae, the Word of Iohouah, the only true and
everliving God. Hear this Word, non meum somnium, not any dream of mine, not
my word, nor the word of any mortal wight, but the Word of the Lord, Hear
this Word, that the Lord has spoken.

The second is taken from the quality of the parties invited. They are Filij
Israel, the children of Israel. By this compellation they are put in mind of
their stock and lineage that they were sprung form, and came out of the loins
of Jacob, whose name was changed to Genesis 32.28. and 35.10.
Israel; whereby they may well be admonished, either to insist in the steps of
that holy Patriarch, or like disobedient and degenerate children to expect
punishment from the Lord: Hear this Word that the Lord has spoken against
you, O children of Israel.

The third is taken from the memory of their greatest deliverance, their
deliverance out of Egypt. By this benefit, had there been nothing else, were
the Israelites deeply obliged to give care to the Word of the Lord their
Redeemer and deliverer. Hear this Word, that the Lord has spoken against you,
O children of Israel, against the whole family which I brought up from the land
of Egypt, saying.

In the handling of these words, I purpose to hold this course: first, to
expound the words; and then to observe out of them such instructions as they
naturally offer unto us, and may be for our good.

Hear this Word that the Lord speaks against you. Hear, Listen unto it, not
only with the outward sense of your ears, but yield unto it also willing
assent in your minds. Hear it interiori auditu: so Albertus Magnus expounds
it, Hear with your inward hearing. In the phrase of the Gospel, it is Audite
and intelligite, Matthew. 15.10. Hear and understand.

Hear this Word] This word is with Castalio, dictum, a saying; with Albertus
it is, something signified by voice, which remains in the heart of the
hearer, after the voice is gone. It may be the decree of God and his
ordinance, touching that he will do unto Israel; and so Jonathan in his
Chaldee paraphrase seems to take it; Hear this Word, that the Lord has
decreed. In the Vulgar Latin I read, Audite verbum, quod locus us est Dominus;
Hear the Word that the Lord has spoken. Our now English is right: Hear this
Word that the Lord has spoken.

Has spoken! To, or against whom? (...) Hhalceem, To you, or against you: so
Drusius. The original is, Super vos, over you or upon you: Drusius well
renders it, to you, or against you; and Petrus Lusitanus not amiss, contra
vos, vel de vobis, against you, or concerning you.

You children of Israel. The Hebrew is (...) Benei Iischrael, sons of Israel.
Children of Israel, or sons of Israel, the Israelites are meant. Each phrase
may be paralleld in the Greek tongue. First, the children of Israel, for the
Israelites: So speak the Greeks, Herod. l. 3.
(...), the children of the Aethiopians, for Aethiopians themselves. (...), the
children of Philosophers, for Philosophers themselves. (...), the children of
Physicians, for Physicians themselves. Again, the sons of Israel, for the
Israelites. And so speak the Greeks, (...), the sons of the Grecians, for
the Grecians themselves. Its very frequent in Jliad. and 162.237 240.276.368.
etc.
Homer. I meet with one place in the Greek Bible, wherewith I will for the
present content my self. It is Joel 3 6. The words are (...); the sons of
Judah, and the sons of Jerusalem, ye sold to the sons of the Grecians; where
the sons of Judah are put for the people of Judah, and the sons of Jerusalem
for the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the sons of the Grecians for the
Grecians themselves: just, as it is here, the sons of Israel for the
Israelites themselves.

Sons of Israel] It is an Hebrew Proverb; Drusius Adag. Hebruir. Druuia. 2
8. ex R. Heuna.
Filij filiorum ecce sunt vt filij; Sons sons, behold they are as sons.
You may understand thus: The sons of sons are accounted of as sons; or,
they are truly sons; sons not in name only, but in very deed.

In the name of son, sometime the Nephew is to be understood. So it is,
Haggai 1.1. Zerubbabel is there called the son of Shealtiel; whose son he
was not, but Nephew, for he was son of Chron. 3.19.
Pedaiah, and Pedaiah son of Schealtiel. And so is it Ezra 5.1. Zechariah the
Prophet is there called the son of Iddo, whose son he was not; but Nephew;
for he was the son of Barachiah, and Zachar. 1.1.
Barachiah the son of Iddo. Now as a son is sometimes put for a Nephew, so
are sons for a posterity; So in my Text, the sons of Israel are put for the
posterity of Israel. The sons of Israel, Secundum carnem, non secundu^
spiritum, as Petrus a Figueiro speaks; the sons of Israel after the flesh,
not after the spirit. Sons of Israel, such as were lineally descended from
the loins of Jacob, who was surnamed Israel. These sons or children of
Israel are here further described to be that whole family which the Lord
brought up from the land of Egypt. Hear this Word, that the Lord has spoken
against you, O children of Israel, against the whole family, which I brought up
from the land of Egypt.

Against the whole family] The Hebrew word here is (...) Mischpachah, and
signifies a family. So its translated by Brentius, and Calvin, and Drusius,
and Gnalter, and Iunius, and Piscator: and so is it in our newest English;
against the whole family. A family, to speak properly, is of them that are
contained in one and the same house: it is a household consisting of persons of
diverse sexes, ages, statures, strengths, and abilities. But this narrow
signification of a family will not serve for this place. For it was not only a
household that the Lord brought out of Egypt, it was more than so.

The Author of the Vulgar Latin gives here a larger scope. Familia contents
him not; Cognatio is his word. Not a family, but a kindred must serve his
turn. His reading is Super omnem cognationem. Is pleases Luther, and Mercer,
and Vatablus. Against all the kindred. A kindred we know may contain many
families: and many were the families which the Lord brought up from the Land of
Egypt; yet is not this word kindred of extent sufficient to comprehend the
great multitude that was brought up from the land of Egypt.

Nation is a fitter word with Castalio: Hear this word, that the Lord
pronounces to you, to the whole Nation, which I brought up from the land of
Egypt. It was indeed a Nation that the Lord brought up. A Nation, and
therefore many kindreds, and more families. Yet need we not refuse either the
word kindred or family as unfit for this place; for each of them may well be
used to signify a Nation. The reason whereof Kimhi gives, quia ab initio
gentes singulae ab vno aliquo viro defluxerunt; because at first Nations had
their beginning from some one man that was head of a family or kindred.

A Family for a Nation you have, Mic. 2.3. Behold, says the Lord; behold,
against this family do I devise an evil. Against this family, that is,
against this Nation of the Israelites. So have you, Ierem. 8.3. Death shall be
chosen rather than life, by all the residue of them that remain of this evil
family. This evil family is the nation of the Jews. I read of the family of
Egypt, Zach. 14.18. and there the family of Egypt, is the nation of the
Egyptians. Such is the signification of the word family in my Text; against
the whole family, that is, against the whole nation of the Israelites.

By this whole family of the children of Israel, some do understand all the
people which the Lord brought up from Egypt, which afterward was rent into two
Kingdoms, the Kingdom of Judah, and the Kingdom of Israel. So Saint Hierome,
and Remigius, and Hugo, and Lyra, and Dionysius. Some by the children of Israel
do understand the Kingdom of Israel, the Kingdom of the ten Tribes, and in
the whole family brought up from the land of Egypt, they will have included
the Kingdom of Judah, the other two Tribes; the Tribes of Benjamin and Judah.
So Theodoret, and Albertus, and Montanus, and Quadratus, and Christophorus a
Castro.

Petrus a Figueiro takes this whole family to be here used Appositorie, by
Apposition, to express what is meant by the children of Israel. The children
of Israel, that is, the whole family, kindred, or nation of the Israelites
which the Lord brought up from the land of Egypt. The like does Tauerner in
his English Bible; his Translation runs thus: Hear what the Lord speaks
unto you, O ye children of Israel, namely unto all the Tribes whom I brought
out of Egypt.

I take them to be in the right, who by the children of Israel, do understand
the Kingdom of the ten Tribes, and by the whole family brought up from Egypt,
the other two Tribes: the Tribes of Judah and Benjamin: to this sense, Hear
this word, this sentence, that the Lord pronounces against you, O children of
Israel, and not against you alone, but even against all those whom I brought up
from the land of Egypt. All that are in the same fault do well deserve the
same punishment. If Judah sin as well as Israel, Judah shall be punished as
well as Israel. Hear therefore this word, not only you of Israel, but you of
Judah too, all you whom I brought up from the land of Egypt.

All, which I brought up from the land of Egypt?] How can this be? Of those
which the Lord brought up out of Egypt, all that were of Numb. 14.30. and
32.11, 12.
twenty years old and upward, all save two, Caleb the son of Iephunneh, and
Joshua the son of Nun, died in the Wilderness. They died there, and
therefore they came not into the Holy Land.

Again, the deliverance of Israel out of Egypt was about An. M. 2454.
seven hundred years before the Which was An. M. 3158.
time that this Prophecy came by the ministry of Amos unto Israel.

What? Seven hundred years before this time! Its then to be presumed, that
all, which so long before were brought up from Egypt, were long ere this time
dead. And so out of doubt they were. How then is it, that here so long after it
is said to the children of Israel from the Lord, Eduxi, I brought you, your
whole family, up from the Land of Egypt? The Israelites, to whom this speech
is, had for the place of their nativity and habitation the land of Iudaea.
Never had they been in the land of Egypt, and yet may there be a good
construction of what is here said unto them; Eduxi, I brought you, your whole
family, up from the land of Egypt. Albertus makes the construction; I brought
you up, vos in patribus, you in your Fathers. So does Petrus Lusitanus; I
brought you up, vos vtique in parentibus, you in your parents. And so Piscator,
I brought you up, vos in maioribus, you in your Ancestors. You, in your
Fathers, in your Parents, in your Ancestors, I brought you up from the land of
Egypt.

I brought up from the land of Aegypt] The words we met with before, Chap.
2.10. There they were by me expounded; and happily you will not think it fit, I
should say the same again unto you. Wherefore for a full exposition of these
words, and the profit to be taken by them, I refer you to my fifteenth
Lecture upon the second Chapter of this Prophecy of Amos.

Hitherto have I dwelt upon the opening of the words of my present Text. I
gather up all in brief. Heare] not only with the outward ear, but also with
the assent of mind; hear and understand, -- this word] this thing, this
sentence, this decree, -- that the Lord] Jehovah, the only true everlasting
and Almighty God -- has spoken] has pronounced -- over you] upon you, to you,
against you; against you O children of Israel] ye the sons, the posterity of
Jacob, and not against you only, but also -- against the whole family] the
whole Nation of you, them of Judah too, against you all, whose Fathers,
Parents, and Ancestors -- I brought vp] and delivered with a mighty hand and
outstretched arm -- from the land of Aegypt] that land, wherein they lived in
great slavery and bondage, -- saying] after this manner as it follows, verse.
2. You only have I known, etc.

The words you see are expounded. It remains now, that we gather from hence
such observations as are here naturally offered unto us, and may be for our
instruction.

Of the three perswasory arguments here used by Amos to move the Israelites to
attention, the first is taken from the authority of the Word to the hearing
whereof they are invited, it is verbum Iehouae; Hear this word, non meum
somnium, not any dream of mine, not my word, nor the word of any mortal
wight, but verbum Iehouae, the Word of Jehovah, the only true and everliving
God. Hear this word that the Lord speaks against you. My observation is: The
Word of the Lord is diligently to be hearkened unto.

Were it not so, never would the holy Prophets have been so frequent in that
their inuitation; Esa. 1.10. and 28 14. Ierem. 2.4. 7.1. 9 20. 10.1. 27.20.
19.3. 21.11. 29.20. 31.10.
Audite verbum Iehouae, Hear ye the Word of the Lord. That same general
Proclamation, Mat. 11.15. Whosoever has ears to hear, let him hear;
repeated in Matthew. 13 93. Mark. 7.91. and 23. Luke 8.8. 13.35. Revel. 2.7,
11.17.29. 3.6, 13 22.
sundry others places of the New Testament, what else implies it, but that all
are bound to hear? The voice that spoke out of the cloud at the time of Christ
his transfiguration, Matthew. 17.5. it said no more but this, This is my beloved
Son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him. Hear him, says that voice, as
if in hearing were comprised all the duties of man. Christ Jesus in the tenth
of Luke, the nine and thirtieth verse, speaking of one thing that is necessary,
speaks of nothing but of hearing the word. Martha, Martha, thou art careful,
and troubled about many things: But one thing is necessary, and Mary has
chosen that good part. One thing necessary, and Mary has chosen it! what is
that? She sitting at Jesus feet did hear his Word. See now, to hear the Word
of God is so necessary a thing, that all other necessities should give place
unto it.

It makes much for this necessity of hearing, that the Word of God is called
meat, Heb. 5.12. and the want of this word, a famine, Amos 8.11. What can from
hence be collected, but, that it is as necessary for us to hear the word of
God, as it is to eat?

Much more might be spoken to show the necessity of this duty of hearing the
word of God; but I have said enough for the confirmation of my doctrine: The
word of the Lord is diligently to be hearkened unto.

One reason to enforce this duty, I take from the person of him, from whom this
duty is enjoined us. He is in my Text called Jehovah, the Lord: Hear this word
that Jehovah the Lord speaks. Jehovah, he is our Deuteronomy. 32.18.
Creator, we are his creatures; he is our Psalm. 23.1.
Shepherd, we are his Sheep; he is our Mal. 1.6.
Master, we are his Servants; he is our Father, we are his children; he is
our Psalm 44.4.
King, we are his Subjects. Say now, is not the creature bound to obey his
Creator, the sheep his Shepherd, the servant his Master, the child his
Father, the subject his King? The Scripture shows it: yea nature teaches it.
If then the Lord speak unto us, we are to hear him.

A second reason to enforce this duty, I take from the great value and high
price of obedient hearing. Obedience in this kind is better worth than any
sacrifice, yea than all the sacrifices that can be offered. Samuel avouches
it, 1 Samuel 15.22, 23. where he that reproves Saul to his face: Has the Lord
as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as when the voice of the
Lord is obeyed? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice: and to hearken, than
the fat of Rams. For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and
stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry. See here how elegantly Samuel
deciphereth two contraries, Obedience and disobedience? He makes the one to be
better than sacrifice; the other to be as witchcraft and idolatry. Obedience
is better than sacrifice: for he that offers a Sacrifice, Greg. Moral. lib.
35. c. 10.
offers the flesh of some beast: but he that obeys offers his own will,
as a quick and reasonable sacrifice, which the Lord well accepts.
Disobedience is as witchcraft and Idolatry. If, when the Lord imposes some
duty upon us, we then confer with our own hearts, as 1 Samuel 28.7.
Saul consulted with the woman of Endor, or as 2 Reg 1.2.
Ahaziah with Beelzebub, whether we shall hearken unto the voice of the Lord,
or not; this is disobedience, and disobedience in a high degree; as prodigious
as witchcraft and idolatry. Now this second reason I thus frame. God likes of
obedience, and prefers it before sacrifice; he hates disobedience as he
does witchcraft and idolatry; therefore it is our duty, refusing this, to
embrace that: and when the Lord shall speak unto us, to hearken unto him, and
obey his Word.

A third reason to enforce this duty of hearing the Word of God, I take from
the consideration of the punishment that shall betide the disobedient. The
disobedient shall be sure to be punished. Our warrant for this we have, Deuteronomy.
28.15. If thou will not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe
and to do all his Commandments and his Statutes which he commands thee;
then shall all these curses come upon thee, and overtake thee. Cursed shall
thou be Deuteronomy. 28.16.
in the City, and cursed in the field: Cursed in thy basket, and cursed in thy
store: Cursed in the fruit of thy body, in the fruit of thy land, in the
increase of thy kine, and in the flocks of thy sheep: Cursed when thou come
in, and cursed when thou go out. With these and the like curses, how sly
soever thou be, thou shall always be environed, it will not boot thee to seek
starting holes. If thou go into thine house, and shut the door, and double
bar it, yet shall the Amos 5.19.
serpent come in and sting thee there. If thou go into the field, and seek
means to escape, thou shall meet with a Lion upon the way: if thou slip aside
from the Lion, a Bear shall meet thee. Be thou assured, God has his
storehouse full of rods, not of three or four sorts only, but of infinite to
pay thee home, if thou will not hearken unto his voice.

But if thou will hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 28.1.
to observe and to do all his Commandments which he commands thee, then
shall blessings come as thick upon thee. Blessed shall thou be in the City,
and blessed in the field: blessed in thy basket, and blessed in thy store:
blessed in the fruit of thy body, in the fruit of thy ground, in the fruit of
thy Cattle, in the increase of thy kine; and in the flocks of thy sheep:
blessed when thou come in, and blessed when thou go out. With these and
other like blessings shall thou be compassed about, if thou give ear unto the
voice of the Lord thy God.

Now this third reason I frame thus: If the obedient shall be blessed and
rewarded for hearing, and the disobedient cursed and punished for not hearing
the voice of the Lord our God, then it behooves us with all diligence to give
ear unto his holy Word.

From the reasons enforcing the duty of hearing the Word of God, I come now to
make some use of the doctrine delivered.

It may serve first for reproof. For the reproof of such as refuse to hear
the Word of God. Such, as if they had no soul to save, yea, as if they
believed, that there is neither God nor Devil, neither Heaven nor Hell, do
stop their ears, that they may not hear. Very desperate is their disease. The
Mat. 12.42.
Queen of the South shall rise up in judgment and condemn them. She thought
it worthy her labor, to make a long journey to hear the wisdom of Solomon;
and yet, behold, more than Solomon is here. Here, not far hence, in this
place, and present with you is Christ our Lord. Solomon, a man. Christ is God.
Solomon a mortal King, of the Kingdom of Christ there is no end. Solomon a
King by humane succession, Christ by divine eternity. Solomon a sinner
inwrapped in the allurements of lasciviousness, Christ 1 Pet. 2.22.
without sin, without guile, Heb. 7.26.
harmless and undefiled. Solomon gave his Parables only in Jerusalem;
Christ gives his voice thorowout the Christian world, he gives it us in our
streets, in our Temples, in this his house wherein now I stand.

Inexcusable therefore art thou O man, O woman, O child of understanding,
whosoever thou art that refusest to hear the word of Christ, thy Lord and God.
For such your refusal you shall be sure to give an account at the great day of
Gods vengeance. Against such refusal the voice of wisdom cries out, Prou.
1.24. Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out mine hand
and no man regarded, I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your
fear comes.

Parallel to this is that, Esa. 65.12. There thus says the Lord; Because when
I called, ye did not answer; when I spoke, ye did not hear; but did evil
before mine eyes, and did choose that wherein I delighted not, therefore will I
number you to the sword, and ye shall all bow down to the slaughter.

Hereunto may that be added, Ierem. 7.13. Because I spoke unto you, rising up
early and speaking, but ye heard not, and I called you, but ye answered not,
therefore will I do unto you thus, and thus: I will cast you out of my sight:
I will power out mine anger and my fury upon the place of your habitation, upon
man, and upon beast, and upon the trees of the field, and upon the fruit of the
ground: I will cause to cease from your streets the voice of mirth, and the
voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride.
Thus and thus shall it befall them, that refuse to hear, when the Lord
speaks; the Ier. 14.12, 16.
famine shall pinch them, the Ier. 15.3.
sword shall slay them, the Ier. 21.9. Ezech. 6.11. and 7.15.
pestilence shall waste them, Ierem. 15.3.
dogs shall tear them, wild beasts shall destroy them, and the Fowls of
Heaven shall devour them. You have the first use.

The second use may be for reproof too; for the reproof of such as come to
hear, but hear not as they should. I have read of a generation of such
hearers.

Some, says my Author, hearken after news; If the Preacher say any thing of
beyond Sea matters, or of court affairs at home, that is his lure.

Some hearken whether any thing be said, that may be wrested to be spoken
against persons in high place, that they may accuse the Preacher.

Some smacke of eloquence, and gape for a phrase, that when they come abroad in
company, they may have a fine word to grace their talk.

Some sit, as Malcontents, till the Preacher come to gird some, whom they
spite: then prick they up their ears to listen, and it shall go hard, if
they remember not something of what is spoken.

Some come to gaze about the Church: their eyes are evil eyes, they are wanton
eyes, they are evermore looking upon that, from which holy Job turned his eyes
away.

Some sit musing all the Sermon time, some of their Lawsuits, some of their
bargains, some of their iourneyes, some of some other employments. The Sermon
is ended before these men think where they are.

Some that come to hear, so soon as the Prayer is done, or soon after, fall
fast asleep; as though they had been brought into the Church for corpses, and
the Preacher should preach at their funerals.

You see now a generation of hearers: seven sorts of them; not one of them
hears as he should. If they come to the Church, and do remain there for the
Sermon time, they think their duty well and sufficiently discharged. But much
more than so is required at their hands. Outward service without inward
obedience is but Hypocrisy. The naked hearing of the Word of God, is but an
halting with God. If thou keep from him thy heart, he cares not for thy
presence, nor for thy tongue, nor for thy ear.

Cares he not for our presence, nor for our tongue, nor for our ear, unless
he have our heart too? Then may that Caveat, which Christ gives his Disciples,
Luke 8.18. when he had expounded unto them the parable of the Sower, be a
seasonable caveat for us. The Caveat is, Take heed how ye hear. This same take
heed, ever goes before some danger. Some danger there is in hearing: for you
may easily hear amiss. You may easily hear amiss, and therefore take heed.
Take heed how you hear. When you sow your seed in the field, you will take
heed how you sow, lest your seed should be lost. Your care herein is
commendable. Let not your care be less to further the growth of Gods seed.
Gods seed! it is immortal seed, even his holy Word; O take heed how you hear,
that none of this seed be lost. No seed grows so fast as this, if it be
received in good ground, in an Luke 8.15.
honest and good heart: for so it grows in a moment as high as Heaven. Take
heed therefore how ye hear.

Would ye now know how ye should hear? The Prophet Jeremy shall teach you,
Chap. 13.15. Hear and give ear. So shall Esaias, Chap. 28.23. Give ye ear and
hear, hearken and hear. Hear, give ear and hearken! Why is this multiplying
of words, but to teach you, that you are to hear and m^re than hear? More
than hear! What is that to say? It is to hear interiori auditu, with the
inward hearing, as before I noted out of Albertus. It is audire and
intelligere, to hear and understand, as in the phrase of the Gospel already
alleged. It is to hear for the after time, as Esaias speaks, Chap. 42.23. It
is to mark, and understand, and remember, and believe, and follow that which
you hear.

This duty of hearing as we should, we shall the better perform, if as Moses
at the commandment of the Lord did put off his shoes, the shoes from off his
feet, because the place whereon he stood was holy ground, Exodus 3.5. so shall
we, as often as we come to this or the like holy place, the House of God, to
hear his Word read and preached unto us, put off our shoes too; not our
shoes from off our feet; but our much fouler shoes, our lusts, our thoughts,
our cares, our fancies, our businesses, even all that corruption and sin
wherewith in this life we are clogged: which, as the dust to the shoe, and the
shoe to the foot, cleaues fast to us.

If thus prepared we come to hear the Word of God, we shall be sure of a
blessing. When the woman said to Christ, Blessed is the womb that bare thee,
and the paps which thou have sucked, Christ replied, Luke 11.18. Yea, rather
blessed are they that hear the Word of God, and keep it. By this his reply,
he shows that his Disciples were more blessed for hearing him, than his
Mother for bearing him. Yet hereby he denies not his Mother to have been
blessed even for bearing him: but insinuates only that she was more blessed in
being his child, than in being his Mother. Saint Austine, De Sancta
Virginitate, cap. 3. well expresses it; Beatior percipiendo fidem Christi,
quam concipiendo carnem Christi; The blessed Virgin, the Mother of Christ, was
more blessed by receiving the faith of Christ, then by conceiving the flesh of
Christ.

Christ said unto his Disciples, Matthew. 13.16. Blessed are your ears for you
hear; showing, that they were more blessed than all the world besides, because
they had this one blessing to hear the truth. This is the blessing which you
come hither for. God in the abundance of his goodness brings it home unto you.
And well may you call it a blessing. For the word which we bring unto you is
verbum regni, Mat. 13.19. The word of a Kingdom; it bring a Kingdom with it:
It is verbum vitae, Ioh. 6.68. the word of life: it brings life with it. It is
not only a word of authority, to command and bind the conscience, nor only a
word of wisdom to direct you, nor only a word of power to convert you, nor
only a word of grace to comfort and uphold you, but the word of a neuer-fading
Kingdom, and of eternal life to make you perfectly and for ever blessed.

Thus far has my first Doctrine carried me. The Doctrine was delivered in
these words: The word of the Lord is diligently to be hearkened unto.

It was grounded upon the first branch of my Text, wherein is contained the
first perswasory argument of attention drawn from the authority of the word to
be hearkened unto. Hear this word that the Lord speaks against you.

The next argument of persuasion to enforce attention in the hearer, is drawn
from the persons of them who are here invited to give ear. They are Filij
Israel, the children, the sons, the posterity of Israel; a people descended
from the holy Patriarch Jacob, chosen above all other nations to be Gods
peculiar people, with whom God had made a covenant, and had on his part most
absolutely performed it, preserving them from their enemies, and multiplying
upon them all his benefits. So graciously did God deal with these sons of
Israel, not only whilst they loved him, kept their conjugal faith with him,
and served him according to his word, but even then too, when they had despised
him, and forsaken him, had violated their faith with him, and committed
spiritual whoredom with false gods. Yet, when those their impieties,
disobediences, and rebellions were grown to the height, God was resolved to
come against them in judgment, and to punish them. This his resolution
appears in the many menaces and threats, which from time to time the Lord
sent unto them by his holy Prophets. One of which is in my Text, Hear this
word that the Lord speaks against you, O children of Israel; Against you, to
punish you, O children of Israel, even you. My observation here is: God will
not spare to smite his dearest children, when they sin against him.

One reason hereof may be, that the Lord may declare himself an adversary to
sin in all men without partiality.

A second is, that the Lord may reduce his children from running on headlong to
perdition with the wicked.

And the uses may be two: One to teach us to magnify the righteousness of
God, as generally in all his works, so particularly in the afflictions of his
people.

The other to admonish us, that we look not for any certain earthly peace,
though we are by faith the children of Israel, but that we prepare our selves
for a continual succession of crosses and calamities.

The third argument of persuasion to move attention in these children of
Israel, is taken from the commemoration of their greatest deliverance, their
deliverance out of Egypt; Hear this word that the Lord speaks against you,
O children of Israel; against the whole family, which I brought up from the
land of Egypt. My observation is: The temporal benefits and manifold
deliverances, which the Lord bestows upon his people, are ever to be had in
remembrance, and in thankful acknowledgement.

This very doctrine for the substance of it, I have heretofore in your hearing
propounded and proved, in my fifteenth Lecture upon the second chapter of this
book, occasioned thereunto by the tenth verse, wherein this great deliverance
out of Egypt is mentioned. I will not therefore at this time stand to enlarge
it. Only let me now tell you, that this delivery of the Israelites out of
Egypt, is not appropriate only unto them, but that in some sort it
appertains to the Church of God in all ages: for as much as it was a type of
a more surpassing delivery from that fearful Kingdom of sin and darkness.
It appertains even unto us, whom God of his infinite goodness and mercy,
through the precious blood of his Son, and our Savior, Christ Jesus, has
delivered from this spiritual Egypt, the Kingdom of sin and darkness, and
will in his good time give us safe passage from hence, to that heavenly Canaan,
the true Country and Inheritance of all Saints. Whither, most gracious God,
vouchsafe to bring us all. Amen.

THE Second Lecture.
AMOS 3.2. You only have I known of all the families of the earth: therefore
will I punish you for all your iniquities.


THis second verse is the second part of Amos his second Sermon concerning the
Kingdom of the ten Tribes, the Kingdom of Israel. It is the proposition, and
contains the very substance of the whole Sermon: which is to let the
Israelites understand, that, for as much as the Lord has been good unto them
above all the Nations of the earth, and they have returned unto him nothing but
unthankfulness, the Lord will surely punish them for all their iniquities.

The parts are two: 1 A Commemoration. 2. A Commination.


The Commemoration is of benefits, the Commination is of punishment. The
Commemoration is for words short, yet for matter very copious. It has
reference to the many singular and exceeding great benefits, which the Lord
has bestowed upon his people, Israel. You only have I known of all the
families of the earth.

The Commination is sharp, but very just. It may serve thus far to instruct
the Israelites, that if the Lord should at any time with his strong hand Job
30.21.
oppose himself against them, and make their Verse. 15.
welfare to pass away as a cloud, and lay terrors upon them, yet they should
not calumniate, and Job 1.22.
charge God with folly, but should lay the whole blame thereof upon themselves
and their own deseruings. Therefore will I punish you for all your iniquities.
Of both in their order.

First, of the Commemoration. You only have I known of all the families of
the earth.

You only! Only you! How can this be so? Did not the knowledge of God extend
it self to other Nations, as well as to the Israelites? It may not be denied.
It extends it self, not to men only, but to whatsoever else is in the world.

You may consider it two manner of ways: either in it self, or as it has
reference to things known. If it be considered in it self, it is most
certain, and is ever the same: as necessary and immutable, as is the very
divine Essence; from which it differs not indeed, but only consideration.
For that axiom of the Schools is true, Quicquid est in Deo, est ipsa Dei
Essentia; Whatsoever is in God, is Gods own Essence. And therefore the
knowledge of God is his divine Essence, and God is his own knowledge. Whence
it follows, that wheresoever God is and his holy-Essence, there is his
knowledge. Now God is every where, his Essence is every where: his knowledge
therefore must be every where. Its impossible that any thing should be
concealed from it.

Again, the knowledge of God may be considered, as it has reference to things
known: and so also nothing can be hid from it. For it knows it self, and
every thing else. Things universal and singular; things past, present, and to
come; things which neither are, nor have been, nor ever shall be; things
necessary and contingent, natural and voluntary, good and evil, achieved and
thought upon, finite and infinite, all, are known unto him. So says the
Apostle, Heb. 4.13. There is no creature that is not manifest in the sight of
God. No creature! Nay, unto his eyes all things are naked and open. All things!
How then is it, that here he says to the Israelites, You only have I known
of all the families of the earth?

For the clearing of this doubt, we are to note, that knowledge attributed unto
God in holy Scripture, does not ever betoken a bare and naked knowledge, but
sometimes his love, his favor, his care, his providence, his choice, his
approbation, his allowance, his acceptance, or the like. As Psalm. 1.6. The Lord
knows the way of the righteous. He knows, that is, he loves, he
approves, he accepts, he is well pleased with, and graciously directs, the
way of the righteous. And so are we to expound that of the 37. Psalm. Verse. 18.
The Lord knows the days of the upright. He knows, that is, He does not
only foresee, but also he allows, he cares and provides for the life of
the upright. So I understand that branch of David's prayer which he made in the
cave, Psalm. 142.3. When my spirit was ouer-whelmed within me, then thou knew
my path. Thou knew, that is, thou did approve and allow of the order of my
life, and innocent conversation.

In the book of Exodus, Chap. 33.17. the Lord said unto Moses, Thou have found
grace in my sight, and I know thee by name. I know thee by name, that is, I
have respect unto thee, I approve thee, I care and provide for thee. In the
first Chapter of the Prophecy of Nahum, verse. 7. it is said of the Lord, that
he knows them that trust in him. And there to know, is to love, to defend, to
approve, to regard. Them that trust in him he knows, he suffers them not to
perish. In the second Epistle to Timothy, Chap. 2.19. we read of a foundation,
a foundation of God, a sure foundation, the seal whereof is, Nouit Dominus,
qui sunt ejus: The Lord knows those that are his. The Lord knows;
understand not only a knowledge in general, but a special knowledge; such a
knowledge as is joined cum applicatione cordis ac voluntatis (...), as a
learned Divine well speaks, such a knowledge as is associated with the
applying of the heart, and will, and good pleasure of the Lord. The Lord
knows who are his: He so knows them, as that they Joan. 10.28.
shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of his hand.

Other like places I could produce yet further, to show this idiotisme of the
holy tongue, that verba notitiae, words of knowledge, do not ever betoken a
bare and naked knowledge, but sometime such a Mat. 7.23. Luke 13.27. Mat.
25.12. Romans 7.15.
knowledge, as is joined with some Vorstius amica Duplicat. cap. 4. page 225.
decree of him that knows, with some action of his will, with his
approbation. But I shall not need to do it. From the Texts of Scripture
before alleged, arises a distinction of the Schoolmen: their distinction of
the knowledge of God. The knowledge of God, say they, is twofold: the one is
the knowledge of his Aquin. 2a. 2 ae. qu. 188. 5. 1.
apprehension; the other, the knowledge of his Ripa in 1. Th. qu. 14. Art. 13.
Dub. 4. cap. 4. fol. 83. col. 3. and Wendalin. Suppl. in 4. Sentent. Did. 50.
qu. 1.
approbation. That they call his absolute and speculatiue knowledge; this his
special, and practical: and this, not that, is the knowledge to be
understood in the places even now by me expounded. And this, not that, is the
knowledge intended in my Text.

Thus is the doubt resolved. The doubt was; How it is here said; that the Lord
only knew the Israelites above all the Nations of the Earth? The answer is:
He knew them, not only as he knew other Nations, by his absolute and
speculatiue knowledge, but also by his special and practical; not only by
the knowledge of his apprehension, but also by the knowledge of his approbation.

Some there are, that by knowledge here, do understand a possession. To know,
say they, is to possess, to have in our power, to enjoy as our own. For
proof whereof they bring that, Psalm. 50.11. I know all the fowls of the
mountains, and the wild beasts of the field are mine. The words are the words
of God unto his people Israel. Hear, O my people, and I will speak, O Israel.
I am God even thy God. I know all the fowls of the Mountains. I know them, I
so know them, that I can count them, and call them when I list; they are in my
power, I enjoy them as mine own, they are mine own possession.

And so they expound my Text: You only have I known of all the families of
the earth. I have known you only. Vos tantummodo mihi in viros cultores
assumpsi, aut possedi, says Illyricus. You only have I taken to be the men for
my worship: you alone have I possessed.

For I have known you, the Chaldee Paraphrast has, I have chosen you. I have
chosen you. Not amiss: if by this choice, you understand not, that special
election Ephesians. 1.4.
and choice of God, by which he has ordained to life eternal those, whom of
his free good will and pleasure he has decreed to endow with a celestial
inheritance. For its not to be denied, but that among the people of Israel,
there were many, that had no part in this eternal election and choice of God.
Many of them had no part in it, and therefore this election and choice is not
here to be understood.

But there is another election and choice of God, an election and choice more
general; an election, a choice, whereby God prefers some one Nation above
others, graciously to manifest himself, and to reveal his saving word unto
them. And thus may God be said only to have elected and chosen the people of
Israel. You only have I chosen of all the families of the earth.

That the people of Israel were alone thus elected and chosen of God, Moses
confesses, Deuteronomy. 4.7, 8. What nation, says he, is there so great, who has
God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things, that we call upon
him for? And what nation is there so great, that has statutes and judgments
so righteous, as all this Law is, which is set before us this day? It is as if
he had thus said: Let us be compared with the rest of the Nations of the
world, and we shall find that God is good and gracious unto us above them all.
As soon as we pray unto our God, and resort unto him, we feel him near us by
and by. It is not so with other Nations. Again, we have his Laws and
Statutes, and righteous Ordinances: other Nations have not so.

This does the same Moses more plainly deliver, in sundry places of the same
book of Deuteronomy, Chap. 7.6. Chap. 10.15. Chap. 14.2. Chap. 26.18. In all
which places his purpose is to fasten it in the memories of the people of
Israel, that they were an holy people unto the Lord their God: that the Lord
their God had chosen them to be a peculiar people unto himself above all
people that were upon the face of the earth. In the three first places is
expressly said, that the Lord did choose Israel to be a peculiar people unto
himself above all the Nations that are upon the earth: in the fourth, that the
Lord avouched them to be his peculiar people. He chose them, he avouched them
to be his peculiar people; and all for his promise sake.

The promise is, Exodus 19.5. Ye shall be a peculiar or chief treasure unto me
above all people, though all the earth be mine. A peculiar, or a chief
treasure! The Hebrew word is (...) Segullah, which signifies ones own proper
good, which he loves and keeps in store for himself, and for special use.

You shall be (...) Segullah, a peculiar, a chief treasure unto me above all
people. The meaning of this promise is, that, although the whole earth be the
Lords by the right of creation, yet this people, the people of Israel, should
above all other have a special interest in him. Or the meaning is, that the
Lord would commit unto this people, his people Israel, as a chief and
principal treasure, his Laws and Statutes, which he would not do to any
other people in the world besides. So much is acknowledged, Psalm. 147.19, 20.
He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and ordinances unto Israel. He
has not dealt so with any Nation. Certainly hereby the Lord shows how dear
and how precious the people of Israel were in his eyes; and what prerogatives
they (...) have above other people.

A chief prerogative of theirs, is, that the Oracles of God were committed
unto them. Saint Paul affirms it, Romans 3.1, 2. What all (...) together has
the (...) what profit (...) of circumcision? Much every way: chiefly, because
(...) them were committed the Oracles of God.

Many other, and very excellent prerogatives had they. They are helped up
together, Romans 9.4. They were Israelites; to them perish (...), and (...) and
this covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the
promises: Theirs were the Fathers, and of them as concerning the flesh Christ
came, who is over all, God blessed for ever.

So many preeminences, are so many evidences and demonstrations, that of all
the nations of the Earth, the Israelites were known of God, were chosen by
him, and were his possession. They were known of him by the knowledge of his
approbation: they were chosen by him, and were separated from among all the
people of the earth to be his inheritance. So Solomon confesses, 1 King. 8.53.
and the Lord himself here in my Text avouches: You only have I known of all
the families of the earth.

Your will now confess with me, that these words are, as in the beginning I
said they were, a Commemoration of Gods benefits upon Israel. Every prerogative
of theirs was a benefit, a blessing of God upon them. It was Gods blessing upon
them, that to them were committed the Oracles of God. It was Gods blessing upon
them that they were Israelites, that to them pertained the adoption, and the
glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God,
and the promises. It was Gods blessing upon them, that theirs were the Fathers,
and that of them, concerning the flesh, Christ came.

These great benefits, these blessings of God upon the Israelites, Albertus
Magnus in his Enarration upon the words of my Text, reduces to the number of
five. Thus: You only have I known of all the families of the Earth, per
beneplacitum. Only you of all the families of the Earth have I known by my
good pleasure: Quia me vobis reuelani, legem vobis posui, promissiones adhibui,
praemiis remuneraui, prophetiis illuminani. I have revealed my self unto you,
I have given you the Law, I have made to you the promises, I have recompensed
you with rewards, I have illuminated you with Prophesies. Then adds he that of
the Psalm, Non taliter fecit omni nationi: He has not dealt so with every
Nation. With every Nation! Nay he has not so with any Nation.

Upon this first part of my Text; this Commemoration of Gods benefits bestowed
upon Israel, I grounded my first observation. It is this: It is an excellent
privilege to be known of God by the knowledge of his approbation; to be
chosen of him to be his people, to be in his love and favor; to be under his
care and providence.

The excellency of this privilege appears in this, that the Lord here calls
Israel to the remembrance of it, saying, You only have I known of all the
families of the earth. This excellent privilege, the true service of the living
God through the free use of his holy Word and Sacraments wheresoever it is found
among any people, is a sure pledge that the Lord knows that people with the
knowledge of his approbation, that he has chosen them to be his peculiar
people, that they are in his love and favor, and that he cares and provides
for them.

How much then (Beloved) how much are we indebted to the Majesty and bounty of
Almighty God, who has graced us with so excellent a blessing as is the
Ministry of his holy Word? His holy Word! It is a Jewel, than which nothing
is more precious; to which any thing compared is but dross; by which
whatsoever is tried, will be found lighter than vanity.

The true estimate of this Jewel may be had out of the 19. Psalm. At the 7.
verse. it is Perfect, nothing may be added to it, without marring of it: it
conuerteth the soul, and turns it from evil to good. It is sure; you may
build upon the truth of it, as well for the promises of mercy, as for the
threatenings of judgment. It gives wisdom, the wisdom of the spirit, even
unto the simple, to the humble and lowly of mind. At the eighth verse, It is
right, without any injustice or corruption. It rejoices the heart, with true
and sound joy. It is pure, pure in all points, and gives light to the eyes,
the eyes of the mind, that we may securely trace the way to Heaven. At the
ninth verse, It is clean, without spot or show of evil, and endures for ever
without alteration or change. It is truth without falsehood, and is righteous
all together, there is no error in it.

Is your desire for profit, or for pleasure? This Jewel yields you both. At
the tenth verse; for profit, it is compared to Gold, for pleasure to Honey. For
profit it is more to be desired than gold, yea than much fine gold: for
pleasure, it is sweeter than honey or the honey comb.

Moreover, at the tenth verse. It will make you circumspect; it will show you
the danger of sin, and will teach you how to avoid it, and may encourage you
to obedience, for as much as in the keeping of it, there is great reward. Great
reward; yet through Gods mercy, and not of your merit.

Now dearly beloved, is the holy Word of God a Jewel so precious? of such an
estimate? Then give ear to the exhortation of wisdom; Prou. 23.23. Buy it,
and sell it not. Buy it, what ere it cost you, seek by all means to obtain
it; and when you have gotten it, sell it not at any hand: depart not from it
for any price, for any cause. But let it (according to the exhortation, that
Saint Paul made to the Colossians, Chap. 3.16. Let it dwell in you plenteously
in all wisdom. It is, as one wittily speaks, Gods best friend, and the Kings
best friend, and the Courts best friend, and the Cities best friend, and the
Countries best friend, and every man's best friend. Give it therefore
entertainment, not as to a forreiner or stranger, but as to your familiar, as
to your best friend, let it dwell in you. And since it comes not empty, but
brings with it, as well pleasure, as profit, as you have already heard, Let it
dwell in you plenteously. Plenteously; Yet in all wisdom. Let us hear it in
all wisdom, read it in all wisdom, meditate upon it in all wisdom, speak
of it in all wisdom, and preach it in all wisdom; not only in wisdom, but in
all wisdom, that the words of our mouths, and the meditations of our hearts
may ever be acceptable in the sight of the Lord our strength and our Redeemer.

Thus far of my first observation, grounded upon the Commemoration of Gods
blessings upon Israel; You only have I known of all the families of the earth.

You only! My second observation is: that, this great blessing of the true
service of God, and the free use of his holy Word, was in the days before
Christ appropriate to the people of the Jews.

This appears by some of those places before alleged, Deuteronomy. 4.7, 8 and Psalm.
147.19, 20. for the further illustration of the point, that of the 76. Psalm,
verse. 1, 2. may well serve: In Judah is God known, his name is great in
Israel, in Salem is his tabernacle, and his dwelling in Sion. In which words,
the Psalmist gives unto the land of Judah and Israel this prerogative above
the rest of the Nations of the whole earth, that there God was known, and his
name was great, but especially in Salem, that is, in Jerusalem, and in Mount
Sion, the place which he desired for his habitation. Psalm. 132.13.
There was God known; his name was great there. Elsewhere it was not so. It
was not so among the Nations. For (as Barnabas and Paul told the men of Lystra,
Acts 14.16.) in times past God suffered all Nations to walk in their own
ways. The way of God they then knew not.

The then state of the Nations Saint Paul, Ephesians. 2.12. elegantly decyphereth
in five circumstances. He bids them remember what they were in time past: as
that first, they were without Christ; secondly, they were aliens from the
common wealth of Israel; thirdly, they were strangers from the covenants of
promise; fourthly, they were without hope; fifthly, they were without God in the
world. Enough is said for the confirmation of my second observation, which was,
that in time of old, in time past, in the days before Christ his coming in
the flesh, the true service of God, and the exercise of his holy word was
appropriate to the people of the Jews, to the children of Israel.

Now the reasons of this appropriation, are two. One is, Gods undeserved and
special love; the other is, the truth of his promise. Both are expressed,
Deuteronomy. 7. At the seventh verse the false cause is removed; at the eighth the
true is put. The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because ye
were more in number than any people: for ye were the fewest of all people.
There the false cause is removed. The true cause is put in the words following:
But because the Lord loved you, and because he would keep the oath, which he
swore unto your fathers, therefore has the Lord brought you out with a mighty
hand, and redeemed you out of the house of bondmen, from the hand of Pharaoh
King of Egypt: and has given you the rich treasure of his true service and
holy Word. To you only has he been so gracious, not for any dignity or worth
of yours, but for his own loves sake, and for his promise sake.

One use of this observation may be to show, that heretofore Grace was not so
universal, as Papists now would have it to be. The knowledge of the means of
salvation was denied to the Nations.

A second use may be, to admonish us, that we hold it for a singular blessing,
that the Lord has reserved us for these last days, wherein the word of God of
old time limited to the coasts of Iudaea and Palaestina, Ephesians. 2.13.
is now published unto us of the Gentiles. Now in Christ Jesus, we who were
sometimes far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ. Now therefore we are
no more strangers and forreiners, Psalm. 107.8.
but fellow-heires with the Saints, and of the household of God. Of that we
would therefore praise the Lord for this his goodness, and declare this wonder
that he has done for us.

It is time, that from the Commemoration, we descend to the Commination. The
Commination is in these words: Therefore I will punish you for all your
iniquities.

Therefore! Why? Because the Lord has known Israel above all the families of
the earth, will he therefore punish them for all their iniquities? Is not the
sequel absurd, You only have I known of all the families of the earth,
therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities? Were it not better thus;
You only have I known of all the families of the earth, therefore I will
spare you, I will pardon you, I will not punish you for all your iniquities.

Deuteronomy. 5.2.
For removing of this scruple, we must have recourse to that Covenant which the
Lord made with Israel in Horeb. The form of the Covenant is extant, Exodus
19.5. If you will obey my voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then ye shall
be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people. This Covenant is more at
large described in Deuteronomy. 7. and 28. The sum of it is: If thou will hearken
diligently to the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe and to do all his
Commandments which he commands thee, then blessed shall thou be; but if
thou will not, accursed shall thou be.

The Covenant you see is upon a condition. If the condition be broken on
Isreal's part, God is no longer on his part tied to any performance. This
sequel then may be good: I have chosen you by Covenant above all the nations
of the earth, that ye should keep my Law; but you have failed in the
condition; you have not kept my Law. Therefore I will punish you; and will
punish you for all your iniquities.

Therefore] because you having been graciously received by me into favor, do
run headlong into all iniquity, I will punish you: therefore I will punish
you. In the Hebrew it is Visitabo super vos, or contra vos, I will visit upon
you, or against you. The Vulgar Latin has Visitabo super vos, I will visit
upon you all your iniquities.

I will visit.] To visit, is sometimes in the holy Scripture taken in the evil
part, for to visit in anger or dispeasure, whence by a Synecdoche of the Genus
for the Species, it betokens to punish. So is God said to visit, when with
some sudden, and unlooked for scourge or calamity, he takes vengeance upon
men for those sins, which for a long time he seemed to take no notice of.

In that part of David's Prayer, Psalm. 59.5. O Lord God of hosts, the God of
Israel, awake thou to visit the heathen, to visit is to visit in anger, it is
to corroct, it is to punish. In the 89. Psalm. verse. 32. to such as depart from
the Law of the Lord, and from that rule of righteousness which it prescribes
them to walk in, the Lord threatens, that he will visit their transgression
with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes. And there to visit, must needs
be to visit in anger, for as much as it brings a rod and stripes with it. It is
to correct, it is to punish. In the thirteetnh of Esaias, verse. 11. the Lord
says, I will visit the world for their evil, and the wicked for their
iniquity. And there also to visit, is to visit in anger: it is to correct, it
is to punish.

Now as to visit signifies in the now alleged places, so does it in my Text,
I will visit you, I will visit you in mine anger: it is to correct, it is to
punish.

Now as to visit signifies in the now alleged places, so does it in my Text,
I will visit you, I will visit you in mine anger, I will correct you, I will
punish you. But for what? It follows, For all your iniquities.

For all, either universal, or indefinitely. For all universally; so the
gloss takes it, so Albertus the Bishop of Ratisbone; so Rupertus the Abbot of
Tuitium. I will punish you for all, Vt sit nihil impunitum, that nothing be
unpunished. I will punish you for all, Instante judicio, remota misericordia,
summa cum seueritate; with instant judgment, without mercy, with greatest
severity. I will punish you for all. For it is a just thing even with men, that
he that makes a Law, should punish according to the Law.

Or, All, may here be taken indefinitely, for some of all. It is Drusius his
observation; Omnes dixit, pro omne genus, vel plerasque. All, he has said for
all sorts, or for the most part. I will punish you for all your iniquities;
that is, for the sorts of your iniquities, or for the most part of them. For
the Lord of his clemency and mercy remitteth unto his some of their iniquities.

Of these two expositions for this place I prefer the former. So shall this
second branch of my Text bear with it this understanding; Therefore I will
visit upon you all your iniquities. Therefore] because you, having been
respected by me, and received into my favor above all the Nations of the
earth, have notwithstanding forsaken my Laws, and corrupted my service, I will
visit upon you all your iniquities. I will punish you for all; for all,
universally; for all your iniquities; not one of them shall escape unpunished.
I will punish you for all your iniquities. I] there is the Agent. Will punish]
there is the Action. You] there is the Patient. For all your iniquities] there
is the Cause. I will punish you for all your iniquities.

From the Agent and his Action, arises this observation; Whatsoever punishment
befalls any one in this life, it is from the Lord.

The Lord! He is (...), he is efficiens primarum, he is the primary and
principal actor in all punishments. He is a sure revenger of all impiety, as
he is the maintainer of his holy Law.

This office of punishing, the Lord assumeth to himself, Esaias 45.7. I am the
Lord, and there is none else: I form the light, and create darkness: I make
peace, and create evil: I the Lord do all these things. I create evil. In
this place, by Evil, we are not to understand malum culpae, (...), not
robbery, not covetousness, nor any like wickedness; but malum poene, (...),
as Saint Chrysostom speaks, Homily 23. upon Matthew, the stripes or wounds
that we receive from above. Gasper Sanchius does here reckon up, whatsoever
disturbeth our tranquillity or quiet, whatsoever external or domestical
vexation we have, whatsoever takes from us the faculty and opportunity of
those things that are necessary for our life; as war, and exile, and
depredation, and servitude, and want, and the like. Of all these it may be
truly affirmed, that the Lord creates them; the Lord does them all.

Of such evils is that also to be understood, which our Prophet Amos has in
the sixth verse of this Chapter: Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord
has not done it? The interrogation is used, the more to urge the point. Shall
there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? There shall be none.
No evil of punishment, no calamity, no misery, no cross, no affliction shall
be in any City, or in any other place of the world, but the Lord is the actor
of it: he does it.

Hereof was holy Job well advised. The check he gives his Wife shows it.
She seeing him all smitten over with sore biles from the sole of his foot unto
the crown of his head, falls a tempting him: Do thou yet retain thine
integrity? Curse God and die. Jobs reply unto her is, Chap. 2.10. Thou speak
as one of the foolish women speaks: What? Shall we receive good at the hand
of God, and shall we not receive Evil? Shall we not receive Evil? By Evil
he means the Evil not of sin, but of punishment: as calamities, miseries,
crosses, afflictions, and the like: which he calls evil, not because they
are so indeed, but because many think them so to be. For things may be
termed Evil in a twofold understanding. Some are indeed Evil; such are our
sins, and of them God is not the cause. Some are not indeed Evil, but only
in regard of us, in regard of our sense, of our feeling, of our apprehension,
of our estimation. Such are the punishments, the calamities, the miseries, the
afflictions, whereto we are in this life subject: and of these God is the
cause. This is it which Job acknowledges in the reproof of his wives folly;
Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive Evil? and
it fitly serves for the establishment of my doctrine.

Whatsoever punishment befalls any one in this life, its from the Lord. The
reason hereof is: because the Lord is the principal doer of all things. He is
the primary agent, the chiefest actor in all things, and therefore in all the
punishments which do befall us in this life.

The uses of this observation are two:

One is to reprove some Philosophers of old, and some ignorant people now
adays, for a vain opinion of theirs, whereby they attribute to accident,
chance, and fortune, all those their afflictions, from the least to the
greatest, whereof they fee not any apparent cause.

The other is, to admonish us, that when any affliction is upon us, we take it
patiently as coming from the Lord; and repine not at the instruments, by whom
we are afflicted. They without him could do nothing against us. Whatsoever
they do, they do it by his permission. The hand of his particular providence
is with them to appoint the beginning, and end, and measure, and continuance of
all our afflictions. Wherefore in all our afflictions let our practice be, as
holy David's was, Psalm. 39.9. even to hold our peace, and say nothing, because
the Lord has done it.

From the Agent and his Action, I pass to the Patient: You. I will punish You.
Y^u, mine own possession; You, my peculiar treasure; You, my chosen people
above all the Nations of the earth, I will punish you. My observation from
hence is: The Lord does punish his servants in this life above others.

This truth I further prove out of Saint Peter, Epist. 1. Chap. 4. Verse. 17. He
there says, The time is come, that judgment must begin at the house of God.
At the house of God it must begin. His servants therefore must have the first
taste of it: and the time is come for them to have it. Is the time now come?
Was it not before? Yes; it was ever. Nadab and Abihu, two of Aarons sons,
they offer strange fire before the Lord: and a fire comes out from the Lord,
and deuoures. This is it, that the Lord spoke saying, In propinquis meis
sanctificabor, Leuit. 10.3. I will be sanctified in them, that come nigh me. If
they that come nigh unto me transgress my laws I will not spare them; they,
even they shall feel the heaviness of my hand.

So says the Lord, Ierem. 25.29. Lo, I begin to bring evil on the City, in
which my name is called upon. And there you see: It is not the service of God,
not the calling upon his holy Name, that can exempt a place from punishment if
it be polluted with iniquity.

Begin at my Sanctuary. It is the Lords direction for the punishment of
Jerusalem, Ezech. 9.6. Go through the City, and smite, Let not your eye spare,
neither have ye pity: Slay v^terly old and young: yea, maids and little
children, and women. But come not near any man upon whom is the mark; the
rest slay utterly old and young, Spare not, Pity not, and begin at my
Sanctuary.

Now lay we all this together: Begin with them, that are nigh unto me:
begin at my City, at my house, at my Sanctuary, spare none; pity none, smite
all. You see my observation made good: The Lord does punish his servants in
this life above others.

I say in this life.

One reason hereof may be; because the Lord, out of his love to his servants,
will not suffer them to go on in sin.

A second may be; eternal punishments are prepared for the wicked hereafter,
and therefore here in this life are they the less punished.

And the uses may be two:

One, to lessen us, that in the multitude and the greatness of our
afflictions, we acknowledge Gods great mercy, and endeavor to bear them all
with patience and contentment. Whenever Gods hand shall be upon us, in
judgment for our sins; let that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.32. be our
comfort, When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not
be condemned with the world.

A second use may be, to show unto us, how fearful their case is, who pass
all their time here in this world without any touch of affliction. Affliction!
it is the badge of every son of God. Whosoever has no part herein, he is a
bastard, he is no son. So says the Apostle, Heb. 12.8.

I have done with the Patient; with the parties punished. Now a word or two of
the cause of their punishment, which is the last circumstance, in these words;
For all your iniquites. I will punish you for all your iniquities; for all your
sins; for all, not only original, but also actual: and for all actual, not
only of commission, but also of omission; not only of knowledge, but also of
ignorance; not only of presumption, but also of infirmity: I will punish you
for all your sins. For all. The observation is: The Lord will not suffer any
sin to escape unpunished.

Sin! It is causa (...), it is the impulsive cause of punishment. It plucks
down vengeance from the Majesty of Heaven. Its true of every sin, even of
the least sin: Cognatum, immo innatum omni scoleri, scelaris supplicium. The
wages of sin is death. As the work is ready, so the pay is present. Nec
aufertur, nec differtur. If impiety, no impunity. Its impossible, any sin
should be without punishment. Impossible. The reasons are two:

One is taken from the justice of God. It is a part of Gods justice to punish
sin, and therefore he cannot but punish it.

The other is taken from the truth of God. God who is ever true, has threatened
to punish sin, and therefore he will not leave any sin unpunished.

The consideration of this point, Beloved, should be unto us a bar to keep
us in, that we be not too secure, too presumptuous of our own estate. We
cannot be ignorant, for we have learned it out of Gods Word, that we have
whole armies of enemies to encounter withal, not only out of us, in the world
abroad, but also within us lurking within our own flesh, even our sins.
These sins of ours are our cruelest enemies. They are ever burring us on to
punishment. Wherefore let us be at utter defiance with them; and use we all
holy means to get the victory over them, by the daily exercises of prayer and
repentance, and by a continual practice of new obedience to Gods most holy
Will, according to that measure of grace which we have received. So shall our
sins, all our sins, lie drowned in the most precious blood of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, as in a bottomless Sea, from which they shall never be
able to rise up against us for our hurt.

THE Third Lecture.
AMOS 3.3. Can two walk together, except they be agreed?

Will a Lion roar in the Forest, when he has no prey? Will a young Lion cry
out of his den, if he have taken nothing?

Can a bird fall in a snare upon the earth, where no gin is for him? Shall one
take up a snare from the earth, and have taken nothing at all?

Shall a Trumpet be blown in the City, and the people not be afraid? Shall
there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it.


OF the three parts, which heretofore I have observed in this third Chapter and
second Sermon of Amos concerning the kingdom of the ten Tribes, this is the
third, and is continued from this third verse to the end of this Chapter. I
termed it an Enarration, a Declaration, an Exposition, an Expolition. Call you
it as you will. Here shall you find the Proposition, whereof you heard in my
last Lecture, powerfully and elegantly made good. The substance of the
Proposition was; God having been good and gracious to a people, if he be
repaid with unthankfulness, will assuredly visit that people, and punish them
for all their iniquities.

For the polishing and adorning hereof we have here diverse similitudes, by
diverse Interpreters, diversely expounded. I find among them five different
expositions.

Some will have all these similitudes, all six, to be brought to prove one and
the same thing; namely: That no evil can befall any city, except the Lord
command it. Of this exposition Saint Hierome makes mention. It is the
exposition of Theodoret, and Remigius: and may run thus. As it cannot be,
that two should walk together, except they be agreed; or that a Lion should
roar in the forest, when he has no prey; or, that a Lions whelpe should cry
out of his den, if he have gotten nothing; or, that a bird should fall in a
snare upon the earth, where no gin is for him; or, that a Fowler should take up
his snare from the ground, before he have taken somewhat; or, that the Trumpet
should sound an Alarm in the City, and the people not fear: so it cannot be,
that there should be any evil, any evil of punishment, any plague in a City,
except the Lord command it so to be.

Some there are that expound these similitudes, of Gods agreement with his
Prophets for the denouncing of some evil that is eminent and near at hand.
Lyra, Hugo, and Dionysius, do so expound them. Their exposition runs thus:
As it cannot be, that two should walk together for the dispatch of a
business, except they be first agreed; or, that a Lion should roar in the
forest when he has no prey, and so forth of the rest; So it cannot be, that
Gods Prophets should forewarne us of any judgment that shall befall us, except
they be first agreed with God, and God speak in them. This exposition
Christophorus a Castro takes for good, because it is said verse. 7. of this
Chapter, Surely, the Lord God will do nothing, but he reuealeth his secret
unto his servants the Prophets. By his servants, the Prophets, the Lord roareth
as a Lion, he lays his snares as a Fowler, he sounds an alarm as with a
trumpet, and proclaims evil to a City.

Others there are, that refer these similitudes to the disagreement that is
between God and Israel. Albertus, Rupertus; and Isidore, do so refer them.
Their exposition may run thus: as it cannot be, that two should walk
together, except they be agreed; so it cannot be, that God should walk with
Israel. The time indeed was, when God walked with his people Israel, and Israel
with God. It was then, when they of Israel were desirous to please God, to do
his holy will, and to depend upon him. But afterward, when they forsook God,
and betook themselves to the service of strange gods, Idoll-gods, Devils, it
could not be, that God should walk any longer with them, or they with God. No
marvel then, if upon this disagreement, the Lord by his Prophets do roar at
Israel, as a Lion roareth at his prey: nor marvel, if he lay a snare for them,
as a Fowler does for birds: no marvel, if he sound an alarm as with a
Trumpet, and proclaim against them.

There is yet a fourth exposition; the exposition of Arias Montanus. He
understands these similitudes of the disagreement, that was between the two
peoples, of Israel and Judah. Notorious was the revolt of Israel from Judah:
notorious the rent of the ten Tribes from the other two. By this revolt, or
rent, of one kingdom were made two: the kingdom of Israel, and the kingdom
of Judah. Here was much a do, much contention, which kingdom should be the
chief, which should have the preeminence. Notwithstanding this their variance,
yet was there a concord between them: a concord, to forsake the Law of the
Lord and his holy worship: a concord to tread the paths of superstition, and
to embrace the service of Idols. Herein they were agreed. Agreed among
themselves, but not with God. The more they were agreed among themselves, the
further off they were from any agreement with God. Now this exposition is: As
it cannot be, that two should walk together, except they be agreed: so it
cannot be that God should walk either with Israel or Judah: As well Judah, as
Israel, being at odds with God, as having left his holy Law, and polluted
themselves with superstition, must taste of the severity of Gods displeasure.
God will be unto them as a Lion that roareth at his prey; and as a snare that
is spread by the Fowler; he will cause an alarm to be heard among them, and
will summon them to battle, whereby their ruin shall be wrought: ruin upon
Israel through Salmanasser, and ruin upon Judah through Nabuchodonosor.

I cannot pass by a fifth exposition. I have it from Saint Hieroms relation;
from his reading Legi in cuiusdam commentario, rem difficilem persuadere
cupientis, I have read, says he, in a Commentary of one, that is willing to
persuade a hard matter; that here are eight comminations, answering to eight
precedent impieties. Those eight impieties are these: the first of Damascus;
the second of Gaza, and other Cities of Palaestina; the third of Tire; the
fourth of Idumaea or Edom; the fifth of the children of Ammon; the sixth of Moab;
the seventh of Judah, or of the two Tribes; the eight of Israel, or, of the ten
Tribes. Five of them are discovered in the first Chapter, the other three in
the second. To these eight impieties, eight comminations are here rendered; to
the first, the first; to the second, the second; to the rest, the rest in their
order. Quod vtrum rerum sit, nouerit ipse, qui scripsit: But whether this be
so, or not, let him that wrote it, look to it. So does Saint Hierome put by
this fifth exposition: neither do I see any reason to admit it.

The four former are more pertinent to this place, and of them the two first
are most of all, as Castrus supposes. But which is indeed the most pertinent,
it will appear by the particular consideration of each similitude in its
order. I begin with the first. The first similitude is taken from wayfaring
men, from travelers: verse. 3.

Can two walk together, except they be agreed? (...). So Saint Cyrill begins
his exposition of this verse. We have here a profound riddle, and an obscure
saying; (...), yet will we speak of it, we will expound it, as we may.

Can two walk together, except they be agreed?] The translation of the
Septuagint is, (...), Will two walk wholly to the same purpose, (...), unless
they know one the other? The Vulgar Latin has Nunquid ambulabunt duo pariter,
Will two walk together, nisi conuenerit eis, unless they be agreed? Tremelius
and Iunius, and Piscator; their translation is; An ambulaturi essent duo vna,
Would two walk together, nisi conuenirent, unless they could agree? Drusius
he reads: An ibunt duo simul, Will two go together, nisi conuenerint, unless
they meet in some certain place? Tauerner, an ancient English Translator, he
has, May twain walk together, except they be agreed among themselves. Will
two, Would two, May twain, Can two walk or go together, unless they know
one the other, unless they be agreed, unless they could agree, unless they
meet together, except they be agreed among themselves? Some difference you see
there is in the translations, but the understanding of the place is not thereby
much varied. I follow our newest and best approved English.

Can two walk together, except they be agreed?] Can they? The answer must be
negative; No. They cannot. Can they not? How so? Carthusian says they may. For
a man may be compelled to walk with another. And its plain by that, which our
Savior in his Sermon, in the Mount, says to his Auditors, Mat. 5.41.
Whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain. Now where
compulsion is, there is no agreement: and therefore may two walk together,
though they be not agreed. May they so? To what end then serves this
Interrogation; Can two walk together, except they be agreed?

I answer with Carthusian, that our Prophet here speaks, secundum communem
cursum, according to the common course: and communiter verum esse, that it is
commonly true, that two cannot walk together, except they be agreed. Commonly
it is true, yet not ever so. Drusius has a Solent, to express the meaning
with: Can two walk together, except they be agreed? Mirime solent, they use
not so to do. Mercerus has likewise his Solet, Can two walk together, except
they be agreed? Fere fieri non solet: it is not usual they should do so: For
the most part they do it not. This is it, that Paulus de Palatio has: Solent,
qui volunt iter simul facere, prius secum de eo itinere co^uenire; they who
undertake any journey together, do use first to agree upon it. Should they not
first agree, how could they come together, how walk together? Commonly and for
the most part they could not.

You see now what answer is to be made to the interrogation here; Can two walk
together, except they be agreed? The answer is, They cannot, Commonly they
cannot, for the most part they cannot; usually they cannot. They cannot walk
together, except they be agreed.

It is a known rule: Interrogatio quandoque vim habet nogandi: An
Interrogation has sometimes the force of a Negation. So has it, Genesis 18.14.
Is any thing too hard for the Lord? The answer must be, No; there is nothing
too hard for him. The Angel Gabriel well renders it, Luke 1.37. With God
nothing shall be impossible.

In the seventh Chapter of Saint Matthew, verse. 9, 10. you have a twofold
Interrogation: What man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he
give him a stone? or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent? The answer
must be, No. You will not give any son of yours, a stone in stead of bread,
or a serpent in stead of fish. You will not. You know how to give good gifts
unto your children.

In the same Chapter, verse. 16. the Interrogation is, Do men gather grapes of
thorns, or figs of thistles? The answer must be, No. They do not. It is
against the course of nature, that either thorns should bring forth grapes, or
thistles figs.

Such is the Interrogation here: It has the force of a Negation. Can two walk
together, except they be agreed? The answer must be, No. They cannot. Two
cannot walk together, except they be agreed.

Hitherto you have had the (...), the proposition of this first similitude; now
follows the (...), the reddition of it. Hitherto has been rei extraria
consideratio, now follows rei praesentis accommodatio: hitherto the
explication of the former part; now, the application of the latter. Thus,

As it cannot be, that two should walk together, except they be agreed: so it
cannot be, that the Prophets of the Lord should forewarne us of any judgment,
that shall befall us, except they be first agreed with God, and God speak in
them. This is the second of those five expositions, whereof you heard in the
beginning of this exercise. It was the exposition of Lyra, Hugo, and Dionysius:
and is embraced by later Expositors; by Paulas de Palatio, Marthurinus
Quadratus, and Christophorus a Castro, by Brentius, and Winckleman, by Calvin
and Mercer. The observation is: The Prophets of the Lord cannot forewarne us of
any judgment that shall befall us, except they be first agreed with God, and
God speak in them.

This truth Saint Peter expressly delivers, Ep. 2. Chap. 1. verse. 20, 21. No
prophecy of the Scripture is of any private interpretation: for the prophecy
came not in old time by the will of man; but holy men of God spoke, as they
were moved by the holy Ghost. The Prophets of the Lord spoke not of their own
heads; God spoke in them.

Prophets! They are criers: and criers speak nothing, but what is put into
their mouths. Esaias is a crier. He makes a noise after the manner of a crier,
Esaias 55.1. Hoe, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters. The Lord bids
him cry, Esaias 40.6. and he says, What shall I cry? Then are the words put into
his mouth: All flesh is grass, and all the goodlinesse thereof is as the
flower of the field. John Baptist is a crier. So he styles himself, Ioh. 1.23.
I am the voice of a crier in the wilderness. And how cries he? Even as the
words are put into his mouth: Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths
strait.

Prophets! They are Trumpeters. Their voice is like a Trumpet. Esaias 58.1. Cry
aloud, spare not, Lift up thy voice like a trumpet, show my people their
transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins. They must set the trumpet
to their mouths. Hos. 8.1. They must blow the trumpet, Joel 2.1. But they must
blow it with the breath of the Lord: Otherwise it gives but an uncertain
sound, and a false alarm.

Prophets! They are Watchmen. Their office is, to hear the Word at the Lords
mouth, and then to warn the people. The charge is given them, Ezech. 3.17.
Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel: therefore
hear the Word at my mouth, and give them warning from me. This their charge is
reiterated, Ezeck. 33.7. O son of man, I have set thee a watchman unto the
house of Israel: therefore thou shall hear the Word at my mouth, and warn
them from me. You see; they are not to speak a word, but they have it from the
Lord, and accordingly must they warn the people.

Jeremy, a Prophet. He eats the words of the Lord, Chap. 15.16. and is thereby
fitted to his function.

Ezechiel, a Prophet. A hand is sent unto him, and lo, a roll of a book
therein. The roll is spread before him, and is written within and without.
Within is written, Lamentations, and mournings, and woe. This roll he is
commanded to eat. He eats it. So he goes and speaks unto the house of Israel,
Ezech. 3.3.

Saint John the Divine a Prophet too. He sees an Angel with a little book in
his hand, and begs the book. The Angel gives it him, and bids him eat it. He
takes it and eats it. Then is he fit to prophecy before many peoples, and
nations, and Kings, and tongues, Revel. 10 11.

The Prophets profess of themselves, that they speak nothing besides the pure
word of God. Joshua, he says to the children of Israel: Come hither and hear
the Word of the Lord your God, Chap. 3.9. The words which I shall deliver unto
you concerning what shall come to pass hereafter, they are not my words; they
are the words of the Lord your God. Esaias calls upon Heaven and Earth to hear,
Chap. 1.2. Hear O Heavens, and give ear, O Earth, for the Lord has spoken.
The words, which I now speak unto you, they are not my words, they are the
words of the Lord. Amos our Prophet: he likewise calls upon the children of
Israel in the beginning of this Chapter. Hear this word that the Lord has
spoken against you, O children of Israel. Hear it. It is not my word, it is
the word of the Lord; the Lord has spoken it.

What more familiar in the writings of the Prophets, than these forms of
speech, Thus says the Lord, Says the Lord, the burden of the Word of the
Lord; the Word of the Lord came unto me? They all make for the authority of the
Prophets of old, and their prophesies.

From hence, as also from that they are Eaters of the Word of God, and are
Watchmen, and are Trumpeters, and are Cryers, its evident, their prophesies
were not of their own wills: they spoke not of their own heads; God spoke in
them.

Thus the truth of my Doctrine stands inviolable: The Prophets of the Lord
cannot forewarne us of any judgment that shall befall us, except they be first
agreed with God, and God speak in them.

Here first is a lesson for us, who succeed the Prophets in the Ministry of
the Church. We may not deliver any thing unto you, but what we have gathered
out of the Word of God. Every Minister of the New Testament, should be as
Moses was of the Old. Moses his charge was not to conceal any thing, but to
speak all, Exodus 7.2. Thou shall speak all that I command thee. It is our
part to do the like. It is our part to speak in the Name of God, and in his
Name alone, to feed the flock of Christ with his pure word, and with his word
alone: and to do it as learnedly, as faithfully, as sincerely, as constantly
as we may; leaving the success of all to him that has sent us, and disposes
of all men's hearts at his pleasure. So running our race; we shall one day be at
rest in eternal comfort, fully delivered from this vile world, from wicked
men, from evil natures: from such, who are ever ready to take our best
endeavors in the worst sense, and to requite our honest affections with their
foul disgraces.

Here secondly is a lesson for you. For you, Beloved: for all such as are the
Auditors and hearers of the Word of God. This duty of hearing is to be put in
practice; not dully, but with diligence; not heavily, but with cheerfulness,
as to the Lord. There is a generation of hearers, that would seem desirous to
bear the Word preached, but they would have it of free cost: they like not the
charges it brings with it. O let not any such repiner, any such grudger be
found in the assembly of the Saints. Such, if they confer any thing to the
maintenance of the Ministry, they do it not for conscience sake, but of
necessity; not for any love they bear unto the Word preached, but by
compulsion of Law: not as a free will offering to God for the recompense of his
Kingdom among them, but as a taxation, which they cannot resist. To such the
preaching of the Word is not a benefit, but a burden. So far are they from
taking any delight therein, as that by their good wills they would wholly shake
and shift it off. Carnally minded men, careless and prodigal of the salvation
of their own souls. The horse-keeper that dresseth their horses, the
shepherd that watches their sheep, the heardman that looks to their swine,
the Cobbler that clouteth their shoes, shall willingly be considered for their
pains: but the Minister or Pastor that breaks unto them the bread of life,
shall have no supply from them to the relief of his necessities. No supply!
Nay, well were he if he could hold his own, even that portion of maintenance,
which is allotted to him by the Word of God.

But I hope there cannot be found in this assembly, any one so sacrilegiously
affected. I have good reason to be persuaded much better of you all. Yet you,
as well affected as you are in this behalf, are to be admonished, that to
these exercises of our religion ye come willingly and joyfully. Willingly for
you own duties sake, and joyfully, because from hence you may carry home with
you a Jewel of an inualuable price, even the precious Word of God: wherein
quicquid docetur, veritas; quicquid praecipitur, bonitas; quicquid promittitur,
felicitas est, as Hugo lib. 3. de Anima speaks: Whatsoever is taught, its
truth; whatsoever is commanded, its goodness; whatsoever is promised, its
happiness. Nam Deus veritas est, sine fallacia; bonitas, sine malitia;
felicitas, sine miseria: for Gods is truth, without falsehood; goodness,
without malice; happiness, without misery.

O come ye then hither, as willingly for your duties sake, so also joyfully for
your profits sake. Willingly, and joyfully. It is somewhat, I grant, to come
hither, to this house of God to divine service; but to come willingly and
joyfully, it is a double virtue, and that which gives life unto your coming.
If you come unwillingly or grudgingly, if you be drawn hither, either for
shame of the world, or through fear of Law, you come as men more than half
dead, without either operation of the spirit, or desire of profit, or feeling
of comfort, or increase of faith, or bettering of obedience.

Wherefore, dearly Beloved, let your care be, ever willingly and joyfully to
present your selves in these Courts of the Lord, in his holy Temple. Be ye well
assured, that as he is accursed that does the work of the Lord negligently;
so is he also accursed that comes into the house of the Lord either
unwillingly or grudgingly, as if he were discouraged with the tediousness
either of the way, or of the word.

It is recorded of the people of God, Psalm. 84. that they traveling toward
the place of Gods worship, passed through many dangers, endured much heat,
suffered wants in the wilderness, and all for the delight they took in his
service. The delight that they took in the service of God, did swallow up all
their wants, their travel, their labor, and their pains. It made them say; A
day in thy courts is better than a thousand. And, I had rather be a
doore-keeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness.
A day in thy courts is better than a thousand.] A day] one day only, and no
more, in thy courts] in the courts of God, in his Temple, and the public
meetings and assemblies there, is better] is more sweet, more comfortable, more
profitable, than a thousand] elsewhere, yea, though the place be never so full
of pleasure. And, I had rather be a doore-keeper in the house of my God] I had
rather be of the meanest account in the Church, the place where my God, the
only true and everliving God is served; than to dwell in the tents of
wickednesse] than to make my abode in most stately and gorgeous Palaces,
wherein wickedness is practiced and professed. O! how amiable are thy
tabernacles, O Lord of hosts!

How excellent was this zeal of Gods people? how great their forwardness to
do him service? We would be accounted Gods people, as well as they. But where
is our zeal? Were ours as theirs was, certainly neither blasts of wind, nor
fear of rain, nor heat of Summer, nor cold of Winter, nor a Lion in the way,
nor any like trifle should stop us from coming to the house of God, his
Temple, the place where by his Ministers he speaks to his people.

Thus far by the occasion of my first observation, which was grounded upon
the second of those five expositions, whereof you heard in the beginning of
this exercise. My observation was: The Prophets of the Lord cannot forewarne us
of any judgments that shall befall us, except they be first agreed with God,
and God speak in them. I proceed.

A second application of this first similitude to the matter here intended by
the Holy Ghost, may be thus: As it cannot be, that two should walk together,
except they be agreed; So it cannot be that God should walk with Israel, for
as much as there is a disagreement between them. The time indeed was, when God
walked with Israel, and Israel with God. Then it was, when the people of Israel
were desirous to please God, to do his holy will, and to depend upon him. But
afterward, when rebelliously they forsook God, and applied themselves to the
service of false gods, it could not be, that God should any longer walk with
them, or they with God. This is the third of those five expositions, whereof
even now you heard. It was the exposition of Albertus, Rupertus, and Isidere;
and is embraced by later Expositors, by Pranciscus Ribera, by Petrus Lusitanus,
by Occolampadius, Danaeus, Gualter, Tremellius, and Iunius, and Piscator. The
observation is: When man through his evil courses leaves off to walk with
God, or forsakes him; then will God no longer walk with man, but will also
forsake him.

To walk with God is lovingly to adhere unto him, and to please him. So is the
phrase used in the Prophecy of Micah, Chap. 6.8. What does the Lord require of
thee. O man, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to hu^^^ thy self to
walk with thy God. To walk with thy God, that is, Jonathan translates it, to
walk in the worship and fear of God. Petrus Lusitanus says, it is to live
according to the Law and will of God. And this doubtless is to please God.

It is said of Enoch, Genesis 5.22, 24. that he walked with God. He walked with
God, that is, he pleased God. So does the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews expound the place, chap. 11.5. Enoch before his translation, had this
testimony, that he pleased God. The testimony which he had was, that he walked
with God; and therefore to walk with God, is to please God. Syracides in the
44. of his Ecclesiasticus, verse. 16. says to the same effect. Enoch pleased
the Lord, and was translated, being an example of repentance to all
generations. Enoch pleased the Lord, says Ecclesiasticus; in Genesis it is,
Enoch walked with God: and therefore to walk with God is to please God.
Onkelos says it is, to live in the fear of God; surely he that so lives
pleases God.

It is said of Noah, Genesis 6.9. that he walked with God: Noah was a just man,
perfect in his generations, and walked with God. He walked with God, What Is
that? He lived a solitary life, and professed Monkery? No: He left the
concourse of the world, and got him aside into some wilderness? Nor so. He
lead a single life, and therefore no marvel if he pleased God? Nor this. What
is it then, he walked with God? It is this: He served God, as was fit he
should, in his vocation; he lived piously, and without blame: he composed
himself, not to man's b^cke, to man's example, to man's applause, but wholly to
the holy Will of God: in a word, he led a life acceptable and pleasing unto
God; and so he walked with God.

That which God says to Abram, Genesis 17.1. Walk before me, and be thou
perfect, is all one, as if he had said, Walk with me, and be thou perfect. To
walk with God, or to walk before God, is all one. It is not Foris simulare
pietatem, hypocritarum more; it is not to make outwardly a show of piety, as
Hypocrites use to do; but it is Sincere Deo fidere; it is to trust in God
sincerely, to depend upon him wholly, to serve him alone, and to obey him
according to his will. Such are those servants of the Lord, of whom Solomon
speaks, 2 Chronicles. 6.14. that walk before the Lord with all their hearts. Such
are they that walk in the Law of God, Exodus 16.4. Such they, that walk after
the Lord their God, Deuteronomy. 13.4. where they are further described to fear the
Lord, to keep his Commandments, to obey his voice, to serve him, and to
clean unto him. In the language of Canaan you see it is all one, to walk in
the Law of God, to walk before God, to walk after God, and to walk with God.
The Metaphore is very elegant: and may serve thus far to instruct us; that,
as when we walk, we stand not still, but are ever in motion, and do go
forward: so in the way of piety, in the course of godliness, when we walk
either in the Law of God, or after God, or before God, or with God, we are not
to stand still, but are ever to be in motion, in a spiritual motion, and to
go forward: to go forward, as Origin speaks in his twelfth Homily upon
Genesis, De vita ad vitam, de actu ad actum, de bonis ad meliora, de vtilibus
ad vtiliora, de sanctis ad sanctiora. Our going forward must be from life to
life, from action to action, from good to better, from profitable to more
profitable, from sanctified actions to more sanctified: and all this must be,
Non passibus pedum, sed mentis profectibus, not with the steps of our feet, but
with the profit of our understanding. Our motion in this our walk must be
perpetual. Hominis, qua Christianus est, proprium est, non quiescere: it is
the propriety of a man, as he is a Christian, not to be at quiet, not to rest,
not to stand still, not to be at a stay. For in Schola Christi non progredi est
regredi: in the School of Christ, not to go forward, is indeed to go
backward. Saint Bernard in his 341. Epistle thus expresses it; In the School
of Christ, Non proficere, sine dubio deficere est: not to proceed and profit,
without doubt it is to retire and to faint. And therefore let no man say, Satis
est, sic volo manner, sufficit mihi esse, sicut heri and nudius tertius: It is
enough for me; thus will I abide; its sufficient for me that I am as I was
yesterday and the day before. Let no man say thus with himself. In via
residet, qui huiusmodi est; he that is such a one sits him down in the way. He
goes not forward: he walks not, as he should, either in the Law of God, or
before God, or after God, or with God. Thus far has this Metaphor of walking
led me. Yet may I now leave it without giving some rule of it. The rule is:
Solet Scriptura verbo Ambulandi consensionem animorum explicare: it is the
custom of the Scripture, by this word of walking to express the agreement and
consent of minds.

It is the voice of wisdom to her son, Proverb. 1.15. My son, if sinners
shall say unto thee, Come with us, cast in thy lot among us, let us all have
one purse, Walk not thou in the way with them; refrain thy foot from their
path. Walk thou not in the way with them, that is, ne acquiescas eis, ne illis
assentiaris, yield not to them, agree not with them. This exposition is good by
that, verse. 10. My son, if sinners intise thee, consent thou not.

Syracides in his Ecclesiasticus, Chap. 7.38. according to the vulgar says,
Non desis plorantibus in consolatione, and cum lugentibus ambula. Fail not to
be a comfort to them that weep, and walk with them that mourn. Walk with
them that mourn, that is, Idem sentito, quod illi, think as they think; Eo
animo esto, ac si tua essent illa mala: be thou affected, as if their losses
were thine.

The Psalmist, Psalm. 1.1. pronounces the man blessed, that walks not in the
counsel of the wicked. There is therefore a walking in the counsel of the
wicked. But what is it so to walk? To walk in the counsel of the wicked, is
to yield thine assent, to agree unto, to join thy self in naughty practices
with the wicked. Blessed is the man that so walks not.

Enough for the rule. The rule was: It is the custom of the Scripture by this
word of Walking to express the agreement and consent of minds. Its justified
by my Text: Can two walk together except they be agreed? and may conclude the
truth of my observation: When man through his evil courses leaves off to
walk with God, then will God no longer walk with him. When man forsakes God,
then will God also forsake him.

Then, and not before. The ancient Fathers are frequent in auowing this truth.
Saint Augustine in his book, De bono Perseuerantiae, cap. 6. gives it for
granted; Voluntate sua quemque deserere Deum, vt merito deseratur a Deo; that a
man of his own will first forsakes God, that God may well forsake him. The
same Father in his 88. Sermon De Tempore, exhorts his then Auditors, faithfully
and firmly to believe, that God never forsakes man, nisi prius deseratur ab
homine, unless he be first forsaken of man. In his Soliloquies, cap. 14. he
brings in the soul in her private talk with God acknowledging as much:
Quocunque iero, tu me Domine non deseris, nisi prior ego te deseram: O my Lord,
go I whither I will, thou will never forsake me, unless I forsake thee first.

To this purpose writes Saint Prosper in his answer to the objections of the
French, his sentence upon the seventh objection: Although the omnipotency of
God could have given to them that would fall, strength to stand, Gratia tamen
eius non prius eos deseruit, quam ab eis desereretur; Yet did not God forsake
them, before he was forsaken of them.

Saint Bernard in his deuoutest Meditations, cap. 7. speaks home to this
point. God! fidelis socius est, he is a faithful companion; nec deserit
sperantes in se, nisi ipse prior deseratur, and forsakes not them that trust in
him, unless he be first forsaken of them.

Neither the time, nor your patience will suffer me to allege, what Hom. 4. in
1. cap ad Romans
Chrysostom, what Hom. 4. Qui deficiunt a Deo, ab eo deseruntur.
Macarius, what others of the ancient have in their books delivered concerning
the point in hand. Sufficient has been said already, not only for the
confirmation, but also for the illustration of my second observation; which
was, When man, through his evil courses, leaves off to walk with God, then
will God no longer walk with him. When man forsakes God, then will God also
forsake him.

But why is it thus? Why is it, that man first leaves off to walk with God,
ere God leaves off to walk with man? Why is it, that man first forsakes God,
ere God forsake him?

The reason hereof may be taken from the promise of God. His promise is to
Ioshuah, chap. 1.5. I will not leave thee nor forsake thee. Not to Ioshuah
alone is this promise made, but to all; to all the godly. The Author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews so applies it, chap. 13.5. I will never leave thee nor
forsake thee. He brings it for a motive against Covetousness; against the
insatiable greediness after the Mammon of this world, which is to many their
delight, their love, their solace, and to some their God. Let your conversation
be without Covetousness, and be content with such things as you have. For he
has said, God has said it, I will never leave it, I will never leave thee nor
forsake thee. God is ever as good as his word. He has said it, I will never
leave thee nor forsake thee. Nor will he. Look what care he had of Ioshuah,
the like he has of all that trust in him. He will never leave them, he will
not forsake them. If they leave God, if they leave off to walk with him, if
they forsake him, so it is: the fault is their own, God is no way to be
blamed.

Now lets make some use of my second observation: I can but point at it.

If it be thus, Beloved. If God leaves not off to walk with us, till we leave
off to walk with him; if he forsake not us, till we forsake him: O then let
it be our care, never to leave off to walk with him, never to forsake him. Our
sins they are, that break off our walk with God, and cause us to forsake
him. To what purpose make we a show of walking with him, of delighting in him,
if in the mean time we hold fast by those funes peccatorum of Prou. 5.22.
Solomon, the cords of sin, those vincula plaustri of Cap. 5.18.
Esaias, the Cartropes of sin, and so drive God from us? If by our sins, our
drunkenness, our luxury, our uncleanness, our covetousness, our oppression,
our uncharitableness, and other our sins no less odious, which indeed are
the very diet and dainties of the Devil, we feast the foul fiends of Hell,
we drive God from us. He can no longer walk with us, he cannot but forsake us.

What shall we then do, Beloved? What? Certainly, Ne Deum moueamus, vt nos
deserat, opus est vt inter nos and ipsum conueniat: that we cause not God to
forsake us, there must be between him and us an agreement. Agreement there
can be none, if we go on still to provoke him with our impieties. Wherefore
that there may be between us an agreement, tread we the way scored out unto
us by Saint Paul, Titus the second Chapter and the twelfth Verse, which is,
that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we live for the time to come
soberly, righteously, and godlily in this present world, looking for that
blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ. So doing, we shall be at agreement with God and walk with him.

But here, Beloved, Magna custodia tibi necessaria est, as Bernard speaks in
the sixth Chapter of his Meditations: Its necessary that thou keep a diligent
watch and ward over thy self, that thou neither do, nor say, nor think any
thing that is unlawful, and may offend. For thou live before the eyes of the
Judge that sees all things. Cum illo tamen semper es securus, yet with him,
with so all-seeing a Judge, thou art secure and safe, if thou so behave thy
self, that he may vouchsafe to be with thee. What said I? So behave thy
self that he may vouchsafe to be with thee? Nay howeuer thou behave thy
self, he will not fail to be with thee. Si tecum non est per gratiam, adest
per vindictam; if he be not with thee by his gracious favor, he will assuredly
be with thee in vengeance, to pay thee home for thy mis-doings. Sed vae tibi,
si ita tecum est: but woe is thee, if he be so with thee.

What then remains for thee, for me, for every one of us, but that we all
endeavor so to spend the residue of the days of our pilgrimage here in this
life, in all righteousness and true holiness, that God, our good God, be not
at any time provoked to be with us, per vindictam, by his vengeance, who is
ever most willing to be with us per gratiam, by his gracious favor. So having
finished our course here, in this mortality, we shall be advanced to a state
immortal in the Paradise of Heaven, where we shall with all Saints sing
perpetually Hallelujah, Salvation, and Honor, and Glory, and Power, unto the
Lord our God. To this state immortal, the immortal, invisible, and only wise
God vouchsafe to bring us all, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

THE Fourth Lecture.
AMOS 3.4. Will a Lion roar in the Forest, when he has no prey? Will a young
Lion cry out of his den, if he have taken nothing?


THat a people, chosen by God himself to be his peculiar, above all the
Nations upon the earth, honored with many singular and super-eminent
privileges, advanced to the custody of Gods holiest Oracles, should be so
stif-necked, so uncircumcised of hearts and ears, so disobedient, so
rebellious, as to set at naught the threatenings of the Lord, to account them
vain, to esteem of them as of sports, could it ever be imagined? Yet thus
stood the case with the people of the ten Tribes, the children of Israel, with
whom this our Prophet Amos was to deal.

Amos, to meet with such their gross stupidity, and to reform their erroneous
conceits of those fearful threatenings; which the Almighty by the mouth of his
holy Prophets uses to give forth against sinners and wicked men, instructs
them by similitudes. The similitudes which here he brings, are in number six.
They are all taken from vulgar experience, and such as is incident to a
Shepherds walk. Of the first, taken from wayfaring men, from two travelers
upon the way, I spoke in my last exercise, occasioned thereunto by the third
verse of this Chapter.

This fourth verse, now read unto you, will yield us two other, taken from the
custom of Lions, old and young. From the custom of the old Lion in these
words; Will a Lion roar in the forest, when he has no prey? From the custom
of the young Lion, in these; Will a young Lion cry out of his den, if he have
taken nothing at all? Of both in their order: and first of the old Lion.

Will a LIon roar in the forest, when he has no prey?] The answer should be
negative; No; he will not. Will he not? It seems he will. Else how may that
be understood which is spoken of our adversary, the Devil, 1 Pet. 5.8. that
he, as a roaring Lion walks about, seeking whom he may devour? There it
seems the Lion roareth before he have his prey. That he does so, many of the
Ancient have affirmed it. Its affirmed by R. David, he says; When the beasts
of the forest hear the Lions voice, they by and by through fear stand still,
and the Lion takes for his prey, which of them he will. So says Lyra; Ad
rugitum Leonis prada sequitur; the Lion roareth, and then he takes his prey. So
Dionysius the Carthusian; Leo cum famem patitur, mox vt bestiam viderit,
rugitum dat, quo audito territa bestia gradum figit, and capitur. The Lion,
says he, when he is hungry, if he see a beast, roareth: the beast, terrified
with the Lions voice, stands still and is taken. Saint Basil says as much for
substance. His words are in his ninth Homily upon the Hexaemeron: Nature has
bestowed upon the Lion, such organs or instruments for his voice, that
oftentimes beasts far swifter than the Lion are taken, (...), only by the
roaring of the Lion. The Lion roares; the beast stoopes, and is taken.

Saint Cyril likewise, he that was Archbishop of Alexandria, he has the like
observation, and he takes it from those, who with much curiosity and diligence
have sought into the nature of wild beasts. The observation is, that the hungry
Lion, espying some beast fit for his food, through his hideous and uncouth
roaring seizes upon it for his prey. Now if a Lion will roar before he have
taken his prey, as by the now produced authorities it seems he will, to what
end serves this interrogation, Will a Lion roar in the forest, when he has
no prey?

I must answer as I did out of Carthusian to the former similitude, that Amos
here speaks, secundum communem cursum, according to the commong course, and
communiter verum esse, that its commonly true that a Lion will not roar in the
forest, when he has no prey. Commonly it is true, yet not ever so. Mercerus
has a Solet to express the meaning with: Will a Lion roar in the forest,
when he has no prey? Non solet haud dubie; Without doubt he uses not so to
do. Drusius has likewise a Solent for the saluing of this question; Leones
non solent rugire, nisi praedam ceperint, capturine sint; Lions, they use not
to roar, unless they have taken some prey, or are ready to take it. They use
it not, though it may be sometime they do it.

But why will a Lion roar when he has gotten his prey? Should he not then
rather be quiet, and fall to the devouring of his prey? Plutarch in a treatise
of his, concerning this question, Which creatures have more reason, they that
line on the earth, or they that in the water? thus speaks of the Lion: The
Lion, when he has gotten a prey uses to roar, thereby to call his
fellow-lions to be his partakers in the prey. But I will not now diue into the
secrets of nature. Why the Lion roareth when he has his prey, it much skilleth
not: it is plain, he roareth.

It is plain by the 22. Psalm, where David complaining of the cruelty of his
enemies under the name of the Bulls of Bashan, says of them, verse. 13. They
gaped upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and a roaring Lion. It is
likewise plain by the 31. of Esaias. At the fourth verse of that Chapter, you
may see the Lion roaring on his prey. In the 22. of Ezechiel, verse 25. you may
behold in Jerusalem a conspiracy of Prophets like a roaring Lion, ravening the
prey. Well then is it demanded by Amos in my Text, Will a Lion roar in the
forest, when he has no prey? Thus far of the old Lion. It follows of the
young.

Will a young Lion cry out of his den, if he have taken nothing?

This young Lion in the original is (...) Chephir, Leo-iuuenis, leunculus; in
the Septuagint, he is (...): in the Vulgar, Catulus Leonis, the Lions whelpe.
The property of this young Lion or Lions whelpe is, to lie close in his den
without making any noise at all, till such time as the old Lion brings him a
booty for his food; then does this whelpe rouse up himself, gives forth his
voice, cries and roareth. It is Saint Cyrils observation. Petrus Lusitanus
likes it well. He thus delivers it: Leunculus in latibulo suo jacens, tacet;
The Lions whelpe couching in his den makes no noise: at vbi praedam a Leone
adductam ceperit, tunc vocem dat, and exultat; but when he has taken his prey,
brought unto him by the old Lion, then for joy he leapeth, then he gives forth
his voice, cries and roareth.

Now to the question, as it is made by Tauerner, Cries a Lions whelpe out of
his den, except he have gotten some thing? or as it is in our newest English,
Will a young Lion cry, or give forth his voice out of his den, if he have taken
nothing? My answer must be, as it was to that of the old Lion, and out of
Mercer too, Non solet hand dubie, Out of doubt, the young Lion, or Lions whelpe
uses not, as he lies in his den, to give forth his voice, to cry or roar
except he have gotten somewhat. He uses not so to do.

Some Expositors there are, that will have these two branches of the Lion, and
the Lions whelpe to be all one; and the latter to be but a repetition of the
former, mutatis verbis, in others words. So R. David, and Lyranus. But Saint
Cyril is of opinion, they are not all one, but are different; So is Saint
Hierome. So R. Abraham. So Albertus, Rupertus, Carthusian, and others: and with
these accords our present exposition.

The exposition thus given, descend we to the application, that we may
understand what this Lion is, and what the Lions whelpe.

Will a Lion roar in the forest, when he has no prey? The Lion is God, the
forest the world, the prey of the Lion the people of the world, the roaring of
the Lion Gods threatenings by his Prophets. You may thus apply it: As a Lion
will not roar in the forest, unless he have a prey; So neither will God by
his Prophets threaten any evil, unless he be thereunto urged by the sins
of the people. Such commonly is the application of this second similitude.

With Rupertus likewise this Lion is God; but the Lions prey is omnis electus,
every one of the Elect: who, wheresoever he be, because he is predestinate unto
life, ab ipso Deo requiritur, is sought for of God himself, that at his voice,
whether it be uttered by an Angel, or by a Prophet, or by the Scriptures, he
may tremble, may be humbled, may repent him of his sins, and be saved. The
application which he makes is after this manner: Nunquid rugiet Leo in saltu,
nisi habuerit praedam? Will a Lion roar in the forest, unless he has a prey?
Idem est, ac si dicet, It is as if he said, Is it worthy of God, there to
speak, or thither to send a Prophet, where he knows there is none worthy of
eternal life? Is it seemly, is it any way fit, that God should there utter
his voice, or send his Messengers thither, where he knows, there is not any
one ordained unto salvation? By all congruity of reason the answer must be
negative; No, its altogether unseemly; its not any way fit. The Lion in the
forest roares not, unless he have his prey. This exposition of Rupertus is by
Ribera mentioned with some approbation: but Petrus a Figueiro says, it is
nimis violenta, too violent, too far fetched. And well may it be so.

Arias Montanus by this Lion, and Lions whelpe, understands Sennacherib and
Nabuchodonozor, two Assyrian Kings, two mighty enemies to the state of the
Kingdom of Judah. According to him thus must the application be: As a prey,
that is between the Lions teeth, or within his paws, cannot escape away; so
shall not the people of Judah escape from out the hands of Sennacherib, or
Nabuchodonozor. Bur this application of his is not so fit for this place,
because whatsoever is here spoken, it is spoken not to the people of Judah, but
the people of the ten Tribes.

If great Albert must be followed, this Lion must be vel Deus comminans, vel
melius inimi us inuadens, vel homo, vel Diabolus. This Lion must be either God
threatening, or rather some enemy inuading, be he man or Devil.

The Devil must be this Lion in the construction of diverse, as Carthusian has
observed, for as much as the Devil like a roaring Lion walks about seeking
whom he may devour, Semperque sitit animarum damnationem, and rugit vt eas
deglutiat, and ever thirsts of the damnation of the souls of men, and
roareth that he may swallow them up. I may not deny, but that the Devil for
his extreme fierceness and cruelty joined with force and hurt to annoy
mankind, is by Saint Peter likened to a Lion, to a roaring Lion; yet I cannot
think that he is the Lion in my Text; no, though this in my Text be a roaring
Lion.

But may not some man, an enemy, a tyrant, an oppressor, one or more, be meant
by this Lion, this roaring Lion in my Text? Its not to be doubted, but that
such are diverse times in the holy Scriptures compared to Lions. The wicked man,
who is evermore an enemy to the godly, is likened to a Lion, Psalm. 10.9. He
lies in wait secretly as a Lion in his den; he lies in wait to catch the
poor. David's enemies are as Lions; He so speaks of them, Psalm. 22.13. They
gaped upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and a roaring Lion. Tyrants
and oppressors of the Church are as Lions. Such a one was Nero, Saint Paul
calls him a Lion, 2 Timothy 4.17. I was, says he, delivered out of the mouth of
the Lion. The Lion, not the Devil, as Ambrose says; nor Festus the President
of Iudaea, as Primasius affirms: but Nero, proud and cruel Nero, persecuting
Nero, as its expounded by Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophylact, Oecumenius,
Aquinas, and Eusebius, Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 22. Be it then granted, that
Men, enemies to the godly, Tyranas and oppressors are in holy Scripture
sometimes compared to Lions; yet can it not thence be inferred, that therefore
by this roaring Lion in my Text, Men are to be understood.

It remains then, that God either solely or principally be here intended. Sic
communiter omnes intelligunt, says Christophorus a Castro. So do all
Expositors commonly understand this Text: that God should be this Lion. And not
only the old Lion, but the young one too. God is compared to both, as well to
the young Lion as to the old. To both he is compared, Hos. 5.14. There thus
says the Lord: I will be unto Ephraim as a Lion, and as a young Lion to the
house of Judah. I, even I will tear and go away: I will take away, and none
shall rescue him. So likewise, Esaias 31.4. Thus has the Lord spoken: Like as
the Lion and the young Lion roaring on his prey, when a multitude of Shepherds
is called forth against him, he will not be afraid of their voice, nor abase
himself for the noise of them: so shall the Lord of hosts come down to fight
for mount Sion and for the hill thereof. In both places you see, God is
compared not only to the old Lion, but to the young one too, to the Lions
whelpe. So is he here in this Text of mine. Now the meaning is; As a Lion will
not roar in the forest, except he has a prey, nor the young Lion cry out of
his den, except he has gotten somewhat: No more will Almighty God roar from
Sion, or utter his voice from Jerusalem, except there be a prey ready for him:
He will not by his Prophets and Ministers give forth his threatenings, except
there be just cause for him, to be avenged upon a people for their sins. My
observation is: If by our sins we provoke Gods wrath against us, we shall
find that his threatening of us will not be in vain.

The threatenings of God, they are not vana dunt axat puerorum simplicisque
rusticitatis terricula, as Quadratus has well noted, they are not only as
scar-crowes or bugs for the terrifying of little children and the ruder sort of
people; but are certain evidences of Gods resolution for the punishment of
sin. Never are they in vain.

Of two sorts they are: for either they concern a spiritual and eternal
punishment; or a punishment, that is temporary and corporal.

Of the first sort is that commination, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Cursed be he that
confirms not all the words of this Law to do them. The punishment there
threatened is spiritual, it is eternal. Saint Paul so expounds it, Gal. 3.10.
where he says: As many as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse:
for it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which
are written in the Book of the Law to do them. The curse there spoken of is
no temporal, no corporal matter, it is spiritual, it is eternal. The reason
is, because the curse is opposed to the blessing. Now to be blessed with
faithful Abraham, is to be justified, to be absolved from sin and death, to
be in favor with God, to obtain eternal salvation, and therefore to be
accursed, is to be condemned for sin, to be cast out from God, to be adjudged
to everlasting death and Hell. The blessing is spiritual and eternal, and
therefore must the curse also be spiritual and eternal.

Comminations of the second sort are in holy Writ more frequent and obuious. If
you will not hearken to the Lord your God to do his Commandments, but will
despite his statutes and abhor his judgments, then will the Lord do thus
and thus unto you. In the 26. of Leuit. verse. 16. he will visit you with
vexations, consumptions, and burning agues, that shall consume your eyes, and
cause you sorrow of heart. Verse. 17. he will set his face against you, and ye
shall be slain before your enemies: they that hate you shall reign over you,
and ye shall flee when none pursues you. Verse. 19. He will break the pride
of your power, and will make your Heaven as iron, and your Earth as brass: and
your strength shall be spent in vain; for, neither shall your land yield her
increase, nor your trees their fruits. Verse. 32. He will send wild beasts
among you which shall rob you of your children, and destroy your cattle, and
make you few in number. These and other like threatenings against the wilful
contemners of Gods holy Will you may better read of in the now alleged 26.
Chapter of Leuiticus, and 28. Chapter. of Deuteronomy, and other places of holy
Scripture, than I can at this time stand upon to relate them. They are many:
they are fearful. Many and fearful are the punishments, though but
temporary and corporal, which the Lord threatens to the wilful contemners of
his holy Will.

Thus you see, Gods threatenings are of two sorts; either of spiritual and
eternal punishments, or punishments that are temporary and corporal. These
threatenings of punishments, corporal or spiritual, temporary or eternal, are
by the Lord himself accomplished at times certain and unchangeable.

When the old world in the days of Noah had grown to much impiety and
wickedness, the Lord appointed a certain space, the space of 120. years for
their repentance and conversion, Genesis 6.3. My spirit shall not always strive
with man, for that he also is flesh: yet his days shall be an hundred and
twenty years. Though he saw, that the wickedness of man was great in the
earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was evil, was
only evil, was evil continually, so that with great justice he might forth
with have swallowed them up with a flood, yet would he not, but would yet
forbear longer, and look for their amendment. A hundred and twenty years yet
would he give them, to see if they would return and avoid his wrath. But they
would not return, and therefore at the very end and term of those hundred and
twenty years he brought the flood upon them. Then, then, and not before, he
brought the flood upon them. For compare we the particular circumstances of
time noted, Genesis 7.3, 6, 11. with that which Saint Peter writes in his first
Epistle, chap. 3.20. we shall find, that the inundation of waters came upon
the earth at the very point of time before determined.

Memorable is that commination of the Lord against the Jews, Ierem. 25.11.
Because you have not heard my voice, behold I will take from you the voice of
mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice
of the bride, the sound of the Milstones, and the light of the candle: you
shall be a desolation, and an astonishment, and shall serve the King of Babylon
seventy years. The sum of the Commination is, that the Jews for their sins
should be led captive, and serve the King of Babylon seventy years. Now if we
take the just computation of time, it will appear that so soon as those
years, those seventy years were expired, the foresaid threat was
accomplished. And therefore Daniel alluding to this prophecy of Jeremy,
exactly sets it down, Chap. 5.30. saying, The same night was Belshazzar
King of the Chaldeans slain, the same night, the very night wherein those
seventy years came to their full period, was Belshazzar King of the Chaldeans
slain.

To these fearful examples of Noah's flood, and the carrying away of the Jews
into Babylon, may be added the burning of Sodom by fire and brimstone, the
destruction of the ten Tribes, the ruin of Jerusalem, and the Kingdom of
Judah, the desolation of the seven Churches of Asia; all which, besides many
other calamities upon many other places, and persons, accomplished and come to
pass according to the threatenings of the Lord, may well assure us, that
whatsoever he has threatened, will certainly take effect. And certainly, if we
by serious and true repentance do not prevent the execution of his threats, he
will not fail to prevent us, and take us away suddenly. Thus is my observation
made good; If by our sins we provoke Gods wrath against us, we shall find
that his threatening of us will not be in vain.

No, it will not. If God threaten, and no repentance follows, then certainly
the threatenings pronounced will come to pass. He threatens not in vain; he
terrifies not without cause; no more than the Lion roareth when he has no
prey, or the Lions whelpe cries out of his den if he have gotten nothing.

Is it thus, Beloved? Shall we find that Gods threatenings will be effectual
and powerful against us, if we by our sins go on still to provoke him to
displeasure? It seems then, that if we repent us of our sins, and cease any
further to grieve Gods holy Spirit, his threatenings will be vain and without
effect. Understand we therefore, that the threatenings and denuntiations of
Gods judgments are either absolute or conditional. If absolute, then are they
irreuocable, and must take effect: but if conditional, then upon humiliation
and repentance they will be changed, they will be altered.

Absolute was the denunciation that concerned the eating of the forbidden
fruit, Genesis 2.17. In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die.
This threatening was absolute and peremptory, not to be revoked. If Adam had
prayed all his life long that he might not die, but return to his former
condition, yet the sentence of God had not been reuersed.

Peremptory and absolute was that threatening of the Lord against Moses and
Aaron, Numb. 20.12. Because ye believe me not to sanctify me in the eyes of
the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the
land which I have given them. Moses and Aaron, both are threatened that they
shall never enter into the land of Canaan. Moses understanding the threat
conditionally, besought the Lord that he might go over Jordan into that good
land. But the Lord was wroth with him, and would not hear him; but said unto
him, Deuteronomy. 3.26. Let it suffice thee, speak no more unto me of this matter.
Speak no more: the sentence was peremptory and might not be reuersed.

As absolute and peremptory was that threatening by Nathan from the Lord unto
David, 2. Sam. 12.14. Because by thine adultery thou have given great occasion
to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child also that is borne unto
thee shall surely dye. The child shall surely die. David's hope was, that this
threat was but conditional, and therefore with fasting, weeping, and prayer he
besought God for the child, and said; Who can tell whether God will be gracious
unto me, that the child may live? Yet, as the Prophet had denounced, the child
died. So peremptory was the sentence, and not to be reuersed. So then its
evident, that some of Gods judgments denounced against the sons of men are
absolute and peremptory, not to be reuersed.

Others are conditional, to be understood with this exception, except they
repent and amend. The condition is sometimes expressed; sometimes it is not.
The condition is expressed, Ierem. 18.7, 8. At what instant I shall speak
concerning a nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up and to pull down,
and to destroy it: If that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from
their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them. It is
likewise expressed, Ezech. 33.14, 15. When I say unto the wicked, Thou shall
surely die; if he turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful and
right, he shall surely live, he shall not die. Each of these Comminations is
with an express condition. The first was: Such a Nation, such a Kingdom, I
will pluck up, I will pull down, I will destroy. The Nation, the Kingdom
performs the condition; repents and turns from evil, and God reuerseth his
sentence; I will not pluck up, I will not pull down, I will not destroy it.
The second was; The wicked man shall surely die. The wicked man performs the
condition, repents, and turns from evil, and God reuerseth his sentence; He
shall surely live, he shall not die.

Sometimes the condition is not expressed, but only to be understood. So it
is, Ierem. 26.18. There we read of Micah the Morushite, that he in the days
of Hezekiah King of Judah, prophesied and spoke to all the people of Judah
saying, Thus says the Lord of hosts; Zion shall be plowed like a field, and
Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house, the high places
of a forest. Fearful is the Commination; it threatens ruin to their Temple,
desolation to their City, the utter overthrow of their whole Kingdom. How did
the King and his people hereupon behave themselves? Did they fall into
desperation? No, they did not. Did they conclude an impossibility of obtaining
pardon? Nor did they so. How then? They conceiving aright of the commination,
as fearful as it was, that it was unto them a Sermon of repentance, they
feared the Lord, they besought the Lord: and the Lord repented him of the evil
which he had pronounced against them. So was the Commination conditional,
though the condition was not expressed.

The like we meet with, Esaias 38.1. There is a comminatory message from the Lord
unto the but-now-named Hezekiah; Set thine house in order, for thou shall die
and not live. The good King conceiues aright of the message, that it was no
otherwise unto him, than as a Sermon of repentance; and therefore he turns his
face unto the wall, prays, and weeps sorely: and the Lord repented him of the
message he had sent; and sends him a new message, verse. 5. Go and say to
Hezekiah: Thus says the Lord, the God of David thy father; I have heard thy
prayer, I have seen thy tears: behold, I will add unto thy days fifteen
years. And so was the commination conditional, though the condition was not
expressed.

And such is that in the Prophecy of Jonah, Chap. 3.4. Yet forty days, and
Nineueh shall be overthrown. The King of Nineueh, though an heathen and an
idolatrous King, yet conceiues aright of this threat, that it was to him and
his people, no otherwise than a Sermon of repentance. The King therefore
touched with repentance, vnseateth himself, vnthroneth himself, comes as
low as the meanest, strips himself of his kingly robes, puts on sackcloth,
sits in ashes; causes it to be proclaimed and published through Nineveh, that
there be a general fast kept by man and beast, that man and beast be covered
with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God, and turn every one from his evil
way, and from the violence that is in their hands: for, says the King, Who can
tell, if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that
we perish not? Who can tell? And God saw their works, that they turned from
their evil way, and God repented of the evil that he had said that he would
do unto them, and he did it not. So also was this commination conditional,
though the condition was not expressed.

But why are these and many other threatenings of the Lord against sinners
conditional? Why are they with condition of amendment? Why is the condition
either expressed, or suppressed and only inclusiuely understood?

Its thus. First, because Repentance, if it follow after Gods comminatory
sentence pronounced against sinners, it procures forgiveness of sin, and
takes away the cause of punishment. The cause of punishment is sin; remove
the cause, and the effect must cease. Let sin be washed away with the tears
of unfeigned repentance, and punishment shall never hurt us. This is it, which
but even now you heard out of Ezech. chap. 33.14 15. They were the words of the
Lord; When I say unto the wicked, Thou shall surely die, if he turn from his
sin, and do that which is lawful and right; if he restore the pledge, and
give again that he has robbed, and walk in the statutes of life without
committing iniquity, he shall surely live, he shall not die.

Secondly, the threatenings of God against sinners are for the most part
conditional, because he is a God of mercies, a gracious Psalm. 86.15. (...)
34.6. Numb. 14.18. (...) 103.8. Psalm. 145.8.
God, a God of long suffering, and much patience, a God of unspeakable
kindness, ever ready to receive us to mercy, as soon as we return unto him.
This is it that the Lord commands to be proclaimed by Jeremy, chap. 3.12.
Return thou backsliding Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause mine
anger to fall upon you, for I am merciful, says the Lord, and I will not
keep mine anger for ever.

Thirdly, the threatenings of God against sinners are evermore conditional,
because in his threatenings God aims not at the destruction of them that are
threatened, but at their amendment. Their amendment is the thing he aims at.
Its plain by that, Ezech. 18.23. Have I any pleasure at all, that the wicked
should die, says the Lord God? and not, that he should return from his ways
and live? This by way of question. But its out of question and confirmed by
oath, Ezech. 23.11. As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the
death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn ye,
turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye die, O house of Israel? Why
will ye die? Return and live, I take no pleasure in your death.

Hitherto you have heard of Gods threatenings, that they are of punishments
either corporal or spiritual; either temporal or eternal: and that they are
either absolute or conditional; and if conditional, that then the condition
is either expressed or only understood; Expressed or understood, and that for
three reasons: first, because repentance washes away sin, the cause of
punishment: secondly, because God is merciful, and will not keep his wrath
for ever: thirdly, because he aims especially at the amendment of the wicked.
It is now time that we make some profitable use hereof.

Our first use may be, to consider that in the greatest and most fearful
threatenings of Gods heavy judgments there is comfort remaining, hope of grace
and mercy to be found, life in death, and health in sickness, if we repent and
amend. Thus did the Princes of Judah profit by the threatenings of Jeremy.
Jeremy, chap. 26.6. comes unto them with a threatening from the Lords own
mouth: I will make this house like Shiloh, and will make this city a curse to
all the nations of the earth. He threatened desolation to the Lords house, and
destruction to their city: and therefore the Priests and the people would have
put him to death. But the Princes of Judah were better advised: they pleaded
the practice and example of King Hezekiah for the comfort of himself and the
people of his time; and thereby stirred up themselves to fear the Lord, and to
turn from their evil ways. And thus did the same King Hezekiah profit at the
threatening of Esaias, and the King of Nineueh at the threatening of Jonah, as you
have already heard. They repented of their evil ways, and God repented of the
evils which he threatened to bring upon them; and he brought them not upon them.

Here we are to meet with an objection. The objection is: If God threaten one
thing, and does another, if he threaten to bring evil upon any one, and
repents him of the evil, it may seem his will is changeable, or he has two
wills.

For answer I say, The will of God is ever one and the same, as God is one: but
for our capacities and for the weakness of our understandings, who cannot
conceive how God does after a diverse manner will and not will the same thing;
the will of God is called sometimes secret or hidden, and sometimes revealed,
as the Church is called sometimes visible, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
and sometimes invisible, yet is but one Church. The secret will of God is of
things hidden in himself, and not manifested in his word: the revealed is of
things made known in the Scriptures, or by daily experience. The secret will
is without condition; Romans 9.19.
its absolute, its peremptory, its always fulfilled; no man hinders it, no
man stops it: the very reprobate, yea the Devils themselves are subject unto
it. His revealed will is with condition; and therefore for the most part is
joined with exhortation, admonition, instruction, and reprehension. Now to the
objection, my answer is: Though God threaten one thing and does another, though
he threaten to bring evil upon any one, and repents him of the evil, yet is
not his will therefore changeable, nor has he two wills: but his will is ever
one and the same. The same will is in diverse respects hidden and revealed: Its
secret at first before it be revealed: but as it is made known to us either by
the written Word of God, or by the continual success of things, so it is
called the revealed will of God. Our duty in regard of the will of God, as it
is secret or hidden, is not curiously to pry into it, but reverently to adore
it. Whatsoever this secret, this hidden will of God is concerning us, whether
to live or die, to be rich or poor, to be of high estimation or of mean
account in this world, it is our part to rest in the same, and to be contented,
and give leave to him that made us to do with us and dispose of us at his
pleasure; and then afterward, when by the continual success of things it
shall be revealed unto us, what our lot, our portion, our expectation here must
be; much more are we to be therewith contented, and to give thanks to God,
howsoever it fares with us.

The objection thus answered, our recourse should be to the profit, that is yet
further to be made by the threatenings of Gods judgments. You have heard that
in the greatest and most fearful, there is comfort remaining, hope of grace
and mercy to be found; health in sickness, and life in death, if we repent and
amend. I proceed to a second use.

It concerns the duty of the Minister. Its our duty to propound unto you the
threatenings of the Lord with condition. Should we propound them without
condition, we should be, as if we went about to bring you to despair, and to
take from you all hope of mercy and forgiveness. We therefore propound them
with condition, with condition of repentance and amendment of life: and do
offer unto you grace and mercy, to as many of you as be humble and
brokenhearted. Thus we preach not only the Law, but also with the Law the
Gospel: thus we bind and loose, Mat. 16.19.
thus we retain and forgive sins. We preach, and by our preaching we shut up
the Kingdom of Heaven against the obstinate sinner, but do open the same to
every one that is truly penitent. The third follows.

It concerns you, You Beloved, you and every one that has this grace and
favor with God, to be a hearer of his holy Word. Its your duty whenever you
hear the threatenings of Gods judgments against sinners, to stir up your
selves to repentance and to the amendment of your lives. So shall you prevent
his wrath and stay his judgments. O! take heed beloved, that you rush not on,
as the horse in the day of battle, to your own destruction. If the Lord God
from out of Sion shall roar, as a Lion roareth in the forest when he has
taken a prey; if he shall utter his voice from Jerusalem, as a young Lion
couching in his den, cries out when he has gotten somewhat; will it not
then be too late for us to return unto him? Never is it too late to return to
God, so it be done truly, seriously, and from the ground of the heart. But this
be we well assured of, that if there be no change in us, it will be in vain
for us to look for a change from God. Its certain, God will never change his
threatenings, except we change our lives and conuersations.

Wherefore (dearly beloved) suffer we a word of exhortation for conclusion of
all. I will deliver it in the Lords own words, his words to Israel in Jeremy
chap. 4.1, 4. If thou will return, says the Lord, return unto me: and if
thou will put away thine abominations out of my sight, then shall thou not
remove. Circumcise your selves to the Lord, and take away the fore-skinnes of
your hearts, lest my fury come forth like fire, and burn that none can quench
it, because of the evil of your doings. Wash thine heart from wickedness,
that thou may be saved; how long shall thy vain though lodge within thee?

O come, see and taste, how good and gracious the Lord is unto us, how
seriously he exhorts us, how sweetly he inuiteth us to turn unto him, how
lovingly he calls us to repent, and amend our lives that we may be saved.
Beloved, nothing is wanting, but what is wanting on our parts: and that is the
real performance of true and unfeigned repentance through a lively faith in
Christ Jesus: Concerning which let me give you a rule, a rule that is grounded
and infallible; Without repentance there is no salvation, without sorrow for
sin there is no repentance; without earnest prayer there is no sorrow, no
godly sorrow, and without a due feeling of the Lords wrath, there is no prayer
that can pierce the sky or move the Lord. O therefore let us pray for
repentance, let us sue for repentance, let us work for repentance, let us
bestow all we have upon repentance. All we have! Its nothing to thee, O Lord.
We feel, O Lord, such a benummednesse in our hearts, such a dullness in our
souls, that albeit we see our sins, and know them to be exceeding great, yet
cannot we so bemone them, so lament them, so grieve at them, so detest them as
we should. Smite, O gracious God, smite we beseech thee, our flinty hearts,
make them even to melt within us at the sight of our own transgressions, that
so being cleansed from the filthiness of sin, we may grow up unto full
holiness in thy fear through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior.

THE Fifth Lecture.
AMOS 3.5. Can a bird fall in a snare upon the earth, where no ginne is for
him? Shall one take up a snare from the earth, and have taken nothing at all?


THat the comminations, the menacies, and threats, which the Almighty by the
ministry of his holy Word gives forth against the sons of men for their
impious and evil courses in their peregrination here upon the earth, are not
in vain, like scar-crowes and bugges, for the terrifying of little children,
and the ruder sort of people, but are certain evidences of Gods resolution for
the punishment of sin, I have heretofore out of the former verse made plain
unto you by a twofold similitude taken from the custom of Lions; the old Lion
and the young. This fifth verse yields us two other to the like effect: and
these are taken from the manner of fowlers or birders, whose practice is to lay
snares, and set ginnes, and spread nets to catch birds with. The first is in
the first branch, the second in the second. In the first there is an
adumbration of the providence of God, by which he rules all things: In the
second there is an illustration of the certainty, the stability, the efficacy
of his judgments, which he fore-sheweth and fore-telleth by his Prophets. Of
both in their order.

The first is: Can a bird fall in asnare upon the earth, where no ginne is for
him? Can he fall? The Vulgar Latin is, Nurquid cadet, shall he fall? So read
the Septuagint, so the Chaldee Paraphrast. Nunquid cadit, does he fall? So
Winckleman, and so our Countryman Tauerner in his English translation, An
casura esset, could she fall? So Iunius.

Can a bird, could a bird, shall a bird, does a bird fall (...) hal pach
haaretz, in laqueumterrae, word for word, into a snare of the earth: so is it
in the old Latin. This laqueus terrae, is with Iunius laqueus humilis, a snare
lying low by the ground; with Mercer and Vatablus it is laqueus in terra
dispositus, a snare placed on the ground. Albertus Magnus expounds it to be
laqueus in terra absconditus, a snare hidden on the ground.

Into such a snare can a bird fall, where no ginne is for him? (...) Vmokesch
ein lah. This same mokesch is by some taken for a ginne. With Iunius and
Drusius it is tendicula; with Mercer it is offendiculum; with Vatablus it is
laqueus. These, as our late Translators, take mokesch for a ginne. Others take
it for him that lays the ginne, for the fowler. So do the Septuagint; so
does the Author of the Vulgar Latin, so does Saint Hierome take it. With the
Septuagint this mokesch is (...), a birder, one that catches birds with
birdlime; with the author of the Vulgar Latin and Saint Hierome it is Auceps,
a Fowler. So is it with Tauerner in his translation; Does a bird fall in a
snare upon the earth, where no fowler is? Be it a ginne, or he that lays the
ginne, the birder, the fowler, it much skilleth not: for both readings have
their warrant: as well this, where no ginne is for him, as that, where no
fowler is.

Now to the interrogation, Can a bird fall in a snare upon the earth, where no
ginne is for him, or where no fowler is? The answer must be negative; No, he
cannot. And so is the answer made by Nicolaus de Lyra, and the Author of the
Interlineary Gloss. So is it by Petrus Lusitanus; so by Mercerus, so by
others. Can a bird fall? No; it cannot be that a bird should fall in a snare
upon the earth, where by the fowlers art no ginne is set for him.

O quam vilium similitudines rerum, quam pretiosum praedicant sacramentum! O,
says Rupertus, how vile are the things from which similitudes may be taken,
and how precious the mysteries, that may thereby be published! This our Prophet
de pastoralibus assumptus, once a shepherd, now called to be a dispenser of the
secrets of God, is content to dispense them, by drawing similitudes from such
things, as he was wont to observe in his shepherds walk. Such is that in the
first Chapter, verse. 2. The Lord will roar from Zion: and that in the same
verse, the habitations of the shepherds shall mourn; and that in the verse
before my text, will a Lion roar in the forest, when he has no prey; and
this in my text, Can a bird fall in a snare upon the ground, where no ginne is
for him? All you see are pastoral. Sufficient coelesti magisterio res non
solum piscatorum, verum etiam pastorum, vt per little similitudines docti sint
and doceant conuenienter gloriam rerum caelestium. Things that fall within the
knowledge not only of fishers, but also of shepherds, are available to divine
instruction, that by the similitudes of both, fishers, and shepherds, the glory
of things celestial may be manifested.

Such is this pastoral similitude: this similitude of birds not falling into a
snare upon the earth, unless by the fowlers art some ginne be set for him. It
serves for the adumbration of Gods wonderful providence: thus. As snares,
wherewith birds are catched, fall not on the ground at all adventures and by
chance; but are laid by the skill, industry and foresight of the fowler: so
the calamities and miseries of this life, wherewith men are usually taken and
snared, come not by chance, but are sent among us by the certain counsel of
God, by his just judgment, by his divine providence.

I know that this similitude is by others otherwise applied. Saint Hierome will
have it to belong to the punishment of such as liu^ in discord and variance; to
this sense: They who through charity are as birds, and do fly aloft in the
liberty of the holy Spirit, through discord do lose their wings, fall down
upon the earth and are a prey unto the fowler. Did they still soar aloft with
the wings of love; they should not need to scare the fowlers snares. For as
Solomon says, Prou. 1.17. Surely in vain the not is spread in the eyes of
every thing that has a wing. Keep then thy self above in the air, as if
thou hadest the wings of a dove, and thou art from danger: but if through
variance, through strife, through hatred, and other like impieties thou be
ouer-burdened and pressed down, down thou fallest to the ground, and art by
thine own default ensnared. Iusta enim est ruina peccatorum: for just is the
fall of sinners.

Two Hebrew Rabbis, Abraham and David, apply this similitude to the execution
of the decree of God and his sentence: thus: If men whose dwellings are upon
the earth, can by their cunning and industry cause the birds of the air to
descend upon the earth, and so fall into their snares, from whence there is no
evasion for them: how much more shall I, I the Lord, who have my habitation in
the Heaven of Heavens, bring men themselves within the snare of my decree and
sentence, that there shall be no escaping for them?

Some so apply this similitude, that by this bird they understand a sinner, and
by the snare his sin. Their explication is: As a bird shall not fall into a
snare upon the earth, unless some ginne be laid for him; so shall not sinners
fall into punishment, unless they themselves make snares of their own sins
to catch themselves withal. So may they quickly do; and so says Solomon,
Pro. 5.22. The wickedness of the ungodly shall catch himself, and with the
snares of his own sins, shall he be trapped. What then? Vis non capi laqueo?
would thou not be taken with the snare? rumpe ac frange laqueum: the advice
is good; tear and break the snare. But how? Toll peccatum, and fregisti
laqueum; take away the sin, and thou have broken the snare.

Rupertus so understands this similitude, that he will have the grace of God
herein to be commended. With him this fowler shall be God; his snare the word
of God, the bird to be catched, the soul of man. His conceit runs thus: As
that a bird falls into a snare upon the earth, it is to be attributed to the
care and diligence of the fowler, that laid the snare; so, that the soul of
man comes to be ensnared in the word of salvation, which it neither can
resist, nor is willing so to do, it is wholly to be attributed to the grace of
God. For God alone so spreads the snare of his good word, that this little
bird, this wandering and restless bird, the soul of man, is caught and brought
into the hands of the Lord her God, and so escapes the laws of the Devil.

This his exposition well meets with the Arminians, with those new Prophets,
who at this day pretending a more moderate divinity, then ours is, as if they
came out of Coelestius his School, have with their sophismes and subtilties
much disquieted the State of the Belgicke Churches, chiefly for the point of
divine Predestination and the appendices thereof.

Their fourth Thesis is, touching the operation of the grace of of God in
Christ, Collat. Hug. Brand. page 216.
whether it be resistable or not. The grace of God, say they, is resistable.
Rupertus here says, it cannot be resisted. He is in the right, and with him we
join; and thus we explain our meaning: Man is to be considered in a twofold
respect; in respect of himself, and in respect of God. If he be considered in
respect of himself, as he is unregenerate, and according to his inbred
prauitie, so is grace by him too too resistable: for as much as man of
himself, in his pure naturals, governed only by nature, reason and sense,
without grace, without the Spirit of God, cannot only resist, but also cannot
but resist the grace of God. So says Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 2.14. (...), the
natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, for they are spiritually
discerned. To the like purpose the same Apostle, Romans 8.7. (...): the wisdom
of the flesh is enmity against God: for it is not subject to the Law of God,
neither indeed can be. It is true: the Grace of God is resistable; it is too
easily resisted, ex part hominis, by man in respect of himself.

But ex part Dei it is otherwise. In respect of God, and his good pleasure, it
may well be said to be irresistible. I speak of that grace of God, which is
his moving and effectual grace, against which there is no resistance. For to
say, that the effectual grace of God can be resisted, is to deny it to be
effectual. It implies a contradiction, and it is blasphemy to affirm, that
God with his effectual grace is subject to man's resistance.

That of Saint Paul, Romans 9.19. Who has resisted the will of God? being an
Interrogation of a denier, implying that no man has or can resist it, is in
very reason it self most certain. For the superior cause can never suffer of
the inferior: therefore if man's will should go about to resist or frustrate
the will of God, it were even against reason it self: for then should Gods
will suffer of man's will; which is an impossibility.

Saint Augustine has a fit saying for the establishing of this truth: It is in
his book Decorrept. and grat^ cap. 14. Deo volenti salnum facere, nullum
hominum resistit arbitrium; If God be willing to save a man, no will of man can
resist him. Sic enim velle and nolle in volentis aut nolentis est potestate, vt
diuinam voluntatem non impediat, nec superet potestatem; for to will, or not to
will, is so in the power of him that wills or wills not, that it neither
hinders the will of God, nor ouer-commeth his power.

Thus much by occasion of Rupertus his exposition. Let us go on. Can a bird]
Dionysius the Carthusian will tell you, that this fowler, according to the
Expositors, is either the Devil, or man, or God: and that their snares are
either Laquaei culpae, or Laquaeipoena; either snares of sin, or snares of
punishment.

That the Devil is in holy Scripture compared unto a fowler, I deny not: for I
read of his wiles, Ephesians. 6.11. where we are advised to put on the whole
armor of God, that we may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil. I
read likewise of the snares, 1 Timothy 3.7. and 2 Timothy 2.26. His snares are the
snares of sin, by which he entrappeth men, and leads them captive. But that
the Devil is the fowler in my text, I affirm not.

Nor may it be denied, but that man also is in holy Scripture compared to a
fowler. To a fowler he is compared in a twofold respect, in respect of others,
and in respect of himself.

Man is a fowler in respect of others. He has snares, and cords, and nets,
and grinnes to catch others with. Such fowlers were King David's enemies, his
proud enemies, Saul and Doeg, of whom, Psalm. 140 5. he thus complains: They
have hid a snare for me, and cords, they have spread a net by the ways side,
they have set ginnes for me. And such are they, those wicked men, Ierem. 5. 26.
They lay wait, as he that sets snares, they set a trap, they catch men. And
such are they, of whom the complaint of the faithful is, Lament. 3. 52. Mine
enemies chased me sore like a bird, without cause. They chased me like a bird.
It is true then, Men are fowlers in respect of others; fowlers they are to
catch others.

Yea: and fowlers they are in respect of themselves, even to catch themselves.
Such a one is he, Psalm. 7.15. He made a pit, and dug it, and is fallen into
the ditch which he made. And he, Psalm. 9.15, 16. In the net which he hid, is
his own foot taken: he is snared in the work of his own hands. And he, Prou.
5.22. His own iniquities shall take himself, and he shall be holden with the
cords of his sins. Not amiss then has Carthusian affirmed, that men
sometimes do fall, in laqueum culpae, into the snare of sin, by their own
inclination, or naughtiness. For as Origin witnesses; Quamuis non essent
Diaboli, adhuc homines concupiscentijs pulsarentur: though there were no Devils
at all, yet should men be ensnared with their own lusts.

Thus we see, Man is a fowler; a fowler to catch others, and a fowler to catch
himself: and his snares are laquei culpae, the snares of sin. Yet, that man
is the fowler in my text, I affirm not.

It remains then that by this fowler God must be intended. For God is a
fowler too; and he has snares too: but his snares are laquei poenae, they are
snares of punishment. Of snares of this kind he has no want. He powers them
forth like rain. This is that we read, Psalm. 11.6. Upon the wicked shall the
Lord rain snares, fire and brimstone, and a burning tempest: this shall be the
portion of their cup. Behold a rain of snares upon the wicked. King David
deuoting his enemies to destruction, Psalm. 69.22. Wishes their table to become
a snare unto them, and that which should be for their welfare to become a trap
unto them. The place Saint Paul alleges with some little difference, Romans
11.9. Let their table be made a snare, and a trap, and a stumbling block, and
a recempence unto them. And here behold, a man's own table, and that which
should yield him much comfort, becomes a snare and a trap for God to entangle,
and catch the wicked with.

Remarkable is that of the Prophet Esaias chap. 8.14. where it is said of the
Lord of Hosts himself, that to both the houses of Israel he shall be for a
stone of stumbling, and for a rock of offenses; and to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem for a ginne and for a snare: and that many of them shall stumble, and
fall, and be broken, and be snared, and be taken. And here again behold: The
Lord of Hosts, he that is ever to the faithful a rock of refuge and
salvation, he is to the wicked and the unbelieving a ginne and snare to ensnare
and take them with. It is not to be denied, but that God may very well be
resembled to a fowler. And him I take to be the fowler in my text. Now the
resemblance between God and a fowler stands thus: As snares wherewith birds
are catched, fall not on the ground at all adventures, and by chance, but are
laid of purpose by the skill, industry, and foresight of the fowler: so the
calamities and miseries of this life, wherewith men are usually taken and
snared, come not by chance, but are sent among us by the providence of God. So
this text is, as before I intimated, an adumbration of the providence of God,
by which he rules all things.

The point of doctrine which from hence I would commend unto you, is this,
Nihil accidere, nisi a Deo prouisum, that nothing falls out in this life, no
calamity, no misery, nothing, good or evil, but by Gods providence.

Aquinas 1. quaest. 22. art. 2. makes this demand; Vtrum omnia sint subiecta
diuinae prouidentiae? whether all things are subject to the providence of God?
For the resolution whereof his conclusion is: Since God is of all things the
prime cause, and knows all things in particular, it is of necessity that all
things are subject to his providence, not tantum in universally, sed etiam in
singulari; nor only in general, but also in particular. I speak not now of
the providence of God, as it is potentialis, and immanens; but as it is
actualis, and transiens; not as it is the internal action of God, but as it is
external; not as it is his decree of governing the world, but as it is the
execution of that decree.

This providence of God, this his actual and transient providence, this his
external action, and the execution of his inward and eternal decree, is
nothing else than a perpetual and unchangeable disposition and administration
of all things: or to speak with Aquinas, it is nothing else, than ratio
ordinis rerum ad finem; it is nothing else, than the course which God
perpetually holds for the ordering of the things of the world to some
certain end.

Such is the providence of God, whereof I am now to speak: which is by some
divided into a general, and a special providence: by others into an
universal, a special, and a particular providence.

Gods universal or general providence, I call that, by which he does not only
direct al creatures according to that secret instinct, or inward virtue, which
he has given to every one of them, at the time of their creation, but does
also preserve them in their ordinary course of nature.

Of this universal or general providence of God, Theodoret Bishop of Cyrus,
in his first Sermon concerning this argument, discourses copiously and
elegantly: You that say in your hearts there is no providence of God, consider
the things that are visible, and are obuious to your eyes, consider their
nature, their site, their order, their state, their motion, their agreement,
their harmony, their comeliness, their beauty, their magnitude, their use,
their delight, their variety, their alteration, their continuance; and then, if
you can, deny Gods providence. Gods providence is manifest in every work of
creation: you may behold it in the Heaven, and in the lights thereof, the
Sun, the Moon, and the Stars. You may behold it in the air, in the
clouds, in the earth, in the sea, in plants, in herbs, in seeds. You may
behold it in every other creature, every living creature, reasonable, or
unreasonable, man or beast: and in every beast, whether it goes, or flies, or
swimmeth, or creeps. There is not any thing, but it may serve to magnify the
providence of God.

But why run I to the Fathers for the illustration of a point, wherein the
holy Scriptures are so plentiful, so eloquent? The 104. Psalm contains an
egregious description hereof, a fair and goodly picture, and a lively
portraiture of this providence of God, drawn with the pencill of the holy
Ghost. I see therein the air, and clouds, and winds, and water, and the earth,
and the like, so ruled and ordered by the immediate hand of God, that, should
he remove his hand but for a moment, this whole universe would totter, and
fall, and come to nothing.

I go on to the 147. Psalm; There I see God numbering the stars, and
calling them by name: I see him covering the Heavens with clouds preparing
rain for the earth, giving snow like wool, scattering the hoare frost like
ashes, casting forth his ice like morsells, making grass to grow upon the
mountains, giving food to beasts, to Ravens: all this I see, and cannot but
acknowledge his universal providence.

I look back to the book of Job, and Chap. 9. I find God removing
mountains, and ouer-turning them; I find him shaking the earth out of her
place, and commanding the Sun to stand still: I find him alone spreading out
the heavens, and treading upon the waves of the sea: I find him making
Arcturus, Orion, Pleiades, and the chambers of the South: I find him doing
great things past finding out, yea, and wonders without number. All this I
find, and cannot but admire his universal providence.

Infinite are the testimonies which I might produce out of the old Testament
for this point: but I pass them over, contenting my self with only two out of
the new.

That of our Savior Christ, John 5.17. My Father works hitherto, and I
work, is fit to my purpose. The words are an answer to the Jews, who
persecuted our Savior and sought to slay him, for doing a cure on the Sabbath
day, upon one that had been diseased 38. years. They held it to be unlawful
to do any work upon the Sabbath day: Christ affirms it to be lawful. The
ground of their opinion was; God the Father rested the seventh day from all his
works. This Christ denies not, but explicates the meaning of it. Its true; My
Father rested the seventh day from all his works: yet true also it is, Pater
meus vsque modo operatur; My Father works hitherto.

He rested the seventh day from all his works, and yet he works; how can
this be so? It is thus according to Aquinas: He rested the seventh day a nouis
creaturis condendis, from making any new creatures; yet notwithstanding he
ever works, creaturas in esse conseruando, preserving his creatures in their
being. It may be thus enlarged: Requieuit die septimo, God rested the seventh
day from creating any new world, or from making any new kinds of creatures, but
nor then rested he, nor at any time since has he rested from providing for,
and caring for, and ruling, and governing, and sustaining the world. Never
rests he, but causes his creatures to breed and bring forth after their
kinds, and restores things decaying, and preserves things subsisting to his
good pleasure* This is that saying of our Saviors, Pater meus vsque modo
operatur, my Father works hitherto.

My Father works hitherto! Hom. 37. in Joan. 5.
Saint Chry sostome well discourses thereupon. If, says he, thou should
ask; How is it, that the Father yet works, since he rested the seventh day
from all his works? I tell thee, (...). He provides for, and vpholdeth all
things, that he has made. Behold the Sun rising, and the Moon running, and
pooles of water, and springs, and rivers, and rain, (...), and the course of
nature in seeds, and in the bodies of man and beast; behold, and consider
these, and all other things, whereof (...), this universe consists, and thou will not deny the perpetual operation of the Father, but wilt break forth
into the praises of his universal providence.

That branch of Saint Paul's Sermon to the Athenians, Act. 17.28. In him we
live, and move, and have our being; is also fit to the point we have in hand.
In him, that was to the Athenians the unknown God, but is indeed the only true
and everliving God, we live, we move, we have our being. Saint Ambrose in his
book De bono montis cap. 12. thus descants upon the words, In Deo moremur,
quasi in via, sumus quasi in veritate, vinimus quasi in vita aeterna: In him we
move as in the way, we have our being as in the truth, we live as in the life
eternal. S. Cyprian, or whosoever was the Author of that Treatise de Baptismo
Christi, thus: In Patre sumus, in Filio vinimus, in Spiritu Sancto monemur and
proficimus: We have our being in the Father, we live in the Son, we move in the
Holy Ghost. S. Hilary in his Enarrat, upon Psalm. 13. seems to assign all
these to the holy Ghost: S. Cyril. lib. 2. in Johan. cap. 74. ascribes them all
to the Son. S. Augustine lib. 14. de Trinit. cap. 12. refers them to the
whole Trinity. Of the whole Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
he will have it to be true, that in him we live, and move, and have our being:
and he gives for a reason hereof, that, Romans 11.36. because of him, and through
him, and in him are all things. All things are of him, and through him, and in
him, and therefore in him we live, and move, and have our being.

Homil. 38. in Act. Apost.
See, says S. Chrysostom, how all things are his; (...), providence is his,
(...), and preservation is his; (...), our being is from him, (...), our
actiuity is from him; (...), and from him it is that we perish not. In him we
have whatsoever we have, in him we live, in him we move, in him we have our
being. Who hears this, and stands not in admiration of the universal
providence of God?

From this universal or general providence of God, I descend to his special
providence. The special providence of God, is that, by which he rules every
part of the world, and all things in every part, even the things that seem
most vile and abject; all their actions, all their events. Every part of Heaven
he rules: Not so much as a little cloud arises, or moves, or changes, or
vanishes, but nutu Dei, by the pleasure and appointment of God.

Every part of the earth he rules. There is not the man, that either is
conceived, or is borne, or lives, or is preserved, or moves, or does any
thing, or dies, nisi ex nutu and voluntate Dei, but by the will, pleasure, and
appointment of God. There is not so much as animalculum, not any the least
living creature, nor beast, nor fly, nor worm, that is engendered, or fed, or
sustained, nisia Deo, but by God. There is not so much as herbula, not any the
least flower or grass, that either springs, or blossometh, or withers,
sine manu Dei, but by the hand of God. Gods special providence is over all his
works; but more peculiarly is it over his Church.

His peculiar providence over his Church appears in the wonderful
preservation thereof from its first beginning, but more evidently from the time
that Noah's Arc floated upon the waters until these our days. But of all most
famous, and to be admired, was that his preservation, his protection of the
Church among the people of Israel; when they, Genesis 15.13. Act. 7.6.
soiourning in a strange land, in the Land of Egypt, were for four hundred
and thirty years held in slavery and bondage, and were very ill entreated.
Then, then at the time appointed God sent Act. 7.35.
Moses to be their ruler and deliverer, who led them from out of Egypt into
the wilderness. In the wilderness, a place of desolation, could their
necessities be supplied? They could be, and were supplied. When they needed
guide, God went before them; He went before them Exodus 13.21.
in a pillar of a cloud by day, and in a pillar of fire by night. So day and
night was God their guide. When they wanted bread, flesh, or drink, mercy and
miracle did concur for their supply. Psalm. 78.24.
Heaven gave them bread, the Verse. 26.
wind quails, the Verse. 15.
rock waters. Of apparel they felt no want: for Deuteronomy. 29.5.
forty years together neither the clothes upon their backs, nor the shoes on
their feet, were waxen old. For the direction of their consciences Exo. 20.2.
etc.
a Law was given them from mount Sinai; and for the resolution of their doubts,
they had the oracles of God, from between the Exodus 25.22.
Cherubins. They needed not to fear the force and fury of their enemies: for
they found by experience that the Ios. 10.13.
Sun and Moon, and Exodus 9.23. Psalm. 105.32.
fire from Heaven, and vapors from the clouds, and Exodus 7.20.
water, and Exodus 8.6. Psalm. 105.30.
frogs, and Psalm. 105.31.
lice, and flies, and Verse. 34.
locusts, and caterpillars took their parts. Yea, the Lord himself Exodus
14.14.25. Deuteronomy. 1.30.
fought for them. Very special was the providence of God, for his Church in
Israel.

As special is his providence for his Church among us. Here should I set the
mercies of our Land to run along with Isreal's; we should win ground of them, we
should outrun them. Be it that in Gods actual and outward mercies they might
outstrip us; yet in his spiritual and saving health, they come short of us.
For, as one well says, they had the shadow, we the substance; they the
candlelight, we the noonday; they the breakfast of the Law, fit for the
morning of the world, we the dinner of the Gospel, fit for the high-noone
thereof. They had a glimpse of the Sun, we have him in the full strength:
they saw per fenestram, we sine medio. They had the Paschall lamb, to expiate
sins ceremonially; we have the Lamb of God to satisfy for us really.
Unthankful we, thrice unthankful are we, if we acknowledge not the providence
of God over his Church among us to be very special.

Now follows the particular or singular providence of God. It is that by
which he provides for every particular creature. That there was Jonah 1.4.
sent out a great wind into the sea to raise a tempest against a ship that was
going to Tarshish; that there was a preparation of a great fish Verse. 17.
to swallow up Jonah, and of a Gourd Jonah 4 6.
to be a shadow over his head against the Sunbeams, and of a worm Verse. 7.
to smite that Gourd, it was wholly from the particular providence of God. From
the same providence it is, that the Sun rises on the evil and the good, and
that the rain falls on the just and on the unjust, Mat. 5.45. From the same
it is, that the Lilies of the field are so arrayed, as Solomon in all his glory
was not so, Mat. 6.28. From the same it is, that the hairs of our head are all
numbered, Mat. 10.30. What? Are the hairs of our head numbered? Sermon. de Martyr.
Are they all numbered? Quid timebo, says Saint Augustine, quid timebo damna
membrorum, quando securitatem accipio capillorum? Surely I that have security
for the hairs of my head, will not fear the loss of any member I have. Yet
if it shall please God to smite me in any member I have, in arm, or in leg,
Psalm. 22.14.
or in all, so that I be, as if all my bones were out of joint; I shall ever
acknowledge the hand of God, and his particular providence, without which not so
much as a little sparrow falls on the ground, as it is testified by our
Savior Christ, Mat. 10.30. So true is my propounded doctrine, Nihil accidere,
nisi a Deo prouisum: that nothing falls out in this life, no calamity, no
misery, nothing, good or evil, but by the providence of God.

The objections, that are by the ignorant cast out against this holy and
comfortable doctrine, I cannot now stand to refute: they may, if God will, be
the groundwork of some other meditation. For the present, that I be not
ouer-troublesome unto you, I will add but a word of use, and application.

The first use may be, to stir us up to glorify God for all his mercies. For
since we know, that whatsoever befalls us in this life, it is by the
providence of God, what should come out of our mouths, and hearts, but that of
holy Job, Blessed, Blessed be the name of the Lord for it? In the time of our
prosperity, when the face of the Lord shines most cheerfully upon us, what
should pierce the inward parts of a child of God, but these or the like
motions? O Lord! Lord! that the hearts of these men my righteous friends or
others, are turned unto me, it is of thee alone. Of thee alone it is, that I
have their love, their favor, their benefits* thou alone art the fountain,
they are but the instruments. Thy instruments they are, such as next after thee
I will thankfully regard, but never before thee, nor without thee. Also what
any other creature yields me of comfort, profit, or good any way, the power,
the strength, and the means thereof is from thee alone, from thee my God, my
strength, my hope, and my stay for ever.

A second use may be to work patience in us, even through our whole life, and
in our greatest afflictions. For since we know, that whatsoever befalls us in
this life, be it to the flesh never so sour, it comes to pass by the
providence of God; why should any one that is the child of God murmr or
repine, when he is fed with the bread of tears? O then! Psalm. 80.5.
when we are pinched with adversity, let us not imagine, that God is our
enemy; believe we rather, that, of his good and fatherly purpose, he chasteneth
us for the remnant of sin, abiding in this corrupted nature of ours, thereby to
stir us up to the exercise of true Christian patience. Upon this belief I am
resolved never to look so much at any ill, that shall betide me, as at the
blessed hand, that shall be the guide thereof.

A third use, which for this time shall be my last use of the doctrine now
delivered, is to drive us to our knees early and late, to beg and desire at
this our good Gods hand, the continuance of his ever sweet providence over us,
and for us, that by his good guidance we may quietly sail over the sea of
this wicked world; and when his blessed will shall be, we may arrive in the
haven of eternal comfort, even his blessed, and glorious, and everlasting
Kingdom; to which the Lord grant us a happy coming, for his dearly beloved
Son Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with the Father in the unity of the holy
Spirit be all praise and power.

Amen.
THE Sixth Lecture.
AMOS 3.5. Shall one take up a snare from the earth, and have taken nothing at
all?
YOu may at the first blush think it a needless labor for me to stand upon
the exposition of this second branch of this fifth verse, because it seems to
be coincident with the former. It is true, that as well in this branch as in
that, the similitude is taken from the manner of a fowler; yet I doubt not even
from hence to gather some good and profitable fruit for our instruction in the
way of piety and godly living.

My custom hitherto requires that first I clear the reading; and then
proceed to some wholesome observation.

If the Hebrew be rendered word for word, it will sound thus: Nunquid ascendet
laqueus e terra, and capiendo non capiet? Shall a snare ascend from the earth,
and in taking shall it not take? So are the words translated by Mercerus, and
by Vatablus, and by Drusius. Shall a snare ascend from the earth] To ascend in
the Hebrew tongue, signifies to be taken away, to be removed. Laqueus
ascendit, quum tollitur: a snare ascends from the earth, when it is taken
thence. For this same ascendet, the Septuagint have (...); Shall a snare be
loosed from the earth, shall it be broken upon the earth? Herewith agrees the
Chaldee Paraphrast. The Vulgar Latin has Auferetur, Shall a snare be taken
from the earth? Shall it be taken? By whom? By whom, but by a fowler? The
fowler is expressed by Tremelius and Iunius, and by Calvin; the rest that
express him not, must of necessity understand him.

Shall a fowler remove his snare from the earth, Et capiendo non capiet? and in
taking shall he not take? It is an Hebraisme: for which the Greeks have (...),
without taking somewhat; the old Latin has antequam quid ceperit, before he
have taken somewhat; Calvin and Brentius, priusquam capturam ceperit, before he
has taken a prey: Gualter, si omnino nihil cepe^it, If he has taken nothing
at all. Those hit the sense of our Prophet, though they leave his Hebraisme:
and herein I reprehend them not. For I dissent not from S. Hierome, Comment. in
c. 1. ad Gal. who there says, Non in verbis Scripturarum esse Euangelium, sed
in sensu; non in superficie, sed in m^dulla, non in sermonum folijs, sed in
radice rationis. His saying is, that the Gospel is not in the words of the
Scriptures, but in the sense; not in the outside, but in the marrow; not in the
leaves of the book, but in the root of reason. Well then have the Greeks, and
the Vulgar Latin, and Calvin, and Brentius, and Gualter, left the word, to
give the sense. So has our countryman Tauerner, whose reading is, Takes a man
his snare up from the ground, before he catch somewhat? The meaning he well
expresses. So do our newest Translators; but the better, by how much the
nearer they cleave unto the words: Shall one take up a snare from the earth,
and have taken nothing at all?

Shall be? To this interrogation, as to the former, the answer should be
negative; No, he shall not. Shall he not? How so? A fowler may be deceived;
he may miss of his prey, and so may be driven to take up his snares, his
ginnes, his nets, though he have taken nothing.

Luther for the removing of this scruple here respects the intention of the
fowler, not his labor, nor the event thereof. The fowler lays his snares,
sets his ginnes, spreads his nets with an intent, with a mind to catch
somewhat, though sometime it may fall out he catches nothing.

Petrus Lusitanus here observes it to be the custom of fowlers, non facile
laqueos amouere, not willing to remove their snares, till they catch somewhat.
The like does Mercerus, Hand sane id moris est, surely its not the custom,
that a fowler should take up his snares, if he have taken nothing. So does
Drusius: Non tollitur, A snare is not taken up, before somewhat be catched. Non
tollitur, that is, non t^lli solet communiter, (...), commonly and for the most
part a snare uses not to be taken up, till somewhat be catched. And so says
Carthusian: A net spread to catch birds, is not taken up till some be catched;
Hoc communiter it a est, so commonly it falls out.

It is now easy to give answer to the interrogation. The interrogation is,
Shall one, a man, a fowler, take up his snare from the ground, and have taken
nothing at all? The answer is* Surely no. Commonly, and for the most part he
does it not: he uses not, its not his custom to take up his snare from the
ground, if he have taken nothing at all.

The reading is cleared, the interrogation is answered; and now let us see
whereto this similitude taken from this custom of the fowler is appliable. It
may serve, as in my former Lecture I signified, for the illustration of the
certainty, the stability and the efficacy of the judgments of God, which he
threatens to bring upon the wicked for their sins; thus. A fowler uses not to
take up his snares, till he has catched somewhat: no more is it Gods use, when
he makes show of his judgments, to withdraw his hand, till he has put them
in execution. God gives not forth his threats in vain, nor gathers he up his
nets, nor takes he up his snares, till he has taken what he would; till he
has effected what he threatened by his Prophets. The sum of all is; Verbum
Dei non cadere fine efficacia. The word of God falls not without its
efficacy; what he speaks, that he does. Such is the application of this
present similitude.

Saint Hierome applies it, as he does the former. He applies it to such as
live in discord and variance. Their punishment it is, vt capiantur laqueo, to
be taken in a snare; in a snare, that is placed not in the air but on the
ground; from which whosoever is delivered, good cause has he to rejoice; and
to say as it is, Psalm. 124.7. Our soul is escaped, as a bird out of the snare
of the fowlers: the snare is broken, and we are delivered. This is contritus
ille laqueus, that same broken snare, whereof the Apostle speaks, Romans 16.20.
Deus conteret Satanam sub pedibus vestris velociter; God shall bruise, he shall
break Satan under your feet shortly. And hitherto he brings that, Psa.
140.5. Iuxta semitam scandulum posuerunt mihi, they have spread a net for me, by
the way-side. By the way side have they done it. For they are not able any
other way to deceive the simple, then by propounding unto them the name of
Christ, Vt dum putamus nos Christum inuenire, pergamus ad Antichristum: the
while we think we are in the way to find out Christ, we go on the high way
to Antichrist. Thus has Saint Hierome applied this similitude: and he is
followed by Strabus Fuldensis, the Author of the ordinary Gloss.

The doctrine which that good Father would from hence commend unto us is this;
Discordiae poena, in laqueum incidere. It is the punishment of discord to fall
into a snare. I thus explicate it. The man that lives in discord and variance
shall fall into such calamities, out of which there is no escaping for him, as
there is no escaping for a bird out of a snare.

Must calamity be the guerdon, the recompense of the man that lives in
discord and variance? It must needs be so. The foulness, the leprosy of this
sin will not suffer it to be otherwise. How foul and leprous this sin is,
it may appear, first by the detestation wherein God holds it. Six things
there are which the Lord hates, yea the seventh his soul abhors. A proud
look, a dissembling tongue, hands that shed innocent blood; an heart that
deuiseth wicked imaginations; feet that be swift in running to mischief; a
false witness, that speaks lies: These are the six which the Lord hates:
the seventh which his soul abhors is, He that sows discord among
brethren, Prou. 6.16. And no marvel is it, that he should with his soul
abhor such a one. Non enim est dissentionis Deus, sed pacis, as the Apostle
speaks, 1 Cor. 14.33. For God, he is not a God of tumult, of unquietness, of
confusion, of dissension, of discord, but a God of peace.

Again, this sin appears to be very soul and leprous, in that it
excludes from the Kingdom of Heaven. That it does so, Saint Paul proves,
Gal. 5.19. because it is a work of the flesh: among which he numbreth, hatred,
variance, emulation, wrath, strife, and seditions: and concludes, that they
which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

A third way to find out the foulness and leprosy of this sin, is, to take
a view of the appellations, which in holy Scripture are given to this kind of
sinner. He is carnal, he is froward, he is proud, he is foolish.

First, he is Carnal. Saint Paul avouches it, 1 Cor. 3.3. Ye are yet Carnal.
For whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not
carnal and walk as men? Are ye not carnal? Deny it not. For you are carnal,
and ye walk as men. You are carnal, you follow the force and provocation of
your flesh, your sensuality, your concupiscence, and ye walk as men: Ye walk
not after God, not after the Spirit, 1 Pet. 4.6. Romans 8.4. Gal. 5.16. Colos.
1.10.
not in the Spirit, not worthy of the Lord, not worthy of the Gospel; as long
as there is among you e^uying, and strife, and divisions.

Secondly, the sinner in this kind is froward. So does Solomon style him,
P^ou. 16.28. A froward man sows strife. This froward man, in the Hebrew, Vir
peru^rsitatum, A man of frowardnesses; a man given altogether to frowardness,
sows strife between man and man, between neighbor and neighbor, and is a
very batemaker. Will you a fuller description of him? you may have it, Prou.
6.12. There shall you find him to be a naughty person, a wicked man, one that
walks with a froward mouth, that winketh with his eyes, that speaks with
his feet, that teaches with his fingers, that has frowardness in his heart,
that continually deuiseth mischief, that sows discord. Believe it: it is a
sure mark of a naughty, a wicked, a froward man, to be the Author of
contentions and strife.

Thirdly, this kind of sinner is a proud man. For, as it is, Prou. 13.10.
Only by pride comes contention. Only by pride? The meaning is not, that
pride is the only cause of contention, but one of the chiefest. So is that
place by some expounded. But well may it without gloss or exposition pass for
a truth, that only by pride comes contention, if Saint Augustine in his
book de Not. and Great. against the Pelagians be not deceived. Out of the 26.
Chapter of that book, I thus frame his argument. Every contempt of God is
pride; but every sin is a contempt of God; Therefore every sin is pride;
according to that of Ecclesiasticus, chap. 10.15. Initium omnis peccati est
superbia, The beginning of every sin is pride. Now if every sin, if the
beginning of every sin be pride, then certain it is, that contention,
variance, strife, debate, and the like, are all from pride.

Fourthly, the sinner in this kind is a fool. For a fool he is taken, Prou.
18.6. Where it is said; Labia stulti miscent se rixis, A fools lips are ever
brawling. The words which a fool utters with his lips, have always strife
annexed unto them, as an inseparable companion.

Thus you see the account wherein the Spirit of God holds brawlers,
make-bates, and sowers of discord, in that it styles them carnal, and
froward, and proud, and foolish. It was the third way, I propounded, to find
out the foulness and leprosy of this sin.

There is yet a fourth way: and that is by the effects thereof, as Busaus the
Jesuit in his Panary has observed.

One effect thereof is to increase our sins. Well then does Ecclesiasticus
exhort us to abstain from strife. His exhortation is, Chap. 28.8. Abstain
from strife, (...), and thou shall diminish thy sins. If by abstaining from
strife we diminish our sins, then surely by living in strife we increase our
sins.

A second effect of strife he makes to be the subversion of the bearers:
according to that charge which Paul gives to Timothy, 2 Epist. 2.14. Charge
them before the Lord, that they strive not about words to no profit, but to the
subuerting of the hearers.

A third effect is, that it disturbeth the quietness even of a wise man, says
Solomon, Prou. 29.9 A wise man, if he contend with a foolish man, there is no
quietness for him.

A fourth effect is, that it brings ruin, destruction, and desolation, not
only to houses or families, but to Cities also, yea to Countries, yea to
Kingdoms. This our Savior Christ shows by a prouerbiall saying, Mat. 12.25.
The saying is, Every Kingdom divided against it self is brought to desolation:
and every City, or house divided against it self, shall not stand.

Such, Beloved, are the effects of this sin of disc^rd, and may well discover
unto you the foulness and leprosy of it. For if it increase our sins, if it
be the subversion of those that hear us, if it disturb our quietness, if it
bring ruin, destruction, and desolation to all estates, then surely it is a
foul and a leprous sin.

And thus have I led you in four several paths to find out the foulness,
and leprosy of this sin. The first was by Gods detestation of it. His soul
abhors it. The second was by the gates of Heaven fast shut against it; They
that sin this sin shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. The third was by
the titles given to those sinners; they are carnal, and froward, and proud,
and foolish. The fourth was by the effects which this sin produces: it
increases our faults, it subuerteth our hearers, it disturbeth our quietness;
it brings desolation upon all, upon family, upon nation, upon Kingdom.

You now see the foulness; you see the leprosy of this sin; and will yield
your assents to the truth of my propounded doctrine: which was, The man that
lives in discord and variance, shall fall into such calamities, out of which
there is no escaping for him as there is no escaping for a bird out of a snare.

Is it thus, Beloved? Must the man that lives in discord and variance fall into
calamities, out of which there is no escaping for him? Must he? Our best way
then will be, ever to bear about with us, that same Antidote or preservative
which Saint Ambrose has prescribed, Offic. lib. 1. cap. 21. Caueatur
iracundia, aut si pracaueri non potest cohibeatur. Take heed of wrath, beware
of discord, or if thou can not before hand provide against it, keep it
short, bridle it. But first, Caueatur, Beware, or take heed of it. This is the
counsel which Paul gives in his first book concerning the remedy of love;
Principijs obsta, sero medicina paratur
Cum malaper long as inualuere moras.
Withstand beginnings; thy medicines may come too late, if thy disease be grown
strong. And this is the third remedy prescribed by Busaeus against this malady:
Resist contentionum principijs, Resist the beginnings of discord. If thou be
to talk with any man, keep under the first motions of thy mind, that they
break not forth into indignation; and so thou give the occasion of discord.

Discord is a Serpent. This serpent, like Goliath, must be smote dead in the 1 Samuel 17.49.
forehead, he must be crushed in the head, lest if he get in the head, as he
did into 2 Cor. 11.3.
Eve, he bring in the whole body, and when sin is finished, he leave from
his tail, the 1 Cor. 15.55.
sting of death in our souls.

Discord is a Cockatrice. This Cockatrice must be crushed in the Esaias 59.5.
Egg; If we suffer it to be hatched, and to grow a Basiliske, it will be our
poison.

Discord is a Fox. We must take this Fox, Cant. 2.15.
this little Fox before he do any hurt. If we let him grow till he be great,
then like Luke 13.32.
Herod the Fox, he will become bloodthirsty and ravenous, or like Samsons
Judge. 15.4.
Foxes, he will set all on fire.

Discord is as Leaven, whereof it is said, 1 Cor. 5.6. Gal. 5.9.
Paullulo fermenti tota massa fermentatur, If we purge not out this little
leaven, it will sour the whole lump.

Discord is Number. 3.18, 19
Aqua amaritudinis. We must give this water of bitterness no passage, Eccles.
25.25.
no not a little, lest like that in Cap. 47.3, 4, etc.
Ezechiel, it grow from the anckles to the knees, and from the knees to the
loins, and prove a river that cannot be passed over without drowning.

Discord is Parunlus Babylonis. We must betimes take this youngling of
Babylon, and Psalm. 137.9.
dash him against the stones, lest after growth he should cry against us, down
with them, down with them even unto the ground.

Thus, and thus, are we to deal with this youngling of Babylon, with this
water of bitterness, with this leven, this little leaven, with this fox, this
little fox, with this Cockatrice, with this serpent; we are to resist discord
even in the beginning. And this was Saint Ambrose his Caueatur; Caueatur
iracundia, beware of discord, take heed of it. But if we cannot before hand
provide against it, then follows his Cohibeatur, Keep it short, bridle it.

But how shall we keep it short? how shall we bridle it? The same good Father
will for this point instruct us. Si prauenerit and praeoccupauerit mentem tuam
iracundia, non relinquas locum tuum. If anger, if wrath shall prevent thee, and
prepossesse thy mind, leave not thou thy place. Thy place! What Is that? Locus
tuus patientia est, locus tuus sapientia est, locus tuus ratio est, locus tuus
sedatio indignationis est. Thy place is patience, thy place is wisdom, thy
place is reason, thy place is the asswaging, the quieting of thine anger. By
patience, by wisdom, by reason, thou may assuage and quiet anger.

But my neighbor is so sullen, so froward, so selfe-willed, that I cannot
choose but be moved. In this case what shall I do? The Fathers reply unto thee
is, Reprime linguam tuam, Restrain, keep under, tame thy tongue. For so it is
written, Psalm. 34.13. Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they
speak no guile.

Restrain, keep under, tame my tongue, keep my tongue from evil. The advice
I confess to be very good. But how shall I be able to follow it? S. James
seems to imply an impossibility in this performance, Chap. 3.8. where he
says, The tongue can no man tame: it is an unruly evil, full of deadly
poison. No man can tame it: How then shall I? It is an unruly evil; how shall
I rule it. It is full of deadly poison; how shall I cleanse it?

It were blasphemy to gainsay, what Saint James has said. He has said, the
tongue is an unruly evil; and so it is. It is an evil, and an evil of a
wild nature, it is an unruly evil. An unruly evil it is, Saint Bernard in
his Treatise De triplici custodia, says of it; facile volat, atque ideo facile
violat; It flies quickly, and therefore it wounds quickly. Speedy is the
pace it goes, and therefore speedy is the mischief it does. When all other
members of the body are dull with age, this though it be but little, this
tongue alone is quick and nimble. An unruly evil it is; an unruly evil to
our selves, an unruly evil to our neighbors, an unruly evil to all the world.

And it is full of deadly poison. Poison! What? is there poison in the tongue?
Poison, that is contrary to the nature of a man, is it in the tongue of a man?
Yes. But it may be this poison is no mortal poison, but such a poison, whose
venom may without much ado be expelled. Nay, says Saint James, it is
mortal, it is a deadly poison. Say it be a deadly poison; peradventure there
is but little of it, and so the danger is the less. Nay, says Saint James, it
is full of it; it is full of deadly poison.

The tongue is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison; who can tame it? No man,
says the Apostle. No. Man has no bridle, no cage of brass, no bars of iron
to tame the tongue withal. And yet you see, the Psalmographer calls upon us
to tame this tongue of ours, to keep it from evil. Keep thy tongue from
evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile.

In this case what shall we do, Beloved? Whether shall we have recourse for
help in this time of need? Whether but to the throne of grace, even to him
that sits thereon? He made the tongue, and he alone can tame the tongue. He
that gave man a tongue to speak, can give him a tongue to speak well. He
that placed that unruly member in the mouth of man, can give man a mouth to
rule it. He can give us songs of Sion for loues-sonnets, and heavenly Psalms
for the Ballads of Hell. Wherefore let us move our tongues to entreat of him
help for our tongues. David has scored out this way for us, Psalm. 141.3. Set
a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, keep the door of my lips. Da Domine quod
jubes, and jube quod vis, It was Saint Augustines petition, and be it ours.
Give Lord what thou command, and then command us what thou will. Thou
command that I keep my tongue from evil, and my lips that they speak no
guile: Lord keep thou my tongue from evil, keep thou my lips, and my lips
shall speak no guile.

Yet Beloved, we must not be idle ourselves. The difficulty of keeping our
tongues from evil, should spur us on to a greater diligence. I know you
would keep your house from thieves, your garments from moths, your treasure
from rust: See that ye be as careful to keep your tongues from evil. Give
not over your hearts unto security, and your tongues will be the better. As
far as the heart is good, so far will the tongue be good. If the heart
believe, Romans 10.10.
the tongue will confess. If the heart be meek, the tongue will be gentle.
But if the heart be angry, the tongue will be bitter. James 3.6.
A tongue set on fire of Hell, to tell tales; to speak evil, to backe-bite,
to slander, to curse, to brawle, to revile, discouers a heart as foul, full of
all maliciousness: according to that which our Savior told the Pharisees,
Matthew. 12.34. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. It is a
polluted heart that makes a foul mouth.

Wherefore, dearly Beloved, make clean within, and all will be clean: hate
evil cogitations, and there will proceed from you no evil communication.
Foster charity in your hearts; and your lips will be like the Spouses lips in
the Canticles; they will be like a thread of scarlet, Chap. 4.3.
and your talk comely; the speech that proceeds from you will be gracious in
it self, and such as may administer grace unto the hearers, Ephesians. 4.29.
full of gravity, full of discretion, full of zeal, full of love. So shall all
bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be put away
from you, with all malice. And ye will be kind one to another, you will be
tenderhearted one toward another, you will forgive one another, even as God
for Christ's sake has forgiven you. Happy are ye that are in such a case. You
shall not need to fear any calamity that hangs over the heads of such as
live in discord and variance: concerning whom, my doctrine was: The man that
lives in discord and variance shall fall into such calamities, out of which
there is no escaping for him, as there is no escaping for a bird out of a snare.

I have with some prolixity insisted upon this argument of discord and
variance, the rather being persuaded of the truth of that which S. Augustine.
Sermon. 57. de verbis Domini has delivered in these words, Non potest concordiam
habere cum Christo, qui discors voluerit esse cum Christiano: It cannot be that
he that is at variance with a Christian, should have any agreement with Christ.

The motive that now drew me to entreat of this argument, was Saint Hieroms
application of my Text to such as live in discord and variance, whereupon his
collection was, Discordiae poenam esse, in laqueum incidere, that it is the
punishment of discord, to fall into a snare. Thus far I have been his. I must
now leave him, and look back to the other application of my Text, wherewith I
acquainted you in the beginning of this exercise. My Text is:

Shall one take up a snare from the earth, and have taken nothing at all. The
application is:

A fowler uses not to take up his snares from the earth, till he has catched
somewhat; No more is it Gods use, when he makes show of his judgments, to
withdraw his hand, till he has put them in execution. God gives not forth his
threats in vain, nor gathers he up his nets, nor takes he up his snares, till
he has taken what he would, till he has effected what he threatened by his
Prophets. The sum of all is, Verbum Dei non cadere sine efficacia: The Word
of God falls not out without its efficacy. And it is the Doctrine, which I
would now further commend unto your Christian and devout attentions.

The Word of God falls not out without its efficacy. I thus explicate it. The
Word of God is a certain, a sure, a faithful word. All the prophesies, all
the predictions of future things therein propounded, are wonderfully made good
in their accomplishment and event. All promises therein made, all threats
therein denounced are ever true in their performance.

That the prophesies, the predictions of future things propounded in the Word
of God are ever true, and have their due accomplishment, I shall make plain in
few words.

In the days of Noah the world was grown so foul with sin, that God would
needs wash it with a flood. With this his purpose to wash the world with a
flood, he acquainted Noah one hundred and twenty years before he sent the
flood. When that time had its period, when those one hundred and twenty years
were expired, then, even then, and not before, he brought in the flood, as it
appears by the collation of Genesis 7.6, 11. with 1 Peter 3.20.

In the fifteenth of Genesis, verse. 13. God says unto Abram: Know of a surety,
that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve
them, and they shall afflict them four hundred years: and afterward shall
they come out with great substance. Here is a prediction unto Abram concerning
his posterity; that they should go into a strange land, should live in
thraldom, and should from thence be delivered at the end of four hundred
years. According to this prediction it came to pass. But first I note here,
that this time of four hundred years, must begin at the birth of Isaak;
though from his An. M. 2049.
birth to the deliverance of the children of Israel An. M. 2454.
out of Egypt were four hundred and five years, which few years in so great
a sum makes no great difference. Again, I note here, that by this land, not
theirs, is meant not Egypt only, but Canaan too. And thirdly I note, that
where the Text rehearses these three, they shall be strangers, they shall
serve, they shall be afflicted; we must jointly, not severally, apply them all
to the time limited of four hundred years, that this whole time of four
hundred years, they were either strangers, or served, or were afflicted. And
so Saint Augustine, quaest. 47. in Exodus understands this place. But you see
the accomplishment of the prediction.

Christ the Messiah, the Savior of mankind was promised to our first parents,
even upon the beginning of the world, Genesis 3.15. where God tells the Serpent,
that the seed of the woman should bruise his head. He was promised unto Abram,
Genesis 12.3. In thee shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed. This
promise unto Abraham is seven times reiterated. The seventh repetition of it
is, Genesis 22.18. In thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed. He
was promised unto Isaac, Genesis 26.4. In thy seed shall all the Nations of the
earth be blessed. The time of his coming is noted by Jacob the Patriarch,
Genesis 49.10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from
between his feet until Shiloh come. It is noted likewise by the Angel
Gabriel, Dan. 9.25. Who there wishes Daniel to know and understand, that from
the going forth of the commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem, unto the
Messiah, the Prince shall be seven weeks.

All these promises, prophesies, and predictions touching Christ, the Messiah,
the Savior of mankind, we believe and know, they have had their due
accomplishment.

I could here remember you of prophesies or predictions, wherein certain
persons were by name expressed long before they were borne. Such is that, 1
King. 13.2. O altar, altar, thus says the Lord, Behold a child shall be borne
unto the house of David, Josiah by name, and upon thee shall he offer the
Priests of the high places that burn incense upon thee; and men's bones shall
be burnt upon thee. Josiah, you see, is named: but it was An. M. 2971.
three hundred and thirty three years before Josiah was An. M. 3304.
borne, and before the An. M. 3330.
execution of this prediction three hundred fifty and nine years. The
execution of it we have, 2 King. 22.15.

Such is that, Esa. 44.28. There thus says the Lord of Cyrus, He is my
shepherd and shall perform all my pleasure, even saying to Jerusalem, Thou
shall be built, and to the Temple, thy foundation shall be laid. The prediction
is, that Cyrus should take order for the reedifying of the City of Jerusalem,
and the Temple there. Cyrus is the man that must give leave for this great
work to be set on foot. Cyrus, Cyrus is named, and yet at this time Cyrus was
not borne. Nor was he borne within one hundred years after this time. Nay,
says Josephus, Antiq. Iudaic. lib. 11. cap. 1. the prophecy of Esaias was
written two hundred and ten years before Cyrus his time. Yet was the truth of
this Prophecy An. M. 3426.
fulfilled in Cyrus, as it appears, 2 Chronicles. 36.22. and Ezra 1.1.

Thus have I briefly, and in a few instances made it plain, that the
prophesies, the predictions of things to come, propounded in the Word of God,
are ever true, and have their due accomplishment: that all the promises made
therein, all the threats denounced therein, are ever true in their performance.
So, true is my doctrine.

The Word of God falls not out without its efficacy. True; For God himself
has said it, Esaias 55.10. As the rain comes down, and snow from Heaven, and
returns not thither, but waters the earth, and makes it bring forth, and
bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater: So shall my
word be that goes forth out of my mouth: it shall not return unto me void;
but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing
whereto I sent it. By this similitude taken from the rain and snow, the Lord
gives us to understand that his Word has ever an effectiue power. It is ever
working one way or other. It either mollifieth or hardens: it either
conuerteth or conuinceth: it either cures or kills. None ever heard it, but
they were either the better or the worse by it. We preach, says Saint Paul, 1 Corinthians. 1.23. We preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block,
and unto the Greeks foolishness: and these are the worse by the preaching of
the Word. But unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks, it is the
power of God, and his wisdom; and these are the better by it.

After that heavenly Sermon made by our Savior, Ioh. 6. in the 66. verse, Some
went back and walked no more with him; these were the worse by his preaching.
Others stuck more close, saying verse. 68. Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou
have the words of eternal life: and we believe, and are sure, that thou art
Christ, the Son of the living God: and these were the better by his preaching.

At Paphos in the I Will of Cyprus, Barnabas and Saul upon the request of the
Deputy preached the Word of God. By their preaching Sergius was converted,
Elimas was the more obdurate; the Deputy was the better by it: the Sorcerer
much the worse, Act. 13.7, 8.

This word of God is called a sword, Heb. 4.12. (...), a double edged sword. It
has an edge, and an edge: alijs ad salutem, alijs ad perditionem. It has an
edge for some unto salvation; an edge for others unto perdition: an edge for
receivers unto redemption, an edge for contemners unto reiection. This is it
that our Savior says, Ioh. 12.48. He that rejects me, and receives not my
words, has one that judges him: the word that I have spoken, the same shall
judge him at the last day. The word which he has heard and contemned, the same
shall be his Judge.

Shall it be his Judge? Tell us then, Vbi nam iste talis judex sedebit? Where
shall this Judge, a Judge of this nature, the Word of God, where shall it sit?
Quali de solio suo voces aut sententias indicij sui dabit? From what bench,
from what tribunal shall it give sentence? Lib. 10. Com. in Joan. ad cap. 12.
Rupertus shall make the answer: Prope aderit, intus sedebit, in conscientia
cujus que iustas sententias terribiliter personabit. It will be near unto
thee, it will have a seal within thee, even in thy conscience: and there it
will terribly pronounce just judgment against thee, if thou be a contemner of
the word of God.

Believe it, dearly Beloved believe it, The Word of God preached among us,
shall either save us or judge us. It shall be either a copy of our pardon, or
a bill of our indictment at the last day. For non cadit sine efficacia, as my
doctrine goes: The Word of God falls not out without its efficacy: it
effects whatsoever it promises, whatsoever it threatens.

This is it which Saint Austin has, Enarrat. in Psalm. 94. Sicut verum est quod
promisit, sic certum est quod minatur: As it is true what God in his holy Word
has promised, so certain is it what therein he threatens. And as thou
should be certainly assured of thy rest, of thy welfare, of thy felicity, of
thine eternity, of thine immortality, if thou be obedient to this Word of God;
so must thou be certainly assured of thy molestation, of thy vexation, of thy
ruin, of thy burning in eternal fire, and of thy damnation with the devils,
if thou be disobedient hereunto.

Thus have you as well the illustration, as the confirmation of my second
doctrine; which was, The Word of God falls not out without its efficacy.

The uses may be two. One for terror, the other for comfort. The terror is
for the wicked, the comfort for the godly. I can but point at them.

The first is terror to the wicked. The wicked when he shall consider, that
the threatenings of God against sinners denounced in the Word of God, are ever
true in their performance, and must therefore be performed upon him, how shall
he stand affected? Shall not a fear seize upon him, Ier. 49.24.
shall not anguish and sorrow enuiron him about? Shall not his heart be as the
heart of a woman in her pangs? His agony will be no less, than was
Belshazzars, Dan. 5.6. His countenance will be changed, his thoughts will be
troubled, the ioints of his loins will be loosed, his knees will smite one
against the other. Such will be his agony, when the threatenings in Gods Word
are brought home unto him, and laid unto his conscience: as that, Psalm. 11.6.
Upon the wicked the Lord shall rain snares, fire, and brimstone, and a burning
tempest; this shall be the portion of their cup. And that Romans 2.9. Tribulation
and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil: And that Matthew. 5.10.
Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewne down and cast into the
fire: And that Matthew. 25.30. Cast ye the unprofitable servant into utter
darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. O, what terrors shall
affright the wicked when he shall behold such an army of sorrows coming on
against him with due vengeance from the Lord?

Those terrors that are upon the wicked may be profitable unto us sundry ways.

First, they may teach us rightly to poise the weight of our sins in the
balance of the Sanctuary: and by the fearful issue and after-claps that they
bring, to judge how heinous they are in the sight of God.

Secondly, they may rouse us up to a due consideration of our natural misery.

Thirdly, they may provoke within us an appetite, even to hunger and thirst
after reconciliation by Christ.

Fourthly, they may deter us from the practice of sin. And so passing from
the terrors of the wicked, let us have an eye to the comforts of the godly.

The godly man, he that is the child of God, when he considers that the
promises of God made in his holy Word are ever true in their performance, and
therefore will be performed in his particular, how great cause has he of
exultation and rejoicing? Sweet is that promise made by Christ, Matthew 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest. As sweet is that, John 6.35. He that believes on me shall never thirst;
and that, verse. 37. Him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. Turn
but to the second Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, and there shall you
find a promise of glory, honor, peace, and eternal life, to such as with
patience continue in well doing.

Rest from labor, the asswaging of spiritual thirst, an irreuocable admission
into the fellowship of Christ, glory, honor, peace, and life eternal! Such is
the issue of our obedience, the end of our well-doing. Of this issue, or end,
to speak as it deserves, what tongue of men or Angels is able? A very small
quantity hereof here in life obtained, O, how passes it all understanding! And
who is he that can utter the sweetness of that peace of conscience, and
spiritual rejoicing in God, which himself has here in this life tasted? And
if the beginning be so sweet, how sweet shall the fullness be? Of which
fullness vouchsafe most gracious Father in thy good time to make us all
partakers, for Jesus Christ his sake.

THE Seventh Lecture.
AMOS 3.6. Shall a trumpet be blown in the City, and the people not be afraid?


OF the six similitudes here brought by Amos, this is the last. The first was
from trauailers upon the way, Verse. 3. The second and third were from Lions,
Verse. 4. The fourth and fifth, from Fowlers, Verse. 5. This, the sixth and the
last is from Warriors, Verse. 6. All do serve for the polishing and adorning
of the proposition set down in the second Verse of this Chapter, the substance
whereof is, God being good and gracious to a people, if he be repaid with
unthankfulness, will assuredly visit that people, and punish them for all
their iniquities. My method for the handling of this sixth similitude shall be
no other, then what it was for the other five. I will first clear the reading,
and then proceed to such observation, as may be for the amendment of out lives.

For the reading first. Shall a trumpet be blown in a city, and the people
not be afraid?

This Trumpet with the Vulgar Latin is Tuba, but with Tremelius and Iunius,
with Mercerus and with Drusius it is Buccina. Tuba is the Hebrews (...).
Joseph. Antiq. Iudaic. l. 3. cap. 11.
Chatsotsrah; Buccina is their Sophar, Graece (...). Hier. Hos. 5.8.
Schophar, and so are these two, Chatsotsrah and Schophar translated by the
author of the Vulgar Latin, Hos. 5.8. Clangite buccina in Gabaa, Tuba in Roma.
Saint Hierome upon that place puts a difference between Buccina and Tuba.
Buccina pastoralis est, and cornu recurno efficitur, Tuba autem de are
efficitur, vel argento. According to this distinction Buccina is the Cornet,
and Tuba the Trumpet. So is that place Englished in our newest translation:
Blow ye the Cornet in Gibeah, and the Trumpet in Romah. And so my text should
speak of a Cornet, not of a Trumpet. Shall a Cornet be blown in a City, and
the people not be afraid? Shall a Cornet be blown? The Hebrew is Schophar.

But this distinction of these two is not perpetually observed. The old
interpreters of the Bible do sometime confound them: and do render (...)
Schophar by Tuba, the Trumpet, and (...)
Chatsotsrah by Buccina, the Cornet. And therefore the reading here will be
indifferent either way, whether you read Cornet, or Trumpet. But I take the
Trumpet to be the fittest for us now to follow; because the Translators of our
new Church Bible, following the ancient Interpreters, do prefer the Trumpet.

That which follows, admits a twofold reading: One is, Shall not the
people be afraid? the other is, Shall not they run together? Each reading is
commended unto you by our late Translators: the first in the text; the second
in the margent. The difference arises from the Hebrew word (...)
Charadh, which signifies either to be afraid, or, to run together. Shall a
trumpet be blown in a city, and shall not the people either be Panere,
expanescere.
afraid, or Propere accurrere.
run together.

We shall the more easily understand what this interrogation intends; and
what answer is to be made unto it, if we consider what the ancient use of
Trumpets was.

The ancient use of Trumpets is delivered by a writer of greatest antiquity
from Gods own prescription. Moses in the tenth of Numbers is commanded to make
two Trumpets of silver, which were to be for present use, and for use in time
to come. For the present they were to serve Numb. 10.2.
for the calling of the assembly, and for the iourncying of the camps.

There is a double use of them commanded for the time to come; one in time of
war, the other in time of peace. The use of Trumpets in time of war was, to
assure them, that God would then remember them for good, and save them from
their enemies, Verse. 9. The use of them in time of peace, was, for their times
of joy, and appointed festiuities. In the day of your gladness, and in your
solemn days, and in the beginnings of your months, ye shall blow with the
Trumpets over your burnt offerings, and over the sacrifices of your peace
offerings, that they may be to you for a memorial before your God, Verse. 10.

Of this double use of the Trumpet Saint Hierome makes mention, in his Comment
upon Hos. 5. Tuba in bellis ac solonnitatibus concrepabant: they blew with the
Trumpet in time of war, and in their solemnities. So does Isidore in the
eleventh book of his Etymologies, chap. 20. Tuba adhibebatur, non solum in
praefijs, sed in omnibus festis diebus: The Trumpet was used not only in
war, but also upon their feast-dayes. Whence is that, Psalm. 81.3. Blow up
the Trumpet in the new moon, in the time appointed, on our solemn feast day.

And why was the Trumpet to be blown upon the solemn feast day, but to call
the people together to their holy assemblies? So says Drusius; Ad sonum
buccinae accurrebat populus, cum ad sacra vocaretur: At the sound of the
Trumpet, the people met together for the hearing of divine service. The Trumpet
then called them together, as now the Bells call us.

This use of the Trumpet was merely Ecclesiastical. There were also civil
uses of it even in the time of peace; as when the people were to be called
together, to hear some charge given them; or to give or take aduisement
concerning the affairs of the Commonwealth.

These uses of the Trumpet, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical, Drusius has
touched in his sacred observations, lib. 14. cap. 18. There he says, that at
the found of the Trumpet, the people were wont speedily to come together, Vel
ad audiendum aliquid, vel ad prandum, vel denique ad agendum sieve consultandum,
de republica: they came together, either to hear somewhat, or to pray, or to
deliberate and consult about public matters.

You see, what anciently were the uses of the Trumpet. Now it will not be any
hard matter for us to give an answer to the Interrogation, which way soever it
be made. If it be made according to the reading in the margent, [Shall a
Trumpet be blown in a city, and the people not run together?] the answer
must be negative, No; a Trumpet shall not be blown in a city, but the people
will run together. They will assemble themselves, they will come together at
the sound of the Trumpet, either to hear what shall be delivered to them from
the Magistrate; or to enter into consultation about the affairs of the city;
or to prostrate themselves in devotion before the Lord in his holy Temple. If
the Trumpet be blown, they will run together.

This our marginall reading, Tremelius and Iunius have embraced as the
chiefest, yet so that they reject not the other. Nay, so far are they from
rejecting the other, as that they join both together. They make the
interrogation to be thus: Shall a Trumpet be blown in a city, and populus
trepide non accurrerint? shall not the people tremblingly run together? The
interrogation thus framed, may have an answer affirmative: A Trumpet may be
blown in a city, and the people shall not need tremblingly to run together.
For why should here be any trembling where there is no cause of fear?

There was a feast of Trumpets yearly to be observed in the seventh month, on
the first day of the month, Leuit. 23.24. It was a day Numb. 29.1.
of blowing the Trumpets unto the people. The Trumpets were blown and the
people ran together, but without fear, without trembling.

There was a year of Iubile every fiftieth year to be hallowed. Every
fiftieth year on the tenth day of the seventh month, the Trumpet of Iubile
was to sound, Leuit. 5.19. The Trumpet sounded; the people met, but without
fear, without trembling.

You will say these were set times of festiuitie, times of joy, and the blowing
of Trumpets at these times was ordinary, and therefore the people now had no
reason to be afraid at the sound of the Trumpets: but say, the sound of the
Trumpets were extraordinary; would not the people then be afraid, and
tremblingly run together? No; not ever then.

Extraordinary was the sound of the Trumpets, when David with great solemnity
fetched the Arc from Kiriath jearim. He brought up the Arc from thence with
songs and with Harpes, and with Psalteries, and with Timbrels, and with
Cymbals, and with Trumpets, 1 Chronicles. 13.8. The Trumpets were blown. Here was
much joy expressed; here was no show of fear at all.

Extraordinary was the sound of the Trumpets at the dedication of Solomon's
Temple. Then besides the Levites who had their Cymbals and Psalteries and
Harpes, there were an hundred and twenty Priests sounding with Trumpets, 2 Chronicles. 5.12. The Trumpets were blown; much joy was thereby expressed, there
was no show of fear at all.

Extraordinary was the sound of the Trumpets at the restitution of religion by
Hezekiah King of Judah; and then were the Levites present with their Cymbals,
their Psalteries, and their Harpes, and the Priests with their Trumpets, 2 Chronicles. 29.26. The Trumpets were blown, joy was expressed, no fear appeared.

Thus we see Trumpets have been blown, not only at ordinary times, but also at
times extraordinary, and yet have the people had no cause of fear. What shall
we then say to this interrogation, as it is made by Tremelius and Iunius? Shall
a Trumpet be blown in a City, and shall not the people tremblingly with fear
run together?

The interrogation thus framed, for the substance of it, well agrees with our
new translation; Shall a Trumpet be blown in a City, and the people not be
afraid? and therefore we may alike resolve for both.

Our resolution may be thus: This Trumpet must be blown, not in time of peace
when all is quiet; but in time of war, when all is in combustion: and it must
be blown, not in the streets of the city, but from the watchtower: and it
must be blown not at an ordinary time, but when men least think of it, to
give warning of the sudden approach of the enemy unto the city. To this
understanding we are directed by Jonathan, the Chaldee Paraphrast, who adds
unto my text non suo tempore, to give the meaning of it: Shall a Trumpet be
blown in a city, non suo tempore, out of its ordinary time, and shall not the
people be afraid?

So, our Prophet here speaks de clangore buccina extraordinario, of an
extraordinary blowing of the Trumpet; of its being blown alieno tempore, at a
strange time. Such a blowing of the trumpet, at such a time, was ever a sure
token, aduentantis hostis, that the enemy was not far of: Vnde pauor and
metus, says Drusius; whence fear and trembling were upon the people.

Now to the interrogation, Shall a trumpet be blown in a city, and the people
not be afraid; or, shall they not tremblingly run together? Our answer is
negative; No. It cannot be, that in time of war a trumpet shall be blown in
a city at an extraordinary, an unusual and a strange hour, but the people
will be afraid, and will tremblingly run together.

Hitherto has the reading been cleared, and the interrogation answered: and
now let us see whereto this sixth similitude taken from warriors is appliable.
Saint Hierome applies it, as he does the former. He applies it to such as live
in discord and variance. He makes it to be their punishment; Ve in ciuitate
Domini constituti, tubae sonitu terreantur: that being placed in the city of
the Lord, they be terrified with the sound of the trumpet. By this city of the
Lord, he means the holy Catholic Church, and by this trumpet, the word of
God sounding in the Church. For thus headdeth, Whatsoever is spoken in holy
Scriptures, it is tuba comminans, a threatening trumpet, that with a mighty
voice penetrateth the ears of believers. If we be righteous, this Trumpet of
Christ calls us unto blessedness; but if wicked, unto torments. With the
sound of this trumpet shall they be terrified that live in discord, and
variance. Of the foulness and leprosy of which sin, I spoke at large in my
last Sermon out of this place. Now therefore I leave it, and proceed to some
other application of this sixth similitude.

Saint Cyril applies it to the Prophets of the Lord, and his Ministers, thus:
If a trumpet be blown in a city, to give warning of the approach of the
enemy, who is there so without all sense of grief, as not to conceive
exceeding fear of future evils? But you, you the people of Israel, are so void
of all sense and feeling, that though my trumpets cease not continually to
sound aloud in your ears, and to fore-warne you of evils, that shall come to
pass, you receive no profit thereby. Though you understand by the sound of my
trumpets, that your cities which are now inhabited, Ezech. 12.20.
shall be laid waste, and your Land shall be desolate; yet you take courage to
your selves against such terrors, Amos 6.3.
you put far away from you the evil day, you say within your selves, Ezech.
12.27.
the vision which this man sees, is for many days to come, and he prophefieth
of the times that are far off. To this purpose Saint Cyril.

With him agree three great Rabbis, R. David, R. Abraham, R. Selomo. They make
the Lord here to speak after this manner: If a trumpet be blown in a city at
an unseasonable hour to give warning that the enemy is coming, the people
will exceedingly tremble and be afraid. Why then, are not you afraid? why
tremble ye not at the voices of my Prophets? My Prophets are my trumpetors: by
them I give you warning of the evils that hang over your heads, and will ere
long fall upon you. Why are you not afraid? why tremble you not?

To this application of this sixth similitude, our new Expositors for the most
part have subscribed. They understand by this City the Church of God, by the
Trumpet the Word of God, by the people the hearers of the Word: and so, thus
stands the application: When a trumpet gives a sudden sign by the sound of it
out of a watchtower, all the people harken, and are troubled, and prepare
themselves this way or that way, according as the trumpet gives the token: So
at the voice of God sounding by his Ministers, we ought to give ear and be
attentive, and be moved at the noise of it, and as he gives warning, prepare
our selves and look about us while it is time, left afterward it be too late.

Now the lesson which we are to take from hence is this, The word of God
uttered by his Ministers, deserves more reverence, fear, and trembling, then
does a trumpet sounding an alarm from a watchtower.

For the word of God is a trumpet too, and a trumpet of a far shriller sound.
The blowers of this trumpet are the Ministers of the Word, who in this regard
are called sometimes Tuba Dei, and sometimes Speculatores. They are Gods
trumpet, and they are watchmen. They are Tuba Dei, Gods trumpet: and hereby
are they put in mind of their duty; even to denounce perpetual war against
the wicked; and to excite men, even to fight against the Devil, and to bid
defiance unto sin. And they are Speculatores, they are Watchmen, placed by
God in his holy City, the Church, Volut in specula, as in a Watchtower, to
watch for the safety of the people, and to blow the trumpet unto them, when
any danger is at hand.

Both appellations are met together in Ierem. 6.17. Constitui super vos
speculatores; audite vocem tubae: I have set over you watchmen: hearken to the
sound of the trumpet. Bishops, Pastors, Ministers; they are these watchmen:
and we are to hearken to the sound of their trumpets.

Their trumpets? True. For Ministers have trumpets. Their trumpets are two. One
is Territoria, the other is Consolatoria. One is a terrifying trumpet; the
other trumpet is comforting.

Of the former God speaks by his Prophet Esaias chap. 58.1. Cry aloud, spare
not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their transgression,
and the house of Jacob their sins. So does he by Zephania, chap. 1.16. A day
of the Trumpet and alarm against the fenced cities, and against the high
towers: And I will bring distress upon men, that they shall walk like blind
men, because they have sinned against the Lord. This trumpet you may call tubam
legis, the trumpet of the Law: because by it the Minister denounces the curses
of the Law, the wrath of God, misery, and calamity to every unrepentant sinner.

Of the other trumpet of the ministry, we may understand that, Esaias. 27.13.
The great Trumpet shall be blown, and they shall come, which were ready to
perish in the Land of Assyria, and the outcasts in the Land of Egypt, and
shall worship the Lord in the holy Mount at Jerusalem. This trumpet you may
call tubam Euangelij, the trumpet of the Gospel: because by it the Minister
pronounces the blessings of the Gospel; the love of God, a quiet conscience,
and true felicity to every true believer.

These two trumpets, terrifying and comforting, that of the Law, this of the
Gospel, are still of use in the Church of Christ, the Minister sounding
sometimes woe, sometimes weal, according as our sins shall give him cause.

But why is it, that the ministry of the Word, and the preaching thereof, is
compared to a trumpet? Hector Pintus in his Comment upon the eight and fiftieth
of Esaias gives hereof two reasons. One is, because, as the material trumpet
calls and encourages unto war; so this spiritual trumpet, the preaching
of the Word, calls and encourages us to fight valiantly against the world,
the flesh and the Devil. The other is, because as the material trumpet is
blown at solemnities to betoken joy: so this spiritual trumpet, the preaching
of the Word, should stir us up ad laborem in praesenti, and ad gaudium in
futuro: to labor in this life, and to joy in that to come. For as he adds,
hic est locus vincendi, ibi triumphandi: hic breuis laboris, illic sempiterna
quietis: hic poenae transeuntis, ibi gloriae permanentis. Here is the place for
ouercomming, there for the triumph: here of some little labor, there of
eternal quiet: here of pain that passes away, there of glory that endures.

The comparison standing thus between the preaching of the Word, and a
trumpet, warranteth the truth of the doctrine propounded; which was, The word
of God uttered by his Ministers deserves more reverence, fear, and trembling,
then does a trumpet sounding an alarm from a watchtower.

This representation of the word of God by a trumpet should ever sound, and as
it were, go before us, in all our actions, in war, in peace, in all meetings
and joyful feasts, that all our doings may be acceptable to the Lord our God.

The doctrine now delivered, standing upon the comparison that is between the
preaching of the Word and a trumpet, may in terms absolute be thus; The
preaching of the word of God is to be harkened unto with all reverence. It is
the point I handled in my first Sermon upon this third Chapter of Amos. My
Thesis then was, The word of God is diligently to be harkened unto. What
proofs and reasons out of Scripture I then produced for the confirmation of
that truth, and what use was made thereof, I now stand not to repeat. Nor need
I so to do. The holy Scripture being as the Ocean of waters which can never
be exhausted, yields us great variety of matter, though we speak again
and again to the same point. I proceed then with my Thesis, as it is given in
terms absolute, The preaching of the word of God is to be harkened unto with
all reverence.

I urge this duty,

First, from the honor of him that speaks.

Secondly, from the danger of him that hears negligently.

Thirdly, from the profit of him that hears with diligence.

First, the preaching of the word of God is to be harkened unto with all
reverence for the honors sake of him that speaks. For the honors sake of
him that speaks? Why? Who is he? Is he not some Prophet, some Apostle, some
Priest, or Minister; one whom we know to be of mean descent, some Amos 1.1.
Heard-man, some Matthew 4.18.
Fisherman, some 1 Thessalonians 2.9. Act. 18.3.
Tent-maker, some Matthew. 13.55.
Carpenters son. Is not his mother called Mary? and his brethren James and
Ioses, and Simon, and Judas? And his sisters, are they not all with us? How
then is it that you urge us to give ear with reverence to the preaching of the
Word, for the honors sake of him that speaks?

Our blessed Savior Christ Jesus, vntieth this knot for me. He to comfort his
Apostles against the time of persecution, thus says unto them, Matthew. 10.19,
30. Take no thought how or what ye shall speak, for it shall be given you in
the same hour what ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the
Spirit of your Father, that speaks in you. In the thirteenth of Mark, Verse
11. thus. It is not ye that speak, but the holy Ghost. In the twelfth of
Luke, verse 12. thus. The holy Ghost shall teach you in the same hour what ye
ought to say. Now see; It is the Spirit of your Father; the Spirit of God; the
holy Ghost that speaks in his Ministers. Why then, ye are with reverence to
give ear to them, when they preach unto you, for the honors sake of him that
speaks.

Qui vos audit, me audit, says Christ unto his Disciples, Luke 10.16. He that
hears you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me. He that
hears you hears me! It is an admirable and gracious dispensation from God,
to speak unto man, not in his own person, and by the voice of his thunders
and lightnings, Exodus 20.18.
or with the exceeding loud sound of a trumpet: but by Prophets, by Apostles,
by Disciples, by Ministers; by men of our own nature, flesh of our flesh, and
bones of our bones, by men of our own shape and language, James 5.17.
by men subject to the same passions, whereto we are subject. God is he that
speaks from above, that blesses and curses, that binds and loses, that
exhorts and disswadeth by the mouth of man. For this respect and relations
sake between God and his Ministers, whom it has pleased of his mercy in some
sort to dignifie with the representation of his own person here upon the
earth, the world has ever held them in very reverent estimation.

Remember the Galatians. Though Saint Paul preached the Gospel unto them
through infirmity of the flesh, Galat. 4.13.
without the honor, without the oftentation, without the pomp of this world,
rather as one that studied to bring his person into contempt, than otherwise;
yet were they so far off from despising or rejecting him, that they rather
received him as an Angel of God, yea, as Christ Jesus. And he bare them
record, that if it had been possible, they would have plucked out their own
eyes, and have given them to him. If it had been possible, that is, if Nature
and the Law of God had not forbidden it: or, if it had been possible, that is,
if they might have done it sine suo dispendio, as Haymo and Remigius do
interpret it, if they might have done it without their own utter undoing: or
if it had been possible, that is, if it might have been ad Ecclesiae
vtilitatem, so speak Aquinas and Gorran, if it might have been for the good
of the Church, they would have plucked out their own eyes, and have given them
to Paul. Would they have plucked out their own eyes? Nihil habet quisquam
charius oculis suis: There is nothing more dear unto a man than are his eyes.
And yet if it had been possible, would the Galatians have plucked out their
own eyes, and have given them to Paul.

When the Children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron, Moses said unto
them, Exodus 16.8. The Lord hears your murmurings which ye murmr against
him; and what are we? Your murmurings are not against us, but against the
Lord. What are we, but Serui and Ministri, the Servants and Ministers of the
Lord? Your murmurings are not against us, but against the Lord.

This is that, which the Lord says concerning his Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18.19.
Whosoever will not harken to the words which he shall speak in my name, Ego
vltor existam, I will require it of him, I will be his auenger. Whereupon
Didacus Stella: Hominom non debos aspicere, sod Deum, Enarrat. in cap. 10.
Lucae.
qui in eo loquitur; Look not upon man, se^ not thy thoughts upon him, but
upon God that speaks in him. For the words which he speaks, he speaks
in the name of God.

But say the Preacher be a naughty, a wicked man; what shall I then do? Deum
qui per ipsum loquitur, debes respicere. Thou must have regard to God, that
speaks by him. God diuina and admirabili sua virtute, God of his divine and
marvelous power, is able to bring to pass excellent and divine works by
evil instruments.

God fed Elias by the ministry of Ravens. Ravens brought him bread and flesh
in the morning; and bread and flesh in the evening, 1 King. 17.6. Did Ravens
bring him food? Cur ita? Why so Lord? Could thou nor command Doves, and
other clean birds to feed thy Prophet, but thou must provide for him by
Ravens? Note here the mystery. God uses many times to give unto his people the
spiritual food of their souls, sound and wholesome doctrine, by evil and
wicked men, as he gave good bread and flesh to Elias by Ravens: tu vero comede,
only eat thou, and receive thou from the hand of God what he sends: and be
not curious to know, whether he that brings thee thy souls meat, be a Raven
or a dove, a wicked or a good man, so the food he brings thee be sound and
come from God. By this time you see, you are to give ear with reverence to the
preaching of the word of God for the honors sake of him that speaks.

You are now in the second place to be urged to the performance of this duty,
from the danger of him that hears negligently. The danger is great. Saint
Augustine discouers it by comparing the word of God for the estimation that is
to be held of it, to the Body of Christ in the Eucharist. His words are in the
six and twentieth of his fifty Homilies; Non minus reus erit, qui verbum Dei
negligenter audierit, quam qui Corpus Christi in terram cadere sua negligentia
permiserit: Whosoever shall hear the word of God negligently, shall be no
less guilty, than he that by his own negligence shall suffer the Body of
Christ to fall upon the ground. And therefore with what solicitude and care we
take heed that no part of Christ's body which is given to us by the Minister,
do fall unto the ground; with the like we should take heed, that no part of
Gods word that is offered unto us by the Preacher, do either by our wandering
thoughts, or our irreuerent talking fall from out our hearts and perish.

But say, this solicitude and care be wanting in us; what then? Then the danger
is, our very prayers will be an abomination to the Lord. So says the holy
Ghost, Prou. 28.9. He that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even his
prayer shall be an abomination: where by turning away the ear from hearing,
he means not only the open contemning and despising of the word of God, but
also every negligent, careless, and unprofitable hearing thereof. And so it is
true: He that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, his prayer shall be
an abomination to the Lord, the Lord will loath and abhor the prayer he
makes, and will not hear him.

There is yet a further danger of our negligent hearing, and that is the loss
of the word of God from among us. Negligent hearing deserves no less: for it
is a rebellion against God, and God will tie the tongues of his servants, that
they shall not preach his Word to such. So tied he the tongue of Ezechiel,
chap. 3.26. O son of man, I will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy
mouth, that thou shall be dumb, and shall not be to this people a reprouer,
for they are a rebellious house. Whereupon Great Gregory; Propter malos
auditores bonis sermo doctoribus tollitur: for ill hearers God sometimes
stops the mouths of good teachers. So stopped he the mouth of Saint Paul,
that he should not teach in Jerusalem, Act. 22.18. Make haste, and get thee
quickly out of Jerusalem, for they will not receive thy testimony concerning
me. The Apostles that would have preached in Asia, could not, for the Spirit
would not suffer them, Act. 16.7.

Christ forbids us dare sanctum canibus, Matthew. 7.6. Give not that which is
holy unto dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine. Who are those
dogs, who these swine, but men living in incurable impiety without all hope
of amendment, and wallowing in the mire of unbridled luxury? who if they
vouchsafe to come to this Watchtower of the Lord to hear the sound of the
Trumpet, they give ear but negligently, but unprofitably, but contemptuously?
Such are they whom this inhibition concerns, Give not that which is holy unto
dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine. For what is this holy
thing, that we must not give unto them, what these pearls, but veritatis
mysteria, the mysteries of truth enclosed within the profunditie of the
Scriptures, as pearls within shell-fishes? These holy mysteries be kept back
from them, that will be negligent, unprofitable and contemptuous hearers. And
thus you see, you are to give ear with reverence to the preaching of the word
of God, for the dangers sake of him that hears negligently.

You will now in the third place be persuaded to the performance of this duty,
for the profits sake of him that hears diligently. Here is a threefold
profit for him.

1. His heart hereby shall be softened. 2. It shall be sweetened. 3. It shall be
cleansed.
Enarrat. 1. Dom. 5. post. Trin. page 237.
That the preaching of the Word softeneth the heart, Petrus de Palude would
prove by the confession of the Spouse, Cant. 5.6. Anima mea liquefacta est, vt
dilectus locutus est; As soon as my beloved spoke, as soon as I heard the
voice of my Savior, my soul even melted. But fitter to our purpose is the
example of Ahab, 1 King. 21. Elias comes unto him with the word of God in his
mouth: In the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs lick
thy blood, even thine, O King, verse. 19. and verse. 21. I will bring evil upon
thee, and will take away thy posterity, all thy posterity. Ahab hereupon
rents his clothes, puts sackcloth upon his flesh and lies therein, fasteth,
and goes comfortless, verse. 27. See you not the heart of Ahab humbled, his
hard heart softened by the word of God.

In the second Chapter of the book of Judges, a Messenger of the Lord comes up
from Gilgal to Bochim, with words of reproof against the people of Israel, and
says, I made you to go up out of Egypt, and have brought you unto the Land,
which I swear unto your Fathers, and I said, I will never break my covenant
with you; and ye shall make no league with the inhabitants of this Land; you
shall throw down their Altars: but ye have not obeyed my voice; why have ye
done this? This was the word of God unto them: they heard it, and cried out,
and wept. Their hearts were humbled: their hard hearts were softened. This is
it that the Lord has said, Ierem. 23.29. Is not my sword like fire? and like a
hammer that breaks the rock in pieces? Yes Lord: thy Word is like fire, and
like a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces: It mollifieth and softeneth
the hard stony and flintie heart.

A second profit that the Word preached brings unto us, is, that it sweetneth
the heart. For the word of God is Manna, habens in se omne delectamentum
saporis, it is as the Celestial Manna, that Angels food, that bread from
Heaven, Wisd. 16.20.
very pleasant and well gusted. David esteems it to be sweeter than Honey, and
the dropping of the hony-combe, Psalm. 19.10. And Psalm. 119.103. out of the
admiration thereof, he says, O how sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea
sweeter are they than Honey to my mouth. Faum mellis verba composita, Prou.
16.24. Fair, pleasant, and well composed words are as an Hony-combe, sweet to
the soul, and health to the bones. Qua verba composita, dulcia sunt, si tua
non sunt? So Claudius Aquauiua in his Meditations upon the 119. Psalm: What
fair, what pleasant, what well composed words are sweet, Lord, if thine be
not? Thy words, Lord, de melle coeli mellea, and de lumine tuo luminosa animam
non dulcorant modo, sed dulcedine inebriant. Thy words, Lord, sweet as is the
Honey of Heaven, and full of light through thy light, do not only sweeten the
soul, but do even inebriate it with sweetness.

The third profit that the Word preached brings unto us, is, that it
cleanses the heart. It makes clean the heart, according to that saying of
Christ, John 15.3. Now ye are clean through the Word which I have spoken unto
you. Clean are ye, Non propter baptismum, quo loti estis, Not for the
Baptism wherewith you have been baptized, sed propter verbum quod locutus sum
vobis, but for the Word which I have spoken unto you. You are clean, not for
your Baptism, but for the Word. So Saint Augustine Tract. 80. in Iohannem,
Detrahe verbum and quid est aqua nisi aqua? Accedit verbum ad elementum and sit
sacramentum: Take away the Word, and what is the water but water? the Word
comes to the element, and it is made a Sacrament. You are clean then, not by
your Baptism, but by the Word. And you are clean by the Word, Non quia
dicitur, sed quia creditur. You are clean by the Word, not because the Word is
preached unto you, but because you believe it when it is preached. The
Pharisees and other hypocrites did hear the Word of Christ, yet were they not
thereby made clean, because they did not believe the Word of Christ. And so
does Rupertus expound these words. You are clean. You are clean, because you
believe that which I have said unto you, concerning my death and resurrection,
how I must die for your sins, and rise again for your justification, and go
away to provide a place for you. You have not only heard, but also have
believed the Word which I have spoken unto you, and therefore are ye clean.

The fruit then, and the profit, that arises unto us from our reverent hearing
of the Word preached is by our faith. It is faith that purifieth our hearts,
says Peter, Act. 15.9. Faith it is, by which we apprehend the blood of the
Lamb of God, and are thereby cleansed from all our sins.

But I may not hold you ouer-long with the prosecution of this point. Let it
please you to be remembered, that we have hitherto been moved to the
performance of a holy duty, even to the reverent hearing of the word of God:
and this, first for the honors sake of him that speaks; secondly, for the
dangers sake of him that hears negligently; thirdly, for the profits sake of
him that hears diligently: and that we understand this profit to be
threefold, that it softeneth our hard hearts, that it sweeteneth them, that it
cleanses them. What now remains, but that we pray God to dismiss us with a
blessing?

We humbly beseech thee, most gracious God, so to open our hearts, and to
unlock the ears of our understanding, that now and ever hearing thy Word
profitably, we may observe, learn, and embrace such passages therein, as are
necessary to the confirming of our weak faith, and the Amendment of our
sinful lives. Grant this dear Father, for thy best beloved Son Jesus
Christ. AMEN.

THE Eighth Lecture.
AMOS 3.6. Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it?


THis short sentence you may call the Conclusion or the explication of the
similitudes that went before. The similitudes were six; all taken from vulgar
experience, and such as is incident to a Shepherds walk. The explication, as
it is given by Theodoret and Remigius, stands thus: As it cannot be, that two
should walk together, except they be agreed; or that a Lion should roar in
the forest, when he has no prey; or that a lions whelpe should cry out of his
den, if he have gotten nothing; or that a bird should fall in a snare upon
the earth, where no ginne is for him; or that a fowler should take up his snare
from the ground, before he have taken somewhat; or that the Trumpet should
sound an alarm in the City, and the people not fear: so it cannot be, that
there should be any evil in a City, except the Lord command it so to be. This
dependence of these words upon the former is approved by Christophorus a Castro
in his Paraphrase.

Conrad Pelican and others, look not so far back for the coherence of
these words, but confine them within this sixth verse; thus: As a trumpet is
not blown in a City, but that the people thereof should be afraid, and run
together: so neither is there any evil sent by the Lord to any place, city, or
country, but that the people thereof should repent and amend their lives.

The (...), the reddition, suiting with the (...), with the proposition of the
similitude here drawn from the sound of the trumpet, should be thus: Shall a
Prophet in the name of the Lord foreshew any future evil, and shall not the
people be afraid? But, because whatsoever evils a Prophet foretells, he
foretells from the Lord; and the evils which he foretells, fall not out but
by the Lord; therefore Amos here omitting the Antecedent, sets down the
consequent: Shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord has not done it?

Shall there be evil, etc. Some years have passed away since I handled this
Text in the chiefest assembly of this Diocese. My then endeavors were to arm
my self, and that devout auditory with patience against the day of affliction.
And because that day, is a day, which every child of God must look for, I was
induced to publish what I then delivered, if it might be, for the comfort of
such as then heard me not: and I did it, under the title of the haven of the
afflicted.

What need then is there, that I should at this time recommend the same Text
unto you? What the wise son of Syrach in the eighteenth of his
Ecclesiasticus, verse. 6. says of such as search into the works of God, is
true of us, whose office is, to search into the words of God, Cum consummauerit
homo, tunc incipiet: When a man has done what he can, he must begin again.
For as Saint Hierome has well observed in his Comment upon the 90. Psalm,
Singula verba Scripturarum, singula Sacramenta sunt: every word in Scripture is
a Sacrament, and contains a mystery. Every word a Sacrament! The Rabbis stay
not here: they say as much of every letter; Nullum est iota in Scriptura; a quo
non pendeant montes doctrinarum: there is for an iota, any the least letter in
the Scriptures, but thereon do depend mountains of doctrines. Saint Hierome
in the second book of his Commentaries upon the Epistle to the Ephesians yet
goes further; Singuli apices, singula puncta in diuinis Scripturis, plena sunt
sensibus: there is not a tittle, not a point in the divine Scriptures, bur its
full of spiritual meaning; full of senses.

Not a word, but its a Sacrament! not a letter, but it yields mountains of
doctrines! not a point, but its full of senses! Well then may the words which I
have now read unto you, yield variety of matter, fit for our deepest
meditations a second time: and because they follow in course in this Chapter,
the exposition whereof I have for this place undertaken, I may not in silence
pass them over, but must take a reuiew of them, and recommend them to your
Christian and devout attentions.

Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it?

Herein observe with me three circumstances; Quis, Quid, Vbi. Quis, the Agent;
Quid, the Action; Vbi, the place of performance. The Agent, is the Lord; the
Action, is a doing of evil; the place of performance is a City. Shall there
be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it?

You see the bounds of my present discourse. I will go over them with as much
breuity and perspicuity as I may, Gods holy grace assisting me, and your
Christian and accustomed patience giving leave.

The first point I am to handle is Quis: it is the Agent. His name in my Text
is Jehovah, and it is the most proper name of God.

Is his name Jehovah? How then is it that Jacob the Patriarch, Genesis 32.29.
asking after the name of God, receives answer in the Vulgar Latin, Cur quaris
nomen meum, quod est mirabile? Wherefore is it, that thou do ask after my
name, seeing it is wonderful? And how comes it to pass, that the like answer
is given unto Manoah, Judges 13.18. Cur quaris nomen meum, quod est mirabile?
Why ask thou thus after my name, seeing it is secret? And why does Agur
enquire with admiration, Prou. 30.4. Who has ascended up into Heaven? or who
has come down from thence? Who has gathered the wind in his fist? Who has
bound the waters in a garment? Who has established all the ends of the earth?
Quod nomen eius? What is his name? Can thou tell? as if it were impossible to
find out a fit name for God.

Much disputing is there in the Schools about the name of God, which they
reckon up by a threefold divinity. The first is Salmeron Disp. 4. in 1. Ephesians.
Tom. 15. page 187. Et in 1. Joan. 1. Disp. 5. Tom. 16. page 170.
Theologia affirmatiua, an affirmative Divinity: the second is, Theologia
mystica sieve negatiua, a mystical or negative divinity: the third is,
Theologia Symbolica, a symbolicall divinity.

In the affirmative divinity, God is called by such names as do sound out his
perfection, such as are, Genesis 17.1.
Omnipotent, Genesis 21.33.
Everlasting, Good, Romans 16.27.
Wise, Apocal. 15.4.
Holy, Deuteronomy. 32.4.
Just, and Exodus 34.6.
True.

In the mystical or negative divinity, no certain name is given him, to
describe him, what he is, but to show what he is not. Such appellations are
these, 1 Timothy 1.17.
Immortal, Invisible, Romans 1.23.
Incorruptible, Bernard. Ser. 6. Super Cantic.
Incorporeall, Aug. Tom. 10. de verbis Apost. Sermon. 1.
Ineffable, Inestimable, Incomprehensible, Infinite, Bernard. paru. Sermon. 51.
Immense, Undivided, Unvariable, Unchangeable.

In the symbolicall divinity any name may be given him: he may be called
Salmeron. Disp. 5. in 1 Joan. 1. To. 16. p. 170.
a Lion, a Lamb, a Worm, a Calfe, Light, Heaven, a Star, any thing else, by
Trelcat. instit. lib. 1. page 20.
Analogy or similitude, Nulla Salmeron. in Ephesians. 1. Disp. 4. page 187. Apud.
Aquin. 1.
fiquidem res est, quae in aliquo Deum non referat: for there is not any thing,
but in somewhat it resembles God.

To the first of these three belongs this name of God in my Text; his name
Jehovah. Jehovah is among the affirmative names of God; and is of them the most
principal. So says Damascene lib. 1. Orthodox. fides cap. 12. And well. For
it comprehends totum, all in it self, Velut quoddam pelagus, as a Sea of
substance, infinite and indeterminate.

Jehovah! It is the essential name of God, the name of his essence, for three
reasons. First, because God is of himself, not of any other. Secondly, because
other things are from God, not from any thing else, nor from themselves.
Thirdly, because God gives Esse reale, a real being to (and is ever true in)
his promises, and his threats.

All this is confirmed, Esaias 43.10. Ye are my witnesses, faith Jehovah, that
ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he: before me there was
no God formed, neither shall there be after me. I, even I am Jehovah; and
besides me there is no Savior. Yea, before the day was, I am he; and there is
none that can deliver out of my hand: I will work, and who shall let it? It is
from hence plain, that the Lord, Jehovah, is (...), (...), and (...), he is of
himself alone, and ever of himself and of no other, the beginning and
fountain of all things else, that have any being.

See then here his Essence, verse. 10. I am he, verse. 11. I, even I, am the
Lord, verse. 12. Ye are my witnesses, that I am God, verse. 13. I am he. See here
his Eternity, verse. 10. Before me there was no God formed, neither shall there
be any after me: and verse. 13. Before the day was, I am. See also his
Omnipotency, verse. 11. Beside me there is no Savior: verse. 13. There is none
that can deliver out of my hand. Again in the same verse, I will work; and
who shall let it?

Great is the comfort that this name of God, his name Jehovah, may administer
unto us. Our God is Jehovah; of himself, eternal, and omnipotent: and
therefore will not fail to give unto us the good things which he has promised
in his holy Word.

Much too blame then are the Jews, who through their vain superstition,
holding this name of God, this great name, (...) as they call it, to be (...),
ineffable, and not to be pronounced, do neither write it, nor read it, nor
speak it: but as often as they meet with it in holy Scripture, they either read
for it Elohim, or Adonai, or do only name the four letters of which it
consists, Iod, He, Van, He: whereas yet God has therefore made known this
his name to men, that men might read it, and pronounce it with a reverent and
an holy fear.

This our God the Lord, Jehovah, who is of himself alone, and gives a real
being to all things else, who is ever true; true in himself, true in his
works, and true in his words: this our God is a good God. Good in himself,
and good out of himself. Good in himself of his own essence, and the highest
degree of goodness.

He is sua essentia bonus, good of his own essence. For his goodness is not
by participation of good from any other, but naturally of himself from
everlasting: nor is his goodness accidental, but he is sua ipfius bonitas,
He is his own goodness.

And he is Sum bonus; he is good in the highest degree of goodness. For he
is that same Summum Bonum, that same chiefest good, that is of all men to be
sought for.

He is good also, Extrase, out of himself. For he is the Author of all good,
as well in making so many good creatures, as in doing good to them being made.
And this his goodness is either general or special.

His general goodness extends it self to all his creatures: not only to
such as have continued in that goodness, wherein they were created; but also
to such as have fallen away from their primigeniall goodness, even to evil
Angels, and to wicked men. Of this goodness I understand that, Psalm. 33.5. The
earth is full of the goodness of the Lord.

His special goodness I call that, by which he does good to the holy Angels,
confirmed in grace, and to his elect children among the sons of men. Such is
that, whereof we read, Psalm. 73.1. Truly God is good to Israel, even to such
as are of a clean heart. He is good, that is, he is gracious, favorable, and
full of compassion to Israel, to his elect and holy people, his holy Church,
yet militant upon the earth, delivering her from evil, and bestowing good upon
her.

Now if honey of its own nature and essence sweet, has no bitterness in it;
if the Sun of its own nature and essence light, has no darkness in it:
then out of doubt it cannot be, that our God the Lord, Jehovah, who is ever
good; good in se, and good, extrase; good of his own nature and essence, and
good toward all his creatures, should have any evil in him. No, Lord, We
confess before thee with thy holy servant David; Psalm. 5.4.
Thou art not a God that has pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil
dwell with thee.

Thus you see, Quis, who this Agent is. He is our God, the Lord, Jehovah. He,
who is his own being, and gives a real being to all things else; He, who is
absolutely good, good of his own essence, and good to all his creatures; He,
in whom there is no stain of evil. This is He, the Agent. Now follows his
Action, which seems to be a doing of evil, and is my second circumstance.
For my Text is, Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it?

Mat. 7.18.
It is an observation in Nature, that a good tree cannot bring forth evil
fruit. And there is an axiom in Philosophy, Omne agens agit sibi sim^^ Every
Agent produces the like unto it self. God, the Agent here, being absolutely
good; good in se, good extra se; good in himself, good to all his creatures,
cannot but produce a like action, even very good. How then is it, that here he
is said to do evil? For the untying of this knot, I will produce a few
distinctions; from them I will gather some conclusions; and the doubt will be
cleared.

My first distinction is; Things may be termed evil two manner of ways: some
are evil indeed, and of their own nature: in this rank we must place our
sins: some are evil not indeed, and in their own nature, but in regard of our
sense, apprehension and estimation; and in this rank we must place whatsoever
affliction God lays upon us in this life for our sins. This distinction is
Saint Basils, in his Homily, wherein he proves, that God is not the Author of
evils.

The next distinction is out of Saint Augustine, chap. 26. against Adimantus
the Manichee: There are two sorts of evils; there is malum, quod facit homo,
and there is malum, quod patitur. There is an evil, which the wicked man does;
and there is an evil, which he suffers. That is sin; this, the punishment
of sin: In that, the wicked are Agents; in this, they are Patients: that, is
done by them; this, is done upon them. They offend Gods Justice, and God in his
Justice offends them.

This is otherwise delivered by the same Father, De fide ad Petrum, cap. 21.
Geminum esse constat naturae rationalis malum: vnum, quo voluntary ipsa
deficit a summo Bono, creatore suo: Alterum quo iuuita punietur ignis aeterni
supplicio; illud passura just, quia hoc admisit unjust. It is, says he,
manifest, that there is a twofold evil of the reasonable nature, that is; of
man. One, whereby man voluntarily forsakes the chiefest good, God, his
Creator: the other, whereby he shall against his will be punished in the flames
of everlasting fire. So shall he justly suffer, that unjustly offended.

In his first Disputation against Fortunatus the Manichee, he speaks yet more
plainly. Since, says he, there are two kinds of evil Peccatum, and poena
peccati; Sin, and the punishment of sin; the one, namely sin, pertaines
not unto God: the other, the punishment of sin belongs unto him.

Tertullian lib. 2. contra Marcionem, cap. 14. more than a hundred years
before Saint Augustines time, delivers this distinction with much perspicuity.
There is malum delicti, and malum supplicij: or, there is malum culpae and
malum poenae. There is an evil of sin, and an evil of punishment: and of
each part he nominateth the Author; Malorum quidem peccati and culpae,
Diabolum; malorum vero supplicij and poenae Deum creatorem: Of the evils of
sin or default the Devil is the Author: but of the evils of pain and
punishment, he acknowledges the hand of God, the Creator.

This second distinction of evils, Rupertus well expresses in other terms:
There is malum, quod est iniquitas, and there is malum, quod est Afflictio
propter iniquitatem: There is an evil of Iniquity, and an evil of Affliction.
So he agrees with the ancient Fathers.

My third distinction is of the evils of punishment. Of these there are two
sorts. Some are only the punishments of sin, either eternal in Hell, or
temporal in this world: and some are so the punishments of sin, that they
are also sins and causes of sins.

My fourth distinction is, De malo culpae: it concerns the evil of sin. The
evil of sin may be considered three manner of ways. First, as it is a
sin repugnant to the Law of God; and so only is it malum culpae, the evil
of sin. Secondly, as it is a punishment of some precedent sin, for God
uses to punish sin with sin.

So did he punish it in the Gentiles, when he gave them over to a reprobate
mind, Romans 1.28.
to uncleanness, to the lusts of their own hearts, to do such things as were
not convenient, because when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, Romans
1.12. Thirdly, as it is a cause of some subsequent sin: such as was
excoecatio in Iudaeis, whereof we read, Esaias 6.10. Excoeca cor populi huius,
Make thou the heart of this people blind, or make it fat; make their cares
heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their
ears, and understand with their hearts, and convert, and be healed. This same
excoecation or blindness in the Jews, was the punishment of a precedent
sin, namely, of their infidelity toward Christ; and it was a sin, because
every ignorance of God is a sin; and it was the cause of other sins: so
Saint Augustine teaches, lib. 5. cap. 3. contra Iulianum. And this distinction
is found in Saint Greg. Moral. lib. 25. cap. 9.

My fifth distinction concerns also the evil of sin. In sin there are
two things to be observed: there is Ens, and there is (...); there is Actio,
and there is Actionis malitia: or, there is Actio, and there is Actionis
irrectitudo, which is, declinatio a rectitudine voluntatis Dei in lege
reuelatae. In every sin there is an entitie, being, or action; and there is
of that entitie, being, or action, a crookedness, obliquity, or naughtiness.
Every entity, being, or action, as such is good from a good author, Act. 17.28.
God Almighty, in whom we live, move, and have our being. But the (...), the
crookedness, obliquity, and naughtiness of our Actions, the swaruing of them
from the line of Gods revealed will, as such, is wicked, from a wicked Author,
Genesis 6.5.
man's decayed nature: All the imaginations of the thoughts of man's heart, are
only evil continually.

Thus have you my distinctions. I promised to draw from them some conclusions.

The first is: God is the Author of every evil of punishment. Every such evil
God wills. The will of God is the primarie efficient cause thereof. It may
thus be proved. Every good thing is of God. Now every evil of punishment,
every punishment, is a good thing; for it is a work of justice, by which
sins are punished, and so a just work; and therefore every punishment is of
God, and God wills it.

The second conclusion: The evil of sin, as it is a punishment of some
former sin, God wills and inflicteth. This is that same received and much
used axiom in Diuinty; God punishes sins with sins. In so doing he does
no more, then what becomes a just Judge to do. Hereof Saint August^ne,
Contra aduersarium legis and Prophetarum lib. 1. cap. 24. thus speaks: It is
a fearful judgment, when God takes course, Vt crimina criminibus
vindicantur, and supplicia peccantium non sunt tormenta, sed incrementa
vitiorum. Fearful is the judgment, when God takes course, that sins be
revenged with sins, and the punishment of evil doers be no torment to them,
but additions to their evil doings. O, this is a fearful judgment, which
Saint Gregory, Moral. lib. 25. cap. 9. expresses after this manner: Hoc quippe
agitur, vt culpae culpis feriantur, quatenus suplicia fiant peccantium ipsa
incrementa viti^rum: It is the most admirable judgment of God, and most
dreadful of all other, when he takes course that sin be stricken with
sin, so as that the increase of sin is the punishment of the sinner: it
being ordered by disposition above, but yet by reason of the confusion of
iniquity beneath, both that the former sin is the cause of the latter, and
the latter is the punishment of the former. This of all the judgments of God
is the most admirable, the most dreadful.

My third conclusion, The evil of sin as it is an Action God wills; he
works it, he does it. For whatsoever God properly wills, the same he
works, he does it, either immediately by himself; or Sua virtute, through his
power, by others. Now if Quaecunque voluit, fecit, as it is Psalm. 115.3. if God
has done whatsoever he has willed, then surely, Quaecunque fecit, vult,
whatsoever he does, that he wills. And the truth is, not in Philosophy
only, also in the holy Scriptures, that God is the primary cause of all
actions, whatsoever they are, as far forth as they are actions. This is that
which Saint Paul affirms, 1 Cor. 12.6. God works all in all. For though he
speaks concerning the gifts of the holy Ghost, yet is his proposition
general, God works all in all: like to that, Romans 11.36. God is he, of whom
are all things, through whom are all things, and to whom are all things. All
things? He means not only all substances, but also all the actions of all
things. For as all actions are governed by him, and do tend unto him; so also
are they all of him, as of the first mouer; according to that, Act. 17.28. In
him we live, and move, and have our being.

The fourth Conclusion: The evil of sin, as it is sin, God properly
wills not, neither indeed can he will it. For Sin, as it is sin, is that
same (...) whereof I spoke in my fifth distinction: it is the crookedness, the
obliquity, the naughtiness of an action; it is the swaruing of an action from
the line of the will of God revealed in his holy Word: whereof to make God a
doer, or author, is execrable and blasphemous impiety. Non Deus volens
iniquitatem tu es, Psalm. 5 4. is a description of God according to his proper
nature; God is not a God that wills iniquity. It is proper unto him Nolle
inquitatem, Not to will iniquity. Habbakkuk avouches it, Chap. 1.13. O Lord my
God mine holy one, thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and can not
look on iniquity; Mundi sunt oculi tui, thine eyes are pure, free from all
spot and uncleanness; that thou can not behold evil, to approve it; nor
can look on iniquity, to allow it. So true is my fourth Conclusion: The
evil of sin, as it is sin, God properly wills not, neither indeed can he
will it.

Now out of these conclusions, and the fore-alleaged distinctions, I frame the
resolution to the doubt propounded. The doubt was, How is it that God
absolutely good, good in Se, and good Extrase: good in himself, and good to
all his creatures, is here in my Text said to do evil? The resolution is: The
evil in my Text is not malum culpae, delicti aut iniquitatis; it is not the
evil of default, the evil of sin, or the evil of iniquity: but it is malum
poenae supplicij sine afflictionis: It is the evil of pain, the evil of
punishment, the evil of affliction. Not of that, but of this, is my Text to be
understood. Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? No
there shall be no evil in a City; no evil of pain, punishment, or
affliction, but the Lord has done it.

And thus you are to understand that Esaias 45.7. I, the Lord, create evil. And
that, Ierem. 18.11. I, the Lord, frame evil against you. I create evil; I
frame evil. By evil in both places, Tertullian against Marcion, lib. 2. cap.
24. understands mala non peccatoria, sed vltoria; he understands, evil not
of sin, but of reuengement. So likewise are we to understand by the name of
evil in all those places of holy Scripture in which God either 1 King. 9.9.
Judge. 9.56. 1 Samuel 6.9. Dan. 9.13.
brings, or 1 King. 14.10. 1 King. 21.21. 2 King. 21.12. 2 King. 22.16.
threatens to bring evil upon any. By evil in all such places as here in my
Text, we are to understand the evil of reuengement; the evil of pain,
punishment, or affliction.

The evil of reuengement! The evil of pain, punishment, or affliction! But
why evil? Surely every reuengement, every pain, every punishment, every
affliction that be-falleth us in this life, is good. It is good. First, because
it is laid upon us by God, who is of himself, and absolutely good. Secondly,
because it is just, and whatsoever is just must needs be good. Thirdly, because
it has a good end; the glory of God and the salvation of the elect. For these
reasons it cannot be denied, but that every reuengement, pain, punishment, and
affliction is good. Why then is it in my Text, and elsewhere called evil?

I answer according to my second distinction. Reuengements, pains,
punishments, and afflictions are called evils, not because they are evils
indeed and of their own nature, but only in regard of our sense, estimation
and apprehension. The very torments of Hell, eternal fire, and outer darkness
are not indeed and of their nature evil: Mala sunt, his, qui incidunt in ea,
says Irenaeus aduersus haereses, lib. 4. cap. 77. they are evil to such as
fall into them; but Bona, ex justitia Dei, good they are, as they are from Gods
justice.

What Irenaeus says concerning Hell Torments, the same is true of the
adversities, the crosses, the scourges, the afflictions that befall men in this
life. Evils they are called, and God is said to do them. But how evils? Saint
Hierome, lib. 4. Com. in Ierem. will tell us how: they are called evils, non
quod per se mala sint, not because they are of themselves evil, sed quod
patientibus mala esse videantur, but because they seem evil to us who suffer
them.

With these two, Irenaeus and Saint Jerome, do agree Contr. Adimantum Manich.
cap. 27. and contr. Epist. Manich. c. 38. and lib. 1. contr. aduers. legis and
Prophet. c. 23.
Saint Augustine, Sermon. 16. in Psalm. 118.
Saint Ambrose, Lib. 3. Moral. cap. 7.
Gregory the Great, Lib. 1. in Genesis cap. 7.
Eucherius Bishop of Lions, Cap. 4. de Diuinis nominibus.
Dionysius the Areopagite, Lib. 1. and 10. Recognit.
Clemens the Roman, In Dialogo and lib. de Monarchia.
Justin Martyr, Homil. Quod Deus non sit author malorum.
Great Basil, and Lib. 4. in Esaiam cap. 45.
Cyril of Alexandria, even all the ancient and Orthodoxall Fathers. All these
with one consent do teach, that the adversities, the crosses, the scourges,
the afflictions, which befall men in this life, though in the Scripture they
are called Mala, Evils; yet indeed they are not Mala, they are not evils sua
natura, simply and of their own nature, but only are mala nobis, evil in
respect of us, evil in regard of our sense, estimation, and apprehension. And
such is the evil in my Text: improperly evil, but indeed good: good in its
own nature, but evil, only, as we call evil, whatsoever likes us not, or
is not for our ease.

I have long stood upon the second circumstance, the Quid, the Action, which
was a doing of evil. I must be the shorter in the third, the Vbi, the place
where this Action is performed. In my Text its called a City.

Shall there be evil in a City;

In a City! In ciuitatibus, in Cities; So Nicolaus de Lyra expounds it. In
ciuitaete aliqua, in any City; So Mercerus. In habitatoribus ciuitatis; among
the inhabitants of a City; So Petrus a Figueiro. In populi communitate, among
the people of the world; So Albertus Magnus. I have expounded it, In ciuitate
huius mundi, in the City of this world.

This universe and admirable frame of nature, wherein Jehovah, the Lord our
God, the 1 Timothy 6.15.
King of Kings Psalm. 97.1. and Psalm. 99.
reigns, consists of two Cities, the one is Augustine. Retract. lib. 2. c.
43.
Ciuitas Dei, the City of God, the other is Idem de Temp. Sermon. 106.
Ciuitas hujus mundi, the City of this world. The one is Idem de Ciuitate Dei,
lib. 14. cap. 28.
celestial, the other is terrene. The one is of Idem de Catech. Rud. lib. 1.
cap 19.
Saints, the other is of the wicked. The one is Idem in Psalm. 61.
Jerusalem, the other is Babylon.

In the first, that most glorious City, the City of God, and his Saints, the
celestial Jerusalem, all tears are wiped away from the eyes of the
inhabitants; there they neither weep nor lament; there is neither death, nor
sorrow, nor crying, nor pain; there is no evil there, no not the evil of
affliction: So says the Spirit, Revel. 21.4. And therefore that City, cannot
be the City in my Text.

In the other City, the City of this world, the terrene City, the City of the
wicked, Babylon, great Babylon, the City of confusion, there is no sure repose
for the godly there. There may they become a reproach to their Psalm. 44.13. and
Psalm. 79.4.
neighbors: there may they be a scorn and derision to them that are round
about them: They may be a byword Psalm. 44.14.
among the Heathen, a shaking of the head among the people. There they may
Hebr. 11.37.
be tempted, they may be stoned, they may be flaine with the sword, they may
be sawne asunder: There may they daily Psalm. 88.9.
mourn by reason of affliction: For even the godly, who are August. de Ciuit.
Dei. lib. 15. cap. 1.
by grace Ciues sursum, Citizens above, Citizens of the supernall and
celestial City of God; they are also by grace peregrini deorsum, pilgrims or
strangers here below in this terrene City, the City of this world. Here they
must be cut, 1 Pet. 2.5.
hewne, and squared with sundry tribulations, sicknesses and diseases before
they can be made fit, and as lively stones for the Heavenly Jerusalem. And this
is the City in my Text, my third circumstance, the Vbi, the circumstance of the
place, where the Agent, Jehovah, performs his Action, a doing of evil: Shall
there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it?

Thus is my Text for the understanding thereof made easy; as thus: Shall there
be euill] any evil of reuengement, pain, punishment, or affliction, In a
City] in the terrene City, in the City of this world; Shall there be any such
evil, any where, and the Lord has not done it? or as the Marginall reading
is, Shall not the Lord do somewhat? The point of observation is: There is no
affliction any where in the world, but its from the Lord, and either he does
it, or does somewhat in it.

By affliction in this my Thesis, I understand the suffering of any thing, the
sense or cogitation whereof our nature shunneth. Whatsoever is any way grievous
or offensive to our humane nature I call affliction. The temptations of the
flesh, the world, and the Devil; the diseases of the body; a froward husband
or wife; rebellious children; unthankful friends; loss of goods; reproaches,
slanders, war, pestilence, famine, imprisonment, death; every cross and
passion, bodily and ghostly, proper to our selves, or pertaining to our
kindred, private or public, secret or manifest, either by our own deserts
gotten, or otherwise imposed upon us, I call afflictions. To be short, the
miseries, the calamities, the vexations, the molestations of this life, from
the least to the greatest, from the pain of the little finger to the very
pangs of death, I call afflictions. Of every such affliction, whatsoever it
betideth any one in this life, God is (...), he is the primary efficient cause
thereof, he does it, or does somewhat in it.

Upon the proof of this point I have now no time to spend: nor needs it any
proof, it is so firmly grounded upon my Text. Nor will I recount unto you the
many uses it affords. Let one suffice for the shutting up of this exercise.

Is it true, Beloved. Is there no affliction that betideth any one any where in
this world, but its from the Lord? Here then we have wherewith to comfort our
selves in the day of affliction. Whatsoever affliction shall befall us, its
from the Lord. The Lord whose name is Jehovah, who is himself and of none
other, whose being is from all eternity, who only is omnipotent, who is good in
himself, and good to all his creatures, he will not suffer us to be tempted
above our abilities, but will with the temptation also make away to escape that
we may be able to bear it, Saint Paul is our warrant for it, 1 Cor. 10.13. And
2 Cor. 4 8. he shows it by his own experience. We are troubled on every
side, yet are we distressed: We are perplexed, yet are we not in despair: We
are persecuted, yet are we not forsaken: we are cast down, yet are we not
destroyed. In such a case was Saint Paul. What if we be in the like? If we be
troubled, perplexed, persecuted, and cast down, what shall we do? We will
support our selves with the confidence of David, Psalm. 23.4. Though we walk
through the valley of the shadow of death, yet will we fear no evil; for
thou, Lord, art with us. Thou Lord, art with us! Quis contra nos? Who shall be
against us? We will not fear, what man can do unto us. I draw to a conclusion.

Since there is no affliction, that betideth any one any where in this world,
but its from the Lord; and as the Author to the Hebrews speaks, chap. 12.8.
He is a bastard and not a son, that is not partaker of afflictions; let us,
as Saint James advises, chap. 1.2. account it exceeding joy, when we are
afflicted.

The Patriarchs, the Prophets, the Evangelists, the Apostles, the holy
Martyrs, have found the way to Heaven, narrow, rugged, and bloody, and shall we
think that God will strew Carpets for our nice feet to walk thither?

He that is the door and the way, our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Chri^st,
has by his own example taught us, that we must through many afflictions enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven. There is but one passage thither, and it is a
straight one. If with much pressure we can get through, and leave but our
superfluous rags as torn from us in the throng, it will be our happiness.

Wherefore whenever any adversity, cross, calamity, misery, or affliction
shall befall us, let us with due regard to the hand of the Lord, that smites
us, receive it with thanks, keep it with patience, d^gest it in hope, apply
it with wisdom, bury it in meditation, and the end thereof will be peace and
glory: the peace of our consciences in this life, and eternal glory in the
highest Heavens. Whereof God make us all. partakers.

THE Ninth Lecture.
AMOS 3.7. Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reuealeth his secret
unto his servants, the Prophets.


GOds dealing with his own people, the people of Israel, was not as it was
with other Nations. Others he punished, and gave them no fore-warning. The
Idumaeans, the Ammonites, the Egyptians, the rest of the Heathen, drank
deeply of the viols of his wrath, though thereof they received no admonition
by any Prophet of his. It was otherwise with the Israelites. If the rod of
affliction were to light heavy upon them, they were ever foretold thereof. God
ever prevented them with his Word. He sent unto them his servants, Ierem.
35.14, 15.
the Prophets: he rose early and sent them, with the soonest, to let them
understand of the evils which hung over their heads, that returning every man
from their evil ways, and amending their doings, they might be received to
grace and mercy. This difference between Gods care and providence, toward his
own people and other nations, is thus expressed, Psalm. 147.19, 20. God! He
shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and ordinances unto Israel; He has
not dealt so with any Nation, neither have the Heathen knowledge of his Laws.
Yet was he known to the Heathen. He was known to them partly by his works,
by his creatures, in which the power and Deity of God shined: and partly by the
light of Nature, and power of understanding which God has given them. Both
ways their Idolatry, their Atheism, their disobedience were made before God
inexcusable.

But to his own people, the people of Israel, was he known after another
manner. To them pertained the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and
the giving of the Law, Romans 9.4.
and the service of God, and the promises. To them were committed the oracles
of God. To them at sundry times, Romans 3.2. Hebr. 1.1.
and in diverse manners God spoke by his Prophets. He gave them time and space
to repent them of their sins, and was ready to forgive them, had they on
their parts bin curable. Incurable though they were, yet did God seldom or
never, send among them any of his four sore judgments, either the sword, or
the famine, Ezech. 14.21.
or the noisome beast, or the pestilence, or any other, but he first made it
known unto his holy Prophets, and by them forewarned the people. This our
Prophet, Amos, here avouches.

Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reuealeth his secret unto his
servants, the Prophets. The words according unto some, are an Exegesis, and
exposition, or a declaration of what was said before. Before it was said, There
shall be no evil in a city, but the Lord does it; no evil of pain,
punishment or affliction, but the Lord does it. The Lord does it, as well for
that he sends just punishments upon men that are obstinate in their evil
courses; as also for that he reuealeth those evils to his Prophets, that by
them they may be published.

Or, the words are an Aitiologia, and do contain a reason of what was said
before. Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? Surely
no; there shall be none. All evil of punishment is of the Lord. Yet will not
the Lord oppress his people unawares; but long before with holy premonitions
he provides for them by his Prophets; and either by promises he keeps them
in good courses, or by threats he recalleth them from bad.

Be it (...) or (...), an exposition or a reason of what was said before, it is
all one for the matter. But if we respect the form of the sentence, as it
stands in our now- English translation: Surely the Lord God will do nothing,
but he reuealeth his secret to his servants the Prophets, it may be called
(...), an Assoueration. For such it is: and is of a revelation: concerning
which three things are to be observed, 1. Who is the Reuealer. 2. What is
Revealed. 3. To whom.


The Reuealer is the Lord God, His secret is the thing revealed. They to whom
the revelation is made are his servants, the Prophets. Of those in their order.

The Reuealer is first, and is here set forth by two names of his: Adonai
Iehouih, Lord God. The first place of Scripture, wherein these two names are
joined together, is Genesis 15.2. in the complaint made by Abraham for want of an
heir: Lord God, what will thou give me, if I go childlesse? Lord God.

Lord in Hebrew is Adonai, which signifies My Lords; or my stays, or pillars:
implying in it a mystery of the holy Trinity. Matthew. 11.25.
It is one of the proper names of God, the Lord of Heaven and earth, who as a
base sustaineth his faithful children in all their infirmities. It is written
here with kametz or long A in the end, and so is proper to God, having the
vowels of Jehovah: when it is written with Patach or short A, it is applied to
creatures. In the form singular Adon, Lord or sustainer, is also ascribed unto
God, the Lord of all the earth, Psalm. 97 5. The hills melted like wax at the
presence of the Lord: at the presence of the Lord of the whole earth. The Lord
of the whole earth, he is Adon, Adonim in the form plural is likewise
ascribed unto God; Malac. 1.6. If I be Adonim, If I be a Lord where is my fear?

The other name of God in this place is Iehouih. Iehouih? It is usually so
written when it is joined with Adonai: and it has the consonant letters of
Jehovah, and the vowels of Elohim. And where one Prophet writes Adonai
Iehouih, as in the prayer of David, set down, 2 Samuel 7.18. another writing of
the same prayer, says Jehovah Elohim, 1 Chronicles. 17.16. Say Iehouih or Jehovah,
the signification is the same. But Iehouih, as Tremelius and Iunius have noted
upon the 15, of Genesis, is the more patheticall, the fitter to move affection:
and is therefore used in passionate speeches, and prayers that are very
earnest, by Genesis 15.2, 8.
Abraham, by Deuteronomy. 3.24.9.26.
Moses, by Cap. 4.14. etc.
Ezechiel, and others, as if they were sighing and sobbing. So writes Amandus
Polanus in his Commentary upon Ezechiel, chap. 4.14. But Alsted in his
Theological Lexicon is of another mind: and thinks there is no more passion
showed in saying Iehouih, than in saying Jehovah. Yet may it be otherwise.

Adonai Iehouih, the Lord God. The first of these two names betokens his
Majesty, his sustentation of all things, and his dominion over all: the
second, his Essence, his existing or being.

The first, Adonai. Grammarians derive from Eden, which is as much as Basis or
Stylobates, the base or footstool of a pillar, the foundation thereof: giving
us thereby to understand, that the Lord our God is the sustainer, the
maintainer, the vpholder of all things; that he is most properly, primarily,
and of himself Lord; that he is the only true prime and supreme Lord of all
things, yea, the Lord of Lords; that he alone has absolute, full, free, and
eternal right over all things that are contained within the circuit of Heaven
and Earth.

The second Jehovah, they derive, as they do Jehovah, from Hauah, which
signifies, He was. The force of this name is opened in the Reuelati^n of Saint
John, chap. 1.4. in that his salutation to the seven Churches of Asia: Grace be
unto you and peace from Him, which is, and which was, and which is to come:
that is, from God the Father, Jehovah; from him that is eternal, immortal,
and unchangeable; from him who has his being of himself, and gives being to
all creatures.

In the same chap. verse. 8. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end,
says the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty.
The words are the conclusion or shutting up of the forementioned salutation,
and are a confirmation of that grace and peace that was to come unto the seven
Churches from Jehovah God alone: from him who is the first and the last, our
Redeemer, the Lord of Hosts, besides whom there is no God. Who was; who was
before all, and gave to every creature the being. Who is to come; who is to
come, continues for ever, and supporteth all: even the Almighty, who
exercises his power and providence over all. This same who is, who was, and
who is to come, as before in the distinguishing of the Persons of the Trinity
it was used to express God the Father; so here it is used to declare the union
of substance in the whole three Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

It is likewise used, Reu. 11.17. where those four and twenty Elders which
sat before God on their seats, fell upon their faces and worshipped God,
saying, We give thee thanks O Lord Almighty, which art, and which wast, and
which art to come.

So is it by the Angel of the waters, Revel. 16.5. where he says, Thou art
righteous, O Lord, which art, and which wast, and which shall be.

Thus in the Holy Revelation of Saint John is the force of the name Jehovah,
opened four several times, and implies thus much: 1. That God has his being
or existence of himself before the world was. Esaias 44.6.
2. That He gives being unto all things. For as much as in him all things are
and do consist. Act. 17.25. Exodus 6.3. Esaias 45.2. Ezech. 5.17.
3. That He gives being to his Word, effecting whatsoever He speaks.

We met with this name of God, Jehovah, in the first Chapter of this Book nine
times, in the second seven times; and twice before in this: Now by the change
of a vowell it is Iehouih. This change of a vowell changes not the name:
Jehovah, or Iehouih! the name is the same: the most proper name of God; of God,
whose true Latitude is his Immensitie, whose true Longitude is his Eternity;
whose true Altitude is the Sublimitie of his Nature; whose true Profunditie
being sine fundo, without bottom, is his incomprehensibility. Bernard in his
fifth book de Consideratione, cap. 13. has a discourse to this very purpose,
but with some variety. The question there propounded is, Quid est Deus? What is
God? The answer is, Longitudo, Latitudo, Sublimitas, and Profundum: God, he is
Length, Breadth, Height and Depth. He is Length for his Eternity; Breadth for
his Charity; Height for his Majesty, Depth for his Wisdom. Length He is for
his Eternity. Dan. 7.9. Esaias 57.15. Psalm. 90.2.
He is the Ancient of days, and inhabiteth Eternity. Before the Mountains
were brought forth, or ever the earth and the world were formed, even from
everlasting to everlasting. He is God.

Breadth he is for his Charity, for his Love. Wisd. 11.24.
He loves all the things that are, and abhors nothing which he has made.
Neither would he have made any thing if he had hated it. He makes his Sun to
rise on the evil and the good, Matthew. 5.45.
and sends rain on the just, and on the unjust. The Gulf, or rather the Sea
of this Love of God is exceeding broad.

Height He is for his Majesty. His Majesty! Prou. 25.28.
it is inestimable. He that searches into it, shall surely be oppressed with
the glory thereof. From the glory of this Majesty in the day of the Lord of
Hosts, when he arises to shake terribly the earth, Esaias 2.19, 20.
will the proud man, the lofty man, every wicked man, seek to hide himself
in the clefts of the rocks, Psalm. 72.19.
and in the caves of the earth, but all in vain: for all the earth shall be
filled with his Majesty. In regard of this his Majesty, He is Genesis 14.18. Job
31.28. Psalm. 7.18. and 9.2. etc. Psalm. 147.5.
often in holy Scripture styled Altissimus, the most high. So for his Majesty
he is Height.

Depth he is for his wisdom. His wisdom! it is infinite; there is no end
thereof; It is inuariable, incomprehensible, ineffable. Finding no fit words,
to express it with, I betake my self to the Apostles exclamation, Romans 11.33.
(...), O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out.

Thus far of my first general the Reueal^r (...) Adonai Iehouih, the Lord
God. The Lord God will do nothing, but he reuealeth his secret to his servants
the Prophets.

He will do nothing] The original is, (...) Lo jahaseh dabar, he will not do
a word.

A word in the Hebrew tongue signifies sometimes any thing or matter, that is
either said or done.

In the 18. of Exodus, verse. 16. Moses in his reply to Iethro his Father in
law, says, when they have (...) Dabar, a word, they come unto me, and I judge
between them. (...) Dabar a word, with the Greeks it is (...), a
controversy; with the old Latin Interpreter it is Disceptatio, a contention;
with Tremelius it is Negotium, a business; with our late English Translators,
it is a matter. So Moses says in effect thus much: If there h^ppen any
business or matter of controversy or contention between a man and his
neighbor, they come unto me, and I judge between them.

In the 24. of Exodus, verse. 14. Moses with his Minister Iosuah going up to the
Mount of God, says unto the Elders, Tarry ye here for us, until we come
again unto you: and behold Aaron and Hur are with you (...) mi bahal debarim,
who so is a master of words, let him come unto them. And here words with the
Greeks are (...), a judgment, or controversy; with the old interpreter,
quaestio, a question; in our now English, they are matters; if any man have any
matters to do: The meaning is, who so has any question or controversy, let
him come unto Aaron and Hur for a resolution.

In the 39. of Esaias, verse. 2. it is recorded of Hezechiah King of Judah, that
when Merodach Baladan, the son of Baladan King of Babylon, had sent messengers
to visit him and to congratulate his recovery; He was glad of them, and showed
them the house of his precious things, the silver, and the gold, and the
spices, and the precious ointment, and all the house of his armor, and all
that was found in his treasures. It is added in the end of the verse, Lo hajah
dabar, there was not a word in his house, nor in all his dominions, that
Hezechiah showed them not. Not a word! A word for a thing according to the
custom of the Hebrew. It is Saint Hieroms note upon the place. It is well
rendered in our new Bibles; There was nothing in his house, nor in all his
dominions, that Hezechiah showed them not.

This Hebrew custom of putting verbum pro re, a word for a thing, frequent in
the old, has place likewise in the New Testament.

In the first of Luke, verse. 37. The Angel Gabriel tells the Virgin Mary that
with God no word shall be impossible, (...), no word. His meaning is, with God
no thing shall be impossible.

In the same Chapter verse. 65. The Evangelist having set down what had passed
concerning Elizabeth and her husband Zacharias, says, (...), all these words
were noised abroad throughout all the hill country of Iudaea, (...), all these
words, that is, all these things were diuulged and made known.

In the second of Luke verse. 15. When the Angels who related to the shepherds
Christ's Nativity, were gone away from them into Heaven, the shepherds said one
to another, Let us now go even unto Bethlehem and see (...), this word, that
is, come to pass, which the Lord has made known unto us. This word? that is,
this thing, this whole business, whereof we have heard by the Angels. It is
the Hebraisme which I have hitherto observed; whereby, that I may speak as
Logicians do, the Abstract is put for the Concret, taken either actiuely or
passiuely: as Verbum pro re dicta, a word for a thing that is spoken of. Or to
speak as a Rhetorician would, it is Metonymia adiuncti; the Adiunct is put for
the Subject. Still it is Verbum pro re, a word for the thing or matter, whereof
the speech is.

So it is in this text of mine; Surely the Lord God, non faciet verbum, he will
not do a word; that is, he will do no thing; no such thing as the verse
before speaks of; no evil of pain, punishment, or affliction, He will do
no such thing, but he reuealeth his secret to his servants the Prophets.

He reuealeth his secret. I am come to my second general, concerning the thing
revealed: it is the s^cret of the Lord.

(...) Sodho, his secret, (...), say the Septuagint, translated Eruditionem
suam, his instruction or chastisement. Saint Hierome expounds it Correptionem
suam: the Interlinearie Gloss, Correctionem suam, his reproof or correction.
Theodotio no ill Interpreter of old turned it, (...), his counsel: and Drusius
sees no cause, why it may not well be so turned; for as much as the Hebrew
word (...) Sodh signifies as well consilium as secretum, as well counsel, as
secret. But the current of Translators is for his secret.

His secret] By this secret of his, Albertus Magnus understands
praeordinationis diuinae absconditam voluntatem, the hidden will of Gods
preordination. Arias Montanus expounds it to be, futurarum reru^ cognitionem,
the knowledge of things to come; so does Mathurinus Quadratus. Such a knowledge
they mean, whereof no Mathematician, no Astrologer, no Magician, no Chaldaean,
no Wizard is made partaker. Only the holy Prophets, the servants of our Lord
God, have the privilege and prerogative thereof.

We may not deny that Gods counsels and decrees, things hid from the
understanding of all men, and known only unto God, Ierem. 25.9.
are the secrets of God. But this secret of his whereof my text speaks, is
the decree and purpose of God to bring evil upon a Land and the inhabitants
thereof: to take from them the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the
voice of the Bridegroom, and the voice of the Bride, the sound of the
milstones, and the light of the candle; to make them an astonishment, and a
hissing, and perpetual desolations. The decree and purpose of God to punish a
people for sin is his secret; and this he evermore reuealeth. Yet not this
alone. For of the secrets which God reuealeth there are three kinds.

One is of things supernatural, such as are the mysteries of Religion, the
incarnation of the Son of God, the resurrection of the dead, and the life to
come. These are secrets, to the knowledge of which a man cannot attain,
unless it be revealed unto him from God.

The second is of those things, which are called arcana cordium, the secrets of
the heart, such as are the proper actions of the will and understanding:
Secrets they are; and save to the spirit of man, which is in man, are known to
none, but God, 1 Cor. 2.11. Act. 1.24.
who is, (...), and knows every corner and creuise of the heart.

The third is of those things, which the Schools do call futura contingentia,
such things as are not, nor ever have been, but may hereafter be. And these
are secrets, secrets indeed, only manifest unto him, by whom all things, past,
present, and to come, are acted and governed.

Of these three kinds of secrets, the last is that whereof my text speaks,
the secret of things to come.

Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reuealeth his secret to his
servants the Prophets. He reuealeth his secret] he opens it, he tells it
before hand, he makes it known before it come to pass. The lesson to be taken
from hence is, God is the only reuealer of secrets.

He only reuealeth things to come. This truth is avouched by the Prophet
Daniel, in his second Chapter the 22. verse: his assertion is: God is He, that
reuealeth the deep and secret things. At the 28. verse he tells King
Nebuchadnezzar; Though the wisemen, the Astrologians, the Magicians, the
Soothsayers, cannot show unto the King the secret which he demands, yet
there is a God in Heaven that reuealeth secrets, and makes known to the King
what shall be in the latter days. He says it again, verse. 29. He that
reuealeth secrets makes known unto thee, O King, what shall come to pass.
Once more, verse. 45. The great God has make known to the King, what shall
come to pass hereafter. The King acknowledges as much; and thereupon says,
verse. 47. Of a truth, Daniel, your God is a God of gods, and a Lord of Kings,
and a reuealer of secrets. It is true: God is the only reuealer of secrets.

Is it true? What shall we then say to sundry predictions in Gentilisme? What
to those dreams which the Heathen often had? What to their Oracles? Hier.
Comment. in Esai. 41.
What to Apollo Delphicus and Loxias, and Delius, and Clarius? What to other
their Idols, which made fair show, as if they had the knowledge of things to
come, and could reveal secrets?

Our answer is; they were mere shows; no substance of truth was in them.
Saint Hierome in his twelfth book of his Comments upon Esaias at the 41. Chapter
thus reasons against them: If they could foretell things to come, why
foretold they nothing of Christ? Why nothing of the twelve Apostles? Why
nothing of the ruin, and abolition of their own Temples? If they could not
foretell their own destruction, how could they foretell either good or evil,
that should betide others?

But you will say; many things were foretold by the oracles of old. Know then,
that from those oracles the Devil, the Father of lies, that he might not be
reproved of falsehood, did evermore give his answers doubtfully, that you might
expound them both ways, either for good or evil. Such was his answer given to
Pyrrhus King of the Epirotes, when he took part with the Tarentines against
the Romans.

Cic. 2. de Divine. ex Ennio.
A^o te, Aeacida, Romanos vincere posse: I tell thee Pyrrhus, thou that art of
the lineage of Aeacus, I tell thee, te Romanos vincere posse: the words are
ambiguous, and may be rendered, either for Pyrrhus; thou shall overcome the
Romans: or against him, the Romans shall overcome thee. The like answer was
given unto Croesus, when he consulted the Oracle at D^lphos, about his
expedition into Persia, Herodotus.
Croesus perdet, H^lim transgressus, maxima regna. Croesus, when he is past the
river Halis, perdet maxima regna; the words are ambiguous, and may be rendered,
either for Croesus, He shall destroy great kingdoms of his enemies; or
against him, He shall lose great kingdoms of his own. With such ambiguities
the Devil in those oracles of old, evermore deluded such as sought unto him.

But you will say, those Oracles did sometimes take place; and as they
foretold, so things came to pass.

Be it so. Yet very few of them did hit; which might be by chance, and
hap-hazzard, as we say, a few only of a great number falling out; or the Devil
by the subtlety of his nature, and quickness of his understanding, might by
some antecedent signs foresee the effects and events which should follow: or
he might foretell such things, as by Gods permission, he should effect
himself.

Now to the dreams, which it is said the Heathen often had, whereby they knew
things to come, we say; many of them were devised either by them, who affirmed
they had such dreams; or by the writers to win the more credit thereby. Yet
deny we not, but they had their dreams. Their dreams! Of what sort? There are
three sorts of dreams. Some are (...) or (...), divine dreams; some are (...)
or natural; some are (...) or Diabolical.

The Heathen were not much troubled with the first sort, with divine dreams:
Genesis 41. Dan. 2.
yet we read that Pharaoh and Nabuchodonosor had such. Et Pharaoh and
Nabuchodonosor in iudicium sui somnijs futura cognoscunt, and tamen Deum non
intelligunt reuelantem, says S. Hierome upon the first of Jonas: Both Pharaoh
and Nabuchodonosor to their own condemnation do by their dreams know things
to come, and yet they understand not God the reuealer.

Dreams of the second sort are Natural; and such, no doubt, the Heathen in
their sleep had, as we in ours have. But in these there is no divination; no
fore-knowing of things to come.

The third sort is of dreams diabolical, Hieron. Comment. in Esai.

Distinct. 7 part. 2 art. 1. q. 3. lib. 2.


such as the Gentiles sought for in the Temple of Aesculapius. Bonauenture
calls them, Somnia, quae fiunt ex illusione Diabolica; Dreams which happen to
men in time of sleep by the illusion of the Devil. Dreams of this sort, as
they were ever uncertain, so were they as uncertainly interpreted. Such was
the Dream that Darius had before he encountered with Alexander: Curtius lib. 3.
some expounded it to signify the victory that he should have against him:
some gave a contrary sense, Curtius lib. 3. Tully gives another instance. One
going to the Olympicke games had a dream, that he was turned into an Eagle.
One Wiz^rd interpreted it, that he should overcome, because the Eagle is
supreme to all other fowls: another turned it the contrary way, that he
should have the worse, because the Eagle driving other birds before her,
comes last of all.

Such dreams, as these, are well censured by Siracides in the 34. of his
Ecclesiasticus, verse. 5. Diuinations, and sooth-sayings, and dreams are vain.
Dreams are vain. If they be not sent from the most High in thy visitation,
set not thy heart upon them. For dreams have deceived many: and they have
failed, that put their trust in them. For who so regards dreams, is like him
that catches at a shadow, and follows after the wind.

Thus finding no sound ability either in the dreams of the Heathen, or in
their Oracles, to reveal secrets, or foretell things to come: we must ever
acknowledge it for a truth irrefragable, and not to be gainsaid, that God is
the only reuealer of secrets: that he only foretells things to come.

And let this suffice to have been spoken of my second general, the thing
revealed, the secret of God. The third follows, and is of them, to whom the
Revelation is made: they are his servants the Prophets. Surely the Lord God
will do nothing, but he reuealeth his secret to his servants the Prophets.

The Prophets, that were the servants of the Lord God, were of three sorts:
Some were extraordinarily raised up by God, for the government of the Church in
the infancy thereof. Their office was in the common necessities of the Church
to consult God, as occasion should be given; and to give answers concerning
things to come. These from the inward counsel of God uttering oracles, were
wont to be called 1 Samuel 9.9. Amos 7.12.
Seers.

Others extraordinarily also raised up by God, were ordained for the
instruction of the Church. Their office was to interpret and apply the Law, and
to foreshew the sufferings and glory of Christ. These continued from Act. 3.24.
and 10.43. 1 Pet. 1.10.11.
Samuel unto Malachie. Malachie was the last of them.

The third sort is of the Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Cor. 12.28.
Prophets of the New Testament; such as were endued with a singular dexterity
and readiness, and wisdom to interpret the Scriptures of the Prophets, and to
apply them. In this third rank every Luke 4.24. 1 Cor. 14.32.
true Minister of the Gospel has a place.

Of all these Prophets Christ is the head, he is the chief of all. To him
Deuteronomy. 18.15. Act. 3.22. and 7.37.
Moses, yea and all the Prophets; all the Act. 3.24.
Prophets from Samuel, and all those that follow after, as many as have spoken,
give witness.

But the Prophets of which my text speaks are of the two first sorts of
Prophets, those whom God extraordinarily raised up, as well for the governing,
as for the instruction of the Church. Both are here styled the servants of the
Lord God.

His seruants] Not only because they served God in the common profession of
godliness, but also because they served him in their particular functions and
callings. To be the servants of the Lord God, it is certainly a notable dignity
and prerogative. How do men delight to shroud themselves under the liueries of
great men? and how much do they take themselves to be honored thereby? How
much more ought we to labor to approve our selves in the presence of the Lord
our God, and to show our selves every man in his several vocation and course
of life to be his faithful servants.

And thus have you the particular exposition of this my next; Surely the Lord
God will do no thing, but he reuealeth his secret to his servants the Prophets.

I may not leave untouched the maine observation which this text affords. It
is this.

God never brings any grievous judgment upon any people or nation, nor upon
any private person, but he does always first fore-warne the same and
foretells it. God always teaches before he punishes: he warns before
he strikes. When he was resolved to wash the World with a Deluge of waters
for the sin thereof, he foretold it unto Noah, Genesis 6.13. Though the cry
of Sodom and Gomorrah were great, and their sin very grievous, yet would not
God destroy them, till he had made known his purpose unto Abraham, Genesis 18.17.
and to Lot, Genesis 19.13. The seven years of famine, that should consume the
Land of Egypt, seven years before he foretold to Joseph, Genesis 41.25. So he
revealed the intended subversion of Nineveh to Jonah; Jonah 3.1.
the famine that should be in the days of Claudius Caesar unto Agabus: Act.
11.28.
the captivity of the ten Tribes to this our Prophet Amos. Amos in the full
assurance of this truth, says with boldness: Surely the Lord God will do
nothing, but he reuealeth his secret to his servants the Prophets.

Will he do nothing, but he reuealeth it? We may not so take it, that God
reuealeth to his Prophets, all things which he has a purpose to do, all
things simply, all his secrets: But with a certain limitation, that he
reuealeth omnia vtilia nobis, as Hugo de S. Charo out of the Gloss has
observed; that he reuealeth all things profitable for us: or, that he
reuealeth, Omnia, quae bonum communitatis concernunt, as Carthusian speaks,
that he reuealeth all things, which concern the common good. All things which
either concern the common good, or are profitable unto us, such as are the
judgments of God to be laid upon a multitude or a private person, God
reuealeth. This is the substance of the doctrine even now delivered.

God never brings any grievous judgment upon any people or Nation, or upon
any private person, but he does always first fore-warne the same, and
foretells it. The reasons hereof are two. One is in regard of the godly: the
other in regard of the wicked.

The first is in regard of the godly. God is unwilling at any time to take them
at unawares. He loves them, and would not have any of them to perish, but
would have them all come to repentance, as Saint Peter witnesses, 2 Epist.
3.9. God would have them all come to repentance, that so they might prevent his
judgments. And therefore he never strikes, but first he warns.

The other reason is in regard of the wicked: namely that the wicked might be
without excuse, their mouths might be stopped, and the justice of God cleared,
they having nothing to answer for themselves, or to accuse God of any unjust
dealing. If I had not come, says our Savior Christ Jesus, Ioh. 15.22. If I
had not come, and spoken to them, they had not had sin; but now they have no
cloak, nor excuse, for their sin. Wherefore let these men, wicked men,
learn, as often as the rod of God lies heavy upon them, to accuse themselves;
because when God gave them warning, they would not be warned: when God would
have healed them, they would not be healed.

You have the reasons; The uses follow. I can but point at them: the time will
not suffer any enlargement. Is it so, beloved? Does God never bring any
grievous judgment upon any people or Nation, or any private person, but he
always first fore-warneth the same and fore-telleth it? Here then acknowledge
we Gods great mercy, and his wonderful patience. Thus God needs not to
deal with us. For upon our own peril we are bound to take heed of his
judgments before they come. Yet so good is our God, so loving, so merciful,
so patient, that he is desirous we should prevent his judgments before they
fall, by sending our prayers unto him as Ambassadors, to treat of conditions
of Peace with him. A subtle enemy would steal upon us at unawares, and take
us at the advantage: but God, our good God ever fore-warneth before he
strikes. He does so, says Carthusian, Vt emendemur and ab imminentibus
eripiamur tormentis: he ever fore-warneth us, that our lives may be amended,
and we delivered from the torments that hang over us ready to fall upon us.

Again, does God never bring any grievous judgment upon any people or Nation,
or any private person, but he always first fore-warneth the same, and
foretells it? Let us then, whenever we see any overtaken with any grievous
judgment, confess with Saint Augustine de vera and falsa poenitentia, cap. 7.
Qui verus est in promittendo, verus etiam est in minando: that God is true, as
in his promises, so also in his threatenings. If his desire were not, that we
should prevent his judgments, doubtless he would never give us warning of
them. If he had a will and purpose to destroy us, he would never tell
beforehand, how we should avoid his judgments. Let no man say, that the
silence of God, and the holding of his peace, is a cause of his security. No,
it cannot be so. God never comes with any judgment, but he always sends a
warning piece before. He sends unto us his servants the Prophets. Prophets we
have among us; and Apostles we have among us: and God gives us his Ministers,
Pastors, and Preachers, as it were to put life again into the dead Prophets
and Apostles, even to open and declare unto us those things which they
delivered. Wherefore, when we shall be admonished by his Ministers, that such
and such judgments shall come; when they shall threaten plagues according to
the general directions, which they have in the word of God, let us not
withstand the Spirit speaking in them. It is the wonderful goodness of God,
that he vouchsafes to send them unto us, and to tell us before of his
judgments.

THE Tenth Lecture.
AMOS 3.8. The Lion has roared, who will not fear? the Lord God has spoken,
who can but prophecy?


IT was a thing too common with the Israelites, if their Prophets or Preachers
did at any time speak sharply against their evil courses, evermore to find
fault and quarrel them. What mean these men? Why do they so far urge us?
Why do they not suffer us to be quiet? Will they ever provoke the wrath of God
against us? Sic enim solent homines: surely so worldlings use to do. If
Prophets, if Preachers be austere in their reprehensions, they will command
them to hold their peace, as you have heard by occasion of the twelfth verse of
the precedent Chapter. If Amos foretell Jeroboam, King of Israel, Amos 7.9.
that the high places of Isaac shall be desolate, that the Sanctuaries of
Israel shall be laid waste; that Ieroboams house shall perish with the sword;
there will be an Amaziah to forbid him to prophecy any more in Bethel, Amos
7.12.

If Hanani, the Seer, reprove King Asa for not relying on the Lord his God, Asa
will be in a rage with him, and will put him in a prison house, 2 Chronicles. 16.10.

If Micaiah foreshew unto King Ahab the evil that shall befall him, the King
will hate him for it, 1 King. 22.8. Zedechiah will smite him on the cheek,
verse. 24. Amon the Governor will put him in prison, and will feed him with
bread of affliction and with water of affliction, verse. 27. If Jeremiah
foreshew unto the Jews their desolation for their sins, some will devise
devices against him, and will smite him with the tongue, Jeremy 18.18. Some
will smite him with the fist, and put him in the stocks, chap. 20.2. Some will
apprehend him, threaten him with death, and arraigne him, chap. 26.8. Some will
shut him up in prison, chap. 32.2. Some will let him down with cords into a
miry and dirty dungeon, chap. 38.6.

It is the lot of the Prophets of the Lord, the portion of his Preachers, Esaias
30.10. Leuit. 19.17.
if they speak not placentia, pleasing and smooth words unto the people, but
do rebuke them and not suffer them to sin, it is their lot and portion never
to have want of enemies that shall make war against them. This ill custom in
the people, Amos here finds fault with, and condemns for unjust, saying, The
Lion has roared, etc. as if he had said, You take me for your enemy, because I
foreshew unto you the judgments of God which shall light upon you, and
therefore you contend, you chide, you quarrel with me: but all in vain; for
I may not hold my peace. If I should, the voice of God will of it self be
terrible enough unto you. The evil whereof I tell you, proceeds not so much
from my mouth, as from the Mandate of God. Will I, nill I, I am constrained to
obey my God. God he has chosen me to be his Prophet, and has put into my
mouth what I speak unto you. The Lion has roared, and I cannot but fear: The
Lord God has spoken, and I must prophecy.

Thus have you the scope and drift of our Prophet in the words I have now read
unto you. Wherein for my easier proceeding, may it please you to observe with
me first a Similitude; secondly, the application thereof. The Similitude is
from a Lion, the Application is to God. The Similitude in these words, The Lion
has roared, who will not fear? The Application in these, The Lord God has
spoken, who can but prophecy? First, of the Similitude.

The Lion has roared, who will not fear? Of all four footed beasts the Lion
does bear away the chief price. He is, says Cyril, (...), the strongest of
wild beasts. This wild beast, the Lion, the King of beasts, excelling all
others in courage and strength, full of fierceness and violence, given to
destroy and devour, is in holy Writ called by sundry names according to his
effects and properties. Sometime he is called (...) Labi, that is, hearty or
courageous, Joel 1.6. Sometime (...) Kephir, that is, lurking or couchant,
abiding in covert places, Ezech. 19.3. Sometime (...) Schachal, that is,
ramping and fierce of nature, Job 10.16. Sometime (...) Lajisch, that is,
subduing his prey, Esaias 30.6. Here he is called (...) Arieh, that is, a
plucker, a renter, a tearer: and so was he called in the fourth verse of this
Chapter. So many names have the Hebrews to call the Lion by, according to his
several properties.

The Lions voice is his roaring. The Lion (...) Schagg, has roared. The word,
as Dones son of Labratus has noted, is proper to the Lion, whose roaring is
very shrill, dreadful, and full of ire. No marvel then is it, if at his
roaring all the beasts of the forest do tremble. That they do so its
acknowledged by Saint Basil, in his ninth Homily upon the Hexameron, where he
says, that Nature has bestowed upon the Lion such organs or instruments for
his voice, that oftentimes beasts far swifter than the Lion, are taken,
(...), only by the roaring of the Lion. The like has Saint Ambrose in his
Hexaemeron, lib. 6. cap. 3. Naturally there is in the Lions voice such a
terror, that many beasts which might by their swiftness escape the Lions
assault, do faint and fall down before the Lion, astonished and stricken as it
were with the hideousness of his roaring. The like has Saint Cyril; the like
R. David; Lyra, and Carthusian the like; as I showed in my fourth Lecture upon
this Chapter.

The Lion has roared] He roareth before he has his prey, when he has it in
pursuit, and after he has gotten it.

Before he has his prey he roareth. Psalm. 104.21. The Lions, the young and
lusty Lions, roar after their prey, and seek their meat from God. 1 Pet. 5.8.
there is a Lion that roareth, seeking whom he may devour.

When he has his prey in pursuit, he roareth. So roareth the ravening Lion,
Rugientibus praeparatis ad escam.
Psalm. 22.14. and so roar those Lions ready to devour, Ecclus. 51 4.

After he has gotten his prey he roareth. Esaias 31.4. The young Lion roareth on
his prey. And above in this Chapter, verse. 4. Will a Lion roar in the forest
when he has no prey?

So, the Lion roareth before he has his prey, when he has it in pursuit, and
after he has gotten it. But of all, his roaring is most terrible, when he is
hungry and in the pursuit of his prey: albeit when he is devouring his prey he
roareth very terribly, as Bolducus in his Comment upon Job, cap. 4. has out of
Aristotle, Pliny, and Aelian observed; making the Lion so roaring to be the
express image of ravenous rich men and mighty oppressors.

Pierius Hieroglyph. lib. 1.
From this fearful roaring of the Lion, one of the four Evangelists, Saint
Mark is hieroglyphically figured by the image of a Lion, because as a Lion in
the wilderness sends forth a terrible voice, so S ^^t Mark in the beginning
of his Gospel, mightily thundereth out vocem clamantis in deserto, the voice
of one crying in the wilderness. It is the observation of Saint Ambrose upon
Luke, of Remigius upon Mark, and of Eucherius.

The Lion has roared, who will not fear?] Frequent and familiar are the
comparisons drawn from the Lion in holy Scripture. The Lion for his good
properties is a symbol of good men, yea of Christ himself; but for his bad,
of bad men, yea of the Devil. Habet Leo virtutem, habet and saeuitiam, says
Gregory, Moral. 5. cap. 17. The Lion has courage, and he has cruelty. For his
courage he betokens Christ; for his cruelty the Devil. So Augustine Sermon.
46. de diuersis: Christus Leo propter fortitudinem, Diabolus propter feritatem:
Christ and the Devil may both be called Lions, Christ for his fortitude, the
Devil for his fierceness.

Christ may be called a Lion, not only for his invincible courage and
fortitude, but also for his great might and power in defending his flock from
bodily and spiritual enemies: so is he the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Revel.
5.5. that same victorious Lion, our true Shilo and Messiah, who is Non minus
helluo animarum ad illas saluandas, quam Diabolus ad perdendas, as Salmeron
speaks in his eighth Disput. upon the first Epistle of Peter: Christ the Lion
of the Tribe of Judah, does no less greedily hunt after souls to save them,
than the Devil does to destroy them. Christ's a Lion.

So are Kings and mighty Princes that rule over others called Lions. Judah is a
Lions whelpe, -- He stooped down, he couched as a Lion, and as an old Lion;
who shall rouse him up? Genesis 49.9. where David, Solomon, and other Kings, that
were lineally descended from the Tribe of Judah, are compared to the roaring
Lion, because through the fame of their Empire, they were a terror to many of
their neighbor Nations. Kings and Princes are Lions.

Every godly person is a Lion. So says the Holy Ghost, Prou. 28.1. The
righteous are bold as a Lion. They are bold in all their afflictions, how great
soever they be, and their boldness is, not from any trust in themselves, but
by the faith they have in God: and they are bold as a Lion, fearing nothing.
For as a Lion fears no other beasts, so the righteous fear not whatsoever
crosses may befall them. They know that all things work together for good to
them that love God: Romans 8.28.
they know that without the will of God, no ill can betide them: they know if
they lose this life, they shall find a better: and for this cause in their
greatest extremities are they quiet in mind, ever giving a fiat to the will of
God; Gods will be done. The righteous man for his boldness is a Lion.

The wicked man, every tyrant and violent oppressor is a Lion. A Lion for
cruelty. David avouches it, Psalm. 10.9, 10. He lies in wait secretly as a
Lion in his den, he lies in wait to catch the poor, he does catch the poor
when he draws him into his net. He coucheth and humbles himself that the
poor may fall by his authority. So the wicked man for his cruelty is a Lion.

So Nero, tyrannizing and oppressing Nero; Nero, that was the bloody persecutor
of the Christians in the infancy of the Church, is called a Lion, 1 Timothy 4.17.
I was delivered, says Paul, from the mouth of the Lion. Its no doubt, says
Justinian, but that Paul points at the cruelty and immanity of Nero. The like
Metaphore I meet with, Prou. 28.15. As a roaring Lion, so is a wicked ruler
over the poor people. Its plain, Every tyrant and violent oppressor is a Lion.

And the Devil himself is a Lion. You know Saint Peter styles him so, 1
Epist. chap. 5.8. Your adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion, walks about
seeking whom he may devour. For as the Lion delights in blood, gapeth over
his prey, and roareth hideously: so does the Devil; than whom, says
Fen-ardentius, Nihil truculentius, nihil tetrius, nihil terribilius, nihil
infestius hominibus; There is nothing more fierce, more cruel, more
spightfull, more malicious against men, than the Devil is. He thirsts after
the blood of men, to spill it; he gapeth over the souls of men, to devour
them, he is a roaring Lion.

Thus have you heard, that the Lion, for some properties of his is a symbol of
good men, yea, and of Christ himself; and for some a symbol of bad men, yea
and of the Devil himself.

Now the Lion in my Text is God; and that he is so, it is the joint agreement
of Expositors.

Upon those words of Daniel 6.22. My God has sent his Angel, and has shut
the Lions mouths, in Midras tehilim in the Hebrew exposition of the Psalms,
at the 64. Psalm, there is a remarkable sentence for our present purpose,
Venit Leo, and liberauit Leonem de ore Leonis: A Lion came and delivered a Lion
from the mouth of a Lion. Venit Leo, a Lion came; this Lion is God, holy and
blessed, as it is said in the third of Amos, Leo rugijt, the Lion has roared,
who will not fear? the Lord God has spoken, who will not prophecy? A Lion
came, Et liberauit leonem, and he delivered a Lion, this other Lion is Daniel,
who came from Judah, as it is said, Genesis 49. Catulus Leonis Judah, Judah is a
Lions whelpe. A Lion came and delivered a Lion, de ore Leonis, from the mouth
of a Lion: this third Lion is Nabuchodonosor, as its said, Ierem. 4. Ascendit
Leo de cubili suo; the Lion is come up from his thicket. By this exposition of
the Hebrews the Lion in my Text is God.

So is he in the understanding of Saint Hierome; so Lyranus takes him to be; so
does Hugo de S. Charo; so does Dionysius Carthusianus; so many Rab. David Cyril.
others; most of the Pet. a Figueir. Caluinus. Gualterus. Oecolampadius.
Brentius. Osiander. Pappus, etc.
modern. The Glossator says, that because Amos, whilst he lived a shepherds
life stood in fear of the Lion, therefore he here compares the fear of the
Lord to the roaring of the Lion.

I am not ignorant, that some by this roaring in my Text do understand the
Devil, and by the Lord God here speaking Christ our Savior; that, as the
Devil is heard of the reprobate to their condemnation, so Christ is heard of
the Elect to their salvation. But this opinion being singular, I pass it by,
and following the current of Interpreters, do take this roaring Lion here to
betoken God, to this sense: If at the roaring of the Lion all the beasts of the
forest do tremble; how much more shall men tremble if God roar against them
by his Prophets? The stoutest courage of man, Mascula virtus, the manliest
prowess upon the earth, when it has girded up her loins with strength, and
decked it self with greatest glory, what can it avail where the fortitude of
God is set against it? Pitchers that are fashioned of clay, how is it possible
they should not break and fall asunder, if ever they come to encounter the
brass of Gods unspeakable Majesty? The Lion has roared, who will not fear?
The Lord God has spoken, and commanded us to cry aloud, and spare not, to lift
up our voices like trumpets, and to show his people their transgressions, who
dares be silent?

And thus from the similitude, the Lion roaring, I am come to the application
thereof, God speaking: The Lord God has spoken, who can but prophecy? Wherein
I note, 1 Who speaks. 2 How he speaks. 3 What is the sequel of his speech.


He that speaks is the Lord God.

He speaks after diverse manners.

And if he speak, man must prophecy.

The Lord God has spoken, who can but prophecy?

The Lord God! He is Adonai Iehouih. They are the very names wherewith God was
named in the precedent verse; and were there discoursed upon at large. I will
not now trouble you with any tedious repetition of what was then delivered.
Only be pleased to remember, that the first of these two names, Adonai,
betokens the Majesty of God, his sustentation of all things, and his dominion
over all: the second, Iehouih, his essence, his existing or being. The first,
Adonai, is with Calvin, Oecolampadius, and Brentius, Dominator, ruler or
Governor; with the rest, its Dominus, Lord. The second Iehouih, is retained by
Iunius; its Jehovah with Calvin, Mercer, and Vatablus; with the rest, its Deus,
God.

The first, Adonai, Ruler, Governor, or Lord, puts us in mind that God
alone is absolutely Lord, Ruler, and Governor of all things; yea, and our
Lord. Our Lord, not only by the common right of creation; for thereby he is
the Lord of all created things in Heaven and Earth, yea and of the very Devils.
Nor is he our Lord only by the right of his universal providence, or
government; for thereby he rules over sin and death, and sets them bounds.
But our Lord he is by the right of redemption; Tit. 2.14.
for thereby he has made us, through Christ, a peculiar people unto himself,
zealous of good works. Such is the use of this first name, Adonai.

The second, Iehouih, or Jehovah, which we now translate God, may be our
remembrancer, that of himself, and by himself Revel. 1.4. and 16.5.
he ever was, is, and shall be; that of him all creatures have their Act.
17.28. Romans 11.36.
being; and that he gives a real being to all his promises and threats. This
same Jehovah, Adonai, Iehouih, God Almighty, is he that speaks.

But how speaks He? How to men; himself being incorporeall, without the
instruments of speech?

First, God speaks unto men, either by himself immediately, or by some
messenger. This messenger is either an Angel, or a man. If a man, then is he
either a Prophet, or a Priest; the Priest, Exodus 28.30.
that has in the breast plate of iudgemement the Vrim and the Thummim.

Again, God speaks unto men by a voice, either sensible or spiritual; if
with a sensible voice, then he strikes the outward ears; if with a
spiritual, then the inward: as well the left ear, which is the Fantasy, as
the right, which is the Understanding.

Thirdly, God speaks unto men, either sleeping or waking. So Serarius Quaest.
1. in cap. 1. Ioshuae.

What the ancient Fathers have thought of this point touching God his speaking
unto man, I have long since delivered out of this place in my third Lecture
upon the first Chapter of this Prophecy. What was Saint Basils opinion, what
Saint Augustines, what Saint Gregory's, you then heard.

Later Writers have reduced all the speakings of God to two heads; Deeds and
Words.

Christophorus a Castro upon the first of Zachary, Et factis loquitur Deus and
verbis, God speaks both by Deeds and by words. Franciscus Ribera upon the
same Chapter, Deus ita rebus, vt verbis loquitur; God speaks as well by
things as by words.

A learned and a very orthodox Divine, David Pareus, in his Commentary upon
Genesis at the third Chapter, well liking of Saint Gregory's opinion, thus
resolves upon the point: God speaks either by himself, or by some
Angelical creature.

By himself God speaks, when by the sole force of internal inspiration the
heart is opened: or God speaks by himself, when the heart is taught
concerning the word of God, without words or syllables. This speech of God is
sine strepitu sermo, a speech without any noise. It pierces our ears, and yet
has no sound. Such was the speech of God unto the Apostles, at what time they
were filled with the Holy Ghost, Act. 2.2. Suddenly there came a sound from
Heaven, as of a rushing mighty wind, and it fill^d all the house, where they
were sitting: and there appeared unto them cloven tongues, like as of fire, and
it sat upon each of them. Per ignem quidem Dominus apparuit, sed per semet
ipsum locutionem interius fecit: By the fire indeed God appeared but by
himself he spoke in secret, within, to the heart of the Apostles Neither was
that fire God, nor was that sound God, but God by those outward things, the
fire and the sound, Expressit hoc, quod interius gessit, he showed what he did
within, and that he spoke to the heart. Those outward things, the fire and the
sound, were only for signification, to show that the Apostles hearts were
taught by an invisible fire, and a voice without a sound. Foris fuit ignis, qui
apparuit, sed intus, qui scientiam dedit: the fire, that appeared, was without;
but the fire that gave them knowledge, was within. So may you judge of the
sound: the sound that was heard was without; but the sound that smote their
hearts, was within. So Gods speech, is a speech to the heart without words,
without a sound.

Such was that speech to Philip, Act. 8.29. Go near, and join thy self to
yonder Chariot. It was the Spirit said so to Philip. Bid expounds it of inward
speech. In cord spiritus Philippo loquebatur, The Spirit said to Philip in his
heart. The Spirit of God may then be said to speak unto us, when by a secret
or hidden power, it intimates unto our hearts, what we are to do. The Spirit
said unto Philip, that is, Philip was by the Spirit of God inwardly moved to
draw near, and join himself to the Chariot, wherein that Ethiopian Eunuch
sat reading the Prophecy of Esaias.

A like speech was that to Peter, Act. 10.19. Behold three men seek thee. It
was the Spirit said so to Peter. And here Bid, In mente haec ab spiritu, non
in aure carnis audiuit: Peter heard these words from the Spirit, in mente, in
his understanding, non in aure carnis, not by his fleshly ear. The Spirit said
unto Peter, that is, Peter was by the Spirit of God inwardly moved to depart
from Ioppa, and go to Caesarea to preach to the Gentiles, to Cornelius and his
company.

From this inward speaking of God by his holy Spirit in the hearts of men
without either words or sound, we may note thus much for our present comfort,
that whenever we are inwardly moved, and do feel our hearts touched with
an earnest desire, either to offer up our private requests to God, or to come
to the place of public prayer, or to hear the preaching of the word, or to
receive the blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist, or to do any good work, we
may be assured, that God by his holy Spirit, God by himself speaks unto us.

Thus you see, how God speaks unto us by himself. He speaks unto us also
by his creatures. By his creatures Angelical, and others. And he does it after
diverse manners.

1 Verbis, by words. By words only; as when nothing is seen, but a voice only
is heard: as Ioh. 12.28. When Christ prayed, Father glorify thy name,
immediately there came a voice from Heaven, saying, I have both glorified it,
and will glorify it again. Here was Vox Patris, the voice of God the Father,
yet ministerio Angelorum formata, it was formed by the ministry of Angels.

2 God speaks Rebus, by things; By things only, as when no vo^ce is heard,
but some thing only is objected to the senses. An example of this kind of Gods
speaking is that vision of Ezechiel, chap. 1.4. He saw a whirlwind come out
of the North, with a great cloud, and a fire enfolding it self; and in the
midst of the fire the color of Amber. All this he saw; but here is no
mention of any voice at all. And yet the Prophet says, Omnino fuit verbum
Iehouae ad Ezechielem; the Word of the Lord came expressly unto Ezechiel. The
word of the Lord came, and I looked, and behold a whirlewind. Here was res sine
verbo, a thing but no voice.

3 God speaks Verbis simul and rebus, both by words and things: as when there
is both a voice heard, and also some thing objected to the senses. So He spoke
to Adam presently after his fall* when he heard the voice of God walking in the
Garden, and saying, Adam where art thou? Genesis 3.8.

4 God speaks, Imaginibus cordis oculis extensis, by some images, shapes, or
semblances exhibited to our inward eyes, the eyes of our hearts. So Jacob in
his dream saw a ladder set upon the earth, the top whereof reached to Heaven,
and the Angels of God ascended and descended on it, Genesis 28.12. So Peter in a
trance saw Heaven opened, and a certain vessel descending unto him, as it had
been a great sheet knit at the four corners, and let down to the earth,
wherein were all manner of four footed beasts of the earth, and wild beasts,
and creeping things, and fowls of the air, Act. 10.10. So Paul in a vision in
the night saw a man of Macedonia standing by him, and praying his help: Come
over into Macedonia, and help us, Act. 16.9.

5 God speaks imaginibus and ante corporeos oculos ad tempus ex aere
assumptis; he speaks by some images, shapes, or semblances, for a time
assumed from the air, and exhibited to our bodily eyes. So he spoke to Abraham
in the plains of Mamre, Genesis 18.2. Three men, says the Text, stood by
Abraham; yet were they not three men that stood by him, but three Angels in the
shape of men, with true bodies for the time; palpable and tractable bodies for
the time. One of the three more eminent than the rest, to whom Abraham did
reverence above the rest, with whom he talked, calling him Lord, verse. 3. who
is also called Jehovah, verse. 17. was Christ the second person in the Trinity.
And so God spoke unto Lot, by Angels in the likeness of men, Genesis 19. Two
Angels they were, verse. 1. Men they are called, verse. 10. Angels, and yet men.
Angels in nature, and men in their habit. By them God spoke to Lot of the
destruction of Sodom.

6 God speaks Coelestibus substantijs, by celestial substances. By
Celestial substances I mean not only the Heavens with the works therein,
but also the two superior elements, the fire and the air. So at the Baptism
of Christ, De nube vox sonuit, a voice was heard out of a cloud, as it was also
at his transfiguration upon the mount, This is my beloved son in whom I am
well pleased.

7 God speaks terrenis substantijs, by terrestrial substances. So to reprove
the dullness of Balaam, In ore Asinae humana verba formauit, he enabled Balaams
own Ass to speak, Number. 22.28. Saint Peter, 2 Ep. 2.16. thus delivers it; The
dumb beast speaking with man's voice forbade the madness of the Prophet.

Once more, God speaks simul and terrenis, and coelestibus substantijs, both
by terrestrial and celestial substances: as when he spoke to Moses in a flame
of fire out of the midst of a bush, Exodus 3.2.4. The fire I call the
celestial, the bush the terrestrial substance.

Last of all, God speaks by his Angels, when Secreta eorum praesentia, by a
secret presence of theirs he infuseth the power of his influence to the hearts
of men: and thus may you understand that, Zach. 1.9. Angelus qui loquebatur in
me, the Angel of the Lord that spoke in me said unto me. The Angel that spoke
in me, to my heart.

And thus you see, how God of old at sundry times and in diverse manners did
speak to man. He spoke either by himself, or by his Creatures. By his
Creatures many ways: sometimes by words, sometimes by things, sometimes by
both words and things; sometimes by shapes exhibited to the eyes of the heart,
sometimes by apparitions to the eyes of the body; sometime by celestial
substances, sometimes by terrestrial, sometimes by both celestial and
terrestrial: and last of all, by some secret presence of an Angel within man
to the heart of man.

Thus from time to time has God been used to speak. Now follows the
sequel of his speech, Quis non prophetabit? Who can but prophecy? If the Lord
God has spoken, frendens quasi Leunculus, grinding his teeth as a lusty young
Lion, against his people even ready to be devoured, Quis non prophetabit? What
Prophet is there that dares contain himself from prophesying? that dares
keep silence from denouncing the reuengefull threats of God? The Lord God has
spoken, Quis non prophetabit? Who will not prophecy?

Who will not? Anselmus Laudunensis, the Author of the Interlineary Gloss,
says, Pauci viri sunt, few such men there are: Hugo Cardinalis; Nullus, vel
rarus est; There is not a man, or scarce a man that dares hold his peace, if
God bid him prophecy.

Moses may go about to excuse himself, that he be not sent to Pharaoh;
Exodus 4.10.
O my Lord, I am not eloquent, but am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue; I
pray thee send some other; but his excuses will not be received.

Esaias 6.5.
Esaias may complain, Woe is me, I am undone, because I am a man of polluted
lips: yet so he cannot put off his commission.

Ier^m. 1.6, 7.
Jeremy may cry out, Ah, Lord God, behold I cannot speak, for I am a child.
Yet must he follow his calling. Say not, says the Lord, I am a child; for
thou shall go to all that I shall send thee, and whatsoever I command thee,
thou shall speak.

Ezech. 3.7.
Ezechiel is sent unto a people stiff of forehead, and hard of heart, a people
that would not hearken unto him, by whom he might well fear to lose his life:
yet might he not withdraw himself. Behold, says the Lord, I have made thy
face strong against their faces, and thy forehead strong against their
foreheads. As an Adamant harder than flint have I made thy forehead. Fear them
not, neither be dismayed at their looks, though they be a rebellious house.

Amos 7.14.
Amos, this our Amos, now our Prophet Amos, once no Prophet, nor a Prophets
son, but an heardman, and a gatherer of Sycomore fruit, taken by the Lord, as
he was following the flock, receives his commission from the Lord; Go,
Prophecy unto my people Israel. So he goes, and prophesies.

The Lord God has spoken, who can but prophecy? Who can but prophecy? The
observation is, The office of prophesying when God enioyneth it, is not to be
declined.

The proposition holds true, as well of the Prophets of the New Testament, as
of the Old. The Prophets of the New Testament are the Ministers thereof: who
though they have not the gift of prediction, to foretell things to come, yet
are they called Prophets, Mat. 10.41. He that receives a Prophet in the name
of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward.

Prophets they are called.

First, because their function, sacred and Ecclesiastical, is in place and
stead of the Prophetical office of the Old Testament.

Secondly, because their office is to expound and interpret the writings of the
Prophets.

Thirdly, because they are to preach what is written in the Scriptures of the
Prophets, of the day of judgment, of the rewards of good men, and of the
torments prepared for the wicked in the life to come. Of such Prophets speaks
Gregory 2. part. Pastoralis Curae cap. 4. Prophetae in sacro eloquio nonnunquam
Doctores vocantur, qui dum fugitiua esse praesentia indicant, quae futura sunt
manifestant. Doctors or teachers are oftentimes in holy language called
Prophets, because while they declare things present to be fugitive and
transitory, they do manifest the things that are to come. Thus are Doctors or
Teachers, the Ministers of the New Testament, Prophets in their kind; and the
observation even now made concerning the office of prophesying reaches them.

The office of the Ministry of the Word, when God sends, is not to be
declined. Its not to be declined. He that has once begun to run in this
race, must run on with perseverance, even unto the end. He that has put his
hand to this Plough, may not look back, lest he prove unfit for the Kingdom
of God. Luke 9.62.
In this race and course of life we are to contend and strive with the whole
earth. Though we be despised, despighted, hated, cursed of every man, because
we preach what the Lord has bidden us, and proclaim his vengeance against
sinners, yet will we not be discouraged. Our hand against every man, and every
man's hand against us: Our tongue against every vice, and every tongue walks
and rangeth at liberty through our actions. The Disciple is not above his
Master, Math. 10.24.
nor the Servant above his Lord. If our Master and Lord, Christ Jesus, have
suffered such things, we his Disciples and servants must possess our souls in
patience. If we be thought too clamorous against the disorders of common
life, if too busy, if too severe in striking at offenses; forgive us this
fault. A necessity is laid upon us: The Lord God has spoken, and we cannot
but prophecy.

Is a necessity laid upon us? That's not all. For a Woe is due unto us if we
preach not. Vae mihi, says Paul, 1 Cor. 9.16. Woe is me if I preach not the
Gospel. If I preach not the Gospel! What then shall become of the Law? We
must preach both, as the Gospel so the Law. As we are to publish the tidings
of joy to those that rejoice in our message, so are we to denounce the terrors
of judgment to those that contemn it. As we are to preach liberty to
captives, so are we to threaten captivity to libertines. As we are to pipe to
those that will dance after us, so are we to sound a trumpet of war to those
that will resist us. As we are to build an Arc for those that will be saved,
so are we to power out a flood of maledictions against those that will be
damned. Finally, as we are to open the doors to those that knock and are
penitent, so are we to stand in the doors with a flaming sword in our
mouths, against those that are obstinate.

Thus you see a necessity is laid upon us to preach unto you; to preach not the
Gospel only, but the Law too. Yet is not this necessity, necessitas
coactionis, a necessity of coaction, constraint or compulsion, but necessitas
obligationis and mandati diuini, a necessity of obligation and divine
Commandment. It is our vocation and conscience that imposes this necessity
upon us. If then we preach unto you, we have not whereof to glory or boast our
selves. For we do no more than we are of duty to do. Now if we of duty preach
unto you, then are you of duty likewise to hear us: and a necessity of hearing
is laid upon you: I say not, a necessity of coaction, constraint or compulsion,
but a necessity of obligation and divine Commandment. A necessity is laid upon
you to hear the word of God, God commands you to hear it. And Vae vobis,
Woe unto you if you refuse to hear it. Yet when you hear, take heed how you
hear.

Quid juvat auditus verbi, si non datur vsus? What advantage is it to you to
hear the Word of God, if you make no good use thereof? Ideo audis, vt agas.
Therefore you hear, that you may put in practice what you hear. Sweetly Saint
Augustine upon Psalm. 104. Valde male digerit is, qui been audit, and non been
operatur: Surely he very ill digesteth, that hears well, and works not well.

Now gracious Father, we most humbly beseech thee to open our hearts, and to
unlock the ears of our understanding, that whether we preach, or hear thy
Word, we may preach it and hear it profitably, that we may observe, learn,
and embrace such things as are necessary to the confirming of our weak faith,
and the amendment of our sinful lives. Amen.

THE Eleventh Lecture.
AMOS 3.9, 10, 11. Publish in the palaces of Ashdod, and in the palaces of the
Land of Egypt, and say: Assemble your selves upon the mountains of Samaria:
and behold the great tumults in the midst thereof, and the oppressed in the
midst thereof.

For they know not to do right, says the Lord; who store violence and robbery
in their palaces.

Therefore thus says the Lord God; An adversary there shall be even round
about the Land: and he shall bring down thy strength from thee, and thy
palaces shall be spoiled.


THe equity of Gods judgments is such, that if strangers see them, they
cannot but approve them. It appears to be so, by this passage of Amos his
second Sermon to or against the people of Israel. This passage is an (...), or
an Exornation, pertaining to the prop^sition, which was in the second verse of
this Chapter. It amplifieth the iniquity of the Israelit^s from the
testification of foreign Nations, thus: You, you of Israel, your sins are so
notorious, so gross, so palpable, that the Philistines and Egyptians may
behold them; since you of your selves are not touched with a conscience of your
evil deeds; them, the Philistines and Egyptians I call as witnesses and Judges
of your impuritie and uncleanness. This is the scope of the words now read
unto you.

The parts are two: An Accusation, verse. 9. and 10. A Commination, verse. 11.


The Accusation is delivered by an Apostrophe, by a turning of the speech from
the Israelites to others, verse. 9. Others are called upon to make a
proclamation, in these words, Proclaim in the Palaces of Ashdod, and in the
Palaces of the Land of Egypt, and say: the tenor of their proclamation is in
these, Assemble your selves upon the mountains of Samaria, and behold the
great tumults in the midst thereof, and the oppressed in the midst thereof.

The sins pointed at in this proclamation are two, Cruelty and
Covetousness. Cruelty in their great tumults; Covetousness in their
oppressions. Both are amplified verse. 10. from two places, a genere, and a
specie. First from the general, They know not to do right. Secondly from the
special, They treasure up violence and robbery in their Palaces. Their
violence argues their cruelty, their robbery is a demonstration of their
Covetousness. The truth hereof is not to be questioned. For (...) Neum
Jehovah, the Lord has said it. For they know not to do right, says the Lord,
who store up violence and robbery in their Palaces.

We have a large field for discourse to travel in: we will begin at the gate
or first entrance into it, which is, the iniunction for the proclamation:
Proclaim in the Palaces of Ashdod, and in the Palaces of the Land of Egypt,
and say.

At the entrance into this field the Hebrew word is (...) Haschmignu, and is as
much, as, make to hear. The old Interpreter puts for it, Auditum facite, make
a hearing; so does Saint Hierome: these keep near unto the word. The
Septuagint with their (...), are not far from the meaning, nor is
Oecolampadius with his annunciate, for which our countryman Tauerner has
Preach: Preach in the Palaces at Ashdod.

Calvin. Iunius.
Brentius with his Clamate; Gualter with his Diuulgate; Vatablus, Mercer,
Drusius, and others, with their Promulgate, are all for the Proclamation: Cry,
Diuulge, Publish, or Proclaim.

Proclai^e. Where? In Ashdod, and in the Land of Egypt. First in Ashdod.

Palaestina, the Country of the Philistines, was divided into five Provinces,
Dutchies, or Lordsh^ps, mentioned Josh. 13.3. the Provinces of Azzah, of
Ashdod, of Askelon, of Gath, of Ekron. These five, the chief and most famous
Cities of Palaestina are recorded also, 1 Samuel 6.17. where the Philistines are
said to have returned for a trespass offering unto the Lord, five golden
E^rods; one for Ashdod, one for Azzah, one for Askelon, one for Gath, and one
for Ekron.

Ashdod! In the first division of the holy Land, it was in the lot of the Tribe
of Judah, and is so described, Josh. 15.47. Afterward it fell to the lot of the
Tribe of the Children of Dan, who had their inheritance, as the Children of
Simeon had, within the inheritance of the Children of Judah; I sh. 19.1.
and is accordingly described by Adrichom and Schrot in their tables of the
Holy Land.

The more familiar name of it is Azotus. In it were left Giants, those that
were called Enakim. It is to this day a famous City of Palaestina. Apud
Hieron. Tom. 3.
So says Eusebius lib. de locis Hebraicis. Another learned Author writing of
the Hebrew places in the Acts of the Apostles, says, Azotus, is a famous town
of Palaestina, called in Hebrew Ashdod, and is one of the five cities of the
Allophyli of the Philistines.

For the Etymology of the word, Saint Hierome says, it signifies as much as
ignis vberis, or ignis patrui, the fire of an under, or of an uncle. The words
are in his Commentary upon Amos, chap. 1. where he refuses those that say, it
is ignis generationis, the fire of generation. And well: for they mistake Resch
for Daleth; taking it for Aschdor, when it is Aschdod. The Author of the book
De nominibus Hebraicis upon Joshua, says, Asdod is dissolutio, vel effusio,
sine incendium, a dissolution, or an effusion, or a burning. A little after,
ignis patrui mei, vel incendia, my uncles fire or burnings. Ignis patrui, so I
read with Drusius obseru. 6.8. not Gens patrui, as it is in the old books by
the like mistake of Resch for Daleth. Buntingus in his Itinerarie upon the old
Testament, says it is, Ignis dilectus, a beloved fire. There is no agreement
between these Etymologiz^rs.

The more familiar and Greek name of this City, Azotus, is by Stephanus in
his book of Cities derived from Aza, a woman, that was the Foundresse of this
City. But I rather think that Azotus is so called from the Hebrew Asdod, by
the change of some letters; Azotus for Asdotus, as Ezras for Esdras, and (...)
for (...), in the Doricke Dialect.

This same City Asdod, or Azotus, was made famous by the Ark of the Lord
brought thither, when it was taken by the Philistines; and by the house of the
Idol Dagon there, 1 Samuel 5.2. This is that Azotus, where Philip the Deacon was
found after he had baptized the Ethiopian Eunuch, Act. 8.40. And this that
Asdod, whereof you heard in my thirteenth Sermon upon the first Chapter of this
book, upon the eight verse, these words, I will cut off the inhabitant from
Asdod.

Yet I take it not, that Ashdod is here put so precisely for the City, but
that it may by a Synecdoche comprehend the whole region or Country of the
Philistines. Commonly it is so understood by Ancients, Saint Hierome, Remigius,
Albertus, Rupertus, Hugo, Lyra, Isidorus, and by modern Writers, Montanus,
Christophorus a Castro, Petrus Lusitanus, and others.

But I must from Ashdod, and go on to the Land of Egypt: for there is this
proclamation likewise to be made. Proclaim in Ashdod, and in the Land of
Egypt.

To this Land of Egypt we came twice before in our view of this Prophecy;
Cap. 2.10. and 3.1.
and therefore need not at this time stand long upon it. Yet may we not leave
it altogether unsaluted. It is here called (...) Eretz Mitzrajim, the Land of
Mitzrajim.

Saint Hierome Comment. in Esai. cap. 18. says, that with the Hebrews an
Egyptian man and an Egyptian woman, and the Country of Egypt have all one
name Mesraim: Obser. lib. 5. c 25.
for so Drusius reads out of a Manuscript of Saint Hieromes Works, Apud
Ebraeos and Aegyptius, and Aegyptus, and Aegyptia, vno vocabulo nuncupantur,
M^sraim. But this cannot be so. For the Egyptian man, he is Mesri, the woman
Mesrith, the Country only Mesraim. And if by the name of Mesraim, the
Egyptians be sometime signified, it is by a figure of speech, as when Judah
is put for the Jews, or Ephraim for the Ephraimites.

Josephus in his first book of the Antiquities of the Jews, cap. 7. says,
that Egypt was called Mesre, and the Egyptians Mesraei: he alludeth to the
Hebrew name Mitzrajim. And Egypt was so called from Mitzrajim one of the
sons of Cham, his second son, as we find him, Genesis 10.6. He first
inhabited that part of Africa, which was afterward called Egypt, from
Aegyptus, son of Belus, King of that Land. Now because this same Mitzrajim
was one of the sons of Cham, the Land of Mitzrajim, Psalm. 105.27. and 106.22.
or of Egypt, is in the Psalms of David entitled the Land of Cham; as Psalm.
105.23. Iaacob was a stranger in the Land of Cham; and in other places. And for
the same reason is Cham put for Egypt, Psalm. 78.51. He smote all the first
borne in Egypt, even the beginning of their strength, in the tabernacles of
Cham. The latter part of that verse being an exposition of the former, makes it
manifest, that Cham is there put for Mitzrajim, or Egypt.

Enough for this time of Egypt. The Palaces of both Ashdod and Egypt are here
specified: not barely the houses, as the Vulgar Latin here reads, but the
Palaces: to show, that this proclamation was to be made not in obscure houses,
or poor Cottages, but in their Princes Courts. And quod in aulis principum
diuulgatur, latere non potest; what is published in Princes Courts, it will
abroad. There is the greatest confluence of honorable persons and men of note;
who have evermore some about them, that will not spare to tell abroad what is
either said or done by the Princes themselves in their most secret closets.
Their very vices cannot be hid. So Honorius the Emperor in the Panegyricke
tells his son Theodosius, Claudian. de 4. Cons. Honorij, verse. 271.
-- cunctis tua gentibus esse
Facta palam: nec posse dari regalibus vsquam
Secretum vitijs.
Whatsoever thou do, it is known abroad; nor can any place be of sufficient
secrecy to conceal the vices of Kings.

Now if Kings secrets done in Court, if their secret vices be made known; much
more shall it be known, that is proclaimed in Court. And therefore is the
Proclamation here enjoined to be made in the Palaces of Palaestina and Egypt,
in their Princes Courts, that the same thereof flying abroad into all the
coasts of those dominions, the rest of the people might understand thereof, and
bear witness to the judgments of God, which he executes upon his people for
their sins, that they are very just.

By this iniunction for the Proclamation now expounded, you see, that Heathens,
the Philistines and Egyptians, aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and
utter enemies to that State, are invited to be spectators of the evils which
God in judgment was to bring upon that his people, the Israelitish Nation. And
this was to make the evils, which the Israelites were to suffer, the more
grievous unto them. Hence arises this observation: The calamities, or miseries
which the Lord in justice lays upon us for our evil deeds, will be the more
grievous unto us, if our enemies be made privy unto them.

This is it the Lord says to Jerusalem, Ezech. 5.8. Behold, I, even I, will
execute judgment, in the midst of thee, in the sight of the nations thine
enemies. In the sight of thine enemies will I do it.

It could not be but an exceeding great grief to the Virgin daughter of Zion;
that the Lord had caused her enemy to rejoice over her, and had set up the
horn of her adversaries, Lament. 2.17.

The reproach and ignominy that comes from an enemy in time of misery is to
some far more grievous than death it self, who rather choose to die, though
it be by their own hands, or the hands of a friend, than they will endure
dishonor from an enemy. Examples of such a resolution there are many in
profane Histories, as in Plutarch of Tom. 3. vit. in Catone.
Cato Minor, In Antonio.
Antonius and Cleopatra; in Annal. lib. 16.
Tacitus of Thraseas: These of the Heathen killed themselves through
impatiencie, as not being able to endure the reproach and shame, which they
feared, the one from Caesar, two of them from Augustus, the fourth from Nero.

Nor is the Sacred story void of examples of this kind.

Abimelech son of Ierubesheth. 2 Samuel 11.21.
Ierubbaal, he, whom the Sichemites Judge. 9.6.
made their King, when at an assault of his given to the tower of Theber he had
his scull broken by a piece of a Millstone which a certain woman had cast upon
his head, he called hastily unto a young man his armor-bearer, and said unto
him, Draw my sword, and slay me, that men say not of me, A woman slew him. And
his young man thrust him through, and he died, Judge. 9.54. Such was the end of
that ambitious and cruel tyrant. He is slain of a woman, and when he sees he
is to die, he is desirous to blot out that infamy: he will not have it said
of him, that a woman slew him. That a woman, of the enemies side, slew him, he
will not by any means have it said of him: Kill him rather than it should be
said, A woman slew him.

Such was the impatience of Saul, Saul, he that was the first King of the
Israelites, when the Philistines had gotten the day against him, had slain
three of his sons, 1 Samuel 31.2. 1 Chronicles. 10.2.
Jonathan, Abinadab, and Malchishua, and himself was wounded by their archers,
he thus spoke unto his Armor-bearer, Draw thy sword and thrust me through
therewith, lest these uncircumcised come, and thrust me through and mock me.
Which vile act his Armor-bearer refusing, Saul became his own executioner,
took his own sword and slew himself, 1 Samuel 31.4. He takes his own sword and
slayes himself. And why so? Lest, says he, these uncircumcised Philistines
come and thrust me through, and mock me. See, he will die, that he may not die:
he will be thrust through, that he may not be thrust through; he will kill
himself, that the Philistines may not kill him. He will not endure to come
within the power of his enemies.

I commend not Saul for his valor in killing himself, nor Abimelech for his
in causing his Armor-bearer to thrust him through. It was not valor in them,
but cowardice, or impatiencie. For if they could with patience have borne and
endured their troubles, they would not have hastened their own death.

Selfe-killing is a sin so grievous, that scarce there is any more heinous
before the Lord. Many reasons may be alleged to show the unlawfulness of this
fact; and I hold it not amiss to bring a few, especially in the inequitie of
these times, wherein wretchedness has so fearfully prevailed in some
persons, and almost daily does prevail, that they dare plunge themselves into
this pit of terrible destruction.

My first reason shall be; because it is forbidden in that Commandment, Thou
shall not kill. Exodus 20.13.
In that Commandment is forbidden the killing of any man without lawful
authority. But no man has authority over himself, because no man is superior
to himself: and therefore no man may kill himself: Out of S. Augustine lib.
1. de Ciuit. Dei, cap. 20. I thus frame the reason: Thou shall not kill, that
is the Law. The Law is not, Exodus 20.13.
thou shall not kill thy neighbor, limiting it as it were to some, but
indefinitly; Thou shall not kill, extending it largely to all: and therefore a
man may not kill himself.

My second reason I take from that other Law, Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self. It is given in the Old: Leuit. 19.18. Matthew. 5.43. and 22.39. Romans
13.9. Galat. 5.14. James 2.8.
and is often repeated in the New Testament; Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self. Where the love of our selves, is made measure for the love of our
neighbors. Thou ought to love thy neighbor, but as thou love thy self.
The example of thy charity is drawn from thy self at home. Thy soul, thy
preservation, the good wished to thy self, should be the true direction of thy
deeds unto thy neighbor. But it is unlawful for thee to lay bloody or
murdering hands upon thy neighbor; and therefore thou may not make away
thy self. It is more unnatural for thee to shed thine own blood, than thy
neighbors. Thy neighbors thou may not shed, much less may thou shed
thine own.

Thirdly, for a man to kill himself, it is an injury to the Commonwealth
wherein he lives; for thereby he maimeth the Commonwealth, and cutteth off
one of her members. The King thereby shall want a man, when he has use of him.
This is an injury to the State, and therefore a man may not kill himself.

Fourthly, our life is given us of God. God has placed us in this world, as in
a watch or standing, from whence we may not stir a foot, till God call us and
command us to remove.

Josephus a noble Captain in the war of the Jews, after the loss of the
City Iotapata, which Vespasian the Roman General took, being assembled with
diverse of his soldiers in a cave, where for a while they lay hid from the fury
of the Enemy, when they would take no way, but that they would kill one the
other, rather than they would be taken by their enemies the Romans, uses unto
them a very patheticall speech, as Egesippus lib. 3. de excidio-Hierosolymitano
has recorded it; Thesaurum nobis optimum Deus dedit, The Almighty God has
given unto us our life, as a most precious treasury: he has shut it and sealed
it up in this earthen vessel, and given it us to be kept, till himself do
ask for it again. And were it not a fault now, as on the one side to deny it,
when he shall require it again: so on the other side to spill, and cast this
treasure forth, which was thus committed to us, before he do demand it? If we
should kill our selves, Quis nos admittet ad illa sanctarum animarum consortia?
Who is he, that shall admit us into the company of good souls? Shall it not be
said to us, as once it was said to Adam, where art thou? so, where are ye?
Where are ye, who contrary to my commandment are come, from whence yet you
should not, because yet I have not loosed you from the bonds of your bodies.

Where are ye? Where? The same Josephus in the same speech of his, as himself
has delivered it, lib. 3. de bello Iudaico cap. 14. will tell you, where it is
most likely they are; Quorum manus in seipsos insanierunt, eorum animas
tenebrosior Orcus suscipit; the souls of them who have killed themselves are
descended into Hell. And so much Saint Hierom seems to affirm in an Epistle
of his to Paula concerning the death of her daughter Blafilla, where he makes
God thus to speak, Nullam animam recipio, quae me nolente separatur a corpore,
I will receive no soul, which against my will goes out of the body to which I
have committed it.

Beloved, without Gods exceeding mercy, whereof no man can presume, nay great
and mighty prejudice is to the contrary, it will be very ill with them, who
do adventure to slay themselves.

Let then those of the Heathen, whom even now I mentioned, Cato Vticensis,
Antony, Cleopatra and Thraseas; let Abimelech and Saul, let others be famous
for killing themselves; let it be said of them, that it was not blood, but
honor that gushed out of their sides, yet are they not warrants for us
Christians to do the like. We have a better Master Christ Jesus, the
Righteous: He has taught us a better lesson; namely, that adversity and bitter
affliction must be borne with patience: that in our miseries and calamities, we
are to expect what end God will make, and not to hasten the issue in our
selves. Mayor animus merito dicendus est, qui vitam arumnosam magis potest
far, quam fugere, August. de Ciuit. Dei lib. 1. cap. 22. He is worthily said
to have true fortitude, that can with patience bear the sorrows which are
assigned and allotted out for his portion; whereas he that fearfully flies
from them, is no better than a coward. Quis enim ignorant foemineae timiditatis
esse, Coquaeus Comment. in August. de ciu. Dei lib. 1. cap. 24.
and muliebris formidinis, ne moriare, mori velle? Josephus in that his Oration
now cited out of De Excid. Hieros. l. 3. c. 18.
Hegesippus: Who knows it not to be effeminate timorousness and woman-like
faint-heartednesse, to be willing to die, that thou die not, to kill thy self,
that another kill thee not.

So is it, beloved. This same (...), this same (...), this same selfe-killing,
at the best, is no better than the badge of an abject and a base mind. None of
the Saints in their greatest miseries, nor Joseph, nor Job, nor David, nor
Daniel, nor other, thought of any such way to rid themselves out of trouble.
No. Though they felt the sharpness of poverty, the sting of infamy, the
pains of diseases, and the horror of death, yet their courage quailed not,
but they spurned aside all manner of despair. And for the sweetness they
found in the favor and grace of God, they were well content not only to be
deprived of all worldly delights, and earthly pleasures, but also to embrace
the rod of their heavenly Father, and patiently to endure the weight of the
cross laid on them.

These, beloved, these are fit patterns for our imitation. Wherefore, let us
not be dismayed with any cross or affliction. Let not the extremity of the
pain, nor the sharpness of the misery, nor the continuance of the sickness,
daunt our courage, no, though these calamities befall us in the sight of our
enemies. Nay, though we be given up into the hands of our enemies, who will
triumph and rejoice at our downfall, yet will we not offer violent hands unto
our selves; we will not cut asunder that which God has joined, we will not
seek for ease by shortning of our lives. Whatsoever ill shall betide me, I
will say with Jeremy, Chap. 10.19. Truly this is my grief, and I will bear
it.

And my grief will be the more, if in time of misery, mine enemy insult and
triumph over me. This is a case, that has much troubled Gods holy ones, as in
part you have already heard. It much troubled holy David. And therefore he
prays against it, Psalm. 13.4. Consider, and hear me, O Lord my God: and why?
Lest mine enemy say, I have prevailed against him; and those that trouble me
rejoice, when I am moved. The like eiaculation he has, Psalm. 38.16. and his
reason there is the same; Lest mine enemies should rejoice over me; who, when
my foot slippeth, do magnify themselves against me.

The same David, upon the news of the death of King Saul and Jonathan his
son, willing to prevent the opprobrious and disgraceful insultations and
vpbraidings of the enemy, gives a charge for secrecy, as much as might be, 2 Samuel 1.20. Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon, lest
the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the
uncircumcised triumph.

The little flock of the righteous, the holy Church her self, is sensible of
the insolency of an enemy, Micah. 7.8. O thou enemy of mine, rejoice not at
my fall; for I shall get up again.

Upon these particulars, and the like, depends the truth of the observation
propounded: The calamities or miseries which the Lord in justice lays upon us
for our evil deeds, will be the more grievous unto us, if our enemies be made
privy unto them.

Will they be the more grievous unto us, if our enemies be made privy unto
them? What is the reason? The reason is; because it is a property of wicked
men, enemies to piety, wonderfully to insult over the godly that are afflicted,
and the more these are afflicted, the more insolent are they. Great was the
insolency of those enemies of David, of whom he complains Psalm. 35.15. In
mine adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves together; yea, the very
abiects, [the offscouring of the people] gathered themselves together against
me; made mowes at me, and ceased not.

As great was that of Nabal, in his answer to David's messengers, 1 Samuel 25.10.
Who is David? and who is the son of Iesse? There be many servants now adays
that break away every man from his Master. Shall I then take my bread, and my
water, and my flesh that I have killed for my shearers, and give it unto men,
when I know not whence they be? Churlish Nabal; he is not content only not to
give any thing to David, but also raileth at him, and reuileth him.

And was not the insolency of Shemei of as high a strain? Shemei, a man of
the family of the house of Saul, comes forth from Bahurim, and curses still as
he comes, meets David, casts stones at him, and reuileth him; Come out, come
out thou man of blood, and thou man of Belial, 2 Samuel 16.7. See, see; it is the
property of the wicked exceedingly to insult over the Godly, when they are in
misery: and for this cause will our miseries be the more grievous unto us, if
the wicked take notice of them.

Now the uses which we are to make of this observation, are these.

First, it shows, how vile our nature is, that has no more remorse in it
toward them that are in misery.

Secondly, it teaches us when we are in misery to look for no better from
profane persons, than insultation and rejoicing, and therefore in that case to
arm our selves with patience.

Thirdly, we may learn from hence how to behave our selves toward our
enemies, when they are fallen under the cross, we may not triumph over them.
We must do unto them, as we would be done unto: this is the Law and the
Prophets. But when we are in misery, we would not have our enemies insult over
us: and therefore neither must we insult over them, when they are in misery.

This is that the Lord so severely commands in the Prophecy of Obadiah,
verse. 11, 12. Look not, rejoice not, speak not proudly in the day of thy
brother, in the day of his peregrination, in the day of his perdition, in the
day of his anguish, in the day of his ruin, in the day of his calamity, in
the day of his tribulation. And this is that, whereto Solomon exhorts, Prou.
24.17. Rejoice not, when thine enemy falls; and let not thine heart be glad
when he stumbleth. So Ecclesiasticus admonishes, Chap. 7.11. Laugh no man to
scorn in the bitterness of his soul. Holy Job, Chap. 31.29. in the Catalogue
of his comforts, reckons up this for one; that he never rejoiced at the hurt
of his enemy, nor was ever glad that any harm happened unto him, nor ever
suffered his mouth to do such a sin as to wish him evil.

And now (beloved) if neither the precept of the Lord, nor the exhortation of
Solomon, nor the admonition of the wise son of Syrach, nor the example of
holy Job, can move us to the performance of this Christian duty, namely, not to
rejoice at any that are in adversity: What shall I say? Will the fear of
punishment any whit amend us? Then remember we what the Wiseman says, Prou.
17.5. He that rejoices at the harm of another, shall not himself escape
unpunished.

And thus much be spoken by occasion of the iniunction for the proclamation,
these words, Proclaim in the palaces of Ashdod, and in the palaces of the Land
of Egypt, and say. Now follows the tenor of the Proclamation, in these:
Assemble your selves upon the mountains of Samaria, and behold the great
tumults in the midst thereof, and the oppressed in the midst thereof.

Wherein three things are principally to be observed: One is, the calling of an
assembly.
Secondly, the place for the assembly.
Thirdly, the end of their meeting.


The calling of the Assembly is first. You that are the Prophets of the Lord,
dicite, say plainly and with a loud voice; say to the Princes of Palaestina and
of Egypt, Congregamini, Be ye gathered together; assemble your selves, Come
and meet together upon the mountains of Samaria.

The mountains of Samaria, are the place for this assembly. Samaria, for the
most common use of the name, is the City registered, 1 King. 16.24. to be built
by King Omrie, upon a mountain purchased by him of one Semer, called in the
allegory, Ezech. 23.4. Aholah, sister to Aholibah, named to be the head of
Ephraim, Esai. 7.9. It was a royal city of Israel, the Metropolis, the mother
city of that kingdom. From it the coast adjoining, situate betwixt Galilee and
Iudaea, was named Samaria, and is accordingly described by Cosmographers,
Ptolomee, Ortelius, Maginus and others: and from hence the kingdom of Israel
came to be called the kingdom of Samaria, as 2 King. 17.24. Where the King of
Assyria is said to have brought nations out of Babylon, and other places of his
dominions, and to have seated them in the cities of Samaria, that is, in the
cities of the kingdom of Israel.

Thus may Samaria be either the whole Province, or the chief City thereof.
And so may the mountains of Samaria be either the whole Province, because the
whole was mountainous, as Josephus affirms, Lib. 3. de bello Iudaico, cap. 2.
or they may betoken the chief City thereof, because it was seated on a
mountain. And then our Prophet says, the mountains of Samaria, as we say in
Latin, flumen Euphratis, Vrbs Romae, and herba Lapathi. As we say, the River
of Euphrates for Euphrates, the City of Rome, for Rome, the herb of Patience,
for Patience: so may our Prophet here say, the Mountains of Samaria, for
Samaria. That by these Mountains of Samaria the whole Province is to be
understood, it is the opinion of Saint Hierome, Remigius, Rupertus, with some
other, with whom agrees Petrus Lusitanus. Yet to Castrus it seems more
probable, that the very City be here meant, as in the midst whereof many
detestable villainies and enormities were acted. But both expositions may well
take place. For if the chief city of the Country were so flagitious, the
rest of the Country could not be blameless.

Thus have we the place for this assembly. But what is the end of their
meetings? It is to behold the great tumults in the midst of Samaria, and the
oppressed in the midst thereof. Et videte, And behold.

You, the Princes of Palastina and Egypt having gathered your selves together
upon the mountains of Samaria, Videte, Look about you. It will be a pleasant
spectacle for you to see the great disorder of a people, whom you have a long
time hated. Videte, look about you therefore, Behold, see, (...) Mehumoth
rabboth, What Is that? Insanias multas, says the old Interpreter; so Saint
Hierome; See their many madnesses, (...), say the Septuagint, many miraculous
and strange demeanours: Oecolampadius says, Stupenda multa, many prodigious
deportments. Drusius, Strages multas, many slaughters: Calvin, Concussiones
multas, many concussions, violent and public extortions. Vatabl^^ and Mercer,
Contritiones multas, many Contritions, brusings, or cursings of the afflicted.
Iunius and Piscator, Vexationes plurimas, very many vexations: Gualter,
Tumultus multos, many tumults: Brentius, Tumultus magnos, great tumults; Great
tumults! Its our translation. See; See then, many madnesses, strange and
prodigious behauiours, slaughters, concussions, contritions, very many
vexations, many and great tumults. All these see.

In medio ejus, in the midst of Samaria. Yet is not this all, you are there
to see. For see also (...) Gnaschukim, the oppressed in the midst thereof.
For the oppressed Calvin has Oppressiones, the oppressions; it is the
marginall reading in our now-Bible. Brentius has Calumnias; so has
Oecolampadius; Saint Hierome, and the Vulgar Latin, Calumniam patientes. Their
meaning is, that in Samaria, in the midst thereof, in penetralibus eius, in
the inmost parts thereof, there were many that were calumniated, were accused
falsely, were appeached wrongfully, were charged maliciously, were reproached
unjustly, were reviled injuriously. Such doing was there in Samaria, not only
in the country abroad, but also within the walls thereof. Every where did
cruelty advance it self, and so did Covetousness.

And thus have I expounded the Proclamation; the words thereof; in which the
Philistines and Egyptians, Gentes extra Oeconomiam Dei, profane Nations, are
cited to be witnesses, yea and Judges too, of the impurity and uncleanness,
that was in the Lords own people, the people of Israel. My observation is, God
sometimes conuinceth his own people of impiety, by comparing them with
foreign Nations.

Such a comparison is that, Ierem. 2.10. Pass over the Isles of Chittim, and
see, and send unto Kedar, and consider diligently, and see if there be any such
thing. Has any Nation changed their Gods, which are yet no Gods? But my people
have changed their glory, for that which does not profit. It is a vehement
expostulation, and in the paraphrase may be thus: You, my people of the Jewish
Nation, pass ye over unto Chittim, to the Macedonians and Cyprians, see of
what Religion and constancy they are: and send ye unto Kedar, to the Hagarens,
observe them, mark them diligently. Can you find, think you, any Nations so
like your selves? so inconstant, so mutable? Is there any Nation in the whole
world, that so rashly changes her Gods? Gods! Gods of the Nations! They are no
Gods, but Idols, the froth and skumme of man's brain. And yet are the Nations
constant in the worship of these their false Gods, their no Gods. But you, you
of the Jewish Nation, mine own people; you have changed your Glory. Me, the
true, faithful, and everliving God, in whom alone you should have gloried, Me
have you changed for a thing of naught. Be astonished, O ye Heavens, at this:
be ye horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, says the Lord.

A like comparison is that brought by our Savior in the Gospel, Matthew. 12.41.
Where from the example of the Ninevites, he infers the condemnation of the
Jews. The men of Nineveh shall rise up in judgment with this generation, Luke
11.33.
and shall condemn it: because they repented at the preaching of Jonas; and
behold, a greater than Jonas is here. The Ninevites were Gentiles and
Barbarians; the Jews were Gods own people: the Preacher to the Ninevites was
Jonas, a mere man and a stranger, but Christ God and man, of the line and race
of David, was the Preacher to the Jews: Jonas his preaching continued but for
three days, and the Ninevites repented; Christ preached for three years
together, and the Jews blasphemed. Therefore shall the men of Nineveh rise up
in judgment with the Jews, and shall condemn them.

Saint Paul likewise presses the example of the Gentiles, the more to accuse
the Corinthians of a grievous sin among them, 1 Cor. 5.1. It is reported
commonly, that there is fornication among you, and such fornication, as is not
so much as named among the Gentiles. The Gentiles, who know not God, nor have
heard of the faith of Christ, will not commit so foul a sin: and will you,
Christians, you who hope for salvation by faith in Christ, will you defile your
selves with such abomination? For the love of God, for the love of your own
souls, fly from fornication.

And thus have you the confirmation of my second observation, which was: God
sometimes conuinceth his own people of impiety, by comparing them with
foreign Nations.

The use of this observation may be, to teach us, who profess the faith of
Christ, that the glorious name of Christianity is but vain and idle, if a man's
life through his corrupt and dissolute behavior, be not answerable.

Saint Augustine in his time propounded this question to an Auditory of his, in
his second Sermon upon the thirtieth Psalm: Quam multos putatis, fratres mei,
velle esse Christianos, sed offendi malos moribus Christianorum? My brethren,
how many, think ye, there are, that would willingly become Christians, but
that they take exception at the evil lives of the Christians?

Long after him great Gregory, Moral. lib. 25. cap. 10. complained: Nonnulli
fidem medulliter tenent, sed viuere fideliter nullatenus curant; Many there are
that make profession of the faith of a Christian, but they take no care at any
hand to live the life of a Christian.

The life of a Christian, if you take it in its full perfection, is not such a
kind of life, as the Christians use to live at this day in the world; but such
a life, as our Savior Christ lived, such as his Disciples lived, such as the
holy Martyrs under the Primitive Church did live: a life that is a continual
cross and death of the whole man; whereby man thus mortified and annihilated,
is fit to be transformed into the similitude and likeness of God.

But where is the Christian, that now adays lives such a life? Has not
dissimulation and hypocrisy in a manner covered the face of the Earth? Christi
nomen anditis, you hear the name of Christ, but where shall you see the man
that lives the life of Christ? Crepamus Euangelium, we cry, the Gospel, the
Gospel; but where is he that yields obedience to the Gospel? Doctrinam
fidei ebuccinamus, we trumpet out the Doctrine of faith, but the discipline of
a Christian life we exterminate, we banish. Multa passim fides absque operibus,
every where there is much speech of the efficacy of faith without works; but
where is the man that shows me his faith by his works?

Beloved, what shall I say more? If we have a delight to be called the people
of God, if we take any joy in the name of a Christian, let it be our care to
live as it becomes the people of God, as it becomes Christians. If we shall
so lead our lives, that our lives shall be to the unbelieving Atheist, and
blind Papist, a horror and a scandal, shall they not both, Atheist and
Papist, rise up in judgment with us and condemn us? If under the cloak of
Christian liberty, we live petulantly, lasciuiously, dissolutely, in gluttony,
in drunkenness, in chambering, in wantonness, in whoredom, in
luxuriousness, in strife, in maliciousness, in cruelty, in covetousness, and
in other like enormities, shall they not both, Atheist and Papist, rise up in
judgment with us, and condemn us?

Wherefore (dearly beloved) these enormities and the like, Ephesians. 5.3. Coloss.
3.12.
let them not once be named amongst us, as it becomes Saints. But put we on,
as the elect of God, holy and beloved, the bowels of mercies, Coloss. 3.12.
kindness, sanctimony and holiness of life, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, (if any man
has a quarrel against any) even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us. O!
Let us thus do, and our souls shall live. And that all of us may do thus,
God Almighty grant us of his grace for his well-beloved Son JESUS CHRIST his
sake.

THE Twelfth Lecture.
AMOS 3.10. For they know not to do right, says the Lord; who store up
violence and robbery in their Palaces.


MEn are as fishes of the Sea, that have no ruler over them: it is the
complaint of the Prophet Habakkuk, Chap. 1.14. Fishes of the Sea! It is their
property to devour one another: the stronger and the greater devour the
weaker and the less; so says the Emperor Iustine the second, in Cedrenus his
Annals. Saint Ambrose in his Hexameron, lib. 5. cap. 5. shows this to be true
in two kinds of fishes; in the Scarus, which some call the Guilt-head or
Golden-eye, which cheweth like a beast; and in the Silurus, the Sheath-fish, or
Whale of the river. Among these, Minor esca majoris est, the lesser is food for
the greater, and the greater is set upon by a stronger than he, and becomes
his food. So fares it with men. Great men set upon their inferiors, and
mightier than they upon them. Such men, men for quality like fishes, deuourers
one of another, cruel and covetous men, bore the sway in Samaria. It is plain
by this passage of Amos his second Sermon to the Kingdom of the ten Tribes,
the people of Israel. Of this passage there are two parts: An Accusation, verse.
9, 10. A Commination, verse. 11.


In the ninth verse, a part of the accusation, two things have been observed:
An iniunction for a proclamation: Publish in the palaces, etc. The proclamation
it self. Assemble your selves, etc.


In the proclamation two sins were controlled: Cruelty and Covetousness.


Their Cruelty appeared in their great tumults; their Covetousness in their
oppressions. I gave a touch at both in my last Sermon. I now go on with the
tenth verse, wherein these two enormities, Cruelty and Covetousness, are
amplified by two Topickes; a genere, and a specie. From the Genus thus, They
know not to do right: and thus from the Species, They store up violence and
robbery in their palaces. That so it is God is witness, for (...) Neum
Jehovah, the Lord has said it.

I begin with the amplification from the Genus; They know not to do right.
Saint Hierome reads according to the Hebrew, Nescierunt, they have not
known. So do they who have either non nouerunt, as Calvin, Gualter, and
Brentius; or non norunt, as Vatablus, Mercer, and Piscator: They have not
known. Tremelius and Iunius have, vt ignorent, how they are ignorant; Drusius
has, Nam nesciunt, for they know not. There is our translation. They have not
known, or they are ignorant, and know not, Facere rectum, to do right. So all
save Jonathan, who in his Paraphrase has Facere legem, to do the Law. The
meaning is good; for whosoever knows not to do according to the Law of God,
he knows not to do right.

They know not to do right] Omnino rectum facere nesciunt, says Saint
Hierome; they have no knowledge at all to do what right is; no knowledge to
do any good at all. So then, they of Samaria, the people of Israel, are
accused of Ignorance. Ignorance of the Law of God, and of doing thereafter, is
here laid unto their charge. It yields unto us this observation: Ignorance of
God and his revealed will, is a sin that is damnable and to be avoided.

It is so. I prove it: 1. Because it is against the Commandment. 2. Because
God expressly reproves it.


My third proof shall be from the foulness of this ignorance.

First, it is against the Commandment, against the first Commandment, which
is, Thou shall have none other Gods but me, Exodus 20.3. The Commandment is
negative. And the rule is, In the negative the affirmative must be understood,
and in the affirmative the negative. Thou shall have none other Gods but me,
that is the negative; the affirmative to be understood is, Thou shall have me
alone for thy God: where our knowledge of God is commanded. We are to
acknowledge him, that is, we are to know and confess him to be such a God, as
he has revealed himself to be in his word, and in his Creatures. Now as in
this affirmative part the knowledge of God is commanded, so in the negative is
the ignorance of God forbidden. This ignorance of God, is not only not to know,
but also to doubt of such things as God has revealed in his word. And such is
the ignorance of God that is forbidden in that first Commandment.

It is likewise forbidden, if Polanus deceive not, in the 32. Psalm, verse. 9.
Be ye not as the horse, or as the mule, which have no understanding.

Its forbidden in the Epistle to the Ephesians. cap. 4.17, 18. Walk not from
henceforth as other Gentiles walk in the vanity of their mind, having their
understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the
ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart. Walk not
on in ignorance; For as the knowledge of God is the true life of the soul; so
on the other side, the ignorance of God is the death of the soul.

Hence is that of Saint Paul, 1 These. 4.13. I would not have you ignorant,
brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that you sorrow not, even as
others which have no hope. It seems the Thessalonians were in great
heaviness, and mourned out of measure when they beheld the persecution of the
Church among them. In this their heaviness and mourning they grew toward
mistrust, and to be like the Heathen, which had no hope. This abuse of theirs
grew of ignorance, for that they knew not the happy estate of such as die in
the Lord. Saint Paul to reform this their error, says, Brethren, I would not
have you ignorant concerning them which are asleep. Be ye not ignorant what
is become of them; what God has done for them. God has tried them as gold,
and made them worthy for himself. Its ignorance that makes you heavy, because
you know not what is become of the dead. Be ye not ignorant concerning them,
and your heaviness will be turned into joy. And let this suffice to have been
spoken to show, that in respect of the Commandment, Ignorance of God, and his
holy Will, is damnable, and to be avoided.

So is it in regard that God has expressly reproved it. There is a sharp
reproof of it, Esaias 1.3. The Ox knows his owne^, and the Ass his masters
Crib, but Israel has not known, my people has not understood. Quid stolidius
boue, quid stupidius asino? What is more foolish than the Ox, what more stupid
than the Ass? Yet those bruit beasts do know them, by whom they are fed and
nourished; but Israel, the Lords own people, know not the Lord their God. Not
much unlike is that, Ierem. 8.7. The Storke in the air knows her appointed
times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their
coming, but my people knows not the judgment of the Lord. My people,
Israel, is more ignorant of my judgments, than those birds are of their
appointed seasons. Both these reproves are comparatiue. In the first, is
Israel compared unto beasts; in the second, to birds. Beasts and birds have
more knowledge than Israel.

But the reproof is absolute, Ierem. 4.22. My people is foolish, they have not
known me: they are foolish children, and have no understanding: they are wise
to do evil, but to do well they have no knowledge. As absolute is that,
Ierem. 9.3. They proceed from evil to worse, and have not known me, says the
Lord. They have no understanding, they have no knowledge, they have not known
me, says the Lord. These, and the like reproves of the ignorance of God, from
Gods own mouth, may serve for my second proof, that the ignorance of God is
damnable, and to be avoided.

My third proof I take from the foulness of this ignorance. The foulness
thereof I discover in one position. The position is; The ignorance of God, and
of the things revealed in his holy Word, is a punishment of sin, a cause of
sin, and sin in it self. The position has three branches. I shall
endeavor to speak of each in their order.

The first branch is: Our ignorance of God and of things revealed in his holy
Word, is a punishment of sin. It is a punishment of that sin, which by the
default of our first Father, Adam, was from him derived down to us; and that
is original sin; by reason whereof we are all borne blind: blind in our
understanding, blind in our will, and blind in our affections. There is no
faculty of our soul which is not disabled by this sin.

The chiefest faculties of our soul are three, Men's, Voluntas, Affectiones;
the Understanding, the Will, and the Affections. Men's, Our understanding is by
this sin disabled: For it labors with a defect, or want of light or
knowledge, and with a want of sanctity or holiness; that quality, by which
light or knowledge in the understanding should be seasoned, as indeed it was at
man's first creation.

That in the often repetition of the names of light and knowledge I seem not
tedious, may it please you to take what I shall speak of the one, as spoken of
the other also. For between light and knowledge in the understanding, I put no
essential difference.

Now I note in the understanding a twofold light; the one natural, the other
Spiritual.

The Natural is defective and wanting, not universally, but in part only. For
notwithstanding our first fathers fall, there do yet remain in the
unregenerate man, certain general notions of good and evil things commanded
or forbidden in the Law of God. And these notions are such, that they make man
inexcusable, since they are both maimed and corrupted. The defect or want of
this Natural light is proved, Romans 1.21. When they knew God, they glorified
him not as God. They knew God, there is the light of their understanding: they
glorified him not as God; there is the defect and want of that light, the
maime, the corruption of it.

The spiritual light of the understanding, that is likewise defective and
wanting, not as the natural light in part only, but universally. This is
proved, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man receives not the things of the spirit of
God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned. (...), The natural man, man of himself in his pure
naturals, ruled only by nature, reason, and sense, without grace, without the
Spirit of God, man unregenerate, is altogether destitute of the spiritual
light of the understanding.

Besides this want of light in the understanding, whether natural or
spiritual, there is also carentia sanctitatis, a want of holiness, wherewith
the forenamed light ought now to be, as once it was, seasoned. The want of this
holiness is manifested, Romans 8.7. where you shall find, that whatsoever light
or knowledge is in man, it is all unclean, impure, and profane; the Apostles
words are (...), The wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God: for it is not
subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. Not subject to the Law of
God, nor can be subject to it! What! Can man exempt himself from subjection
unto God? No: be he never so rebellious, he must abide under Gods dominion. But
the meaning of the Apostle is, to note such a rebellion of man's corrupt nature,
as is not subject according unto order, as gives not orderly subjection unto
God. Thus there is in man a want of that holiness wherewith the light of his
understanding should be seasoned.

What I have now delivered de mente, concerning the mind or understanding,
which is a speculatiue faculty of the soul, the same may be spoken De
voluntate and affectionibus, of the will and affections, which are practical
faculties of the same. And therefore as in the understanding there is a defect
of light and sanctity, so is there in the will and affections, even the
absence of created holiness. Nor is there in these faculties of the soul only
an absence of light, knowledge, and sanctity; but also the presence of their
contrary qualities, as darkness, ignorance, and sinfulness.

If the light be put out, darkness comes in place; if knowledge be departed,
ignorance succeeds; if holiness be lost, sinfulness will domineere. Proofs
hereof there are many in holy Scripture. But in this sunshine I need not light
a candle. I have said enough to show, that ignorance of God and his will is in
all the powers and faculties of the soul of man, a punishment of sin, of
original sin. But this punishment of sin is general, its common to all
men, for as much as all men have sinned in Adam.

I add further, that Ignorance is also a punishment of actual sin.
Sometimes its so. Then it is so, when a man for some particular offense is more
and more blinded, and deprived of the knowledge of God and his truth. So God
punished the Gentiles with ignorance, Romans 1.24. Because when they knew God,
they glorified him not as God, therefore God gave them up to uncleanness
through the lusts of their own hearts to dishonor their own bodies between
themselves. So they became vain in their imaginations; and professing
themselves wise, they became fools. And so God punished the wicked among the
Thessalonians, 2 These. 2.10. Because they received not the truth, that they
might be saved, therefore God did send them strong delusions, that they should
believe lies. Thus is ignorance the punishment also of actual sin. And now is
the first branch of my position clear:

Ignorance is a punishment of sin; evermore of Original, and sometimes of
Actual sin.

The next branch is: Our ignorance of God and his truth is a cause of sin.
Aquin. 1. 2. q. 76. art. 1.


Ignorance is a cause of sin. For whosoever knows not God, he cannot
worship God, he cannot but serve strange Gods. We see that in the Galatians,
chap. 4.8. who therefore did service to them who by nature were not Gods,
because they knew not the true God, Romans 3.11. The like collection is made from
some words in the fourteenth Psalm, that therefore men seek not God because
they know him not. There is none that understands, there is none that seeks
God. In both places Saint Paul makes Ignorance to be the mother of superstition
and idolatry. Men know not God; therefore they seek not God, Aquin. 1. 2. qu.
84. art. 1. 2.
but serve strange Gods. Thus is ignorance a cause of sin, I say, a cause of
sin, as one sin may be a cause of another. And one sin may be a cause of
another diverse ways.

1 One sin is the cause of another, in as much as for a sin committed, the
grace and presence of the Holy Spirit leaves and forsakes us. It being
departed, we cannot but run into foul and filthy sins. If our stay by
which alone we are supported in the way of godliness be taken from us, how
shall we stand?

2 One sin is the cause of another, in as much as God punishes sin with
sin; as when God gave up the Gentiles to their own hearts lusts, to
uncleanness, to defile their own bodies between themselves, Romans 1.24. as
even now you heard.

3 One sin is the cause of another, in as much as by committing of any sin,
we are drawn on again to do the like, and to ingeminate and double action
upon action, until at length we make the sin habitual unto us.

4 One sin is the cause of another, in as much as it cannot be, that a sin
should be committed without attendants. In which sense the Apostle, 1 Timothy
6.10. says of (...), that it is (...); he says that Covetousness, or the
love of money, is the root of all evil. They that will be rich, says he, fall
into tentation and snares, and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which draw
men into perdition and destruction; for the love of money is the root of all
evil, which while some lusted after, they erred from the faith, and pierced
themselves through with many sorrows.

5 One sin is the cause of another, in as much as for one, the other is
committed. Pilat for ambition condemned Christ, Judas for money betrayed his
Master, and Balaam for a like reward cursed Gods people. So many ways may one
sin be said to be the cause of another.

Now our ignorance of God is a cause of sin the fourth way, namely as it is
not without attendants. You heard even now that Paul makes it to be the mother
of superstition and idolatry. I may say it is the mother of all heresies and
errors. To this purpose Saint Hierome in a proeme of his to the Virgin
Eustochium before his Commentaries upon Esaias says, that the ignorance of the
Scriptures, is the ignorance of Christ. If, 1 Cor. 1.24.
says he, according to the Apostle Paul, Christ be the power of God, and the
wisdom of God, and he that knows not the Scriptures, knows not the power
of God, nor his wisdom, Ignoratio Scripturarum ignoratio Christi est; the
ignorance of the Scriptures, is the ignorance of Christ. It is so worthy a
saying, that it is put into the body of the Canon Law, Did. 38. C. Si iuxta.
Thus much for the second branch of my position, wherein I affirmed, that
Ignorance is a cause of sin.

The third branch is: Our ignorance of God, and his truth, is in it self
sin. Here the Schoolmen do distinguish. Aquin. 1.2. qu. 76. Art. 2.
Lombard. Sent. lib. 2. did. 22. c. est autem.
There is one kind of ignorance in such men as may know and will not: another
in such as may know and care not; a third in such as would know, but cannot.
The first is an ignorance by wilfulness, the second by negligence, the third
by necessity. The first and second they hold for sins: the third they excuse,
yea they deny it to be a sin.

To their judgment concerning the two former kinds, we give our assent. It is
a malicious sin, a sin of commission, a very heinous sin, when men may
know and will not. It is a negligent sin, a sin of omission, yet a grievous
sin, when men may know and care not. But their opinion touching the third
kind we allow not. What if a man would know, and cannot, is he therefore
simply and absolutely excused? No; he is not. Its a truth, and all the powers
of Hell shall not be able to prevail against it: whosoever knows not what he
ought to know by the Law of God, he is holden in (...), he transgresses the
Law of God. And every transgression of the Law of God is sin. This truth is
sealed by the holy Spirit in the mouth of Saint John, 1 Epist. chap. 3.4.
(...), Every transgression of the Law is sin.

The Text of Scripture which they allege for their opinion is, Ioh. 15.22.
There says Christ, If I had not come and spoken unto them, they should not
have had sin, but now have they no cloak for their sin.

My answer is: These words make nothing for them. For Christ by saying so, does
not absolutely excuse the Jews from sin upon the condition that they had not
been able to have heard Christ. The excuse which Christ fitteth to them serves
only to excuse them from the greatness and grieuousnesse of sin, as if he
had thus said, If I had not come and spoken unto them, they should not have had
sin; sin, that is, so grievous sin as now they have, since they have heard
me, and yet do continue in their obstinacy, refusing to give assent to the
truth, which I have told them from my Father. They should not have had sin;
Sin in comparison they should not have had. Their sin of ignorance should
have been none in respect of their sin which now they have.

The place may receive light from Christ's own mouth, Luke 12.47. Our Savior
there affirms, that the servant which knows his masters will and does it
not, shall be beaten with many stripes; with more stripes than he shall that
knows not his masters will, and therefore does it not. Where we are put in
mind of two sorts of sinners: Some there are that know the will of their Lord;
and some that know it not. Both are sinners, and are to be beaten for their
sins; they with more stripes; these with fewer. And these to whom fewer
stripes are assigned, are of three sorts. For either they know not their Lords
will, because they will not know it: or they know it not, because they care not
to know it; or they know it not, because they cannot know it.

They which know not their Lords will because they will not know it, their
ignorance is, as the Schoolmen call it, Biel. Sent. 2. Did. 22. qu. 2.
Ignorantia affectata, an affected ignorance. These shut their ears when God
calls, and being housed in their security, will not step to the door to see
if the Sun shine. This ignorance resideth rather in their will and
affections, than in their understanding part. These are wilfully ignorant,
says Peter, 2 Ep. 3.5. They know but will not know, and they run with broad
eyes unto destruction.

They which know not their Lords will because they care not to know it, their
ignorance is Ignorantia crassa vel supina; a gross, idle, wretchlesse, and
negligent ignorance. And they that are thus ignorant, do also trace the high
way to the pit of destruction: and there shall they be sure to be beaten with
many stripes.

They which know not their Lords will, because they cannot know it, their
ignorance is called Ignorantia inuincibilis, an invincible ignorance, and its
called invincible, says Biel, Sent. 2. Did. 22.
not because it is simply so, but because it remains, after a man has done
all he can to remove it: and this ignorance, says he, does simply excuse a man
from sin, Non solum in tanto, Conclus. 1.
sed in toto, it excuses wholly from sin. So he and the rest of the school.

But by their leaves it is their error; and stands convicted by that saying of
our Savior already produced, The servant that does not his Masters will, by
reason he knows it not, shall be beaten with stripes, though fewer.

But say an ignorance is invincible, an ignorance of necessity, an ignorance
that a man would, but cannot remove: shall not such an ignorance excuse? No, it
shall not, For all men are bound by the Commandment to know God. That some men
know him not, nor can know him, it is not Gods fault, but the fault of their
own parents, and consequently their own fault. Adam had the perfect knowledge
of God imprinted in his nature: but through his own default he lost the same
for himself and his posterity. A man may not for this complain against Gods
justice, since that our first sin has deserved a greater punishment. I say
then, that this invincible ignorance cannot excuse a toto; it may a tanto. It
may be some excuse for the degree and measure of the sin, but not for the
sin it self. And this may serve for the illustration of the third part of my
position, wherein I affirmed, that our ignorance of God and his truth is of it
self sin. Now the whole together stands good: Our ignorance of God, and of
the things revealed in his holy word, whether it be an affected and a wilful
ignorance, or a negligent and careless ignorance, or an invincible and a
necessary ignorance, is an effect and punishment of sin, it is a cause of
sin, and is in it self sin. It was bred by transgression, it does breed
transgression, and is no less than transgression of its own nature. So foul
a thing is ignorance. And therefore in this respect also its true, that
Ignorance of God and his revealed will is a sin that is damnable and to be
avoided.

My observation thus established; Let us now see what profit may from hence
redound unto us.

First, this may serve to warn all Ministers of the Word, that they be
careful to root out ignorance out of the minds of the people, and to plant
the knowledge of God among them. The Minister that neglects his duty, and
either through insufficiency or idleness, suffers the people to go on in
the ways of darkness to their perdition, he becomes accessory, yea a
principal cause of their destruction.

Secondly, this may teach us all to detest this ignorance of God and his
reueuled will, and to seek by all means to know God. They that content
themselves to live in their ignorance, and voluntarily submit themselves to be
led by blind guides, such as cannot inform them in the ways of the Lord,
their estate is lamentable. Beloved, it is every man's duty to have care of his
own soul, though others should neglect it. You shall do well to account this
one thing necessary, to be instructed in the knowledge of Gods truth, and
prefer it before your worldly affairs. Should you want this precious pearl
of Gods Word, you would rather sell all you have to purchase it, than content
your selves to be without it. Now you have it brought home unto you, will you
not make the best of it?

Thirdly, it may serve to reprove a Popesh practice, by which they endeavor by
all means possible to keep the people in blindness and ignorance, by taking
away from them the light of Gods Word both read and preached; that so keeping
them blind-folded, they may do with them at their pleasure, and like carrion
Crows having picked out their eyes, may make a prey of them.

What else mean they, when they teach, that Ignorance is the mother of
devotion? Page 18.
I know that N. D. in his Wardword denies this to be taught by any Catholic.
He says it is forged by some Minister of ours, and laid upon them. But he
seems to have been past shame in denying that, which is so openly known. A
Deane of Paul's, Doctor Cole by name, one chosen not only to maintain the
assertions of the Papists against the Protestants in a disputation at
Westminster, but appointed by the Bishops and other his Colleagues, to be the
mouth for them all; whose speech in the end, they all being asked, did auow to
be the mind and saying of them all: even he in that honorable assembly of the
Council and Nobles, and frequent concourse of the Commons, did with great
vehemence maintain this position in these words: I say, Ignorance is the
mother of devotion. See, this Popish Doctor, appointed by the consent of Popish
Bishops and other his Colleagues to be their mouth, and avouched, to have spoken
nothing, but what was the mind and saying of them all, says peremptorily,
that Ignorance is the mother of devotion; yet the Author of the Wardword
shamelesly denies, that the Papists have any such assertion.

All the harm I wish them, is, that they had no such. But it appears by the
whole practice and policy of that side, that they are fully persuaded, that
without deep Ignorance of the people, it is not possible for their Church to
stand. Therefore as B. Jewel in his Reply to Master Harding, Art. 37. has well
observed, they chase the simple from the Scriptures; they drown them in
ignorance, and suffer them utterly to know nothing; neither the profession they
made in Baptism; nor the meaning of the holy Mysteries; nor the price of
Christ's blood; nor wherein, nor by whom they may be saved: nor what they desire
of God, either when they pray together in the Church, or when they privately
pray alone. Verily it is with them, as it was with the Scribes and Pharisees,
those Hypocrites, unto whom a woe is denounced by our Savior, Matthew. 23.13.
They shut up the Kingdom of Heaven before men. For they neither go in
themselves, neither do they suffer them that would, to enter. For all the
fair shows they make, for all they curiously paint over this rotten post with
the colors of their devotion; yet the truth is, by depriving the people of
knowledge, they deprive them also of salvation, and make them subject to utter
destruction: and so by consequent they make themselves guilty of the sin and
ruin of the people of both which they have been the principal causes.

I have purposely been liberal in setting before you the amplification from
the Genus: nor need I beg pardon for prolixity. It was necessary for this Text;
no less for these times. Now follows the amplification from the Species; who
store up violence and robbery in their palaces.

(...) Haotzerim in the original is from the root (...) Aizar, which
signifies to treasure up, to hoard up, to store up, to lay up as in a store
house. And accordingly run the translations: the Greek, (...), who treasure
up. So the old Latin, Thesaurizantes; Drusius, qui thesauirzant; Tremelius,
Piscator, and Buxtorfius, qui thesauros faciunt: all these are for the
gathering or making of treasures. Vatablus and Mercer have, qui recondunt, who
lay up: Targum has Implentes cellaria sua, filling their Cellars or
storehouses. Our English translation is for storing up. But what is it that is
thus treasured, laid or stored up?

(...) Chamas vaschod. Chamas with the Greeks is (...), Unrighteousness; with
the old Interpreter, Iniquitas, its Iniquity; with Calvin, Oecolampadius, and
Gualter Rapina, its Rauine; with Brentius Iniuria, its Injury; with Tremelius,
Drusius, and Piscator, Violentia, its Violence; and so it is with us. So, see
stored up in the first place, Unrighteousness, Iniquity, Rauine, Injury, and
Violence. Next is,

(...) Schod: and that is likewise diversely translated: with the Greeks it is
(...), Misery; with the old Latin it is Rapina, Rauine; with Calvin and
Galter, Praeda, a prey, booty, or spoil; with Brentius, Deuastatio; with
Tremelius and Piscator, Vastatio; with Drusius and Oecolampadius, Vastitas, a
wasting, a spoiling, a ransacking; with Vatablus and Mercer, Direptio, a
polling, pilling, or robbing; with us it is Robbery. So, see stored up in the
second place, Misery, Rauine, Preyes, Booties, Spoils, Wasting, Ransacking,
Polling, Pilling, Robbery.

But where is all this to be seen? (...), in their places, so the Septuagint:
in aedibus suis, in their houses, so the Vulgar: in palatijs suis, in their
palaces, so all the rest; and this last best agrees with the Hebrew. Thus have
you the exposition of these words from their diverse readings.

The manner of speech which our Prophet here uses would be observed: They
store up violence and robbery in their palaces.] But how can violence and
robbery be stored up? In their effects they may. By violence and robbery
understand the effects of violence and robbery; goods, riches, and treasures
gotten by violence and robbery; and these were too familiarly stored up.

They store or treasure up violence and robbery, that is, they gather together
treasures of violence and robbery. And we say, treasures of violence and
robbery, as Solomon says, treasures of iniquity, Prou. 10.2. The treasures of
iniquity profit not. By treasures of iniquity, Caietan. Iansen. Rodolphus.
Salazar.
he means such treasures as wicked men do get by wicked means, contra jus
fasque, against right and reason. The like phrase our Savior uses, Luke 16.9.
Make to your selves De mammona iniquitatis, of the Mammon of unrighteousness,
or of the riches of unrighteousness. By the mammon or riches of
unrighteousness, he means such riches as unrighteous men do get by
unrighteous or unlawful means. Stella.


So here may we call the treasures of violence and robbery, such treasures as
violent and cruel men, such as covetous men and robbers do gather together by
pilling, by polling, by robbing, by wasting, by spoiling, by ransacking the
poor, fatherless, widows, and other distressed persons. And these riches
thus gathered together they lay up in palatijs suis.

In their palaces] By mentioning their palaces our Prophet here taxes and
twiteth the great ones of Israel, as if they had built stately and sumptuous
houses, Ex pauperum sanguine, says Mercer, of the blood of the poor; yea
says Quadratus, Ex pauperum visceribus, of the very bowels of the poor; Ex
bonis rapto partis, by goods gotten from the poor by catching and by pillage.
And he further intimates that all this covetous and cruel dealing against the
poor was from their great ones, Kings, Princes, Nobles, and Magistrates, whose
duty it was, not only not to have committed such enormities, but also to have
defended the poor from all such violence and wrong: as Petrus Lusitanus has
well observed.

Here then are the rulers of Samaria accused of violence and robbery, just as
the rulers of Jerusalem are, Esaias 1.23. Thy Princes are rebellious and
companious of thieves: Every one loves gifts and follows after rewards: they
judge not the fatherless, neither does the cause of the widow come unto them.
Whence my observation is: Magistrates, rulers, men in authority, such as grow
to wealth by oppression, bribery, and unjust dealing, may from hence be noted
to be men of violence and robbery.

What? can Magistrates be robbers? Yes, they can be and are so, if they deal
unjustly. Sweetly Saint Augustine, De Ciuitate Dei, lib. 4. cap. 4. Remota
iustitia, quid sunt regna, nisi magna latrocinia? Away with justice, and what
are Kingdoms but mighty robbings?

Elegantly and truly did the pirate reply to Alexander the great. Alexander
asked him, Quid ei videretur, vt mare haberet infestum? What he meant to be so
troublesome at Sea to rob all that passed by? The Pirat freely and stoutly
replied; Quid tibi vt orbem terrarum? Nay, what mean you Alexander, to be so
troublesome to rob all the world? What I do, I do it but with one ship, Et
latro vocor, and must be called a thief: you do the like with a fleet, with a
number of ships, and you must be called Emperor. The only difference between
us is: I rob out of necessity to supply my wants; you out of your unmeasurable
covetousness.

Of Magistrates in Courts of Justice, if they be corrupt, Saint Cyprian Ep. 2.
ad Donatum gives this censure: Qui sedet crimina vindicaturus, admittit, and vt
reus innocens pereat, fit nocens judex. It is significantly Englished by
Democritus Junior: See a Lamb executed and a Wolf pronounce sentence; Latro
arraigned, and Fur sit on the bench; the Judge severely punish others, and do
worse himself. Such Judges may justly be noted for men of violence and
robbery. But my speech is not to such, for they hear me not.

It is to you, beloved. Shall I say, that among you there are men of violence
and robbery? I auow it not; yet flatter not your selves. He that filcheth or
pilfereth, the least pin, point or stick of wood from his neighbor, Mark.
10.19.
he that moves ancient bounds, the ancient bounds which his fathers have made,
Prou. 22.18.
with a purpose to encroach upon his neighbors land; he that steals another
man's wife, child or servant; he that commits sacrilege in detaining the
rights of the Church; 1 Timothy 1.10. Ios. 7.19.
he that transgresses thus, or thus, he may go for a man of violence and
robbery.

Dearly beloved, if any of you has been overtaken with these or the like
transgressions, look into your own hearts; examine your selves in what
measure you have or do transgress. For we must not fear to tell you, you do
offend. And if your conscience tell you, your offense is great, run not
headlong into Hell without returning. Vita non est nisi in Conuersione, De
Conuers. cap. 1.
says Saint Bernard; There is no hope of life, but by turning to the Lord. And
your turning to the Lord must be by true and unfeigned repentance. So turn
unto him; and if thou be a Publican, thou may become an Evangelist; if a
b^asphemer, an Apostle, if a thief and robber, a possessor of Paradise.

And so much be spoken of my second part, the special amplification of cruelty
and covetousness, the sins of Samaria, taken from their violence and
robberies, treasured up in their palaces.

My third part is the ratification of the whole accusation. (...) Neum Jehovah,
the Lord has said it. They know not to do right, says the Lord, who store up
violence and robbery in their palaces. Says the Lord.

See, the Lord is not idle in the Heavens, as some imagine, but takes notice of
what is done here below. He beholds the great tumults that are in Samaria,
and the oppressions there, their violence and robberies he beholds. My
observation here shall be that, Job 34.21. The eyes of the Lord are upon the
ways of man, and he sees all his goings.

He sees all. He sees our sins in the book of Eternity, before our own
hearts conceived them. He sees our sins in our hearts, as soon as our
inventions have given them form. He sees our sins in action on the Theater
of this earth, quite through the scene of our lives: and he sees them to our
pain, when his wrathful eye takes notice of them, and his hand is lift up to
punish them. He sees them all. There is nothing so secret, nothing so
abstracted from the senses of men, Vt creatoris aut lateat cognitionem, aut
effugiat potestatem, that it may either lurk from the eye, or escape the hand
of God; August. de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 22. cap. 20. As plain is that, Job 34.22.
There is no darkness nor shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity may
hide themselves.

The Powder-traitors in the mine and Celler, were not unseen to the revenging
eye of God. The villains of the cloisters were all naked unto him. As dark as
their Vaults were, his all-seeing eye descried their filthiness, and laid
waste their habitations. The obscurity of their Cells and Dorters, the
thickness of their walls, the closeness of their Windows, with the cloak of
a strict profession, covering all, could not hide their sins from the eye of
Heaven.

Nor can our sins be hid, though done with gre^test secrecy. Sin as closely
as thou can, there will be witnesses of thy sin; Videt te angelus malus,
videt te angelus bonus, videt and bonis and malis major angelis Deus; Bernard.
de conuers. ad Clericos cap. 16. The bad angel sees thee, and the good sees
thee, and he that is better than the Angels, far above all principalities and
powers, God Almighty, he sees thee.

Wherefore dearly beloved, let our conversation with men be, as in the sight
of God. And since in this mortality we cannot but sin, let us endeavor to see
our sins, to know them, to confess them, to bewail them, and cry we to God
to give us grace to lay hold upon Jesus Christ his Son, that believing we may
be saved by his righteousness. Good God pardon our sins, give us faith,
change our lives to the better, for thy blessed name and mercies sake; even for
Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

THE Thirteenth Lecture.
AMOS 3.11. Therefore thus says the Lord God, An adversary there shall be even
round about the Land: and he shall bring down thy strength from thee, and thy
palaces shall be spoiled.


THis third part of this third Chapter, but second Sermon of Amos to the
kingdom of the ten Tribes, I styled an (...), an Exornation, pertaining to the
proposition delivered in the second verse. It amplifieth the iniquity of the
Israelites from the testification of foreign nations: as thus; You, you of
Israel, your sins are so notorious, so gross, so palpable, that very
strangers, Philistines, and Egyptians, may take notice of them. Since you of
your selves are not touched with a conscience of your evil deeds, them, the
Philistines and Egyptians, I call as witnesses and Judges of your impurity and
uncleanness. It is the scope of this passage.

The passage consists of two parts, An Accusation, verse. 9, 10. A
Commination, verse. 11.


In the ninth verse, a part of the Accusation, two things have been observed:

An Iniunction for a Proclamation, Publish in the palaces at Ashdod, and in the
palaces in the Land of Egypt, and say.

The Proclamation it self; Assemble your selves upon the Mountains of
Samaria: and behold the great tumults in the midst thereof, and the oppressed
in the midst thereof.

In the Proclamation, two sins were controuled: Cruelty, and Covetousness.
Their Cruelty in their great tumults; their Covetousness in their oppressions.

In the tenth verse, the other part of the Accusation, those two enormities,
Cruelty and Covetousness, are amplified from two Topickes; a genere, and a
specie; from the Genus, thus: They know not to do right. From the Species,
thus: They store up violence and robbery in their palaces. That so it is, God
is produced for witness, for Neum Jehovah, The Lord has said it.

These particulars yielded materials for my two former Sermons. Now from the
Accusation I proceed to the Commination, verse. 11.

Therefore thus says the Lord God, An adversary there shall be even round
about the Land: and he shall bring down thy strength from thee, and thy
palaces shall be spoiled. The words are a denunciation of punishment:
concerning which we may observe, The Cause. The Author. The Punishment it self.


The Cause is implied in the particle, Therefore.

The Author is the Lord God.

The Punishment, is a conquest by war, and is described, 1 By the Siege. 2 By
the Victory. 3 By the Spoil.


An adversary there shall be even round about the Land: there is the Siege, the
whole Land beset round about.

And he shall bring down thy strength from thee: there is the Victory, the
overthrow of their strong men.

And thy palaces shall be spoiled. The Spoil is at the lust of the conqueror.
An adversary there shall be even round about the Land, and he shall bring down
thy strength from thee, and thy palaces shall be spoiled.

I have showed you the limits and bounds of my future discourse. I will handle
them as they lie in order, beginning with the cause of the punishment, implied
in this particle, Therefore.

Therefore] It is a particle befitting a Commination. It has relation to the
former verses, and points to the sins there touched: to the great tumults
in the midst of Samaria, and the oppressions there, verse. 9. to the ignorance
of God, and his will; to their violence and robbery stored up in their palaces,
verse. 10. The relation that this particle has to those sins, shows that
those sins are the cause of the punishment here denounced: as if our Prophet
had thus spoken: Because you, that are the Princes and Potentates of Samaria,
do oppress the poor and needy, Therefore will I bring against you mightier
than your selves, that shall oppress and spoil you.

Therefore! The observation is, Sin is the cause of all the evil that
befalls man in this life.

In this my Thesis, by evil I understand malum poenae, the evil of
punishment, or the evil of affliction. Affliction or punishment, whereof sin
is the cause, is two fold, internal or external; either inward or outward.
The inward pertains to the mind, the outward to the body. For the punishment
of sin is to be measured and defined, not only by the torments of the body,
or by the mortality of this life, but also by the most grievous affliction of
the soul: as by the crookedness, obliquitie, and blemish of the soul, by an
evil conscience, by the wrath of God which is importable; by the guilt of
sin, whereby we are obliged to punishment; by vicious habits whereby we are
inclined to a multitude of sins. Foecundum est peccatum; non ibi definit, vbi
incipit. Sin is fruitful; if it once begin, it leaves not there; the worst
thing of it is behind, even the extreme anguish and horror of the soul.

Again, affliction or punishment, whereof sin is the cause, is either
public or private.

Public afflictions, I call such whereof many men at once have a sense and
feeling: Such are the floods of great waters; the ruin of Cities by
earthquakes; the waste done in them by fire, war, evil beasts, pestilence,
famine, tyranny, persecution, the death of good Princes, heresy, schism,
every common misery. All these are public.

Private afflictions are such, as private men in their own particular do
suffer; as sickness, grief, infamy, poverty, imprisonment, death.

Of all these afflictions or punishments, whether public, or private, or
outward, or inward, sin is the cause.

Sin! It is causa (...), it is efficiens impellen^; it is the impulsive cause
of all afflictions or punishments: it fetches down vengeance from the
Majesty of Heaven. It brought that same universal deluge upon the whole
world, Genesis 7.17. It brought down fire and brimstone upon Sodom and Gomorrah,
Genesis 19.24. It caused the Land of Canaan to spue out her inhabitants, Leuit.
18.25. It will make any Land sit mourning like a desolate widow, or a
distressed mother, robbed of her children, and spoiled of all her comforts. It
is avouched by the Psalmist, Psalm. 107.34. A fruitful Land God turns into
barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. It is that,
whereof the Prophet Jeremy complains, Chap. 12.4. How long shall the Land
mourn, and the herbs of every field wither, for the wickedness of them that
dwell therein? Turn to the Prophecy of Micah, Chap. 1.4. Behold there, the
mountains melting as wax before the fire, and as the waters that are powered
down a steep place, for no other cause, but for the transgression of Jacob,
and for the sins of the house of Israel.

Thus far for the confirmation of my doctrine: Sin is the cause of all the
evil that befalls man in this life.

Saint Augustine Sermon. 139. de tempore, thus delivers it: Malorum omnium
nostrorum causa peccatum est: Sin is the cause of all our evils. Non enim
sine causa homines mala ista patiuntur; It is not to be imagined that men
suffer affliction without cause. God is just; he is omnipotent. Nullo modo ista
pateremur, si non mereremur. Surely, no evil could befall us, if we deserved
it not. There is not a man that sins not; and the least sin that he
commits, deserves all the misery that can be laid upon him.

This truth may teach us, First, in time of affliction to acknowledge our sins
to be the cause thereof, and to profit thereby unto amendment.

Secondly, it may teach us to justify God, whenever he shall afflict us,
and to bear his visitation with patience. Wherefore does a living man
complain, a man for the punishment of his sins? Lament. 3.39. A man for the
punishment of his sins, wherefore does he complain? Let us search and try
our ways, and turn again unto the Lord; we have transgressed, and rebelled
against him, and therefore he afflicts us. My resolution shall be in the
words of Micah the Prophet, Chap. 7.9. I will bear the indignation of the
Lord, because I have sinned against him.

And let this suffice to have been spoken of my first general, the cause of
the punishment here denounced, implied in this particle, Therefore. I proceed
to my next general, the Author of this punishment, the Lord God. Therefore,
thus says the Lord God.

Thus says the Lord] It is a note wherewith the Prophets for the most part do
begin their preachings, and prophecyings, to show that they deliver nothing,
but what is of divine credit and authority.

Thus says the Lord] Dicit Dominus, says the Lord. Dicere, with the Prophets,
signifies consilium certum, certamque sententiam, as Arias Montanus upon this
text observes. To say, signifies a certain, a determined sentence or
judgment: it implies, not so much any verbal speech, as the strength and
efficacy of reason and cogitation. Says the Lord, that is, the Lord has in
his secret and infallible counsel decreed and determined to effect what is by
the Prophet here denounced.

Thus says Adonai Iehouih, the Lord God. With these two names of God, Adonai
Iehouih, we have met twice already in this Chapter, verse 7. and 8. Since they
are here again, they are again by us to be saluted: but briefly.

Adonai, the Lord. The name is found in holy Scripture 134. times. It is the
observation of the Massorets. R. Mosche ben Maimon.
Rambam makes this name to be equivalent to the name Jehovah: so does the
Talmud. Yet is there a difference between them. Lib. K^ddusch in cap. Esre
Iochasin, etc.
Adonai is the name of God of his sustentation and dominion; but Iehouih is his
name of existing or being. By Adonai we know that God alone is absolutely
Lord, Ruler and Governor of all things; yea and our Lord. By Iehouih, that of
himself and by himself, He ever was, is, and shall be: Revel. 1.4.16.5. Act.
17.28. Romans 11.36.
that of him all creatures have their being; and that he gives a real being
to all his promises and threats.

Adonai Iehouih, the Lord God, he that is iudex iustissimus, the most just
Judge, and suffers not a sin to pass without due punishment, He is here
presented unto you for the Author of the punishment here denounced. The
observation is, Of all the evil that befalls man in this life, God is the
Author.

And here by evil I understand as in my former observation, the evil of
punishment, or the evil of affliction, private or public, internal, or
external: God is the Author of all.

It is proved above in this Chap. verse. 6. Shall there be evil in a city, and
the Lord has not done it? No, there shall be none; no evil of pain,
punishment or affliction, but the Lord does it. This is it, the Lord assumeth
to himself, Esai. 45.7. I the Lord; I form the light, and create darkness: I
make peace, and create evil; I the Lord do all these things. It is thus in
the Paraphrase: I am the Lord; and there is none else. I send into the world
light and darkness, prosperity and adversity: I give peace, and with it
tranquillity and abundance, and I give that which is contrary to peace, evil,
war, and misery, and perturbation, and poverty: I, the Lord do all these
things.

It is no more than what he takes unto himself, Ier. 18.11. For there also,
thus says the Lord, Behold, I frame evil against you, and devise a device
against you: where by evil understand with Tertullian lib. 2. aduersus
Marcionem cap. 24. Mala non peccatoria, sed vltoria, Evil not of sin, but of
reuengement. In which sense we are to take evil in all those places of holy
writ, wherein God either brings or threatens to bring evil upon any. By
evil in all such places, as in this my Thesis, we are to understand the evil
of reuengement, the evil of punishment, or the evil of affliction. Of every
such evil God is the Author.

God is the Author of punishment. I say of punishment, non quod poena sit ens
quoddam, not as if the evil of punishment had a being, as other things have
which God made. For God is improperly said to be the efficient of punishment;
since punishment of its own nature, Aquin. 1. qu. 48. Art. 1. C.
is nothing else than priuatio boni, the privation, or absence, of that we call
good; or the withholding of Gods blessings from us. The Father of the Schools
thus delivers it: Idem 1. qu. 49. Art. 2. C.
Cum summum bonum perfectissimum sit, mali causa esse non potest, nisi per
accidens. God being the chiefest good and most perfect, cannot be the author of
evil but by accident.

The author of evil by accident! How is that? Why thus? When God withdraws
from the earth his heavenly benedictions, forbidding the clouds to give their
rain, or the Sun his influence, and taking from us our health, our peace, or
any other temporal blessing, he is the author of evil. And this may serve
for the proof and explanation of my second Doctrine, which was, Of all the
evil that befalls man in this life, God is the Author.

The reason hereof is, because nothing is done in the world, but God is the
principal doer of it: and therefore no evil can befall us, but God is the
author of it.

Is it thus? Hence then in the first place, are they to be reproved, who
think, that the Lord does only suffer many things to be done. He is not only
a sufferer, but an orderer, guider, and governor of all things and actions.

Secondly, from hence may be confuted, the vain opinion of Fortune, whereunto
many Philosophers and carnal ignorant people use to ascribe those things
whereof they see not an apparent cause. What more casual in this world than
Lottery? Yet, therein nothing falls out by fortune, but all is wholly and
altogether directed by the infinite and eternal providence of Almighty God:
Solomon expressly affirms it, Prou. 16.33. The lot is cast into the Lap, but
the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord.

Thirdly, from hence we learn that all our afflictions are from God; and are
therefore by us to be borne with patience. God verily loves those that are
his, and yet notwithstanding he suffers them to be afflicted, because it is
expedient for them so to be: yet in their afflictions he yields them comfort.
Saint Paul blesses God for it, 2 Cor. 1.3. Blessed be God, even the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort, who
comfort us in all our tribulation. Who comfort us in all our tribulation;
he says not, who suffers us not to be afflicted, but who comfort us,
while we are afflicted. It is the observation of S. Chrysostom and
Theophylact. God though he suffer us to be afflicted, yet he comfort us when
we are afflicted. Our afflictions, they are Emendatoriae potius, quam
interfectoriae, as Saint Augustine speaks, lib. 3. de lib. Arbit. cap. 25.
They tend rather to amend us, than to destroy us. And sweetly Saint Cyprian.
Ep. 8. Deus quem corripit, diligit: quando corripit, ad hoc corripit, vt
emendet, ad hoc emendat vt seruet: Whom God corrects, him he loves: when he
corrects him, he does it to amend him, and he amendeth him that he may save
him.

And thus much be spoken of my second general, the Author of this punishment,
The Lord God. My third follows, the punishment here denounced; which is a
conquest by war; and is described by the Siege, by the victory, and by the
spoil. Of the Siege first, for it is the first in order. The words are,

An adversary there shall be even round about the Land] The old Interpreter
translates it, Tribulabitur and circuietur terra; the Land shall be troubled
and compassed about. Brentius, Obsidebitur and circumdabitur terra, the Land
shall be besieged and beset round about.

(...) Tsar in the original is rendered Arctator by Montanus; Tribulator, by
Occolampadius; Aduersarius, by Calvin and Drusius; Hostis, by Tremelius,
Piscator, and Gualter; It is Tribulatio with Vatablus and Mercer; but Angustiae
with Jonathan. Well; be it either Arctator, or Tribulator, or an Adversary, or
an Enemy; or be it Tribulation, or be it Anguish; it is not in a little part
or corner of the Land, but in circuitis terrae, it is in the circuit of the
Land, it enuironeth the whole Land. The Septuagint have a reading by
themselves, (...): Tire shall be made desolate; round about shall thy Land be
wasted. Saint Cyril will have them thus to be understood: From Tire and the
Land thereabout the whole country shall by the incursions of robbers be
brought to desolation. Tyrus is in Hebrew Tzor; so is it in the first Chapter
of this prophecy, verse. 9. It seems the S^ptuagint did in this place read
Tzor, as also Aquila once did read. Hieron.
But now the common reading of this place is Tzar: and Tzar is an enemy or
adversary, and has other significations, whereof even now you heard. Thus our
English translation is cleared, it is good.

An adversary there shall be even round about the Land] This adversary is the
Assyrian, the King of Assyria, Salmanassar; He with his armies is to come
against the City and Kingdom of Samaria: he shall so beset and beleaguer the
whole country round about, that there shall be no escaping for any of the
inhabitants. According to this prediction it came to pass some sixty five
years after, Esaias 7.8. 2 King. 18.10.
in the ninth year of the reign of Hoshea son of Elah King of Israel, as it
is, 2 King. 17.6.

An adversary there shall be even round about the Land] Now from this
circumstance of the Siege of Samaria so long before threatened, arises this
observation, Gods threatening to punish long before he punishes, are
inuitations to repentance.

Origin lib. 4. contra Celsum, says, God punishes no man, but whom he does
first warn, terrify, and advertise of the peril. And surely, herein
appears Gods mercy, that he threatens before he punishes, that by his
threatening men might learn to amend. He threatens, says S. Chrysostom, Hom.
12. in Genes. Vt nobis correctis, min as ad opus minime perducat, that we being
amended, his menacing need not take effect.

If this were not the end of Gods threatenings, why does Zephaniah Chap. 2.1, 2.
thus exhort the Jews? Gather yourselues together, yea gather together, O
Nation not desired. Before the decree bring forth, before the day pass as the
chafe, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you; before the day of
the Lords anger come upon you. Seek ye the Lord, seek righteousness, seek
meekness: it may be, ye shall be hid in the day of the Lords anger. He
calls upon the Jewish Nation to return from their evil ways by true
repentance. Where behold (says Saint Hierome) the clemency of God, Quia non
vult infer supplicia, sed tantum terrere passuros, ipse ad poenitentiam
prouocat, ne faciat quod minatus est. Because Gods will is, rather to terrify
them, than to lay punishments upon them, he incites them to repentance, that he
be not driven to do, as he has threatened.

This is that same (...), it is the goodness, the forbearance, the long
suffering of God, whereof Saint Paul speaks, Romans 2.4. Despisest thou, O man,
the riches of his goodness and forbearance, and long suffering, not knowing
that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance? It leads to repentance.
It is vouchsafed unto us to the amendment of life. And thus is my observation
established, Gods threatenings to punish, long before he punishes, are
inuitations to repentance.

One reason hereof is; because if after threatening repentance follow, it
procures the forgiveness of sin, and takes away the cause of the
punishment. Sin is the cause of Gods judgments; this we heard even now. If
the cause be removed, the effect will cease. For so says the Lord, Ez^ch.
33.14, 15. When I say unto the wicked, Thou shall surely die, if he turn from
his sin and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he
shall not die.

A second reason I take from the end of Gods threatenings. The end whereat he
aims, when he threatens, is not the destruction of them that are threatened,
but their amendment. For thus says the Lord, Ezech. 18.23. Have I any pleasure
at all that the wicked should die, and not that he should return from his
ways and live? This by way of interrogation. But it is by way of assertion,
Ezech. 33.11. and is backed with an oath; As I live says the Lord God, I have
no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way
and live. As I live, it is so. Here may we say, as Augustine some-where said
of Christ: Felices nos, propter quos ipse Deus jurat; Happy are we for whom
God himself swears. But infoelices, si ne iuranti quidem credimus; Wretched
are we, if we believe him not upon his oath.

I shall but point at the uses of this doctrine, because I have handled them at
large in my fourth Sermon upon this Chapter.

The first is to teach us, that in the greatest and most fearful threatenings
of Gods judgments, there is comfort remaining, hope of grace and mercy to be
found, health in sickness, and life in death.

The second is a warrant for us of the Ministry to propound unto you the
threatenings of God with condition of repentance: and thus we offer unto you
grace and mercy, to as many of you, as shall be of humble and contrite hearts.

The third is a warning unto you, to all that have this grace and favor with
God to be hearers of his holy word. It is your parts whenever you shall hear
of the threatenings of Gods judgments against sinners, to stir up your selves
unto repentance, thereby to prevent the wrath of God and to stay his judgments.

The fourth is to assure us, that if God threaten and no repentance follow,
then certainly the threatenings pronounced will come to pass. God threatens
not in vain, nor does he terrify us without cause. If we prevent not his
threatenings by true repentance, his threatenings will prevent us by just
execution.

And so much be spoken of the first doctrine arising from this circumstance of
the siege of Samaria, foretold so long before it took effect. A second
doctrine arising from the same, is, Hosts diuinitus a Deo excitari, ad regum
and populorum peccata punienda:

Enemies are by God himself raised up to invade a land for the punishment of
the sins of Prince and people. Unless God send them, they cannot come near
our Cities, they cannot besiege us. God does raise them up.

He raises up the Medes against the Babylonians, Esaias 13.17. I stir up the
Medes, who shall not regard silver, nor shall they delight in gold. Their bows
shall dash the young men to pieces; they shall have no pity on the fruit of
the womb; their eye shall not spare children; Babylon the glory of Kingdoms,
the beauty of the Chaldees excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom
and Gomorrah.

He raises up the Chaldeans against the kingdom of Judah, Habac. 1.6. I
raise up the Chaldeans, that bitter and hasty Nation, which shall march through
the breadth of the land, to possess the dwelling places that are not theirs.

He raises up the Romans against Jerusalem, Luke 19.43. The days shall come
upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee
round, and keep thee in on every side; and shall lay thee even with the
ground, and thy children within thee; they shall not leave in thee one stone
upon another.

God is he that raises up enemies against a Land to invade it. Did not God
send them, they could do nothing against us.

The reason is, because they have no power against us, except it be given them
by God. So Christ told Pilate, Ioh. 19.11. Thou could have no power at all
against me, except it were given thee from above.

The uses follow. One is to teach us not to fear man, but God, that gives
power unto man.

A second is to admonish us, that we be not like the dog that snatcheth at
the stone that is cast at him without regard unto the thrower. If God send an
enemy to invade us, our ey^ must be upon God that sends him.

A third is to advise us, to labor to be at one with God. It will be our best
bulwark against an inuader.

And so I come to gather a third doctrine from this circumstance of the siege,
An adversary there shall be even round about the land.

In circuitu terrae: He shall so beset the land round about, that there shall
be no evasion for any of the inhabitants. My observation shall be that of
Brandmyller in his Typical Analysis, In Regni amplitudine non esse gloriandum:

Men ought not to glory in the greatness of the Kingdom wherein they live.



The extent or greatness of the Kingdom whereof thou art, what can it avail
thee? He that once for sin covered the whole earth with an army of waters,
can now for sin enuiron the greatest kingdom of the earth with an army of
warriors. And flagellum inundans cum transierit, eritis ei in conculcationem,
Esaias 28.18. When the ouer-flowing scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be
trodden down by it. Eritis ei in conculcationem, that is, says Saint Hierome,
you shall suffer all those torments, which you thought you should never have
suffered. The threatenings which you thought should never come to pass, shall
come to pass upon you. An adversary there shall be even round about the Land.

Shall be! But yet there is none. O let us therefore with a sweet feeling
acknowledge the infinite love and compassion of God toward this Kingdom, in
so long preserving it from all hostile invasion. There was indeed an invasion
in the year 88. intended against this Kingdom by a supposed invincible
Armad^. It gloried in strength, munition, ships, preparations and confederates.
It was the Lords mercy toward us to cross, to curse that proud attempt. The
winds and seas by his appointment fought against them, and we were delivered.
For that deliverance, we then sang songs of thanksgiving: then were our
mouths filled with laughter, and our tongues with joy.

Now since it has pleased God to continue unto us hitherto our peace and
plenty; and we sit every one under his Vine, and under his Fig Tree, whilst our
neighbour-nations are shaken and tossed with the tempest of wars, and all
things round about us are in an vproare; Let us bless Gods holy name for it:
and pray we for the continuance of this our happiness: that there be no taste
of the sharpnes and misery of war among us, that there be no assaulting of our
Cities, that there be no sorrow of heart, nor weeping of eyes, nor wringing of
hands, nor shriking of voices among us. Will you take direction for your prayer
from the royal Prophet? Pray then as he has directed, Psalm. 144.12. Pray,
that our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth, that our daughters
may be as corner stones polished after the similitude of a palace, that our
garners may be full, affoording all manner of store: that our sheep may bring
forth thousands and ten thousands in our streets: that our Oxen may be strong
to labor; that there be no breaking in, nor going out; that there be no
complaining in our streets. O happy is that people that is in such a case: yea,
happy is that people whose God is the Lord.

I have done with the Siege, and am come to the Victory.

(...) Vehoridh mimmek gnuzzek, word for word, and he shall cause thy strength
to come down. Dejiciet a te robur tuum, He shall cast down thy strength from
thee, so Tremelius, Piscator, Drusius, and Gualter; Tollet, he shall take it
away from thee, so Calvin; Detrahet, he shall pull it down, so Vatablus;
Deducet, he shall bring it down, so Oecolampadius. The Vulgar Latin turns it
passiuely, Detrahetur ex te fortitudo tua, thy strength shall be brought down
from thee. So does Brentius with his Dejicietur, thy strength shall be thrown
down.

By this same strength, be it robur, or fortitudo, Iunius understands that,
whereby they heaped up the treasures of violence and robbery. Drusius
understands their strong Castles and fortified Cities. Some understand
Riches. And so qui opibus valent, p^tentes vocantur, they that excel in
riches, are called mighty men.

Albertus Magnus will have this strength to be, whatsoever it was wherein they
put their trust, as in some fortification: whether it were the substance of
their riches, or the munitions of their Citie^, or the multitude of their
soldiers, or the armies of their adherents. Whatsoever it be, down it must.
When God means to give victory to an inuader, no strength shall be able to
withstand him. My observation here shall be that of Albertus,

Vltioni diuinae nulla obsistere potest fortitudo: No strength shall be able to
withstand divine reuengement. For there is no strength against the Lord.

No strength! None at all. So says Esaias, Chap. 2.12. The day of the Lord of
Hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, upon every one that is
lifted up; upon all the Cedars of Lebanon, upon all the Oaks of Bashan; upon
all high Mountains and Hills; upon every high Tower, and upon every fenced
wall; upon all the ships of Tarshish, and upon all Pictures of desire: the
loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of man shall be
made low. The Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. In that day when the
Lord shall send a power against a Land, for the iniquity thereof, all strength
shall fail before him.

This is that we read, Esai. 26.5. In the Lord Jehovah is everlasting
strength; For he brings down them that dwell on high; the lofty City he
lays it low; he lays low even to the ground; he brings it even to the
dust. There is no strength against him.

Erit fortitudo vestra, vt fauilla stupae, your strength shall be as the imbers
of tow, and opus vestrum, and the work of your strength shall be as a spark;
they shall both burn together, and none shall quench them, Esai. 1.23. There
is no prevailing by strength against the Lord: it is the acknowledgement of
Hannah in her song of thanksgiving, 1 Samuel 2.9. Our Prophet Amos, Chap. 2.14.
has thus delivered it; The strong shall not strengthen his force. And thus is
my observation confirmed; No strength shall be able to withstand divine
reuengement.

One reason is, because God overthrows the greatest strength that man can
erect, even at his pleasure.

A second is, because there is no strength, but it is of God and from God.
Vastatum superrobustum roborat, Amos 5.9. God above is he that strengthens the
spoiled against the strong, and makes the spoiled to come with might against
the fortress.

I will but name the uses. One is, to teach us, never to put any affiance in
our own strength, but so to use all good means for our defense, that still
we rely upon the Lord for success.

A second is, to stop us from glorying in our strength. There is a caveat
against it, Ierem. 9.23. Let not the strong man glory in his strength. If he
will needs glory, let him glory in the Lord. Let his glorying be in imitation
of the royal Prophet, Psa. 18.2. The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and
my deliverer: my God, my strength in whom I will trust, my buckler and the
horn of my salvation, and my high tower. The Lord is my strength.

A third is to admonish us of a duty of ours, which is, in trouble sometimes,
yea always, to approach unto the throne of grace by humble prayer, to beg of
God his protection against all the assaults of our enemies, that they never
prevail against us to take away our strength.

I am come to my last circumstance, the circumstance of the spoil, in these
words,

Et diripientur palatia tua, And thy palaces shall be spoiled. The Vulgar
Latin says, Diripientur aedes tuae, thy houses shall be spoiled. Petrus
Lusitanus prefers Palaces, as best agreeing with the Hebrew. He is in the
right. palaces are named, because Conquerours when they have won a City by
assault, do enter into the fairest, stateliest, and most princely houses,
presuming to find in them the greatest booties.

These Palaces are by some taken Metonymically to signify either the goods
heaped up in them, Albertus Magnus.
or the poss^ssions belonging to them.

We shall not do amiss if we follow the letter, and take these Palaces, as
they are, for the Palaces of Samaria, wherein the Princes, Magistrates, and
Rulers of Samaria, did store up the treasures of violence and robbery, as we
saw upon the former verse. So the meaning may be thus: Palatia tua, Thy
Palaces, O Samaria, which were as the receptacles, caves, or dens, in which
thou did treasure up thy goods gotten from the poor by violence and wrong,
diripientur, they shall be spoiled: thou have spoiled others, therefore shall
thou thy self be spoiled. Sic erit poena sceleri consentiens; so shall the
punishment be agreeable to the offense. Observe here, Punishments are most
usually in the like; proper and proportionable to the offenses.

This is that which is vulgarly said, In quo quis peccat, in eo punitur; as a
man offends, in the same manner will God punish him.

They who sought the life of Daniel, sinned in causing him to be cast into the
Lions den. How were they for so sinning punished? God might have revenged
himself upon them by his own immediate hand, but would not. They were
punished the same way: they were cast into the Lions den, and so perished, Dan.
6.24.

It was David's sin to commit adultery with Vriahs wife, and to slay her
husband with the sword of the Ammonites. How was he for so sinning punished? He
was paid home and punished in his own kind. To reward and serve him, as he
had served others, God as a just Judge raises up evil against him out of his
own house. 2 Samuel 12.10.
His own sons break out into the same sins; they rise up against him, and
one against another. A tent is spread for Absalom upon the house top, and he
lies with his fathers Concubines in the sight of all Israel, 2 Samuel 16.22.
Amnon deflowreth his sister Tamar, 2 Samuel 13.14. to revenge this, Absalom
causes his brother Amnon to be slain, verse. 28.

Blood requires blood. Hereof are we assured, Genesis 9 6. Who so sheddeth man's
blood, by man shall his bl^ud be shed. So says our Savior in the Gospel,
Matthew. 26.51. All they that take the sword, shall perish with the sword. The
like is that in the Revelation, Chap. 13.10. He that kills with the sword,
must be killed with the sword. Blood requires blood. And though peradventure a
murderer do escape the hand of the Magistrate, yet will the vengeance of God
find him out. We see this in Ioab: he shed innocent blood, the blood of Abner,
and Amasa, two Captains of the Hosts of Israel. He escaped a long time, as if
his murders had been forgotten, but at length vengeance came home unto him,
and suffered not his hoare head to go down to the grave in peace; for his
blood was shed, 1 King. 2.34.

Memorable is the example of Adoni-Bezek, who being taken by Judah and Simeon,
had his thumbes and great toes cut off. Herein he confessed that the justice of
God had found him out, and requited him in his kind, according to his own
cruelty. For says he, Threescore and ten Kings, having their thumbes and their
great toes cut off, gathered their meat under my table: as I have done, so God
has requited me, Judge. 1.7. Thus was cruelty repaid with cruelty in the same
kind.

A like example is that of Agag, King of the Amalekites. He having made many a
woman childlesse, is repaid in the like; and is himself hewed in pieces by
Samuel, with this Item; As thy sword has made women childlesse, so shall thy
mother be childlesse among women, 1 Samuel 15.33.

If Haman set up a gallows to hang up Mordecai, Haman may be the first that
shall be hanged thereon, Esther 7.10.

It is the law of equality and equity, that men suffer the same things of
others, which they have offered unto others. Our Savior Christ in his Sermon
upon the Mount thus delivers it; With what measure ye mete, Luke 6.38.
it shall be measured to you again, Matthew. 7.2. Whereupon one says after this
manner; He that rashly and unjustly censureth others, feels at one time or
other the smart of it in the like kind. For God does justly raise up others to
censure him, that thereby he may be recompensed. According to this law of
equity it is said, Reu. 3.10. He that leads into captivity, shall be led
into captivity: And Esaias 33.1. They that deal treacherously with others, shall
have others to deal treacherously with them; and they that spoil others,
shall themselves be spoiled. This last is the very measure, that is in this my
text threatened to the ten Tribes. They spoiled the poor, treasuring up in
their palaces the goods taken from them by violence and robbery, and therefore
shall their palaces be spoiled. Thus far is the confirmation of my doctrine,
which was, Punishments are most usually in the like: proper and proportionable
to the offenses.

Are punishments proportionable to the offenses? One reason hereof may be,
because the justice of God is hereby cleared, and the mouth of iniquity
stopped. When God retaileth us according to the sin that we have committed,
what can we allege or answer for our selves? Surely, we cannot have any
excuse, pretense or allegation for our selves, but must confess with our own
mouth, and against our selves, that God is righteous, and that our selves are
wicked.

A second reason may be taken from the equity of this kind of proceeding. It
is meet that malefactors have their deserts; nor can they complain of
injustice, so long as they receive their own. God will give to every man
according to his works: he will give them wages according to their deseruings.
Upon this equity is grounded the Law of retaliation, by which God requires of
the hands of Magistrates, that they recompense life for life, eye for eye,
tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, burning for burning, wound for
wound, stripe for stripe, Exodus 21.23. The Law is repeated, Leuit. 24.19, 20.
If a man cause a blemish in his neighbor: as he has done, so shall it be
done unto him. Breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth; as he has
caused a blemish in a man, so shall it be done to him again. Now if God has
made a law for Magistrates to recompense the sinner according to the manner of
his sin, we may not doubt but that God himself will measure his punishments
according to the rule of justice and equity. Upon the ground of these reasons,
my doctrine stands, Punishments are most usually in the like; proper and
proportionable to the offenses.

Now one use of this doctrine is to teach us, to set a watch over our selves,
to keep out the practice of sin, that carries such a tail and train after
it. The sinner shall ever find a punishment answerable to his sin. This is a
notable bridle to induce us to abstain from all kind of sin: to abstain
from whoredom and drunkenness, the sins that rage among carnal men.
Because Magistrates are slack and careless in punishing of these sins, God
brings upon such as continue in them very loathsome and noisome diseases;
meet punishments for such filthy sins. And if we be wise to commit new
sins, God only wise, will catch us in our wisdom; he will be wise enough to
find out punishments that shall be proportioned to our transgressions. Pro
mensura peccati erit and plagarum modus; Deuteronomy. 25.3. Vulg.
as our sin is, so shall be our punishment.

Again, from hence we learn to be patient under the punishments that do
befall us. Since God does punish us in that wherein we have offended, when we
feel that God has found us out, and that neither our selves, nor our sins can
any longer be hidden from his eyes, let us humble our selves under his mighty
hand, and hold our peace, because he has done it. Psalm. 39.9.


Thirdly, this may serve to check all cruel and merciless oppressors, such
as grind the faces of the poor, Esaias 3.15.
and spoil the needy by their covetous and corrupt dealing, pulling from
them, that which is their own, without conscience of sin, or feeling of
judgment to come. God suffers such to have their times while he holds his
peace, and lets them alone, to fill up the measure of their sins. Yet has
God his seasons too, and has determined what to do, and how to deal with
such offenders: the spoiler shall be spoiled, the robber shall be robbed, the
oppressor shall be oppressed: and they that deal violently with others, shall
have others to deal violently with them. Wherefore, whatsoever you would that
men should do unto you, even so do unto them, for this is the Law of equity.

THE Fourteenth Lecture.
AMOS 3.12. Thus says the Lord, As the shepherd takes out of the mouth of
the Lion two legs or a piece of an ear; so shall the children of Israel be
taken out that dwell in Samaria, in the corner of a bed, and in Damascus in a
couch.


THis verse belongs to the Commination that went before. The Commination was
a denunciation or a menacing of the judgment of God against the Kingdom of
the ten Tribes, the people of Israel. The judgment was a conquest by war,
and that was described by three circumstances, the siege* the victory, and the
spoil: all which were handled in my last Sermon. Now is the conquest
amplified, from the sad and fearful event thereof, which our Prophet here
delivers by a Similitude taken from the experience of a Shepherd. Such shall
be the conquest of the Assyrians against the Israelites, that the Israelites
shall be no more able to resist the Assyrians, than a silly Sheep is able to
resist a Lion.

The Israelites trusted in the multitude of their people, in the valor of
their soldiers, in their fenced Cities, among which the chief were Samaria
and Damascus; for they had enlarged their territories even unto Damascus.
Therefore it seemed to them impossible, that any foreign power should prevail
against them. To beat down this vain confidence of theirs, Amos here brings
this rural and pastoral Similitude, assuring them, that those things,
whereupon they rely for safety, shall be so far from doing them any good,
that few, very few of them shall escape the hand of the enemy.

For our more easy proceeding at this time, let it please you to observe with
me two things: 1 An introduction to a similitude, Thus says the Lord. 2 The
similitude it self; As the Shepherd takes out, etc.


The Introduction gives credit and authority to the Similitude.

The Similitude has two parts, the two usual parts of a Simile.

1 (...), the Proposition. 2 (...), the Reddition.
The Proposition: A Shepherd takes out of the mouth of a Lion two legs or a
piece of an ear.

The Reddition: So shall the children of Israel be taken out of the hands of
Salmanassar.

The things compared are; First, a Lion, and Salmanassar King of Assyria.
Secondly, a Sheep, and the Children of Is^ael. Thirdly, some fragments of a
devoured sheep^; two legs, or a piece of an ear, and the small number of the
Israelites that should escape.


These Israelites are here described ab ipsorum securitate, from their security
or lack of care. They live nicely and delicately in all pleasure and delight,
full of confidence, that no evil shall at any time touch them. They dwell in
Samaria in the corner of a bed, and in Damascus in a couch.

Samaria and Damascus, Cities of strength and fortification, were unto the
Israelites as their beds of repose and rest: They thought themselves safe, and
out of danger, by the aid and succor of Cities so well fenced* but were
deceived. For thus says the Lord, As the Shepherd takes out of the mouth of
the Lion two legs or a piece of an ear: so shall the children of Israel be
taken out, that dwell in Samaria in the corner of a bed, and in Damascus in a
couch.

Such is the division of this Text. I now descend to a special handling of the
parts. The first is, the Introduction to the Similitude.

Thus says the Lord.

This Introduction I heretofore copiously handled. I met with it in the first
Chapter of this book five times, Verse. 3, 6, 9, 11, 13. Verse. 1, 4, 6.
in the second, thrice; and once before in this: and therefore the less need
is there, that now I insist upon it. Yet may I not leave it unsaluted, since our
Prophet here repeateth it. And he repeateth it to justify his calling: to
show, that albeit he formerly lived the life of a Shepherd, yet now he has
his calling to be a Prophet from the Lord, Jehovah. Whence my observation is:
It is not lawful for any man to take upon him ministerial function in the
Church without assurance of calling from God.

This truth is by the Apostle, Hebr. 5.4. thus delivered: No man takes this
honor to himself, but he that is called of God, as Aaron was. Now that Aaron
and his sons were consecrated to the Priests office by the authority and
appointment of God, it is plain by the eighth Chapter of Leuiticus, wherein
are set down the sacrifices and ceremonies used at the Consecration, together
with the place and time thereof. Thereby it appears, that the office of holy
Priesthood was not of man, nor from man; but God Almighty did first institute
and ordain it by his own express commandment. Then being ordained, he
confirmed the honor and reputation of it, by that great miracle of the budding
of Aarons rod, Number. 17.8. The rod of Aaron for the house of Leui, brought forth
buds, and bloomed blossoms, and yielded Almonds. Thus was the institution of
holy Priesthood from God alone.

This honor the holy men of God, of old time* took not to themselves. Nor
Esaias, nor Jeremy, nor Ez^chiel, nor any of the residue, took this honor to
themselves, but were all called of God, and in the name of God they declared
unto the people his visions and his words: which is intimated by those
passages, very obuious in the writings of the Prophets; as Esa* 1.1.
the vision of Esaiah, Cap. 1.1.
the vision of Obadiah, the burden of Nineueh in the book of the vision of
Cap. 1.1.
Nahum; the burden which Habakkuk the Prophet did see; the burden of the word
of the Lord to Israel by Malachy: the word of the Lord which came to Hosea, to
Joel, to Jonah, to Micah, to Zephaniah, to Haggai, to Zachariah. Esaias 1.2.
The Lord has spoken; Ierem. 10.1.
Hear ye the word of the Lord: Thus says the Lord; Says the Lord. By these
and the like passages they show their calling to have been from God; Not one
of them took this honor to himself.

Nor did Christ himself take this honor to himself, but with warrant of his
Fathers calling. For so I read, H^b. 5.5. Christ glorified not himself to be
made an High Priest; but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have
I begotten thee, He, even God the Father, gave him this honor. And hereunto
does Christ himself bear witness, in all those places of the holy
Evangelists, wherein he acknowledges himself to be Matthew. 10.40. Mark. 9.37.
Luke 4.18, 43. Ioh. 3.17, 34, etc.
sent of God.

The holy Apostles of Christ, whence had they their calling? were they not all
openly ordained by Christ himself? Never did any of them execute that office,
but with protestation, that they had their calling from God, and therefore
their writings begin: Romans 1.1.
Paul a servant of Jesus Christ called to be an Apostle, not of m^n, neither
by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father. James a servant of God, Gal.
1.1.
and of the Lord Jesus Christ: Peter an Apostle of Jesus Christ: Cap. 1.1.
Jude the servant of Jesus Christ: the revelation of Jesus Christ, which God
gave unto him to show unto his servant John. Thus had Christ's Apostles the
assurance of their calling from God.

So had the blessed Evangelists. So, all those, whom Christ gave unto his
Church for the instruction thereof, Ephesians. 4.11. He gave some Apostles; and
some Prophets; and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers. It is true,
that Christ himself is the chief builder; for so he says, Matthew. 16.18.
Super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam; upon this rock will I build my
Church, and he builds it through his holy Spirit; yet he does use Prophets, and
Apostles, and Evangelists, and Pastors, and Teachers, as vnderworkmen for this
building, even unto the end of the world And all these have the assurance of
their calling from God. Who so has it not, he is not to be vouchsafed the name
of Prophet, or Apostle, or Evangelist, or Pastor, or Teacher: for he is an
Intruder.

And great is the danger of Intrusion. Every Intruder was to be put to death.
The Law for it is, Number. 1.51. Every stranger that comes nigh unto the
Tabernacle, shall be put to death: The stranger, any one that is not of the
tribe and family of Leui, that breaks into the Levites function, and medleth
with holy things beyond his calling, he is to be put to death.

An example hereof we have in the Beth-shemites, 1 Samuel 6.19. who, because they
had looked into the Ark of the Lord, contrary to the Law, were smitten with a
great slaughter to the number of fifty thousand and threescore and ten men.

The like we have in Vzzah son of Abinadab, 2 Samuel 6.6. who because he
touched the Ark of God contrary to the Law, was punished with sudden death,
and stricken with the immediate hand of God that fell upon him, to the terror
of others, and to work reverence in the hearts of all men toward the sacred
things of his service.

Add hereto the example of Vzziah, King of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 26.16. He for
inuading the Priests office, for burning Incense upon the Altar of Incense in
the Temple of the Lord, Carthus. in Number. 1.
was stricken with a leprosy.

And Gedeon that valiant man, who judged Israel for forty years, intermedled
too far with the Priests office, when he made the golden Ephod, Judge. 8.27.
All Israel went a whoring after it, and it became a snare to Gedeon himself,
and to his house.

Now from the danger of intrusion, thus laid open, we may infer the
unlawfulness of meddling with ministerial function in the Church, without
assurance of calling from God.

The same may be inferred upon the blame which God lays upon false Prophets,
Ierem. 14.14. I sent them not, neither have I commanded them, neither spoke I
unto them, yet they prophecy. And Chap. 23.21. Ierem. 29.9.
I have not sent these Prophets* yet they run: I have not spoken to them, yet
they prophesied. They have prophesied? What; but lies, though in my n^me? they
have prophesied false visions, and diuinations, things of naught, and the
deceit of their own heart. Thus have they done, but I sent them not, nor
commanded them, nor spoke unto them. This blame thus laid by the Lord upon
wicked and false Teachers for running before they are sent, and preaching
before they are called, enforces the acknowledgement of the point hitherto
delivered, that It is not lawful for any man to take upon him ministerial
function in the Church without assurance of calling from God.

This calling, the assurance whereof we are to have, is either immediate and
extraordinary, or mediate and ordinary. The first is, where God calls
immediately without the ministry of man; so were the Prophets and Apostles
called. The other is wherein God uses the ministry of man* as at this day, in
the designment of every Minister unto his function. Both these callings, as
well the mediate as the immediate, the ordinary as the extraordinary, are of
God: that of God alone; this of God by man: and of this especially is the
doctrine hitherto proved to be understood: we cannot expect a blessing upon our
labors, except God has called us: so necessary is Gods calling to the
ministry of the Church.

The point hitherto handled serves for the confutation of the Anabaptist, and
other fanaticall spirits, who run without calling, and preach though they be
not sent: contrary to that of Saint Paul, Romans 10.5. How shall they preach,
except they be sent? And yet will these men, if they meet with a Minister that
is lawfully and orderly called, demand of him, Quis te elegit? Sir, Who has
chosen you? though themselves have no calling at all; no, not from their blind
Church: as Gastius has observed in his first book of the errors of the
Catabaptists. Yea, their assertion is; that, if a man understand the doctrine
of the Gospel, be he either Cobbler, or Botcher, or Carpenter, or what else, he
is bound to teach and preach. This is observed of them by Chemnitius in his
Treatise of the Church, Chap. 4.

With these Anabaptists I may join the Photinians, who deny the necessity of
vocation in the Ministers of the Church. Socinus in his Treatise of the Church,
Theophilus Nicolaides, in his defense of that Treatise, Institut. cap. 42
Osterodius, In Notis ad lib. S^ig^cciip 3.
Radeccius, In Refut. These. D. Frantz. p. 2. Disp. 4.
Shemalizius, and the Tit. de Eccles. cap. 2.
Catechist of Racow: all these are against a necessity of calling in the
Ministry, and do here stand convicted of that their error.

So do all those lay people, men or women, who in the case of supp^sed
necessity do adventure to administer the Sacrament of Baptism, which together
with the preaching of the word, the Lord has invested in the persons of
Ministers duly called, Mat. 28.19. Go ye and teach all Nations, baptizing them
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Go ye,
teach and baptize. Go ye. It is our Saviors precept to his Apostles, and in
them to their successors, Ministers duly called. None of the Laity, nor man,
nor woman, has part in this function. And how can it be imagined, that women,
whom Saint Paul has excluded from preaching, 1 Cor. 14.34. should be permitted
to administer any Sacrament? They may not so much as Baptize.

Its objected: women may teach their families; therefore they may also baptize.

Our answer is, that the Consequent holds not. Women may teach, as they are
private Christians, but not as Ministers: Baptize they cannot, but as
Ministers; this being every way, in every respect and manner proper to a
Minister.

It is further objected from the example of Zipp^rah, Exodus 4.25. Zipporah,
Moses wife, circumcised her son. In the place of Circumcision, Baptism has
succeeded; why then may not women now adays Baptize?

I answer: Circumcision was not of old so appropriated to the Levites, as
Baptism is now to the Ministers of the Gospel. And therefore its no good
Consequence; Some that were not Levites did Circumcise; therefore some that are
not Ministers may Baptize.

Again, what if Zipporah sinned in Circumcising her child? Must she be a
pattern to other women to Baptize? Calvin is not afraid to prove she sinned,
and his proof is sound, in the fourth of his Institutions, chap. 15.. 22. Lib.
1. de Sacr. Baptismi. c. 7.. 11.
though Bellarmine labor to refute him. It was doubtless an inexcusable
temerity in her to circumcise her child in the presence of her Husband, Moses,
not a private man, but a prime Prophet of the Lord, than whom there arose not a
greater in Israel, which was no more lawful for her to do, than it is at this
day for a woman to Baptize in the presence of a Bishop. And how can she be
excused from sin in that her act, since she murmured against the ordinance of
the Lord, and reviled her husband? weigh but the bitterness of her speech:
Surely, a bloody husband art thou to me, because of the Circumcision.

Thirdly, say she sinned not in circumcising her child (which yet I may not
grant) then I say, the fact might be extraordinary, and therefore not to be
imitated without like dispensation.

Fourthly, some think she was only the hand of her husband in his weakness;
and so the fact shall be not hers, but her husbands.

For these reasons, the example of Zipporah does not advantage the Bellarm. vbi
supra. Salmeron in Mat. 28.
Papist, or Eckhard fascic. contr. c. 19. qu. 4. Gerbard Loc. Theol. 23. ^. 24,
etc.
Lutheran, in their error about Gynaecobaptismus, or women's Baptism.

But may they not Baptize in case of extreme necessity?

No, not then.

Why then, the child may die unbaptized, and so be in certain danger of
damnation.

We make a great difference between want of baptism and the contempt thereof.
The contempt ever damneth; so does not the want. By want I mean, when God so
preuenteth by death, that Baptism cannot be had according to the manner
allowed in the holy Word of God. In this case the child that dies unbaptized
is not in any danger of damnation. For as Comestor in his Evangelical History,
cap. 197. says, Sine Baptismo saluatur homo cum eum excludit articulus
necessitatis, non contemptus religionis: A man may be saved, though he be
unbaptized, if Baptism be excluded through the instant of necessity, and not
by contempt of religion. So before him taught Saint Bernard, Baptismatis fructu
priuatur, qui baptizari contempsit, non qui non potuit: It is in his Epistle to
Hugo de S. Victore, Ep. 77. He is deprived of the benefit of Baptism, that
despises Baptism, not he that cannot have it. This truth he supporteth by
two chief pillars of the Christian Church, Saint Ambrose, and Saint Augustine.

Saint Ambrose in his funeral Oration of the death of the Emperor
Valentinian, doubts not to say, that Valentinian was Baptized, because he
desired Baptism, not because he had it. Certe quia poposcit accepit,
doubtless because he desired it, he had it. God accounts us to have, that we
unfeignedly wish.

Saint Augustine, lib. 4. de Baptismo contra Donatistas, cap. 22. says that
faith is available to salvation without the visible Sacrament of Baptism, but
then, Cum ministerium Baptismatis non contemptus religionis, sed articulus
necessitatis excludit; When the ministry of Baptism is excluded not of
contempt, but of necessity:

I could here show unto you from the testimonies of our learned adversaries,
that the absolute necessity of Baptism is not justifiable by the practice of
primitive antiquity: but I stand not in this Mount of God to read a
Controversy. I shut up this Discourse with the words of Saint Bernard in the
Epistle above alleged; Nequaquam omnino possum desperare salutem, si aquam non
contemptus, sed sola prohibeat impossibilitas: I cannot altogether despair of
the salvation of such as depart this life without Baptism, if it be not done
of contempt, but when as Baptism cannot possibly be had.

Now of the souls of Infants, who live not to desire Baptism, what shall I
say? May not the desire of others be theirs as well as the faith of others
believing, and the mouth of others confessing is theirs? Here it is safe to
suspend, and dangerous to pass judgment. Secret things belong to God. He
that made all souls knows what to do with them, neither will he make us of
his counsel. Our resolution must be to honor good means and use them; to
honor Baptism and use it if we may; and in the necessary want thereof to
depend upon God, who can work, beyond, without, and against means.

You see how far I have been carried with the objection drawn from women
baptizing in case of necessity, whereby they are intruders into that function
which is appropriate to the Ministers of the Word. If they will needs be
meddling with a calling, I will show them a calling of their own, wherewith
they may busy themselves.

As the Minister holds his calling from God, so does every other member of the
Church. There is not a member of the Church, man or woman, but holds a
particular standing and function from God, and is ranked in order by Gods
special providence and calling. And it is to great purpose, that you all know
this in your own particulars. For

First, it enforces diligence. If God has set thee in thy calling, then it
stands thee upon to discharge the duties of thy calling with all sedulity and
alacrity.

Secondly, it may admonish thee not to pass the bounds of thy calling. Seeing
thou art in thy place by the Will of God, thou must take heed that thou go not
beyond thy limits, either by using unlawful courses, or by intruding into
other men's functions.

Thirdly, it may teach thee that thy particular calling is to serve the
general. Every Christian has two callings; a particular, and a general. The
particular, which is also personal, is the external designment of a man, to
some outward service in the Church or common wealth, to the discharge of
special duties in regard of the distinction between man and man. The general
calling is the calling of Christianity; it is the singling out of a man by
special sanctification to glorify God, and to seek out his own salvation in
the things of the Kingdom of Christ: this is common to every member of the
Church, to all believers. Both these callings, general and particular must be
joined together in our life, as the body and soul in man. Where they are not
joined together, there may be a show of Christianity, but the substance will be
absent. Mat. 6.23.
Christ's Commandment, that men seek first the Kingdom of God and his
righteousness, is a demonstration, that men ought not so to follow their
outward business and employments, as to omit the means of knowledge and
grace. The particular calling must serve the general.

Fourthly, from this consideration, that we hold our particular callings from
God, we are to learn contentment in the willing undergoing of the daily
molestations, troubles, and crosses, that do befall us in our several courses
and kinds of life. It is a lesson, in the practice whereof Saint Paul had well
profited. I have learned, says he, in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content, Philip. 4.11. He knew how to be abased; and he knew how to abound.
Every where and in all things he was instructed both to be be full and to be
hungry, both to abound and to suffer need. Let us set him for the pattern of
our imitation, and we will be content with what we have, be it much or little.
If we have little, our account shall be the less; if more, we are bound to do
the more good.

I have done with the Introduction to the similitude: It is time that I proceed
with the similitude it self.

As the shepherd takes out of the mouth of the Lion two legs or a piece of an
ear, so shall the children of Israel be taken out that dwell in Samaria, in
the corner of a bed, and in Damascus in a couch. Hereof I find diverse
expositions. Some will have this similitude to signify, that few of the
Israelites shall be delivered from the spoil of Samaria, and those such as
shall be sick, weak, and feeble, and therefore shall be despised and left
behind as unprofitable, and of no use to be carried into captivity. And this is
the exposition of Theodoret, Vatablus, Isidore, Rupertus, and Montanus.
Christophorus a Castro thus gives it in his paraphrase: As when a Lion has
eaten his fill, and has satiate his hunger, the shepherd finds two legs, or
a leg, or a piece of an ear, to show that the sheep has been worried: so of
the whole body of Samaria, one or other, a few, a very few shall be delivered
from the slaughter of the enemy, and they unprofitable, as being wretched and
sick, lying by couples in the side of a couch, as well in Samaria as in
Damascus.

Others will have this similitude to be understood by a Sarcasme or Irrision,
as if our Prophet here scoffed at the Israelites for their vain confidence
which they put in Samaria, and Damascus, thus: As a shepherd uses to save
from the mouth of a Lion that has devoured a sheep, one or two legs, or the
tip of an ear: so surely shall the children of Israel save themselves from the
mouth of the Assyrians, trusting in the strength of Samaria, and in the help
of Damascus or of the King of Syria, in whom they think, as a wearied man is
refreshed in his bed, so themselves to be safe from their enemies: whereas
indeed it shall be nothing so. And this is the exposition of Saint Hierome,
Remigius, Albertus, Rupertus, Hugo and Dionysius.

The third exposition is Lyraes; He will have this similitude to signify, that
very few of the Israelites shall be delivered, and they such, as shall escape
by flight either to King Ez^kiah, to the Kingdom of Judah, to save themselves
there in plagu lectuli, in the side or corner of a bed, that is, in Jerusalem,
where the Temple was Dei lectulus, Gods bed, as its called, Cant. 1.16.
Lectulus noster floridus, our bed is decked with flowers; or to the Kingdom of
Syria, to save themselves there in Damasci grabuto, in a couch at Damascus.

Of these expositions I prefer the second, which I touched in my division of
the Text. Now let us a little look upon the words. The Proposition is,

A shepherd takes out of the mouth of the Lion two legs or a piece of an
eare] This he does according to the Law, Exodus 22.13. If a sheep be torn in
pieces by wild beasts, the shepherd is to bring it, or the remnants of it, a
leg, or an ear, or the like, to the owner for a witness that it is torn, and
he shall not need to make restitution thereof unto the owner, so he did his
best to rescue it. For a shepherd is of duty to rescue his flock. David did
it valiantly. As he kept his fathers sheep, there came a Lion, and took a
Lamb out of the flock; and he went out after him, and smote him, and
delivered it out of his mouth: and when the Lion arose against him, he caught
him by his beard, and smote him, and slew him, 1 Samuel 17.34. My shepherd here
is not so happy to save his sheep: but his sheep being devoured, he finds
some part of it, two legs, or a piece of an ear, whereby he may excuse
himself to his Master for his lost sheep. These parcels, leg or ear, he
takes Ex ore Leonis.

Out of the mouth of the Lion] Non ex ore Lupi, sed ex ore Leonis. He says
not, out of the mouth of the wolf, but out of the mouth of the Lion. For a
thing is recovered with more difficulty and with greater danger from a Lion
than from a Wolf. Johannes Leo in his description of Afric: Credat qui
volet, quicquid Leo prehenderit, etiamsi Camelus foret, rostro aufert; Believe
it he that will, whatsoever a Lion catches, though it be a Camel, he bears
it away in his mouth. Hence its prouerbially said, Ex ore Leonis, out of the
Lions mouth, for, out of extreme danger: and its used when a man has
deliverance beyond hope. Saint Paul uses it, 2 Timothy 4.17. (...), I was
delivered out of the mouth of the Lion: the Lion, not the Devil, as Ambrose
says, nor Festus the President of Iudaea, as Primasius affirms; but Nero,
proud and cruel Nero, persecuting Nero, as its expounded by Chrysostom,
Theodoret, Theophylact, Oecumenius, Aquinas, and Hist. Eccles. l. 2. cap. 22.
Eusebius.

The royal Prophet has it, Psalm. 22.21. Serua me ex ore Leonis. The words are
a part of Christ's Prayer, Save me from the mouth of the Lion. Some will have
that Lion to be the Devil; some Pilat, some Caiaphas, some Herod. Lorinus
will have him to betoken Principe^ and potentes, all the chief Priests,
Scribes, the Elders of the people, all that were the crucifiers of Christ.

Here it is in proper terms, without a metaphor, The shepherd takes out of
the mouth of the Lion two legs, or a piece of an ear. Yet will Albertus have
this Lion to be, either the King of Babylon, or the Devil. He adds by way of
explication, Os tyranni violentia est, os Diaboli peccatum: the mouth of a
Tyrant is violence, the mouth of the Devil is sin.

This Lion Carthusian in his moral explanation expounds by the Devil, so
does Salmeron in his Tropologie. And I deny not but that the Lion does many
times in a moral and tropologicall sense signify the Devil. But if we will
follow the letter of my Text, this Lion does well resemble the King of Babylon,
or the King of Assyria, Salmanassar.

It is not unusual for a Lion to resemble a King. This resemblance is, Prou.
19.12. The Kings wrath is as the roaring of a Lion. The roaring of a Lion is
fearful and terrible to the beasts of the forest, so is the wrath of a King
to his subjects. The like is that, chap. 20.2. The fear of a King is as the
roaring of a Lion. The fear of a King; the terror which the anger or wrath of
a King strikes into his subjects, is as the roaring of a Lion, very terrible.
The Lion has a Bear for his associate, Prou. 28.15. As a roaring Lion and a
ranging Bear; so is an ungodly Prince over the poor people. An ungodly Prince
is unto the people over whom he rules, as a roaring Lion or a ranging Bear to
a Lamb or Kid. Thus does a Lion resemble a King, either in good or ungodly.

Not amiss then is it, that Salmanassar, King of Assyria, 2 King. 17.3. 2
Esdr. 13.40.
that great and mighty King, who was to carry away into captivity the ten
Tribes of Israel, is here compared unto a Lion: according to the sense above
given. Such shall be the conquest of the Assyrians, under the conduct of
Salmanassar against the Israelites, that the Israelites shall be no more able
to resist the Assyrians, than a silly sheep is able to resist a Lion.

Now to the (...), the Reddition, the other part of this Similitude.

So shall the children of Israel be taken out, that dwell in Samaria in the
corner of a bed, and in Damascus in a couch. Of both these Cities, Samaria and
Damascus, I have heretofore entreated out of this place: Of Damascus upon the
first Chapter of this, verse. 3. and 5. Of Samaria upon the ninth verse of this
Chapter.

1 King. 16.24.
Samaria was the City royal of the ten Tribes. King Omri bought the hill of
Samaria of Shemer for two talents of silver, and built a City thereon, and
called it after the name of Shemer, the owner of the hill, Samaria. It remained
the chief seat of the Kingdom, as long as the Kingdom endured.

Damascus was the Metropoliticall, the chiefest City of Syria. Chap. 7.8.
Esaias calls it the head of Syria. Julian in his Epistle to Sarapion styles it
the City of Jupiter, and eye of the whole East, Holy and Great Damascus.
Tzetzes upon Lycophron, the Trophee of Jupiter, because Jupiter there conquered
the Titans.

These two Cities, Samaria and Damascus, Cities of strength and fortification,
were unto the Israelites as their beds of repose and rest: Nehem. 9.25.
here they thought themselves safe, did eat, were filled and became fat, living
nicely and deliciously in full ease and pleasure. So much is meant by this
their dwelling in Samaria in the corner of a bed, and in Damascus in a couch.

In the corner of a bed, in a couch.] Sermo est de lecto discubitorio sieve
tricliniari, says Villalpandus in Ezech. 23. The speech is of a triclinary or
parlor-bed, of such a bed, whereon of old time men used to take and eat their
meat. It was the use of old to have a dining room, Chamber, or Parlour,
wherein stood three beds whereon they sat at meat, compassing the table on
three sides; the fourth side was left free and clear for waiters. To this
ancient custom our Prophet here alludeth: as also he does, Chap. 6.4. They lie
upon beds of iuory, and stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat the
Lambs out of the flock, and Calves out of the midst of the stall, and Chap.
2.8. They lay themselves down upon clothes laid to pledge by every Altar. When
I handled those words, I spoke at large of this custom. Amos now again
alluding to it, gives us to understand, that the Israelites desiring to lie in
angulo lecti, that is, in capite lecti, at the beds head, in the chiefest
place, feasted it sumptuously and deliciously as well in Samaria, as in
Damascus: Little thought they of going into Captivity.

Now take the similitude to the full. As when a Lion has eaten his fill, and
has satiate his hunger, the shepherd finds two legs, or the tip of an
ear, to show unto the owner, that his sheep was worried: so the children of
Israel, here a man, and there a man, few of them, very few, shall be taken out
of the mouth of the Lion, King Salmanassar, though they trust in the strength
of Samaria, and in the succor of Damascus, thinking thereby to be safe, as in
a bed of rest or feasting.

We have gone the greater part of our journey; let your attentions bear me
company, for the little that is behind. Our Prophet here deriding or scoffing
at the Israelites, for their confidence in the multitude of their people, in
the valor of their soldiers, in their fenced Cities, in the strength of
Samaria, in the succor of Damascus, teaches us, that All confidence in
creatures, strength of man, or munition of Cities, is vain and sinful.

All such confidence is with all diligence to be shunned* Divine prohibition
is against it, Psalm. 118.8. Put no confidence in man, no not in Princes: and
Psalm. 146.3. Put not your trust in Princes, nor in any son of man. The
prohibition is divine: Put no confidence in man; and therefore all such
confidence is to be shunned.

Now the reasons why no confidence is to be put in man, are diverse.

One is, because it is manifest idolatry so to do. To withdraw and remove the
affections of the heart from the Lord, and set them upon other things, cannot
be less than Idolatry.

A second reason depending hereupon, I take from the description of confidence.
It is described to be indubitata spes futuri auxilij; It is the undoubted hope
of future succor, which is due to God alone. And therefore to put our
confidence in man, is to deny God his due.

A third reason is taken from the condition of man, in whom some put their
trust. The condition of man! What is that? David breaks forth into admiration
of it; Lord, what is man, that thou take knowledge of him? or the son of
man, that thou make account of him? And then shapes unto himself an answer;
Homo vanitati similis factus est; Man is like to vanity, Psalm. 144.4. Like to
vanity! Well were it for him were he only like unto it; Veruntamen vniuersa
vanitas, omnis homo viuens; Verily every man at his best state is altogether
vanity, Psalm. 39.5. Every man at his best state altogether vanity! Surely, men
of low degree are vanity; and men of high degree are a Lie. Lay them in the
balance, they are altogether lighter than vanity, Psalm. 62.9.

What! Man, who has an admirable feature, and abounds with created
^xcellencies, is he made like unto vanity? Nay, is he altogether vanity? Nay,
is he lighter than vanity? What then can his life be? Paul says, its but a
tabernacle, 2 Cor. 5 4. and if a tabernacle stand a year, its much. Peter
calls it grass. Epist. 1. Chap. 1.24. and grass grows but a Summer. David
calls it a flower, Psalm. 103.15. and a flower has but his month. Esaias
describes it by a day, Chap. 21.12. and a day has but a morning and an
evening. Job compares it to a shadow, Chap. 14.2. and a shadow has neither
year, nor summer, nor month, nor day, but an hour. Moses likens it to a
thought, Psalm. 90 9. and of thoughts there may be an hundred in an hour. So
short a life what else does it argue, but that man is vanity?

And what so little a creature is there, that yields not an argument to prove
man's vanity? A little Plin. Hist. Not. lib. 7. c. 7.
hair in milk strangles Fabius; the stone of a Raison Anacreon; a fly Pope
Adrian the fourth. The Myuntines were chased from their habitations by Pausan.
in Ac^a^^. lib. 7.
Gnats; the Atariotes by frogs, some Italians by mice, some Medians by Diod.
Siculus lib 4 cap. 3.
sparrowes, the Egyptians oftentimes by grasshoppers. And if Exodus 5.2.
Pharaoh ask, who is the Lord? Frogs, and Lice, and Flies, and other the
basest vermin shall be his Challengers, and Conquerours, and Iaylors; and
ask, who is Pharaoh? so vain a thing is man.

The fourth reason against confidence in man, I take from the dangerous effects
thereof. First, it brings upon us the curse of God: for thus says the Lord,
Ierem. 17.5. Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm.
And he whom God curses, shall be accursed. Secondly, it makes us liable to
Gods just vengeance. So were the people of Judah, for the confidence they had
in Rezin and Remaliahs son, Esaias 8.6. So they, who strengthened themselves in
the strength of Pharaoh, and trusted in the shadow of Egypt. The strength of
Pharaoh was their shame, and the shadow of Egypt their confusion, Esaias 30.3.
And so (to omit many other) the Israelites in my Text, for relying upon the
multitude of their people, the valor of their soldiers, their fenced Cities,
the strength of Samaria, and the succor of Damascus.

Thus have you the reasons of my Doctrine: why there is not any confidence to
be put in creatures, either in the strength of man, or the munition of Cities.

The use is to admonish us, that we depend not upon the vain and transitory
things of this life, but upon God alone, who only is unchangeable and
immovable: that we resign our selves wholly into his hands, and confess
before him, in the words of the Psalm 91.9. Tu es Domine spes mea: Thou art, O
Lord, my hope. Sermon. 9. in Psalm. Qui habitat.
Sweet is the meditation of Saint Bernard upon the place: Let others pretend
merit, let them brag that they have borne the burden and heat of the day, let
them tell of their fasting twice a week, let them glory that they are not as
other men; Mihi autem adhaerere Deo, Psalm. 73.28.
bonum est, pouere in Domino Deo spem meam; but its good for me to cleave fast
unto God, to put my hope in the Lord God.

Sperent in aliis alii, Let others trust in other things; one in his learning,
another in his nobility, a third in his worth, a fourth in any other vanity,
Mihi autem adhaerere Deo, bonum est, but its good for me to cleave fast unto
God, to put my trust in the Lord God.

Dearly beloved; if we shall sacrifice to our own nets, Habak. 1.15, 16.
burn incense to our own yarne, put our trust in outward means, either
riches, or policy, or Princes, or men, or mountains, forsaking God, God will
blow upon these means and turn them to our overthrow. Wherefore though we
have all helps in our own hands to defend our selves, and offend our enemies,
as that, we are fenced by Sea, fortified by ships, blessed by Princes, backed
with friends, stored with munitions, aided with confederates, and armed with
multitudes of men, yet may we not put our trust herein; for nobis etiam
adhaerere Deo, bonum est; its also good for us to cleave fast unto God, to put
our trust in the Lord God, who alone gives the blessing to make all good means
effectual.

There is not much remaining. The small number of the Israelites that were to
be delivered from the fury of the Assyrian, resembled by the two legs, or the
tip of the ear taken by the shepherd out of the Lions mouth, yields us this
observation: that In public calamities God evermore reserueth a remnant to
himself.

When God punished the old world, the world of the ungodly, 2 Pet. 2.5.
bringing the flood upon them, he saved Noah the eighth person, the preacher of
righteousness. When God condemned the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah with an
overthrow, turning them into ashes, making them an ensample unto those that
after should live wickedly, he delivered just Lot from among them.

There is a remnant left, Esaias 1.9. Except the Lord of hosts had left unto us a
very small remnant, we should have been as Sodom, and we should have been
like unto Gomorrah. You see a remnant reserved, though it be very small. Yea
sometimes there is a reservation of so small a remnant, as is hardly visible;
as in the days of Eliah, who knew of none but himself. I only am left, says
he, 1 King. 19.14. Yet God tells him, verse. 18. of seven thousand in Israel,
which never bowed their knees to Baal. I find, Joel 2.32. deliverance in mount
Sion, deliverance in Jerusalem, and deliverance in the remnant, when the Lord
shall call. There is then a remnant to be called, even in greatest extremity.

Wherefore you, the Elect and chosen children of God the Father, be ye full of
comfort: take unto you, beauty for ashes, Esaias 61.3.
the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of gladness for the spirit of
heaviness, rejoice ye, be glad together and be ye comforted. Let the Prince of
darkness, and all the powers of Hell, assisted with the innumerable company of
his wicked vassals upon the Earth, join together to work your overthrow, they
shall not be able to effect it. For God, even your God, will reserve unto
himself a remnant.

And what is this remnant, but pusillus grex? Its a little flock, the chaste
Spouse of Christ, the holy Catholic Church. Extra eam nulla est salus: Out of
it there is no Salvation, for he that has not the Church for his Mother,
shall never have God for his Father. So much for the explanation of this
twelfth verse. And Gods blessing be upon it.

THE Fifteenth Lecture.
AMOS 3.13, 14, 15. Hear ye and testify in the house of Jacob, says the
Lord God, the God of hosts.

That in the day, that I shall visit the transgressions of Israel upon him, I
will also visit the Altars of Bethel, and the horns of the Altar shall be cut
off, and fall to the ground.

And I will smite the winter house with the summer house; and the houses of
Iuory shall perish, and the great houses shall have an end, says the Lord.


THe words of the Lord are just, by whom soever they are uttered: and the
authority of the holy Spirit is wonderful, by whomsoever he speaks. Non
minus de ore pastoris, quam de ore Imperatoris pertonat: he thundereth, or he
speaks with as much Majesty from the mouth of a shepherd, as from the mouth
of an Emperor. Amos our Prophet, is this shepherd from whom the holy Spirit
here thundereth. Before he came with a proclamation to the palaces of Ashdod,
and to the palaces of the Land of Egypt. Now he comes with a Contestation to
the house of Jacob. Hereafter you may hear his message to the King of Bashan,
that are in the mountains of Samaria, Chap. 4.1. If Amos had from a shepherd
been advanced to the Majesty of a King, as David was, what could we wish
should have been added to the greater majesty of his elocution? The
contestation is the thing whereupon I shall at this time principally insist.

The words are a Prosopopaeia: the Almighty is brought in, calling upon his
Priests and Prophets to give ear unto him, and to bear witness of the
calamities which he was purposed to lay upon the house of Jacob: that when he
should punish them for their evil deeds, he would visit their Temple, and
proudest buildings with desolation.

The parts are two: One is a mandate for a Contestation, or Testification. The
other is the matter to be testified. That verse. 13. This verse. 14, 15.


For the first, these particulars may be observed: 1. Who it is that gives the
mandate? It is he that best may do it, Even the Lord. The Lord God, the God of
Hosts. 2. To whom he gives it: Sacerdotibus, and Prophetis, to his Priests and
Prophets: for to them is this by an Apostrophe directed. 3. How he gives it;
thus, Audite and contestamini, Hear and testify. 4. The place where this
testification is to be made, In domo Jacob, In the house of Jacob.


Hear ye, and testify in the house of Jacob, says the Lord God, the God of
Hosts, Verse. 13.

In the other part, which is of the matter to be testified, we may observe,

1. That God is fully resolved to punish Israel for sin: A day there is
wherein the Lord will visit the transgression of Israel upon him, Verse. 14.

2. That this punishment, so resolved upon by the Lord, shall reach unto their
holiest places, to their houses of Religion, to their Altars in Bethel: the
horns of the Altar shall be cut off, and fall to the ground, verse. 14.

3. That this punishment shall extend to the palaces, the chiefest places of
their habitation, even to their demolition and ruin. The winter-house shall be
smitten, so shall the summer house: the houses of Iuory shall perish, and the
great houses shall have an end, verse. 15.

4. The seal and assurance of all, and that we have in the end of thi^
Chapter, in two words, says the Lord.

In the day that I shall visit the transgressions of Israel upon him, I will
also visit the Altars of Bethel, and the horns of the Altar shall be cut off,
and fall to the ground.

And I will smite the winter-house with the summer house, and the houses of
Iuory shall perish, and the great houses shall have an end, Says the Lord.

Thus have you the division of this text: the branches are many; all
obseruable, and worthy your attention. Order requires that I begin with the
first part, which was the mandate for the testification: the first branch
whereof was of the giver thereof: and that was He, that might best do it,
even the Lord, called here Dominus Iehouih, Deus exercituum; The Lord God, the
God of Hosts.

These names of God have no small weight. They serve to seal the truth of this
Prophecy. Amos might have said in brief, Says the Lord, or the Lord God, as
he had said often before: but not content therewith, he now adds a third title
or appellation, (...) Elohei hatz-baoth, the God of Sabbath. He is called also
Iehoua tzebaoth, 1 Samuel 4.4. the Lord of Sabbath. In your Te Deum, that
excellent Canticle of Ambrose and Augustine, he is styled the Lord God of
Sabbath, Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, Dominus Deus Sabbath, Holy, Holy, Holy,
Lord God of Sabbath.

This name of Sabbath is retained by Saint Paul, Romans 9 29. and he has it from
Esaias 1.9. (...), Except the Lord of Sabbath had left us a seed, we had been as
Sodoma, and made like unto Gomorrah. Saint James has it in his Epistle, Chap.
5.4. Behold, the hire of the laborers which have reaped down your fields,
which is of you kept back by fraud, cries: and their cry is entered (...),
into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath.

There are of the Ancient, who have taken this name, Sabbath, for one of the
names of God. Saint Hierome Epist. 136. writing to Marcella of the ten Hebrew
names of God, says, the fourth is Sabbath. Quartum nomen Dei est Sabbath, quod
Septuaginta virtutum, Aquila exercituum transtulerunt: The fourth name of God
in Hebrew is Sabbath, which is by the LXX. translated Virtutum, by Aquila,
Exercituum. Both words Virtutes and Exercitu^, signify the same thing,
military forces, an host or band of armed soldiers.

Isiodore Bishop of Hispalis, Orig. lib. 7. cap. 1. agrees with Saint Hierome;
Quartum nomen Dei, dicitur Sabbath, Psalm. 24.10.
quod vertitur in Latinum, exercituum sieve virtutum; de quo in Psalmo ab
Angelis dicitur, Quis est iste Rex gloriae? Dominus virtutum? The fourth name
of God is Sabbath: turn it into Latin, it will be Exercitus, or Virtutes,
hosts or bands of armed soldiers: whereof the Angels in the Psalm do speak;
Who is this King of glory? Dominus virtutum, the Lord of Hosts, he is this King
of glory.

The Author of the Looking-glass in the ninth Tome of Saint Augustines works,
the tenth Chapter of that book speaks thus unto the Lord: Tu mitis and
benign, fortis and zelotes, and Sabbath inuictissime: O thou meek and
gracious, strong and jealous, and most invincible Sabbath.

Origin. Hom. 4. in Esaiam, upon those words of the Song of the Seraphins,
Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Sabbath, says, Sabbath is by Aquila's
interpretation Dominus militiarum, the Lord of Hosts. But in this place he
seems to be maimed and imperfect. Drusius in his 23. Epist. corrects him by
adding Adonai unto Sabbath; thus: Adonai Sabbath is by Aquila's interpretation.
Dominus exercituum, the Lord of Hosts. So the meaning is good, and is confirmed
by Epiphanius lib. 1. haeres. 26. Aquila every where in the old Testament, for
Adonai Sabbath, has (...), and that is, Domi^^^ exercituum, the Lord of Hosts.

As for Saint Hierome and Isidore, and the Author of the Looking-glass;
Drusius is of opinion they were deceived, in taking Sabbath for a name of God.
Believe me, says he, Sabbath is never said of God, but it is either Deus
Sabbath, or Dominus Sabbath, either the God of Sabbath, or the Lord of Sabbath.
And he is in the right. For indeed Sabbath is no name of God; nor is it ever
found alone, if it be spoken of God.

Elegantly to this purpose says Epiphanius lib. 1. Haeres. 40. against the
Archontici: (...), the name of Sabbath has the interpretation of Hosts: and
therefore the Lord of Sabbath is the Lord of Hosts. It is well known to every
one that is conversant in holy Scripture, that the Scripture, where it uses
the name of Sabbath, speaks not after this manner, (...), or (...), Sabbath
has said unto me, or Sabbath has spoken; but thus, Dicit Dominus Sabbath,
says the Lord of Sabbath; and that is, if you will interpret, the Lord of
Hosts.

Saint Ambrose his interpretation of this name Sabbath, I may not well pass
by. It is Lib. 4. de fide ad Gratianum, cap. 1. There upon those words of the
24. Psalm, Dominus Sabbath, ipse est Rex gloriae, the Lord of the Sabbath, he
is the King of glory, he ^aith, Sabbath interpretes alioubi Dominum virtutam,
alicubi Regem, alicubi O^^ipotentem interpretati sunt. Interpreters have
rendered the name of Sabbath, sometime by the Lord of Hosts, sometime by the
name of King, sometime by the name of Almighty. But the place is manifestly
vicious. For Sabbath no where signifies a King: nor have Interpreters any
where so rendered it. To correct that error, Drusius for Regem reads
exercituum; and he proves his correction out of Eucherius, whose words are
Sabbath, exercituum, sieve virtutum, aut vt aliqui volunt, omnipotent. Sabbath
is for signification as you would say, of armies, or of hosts, or omnipotent.

Sabbath is rendered Omnipotent, or Almighty, by the Septuagint, as in other
places, so in this text of mine, wherein for Elohe hatzebaoth, the God of
Sabbath, they have (...), God Almighty. Whence is that rule of Saint Hierome to
Damasus, Epist. 142. We are to know, that where (...) Seventy Interpreters
have expressed Dominum virtutum, and Dominum omnipotentem, the Lord of Hosts,
and the Lord Almighty, there in the Hebrew it is Dominus Sabbath, which is by
Aquila's interpretation, Dominus militiarum, the Lord of Hosts. The Lord of
Hosts, by Aquila's interpretation, is God the Almighty by the interpretation of
the Septuagint.

Well. Elohe hatzebaoth, the God of Sabbath; Be he with the Greeks, (...), or
(...), or (...); or be he with the Latins, Dominus, or Deus virtutum, or
Militiarum, or Exercituum; all will be well expressed in our language with one
title, The Lord, or God of Hosts.

But what are these Hosts whereof God is the Lord? There is (...), an host of
Heaven, Act. 7.42. And what that is, Saint Hierome expounds to the noble Lady
Algasia, Epist. 151. quaest. 10. The Host of Heaven, is not only the Sun and
Moon, and glistring Stars, but also the whole multitude of Angels, and their
armies: called in Hebrew Sabbath, which is in Latin Virtutum or Exercituum.
Hispalensis for this host of Heaven, does reckon up in the place above
alleged, Angels, Archangels, Principalities and Powers, and all the Orders of
the armies celestial, of whom God is the Lord. For they are all under him, and
subject to his sovereignty.

It is true what those Ancients have said of the Host of Heaven. True it is
that the Angels are of this army. Micaiah tel^ King Ahab so, 1 King. 22.19. I
saw the Lord sitting on his Throne, and all the Host of Heaven standing by him,
on his right hand, and on his left. There the Host of Heaven are the Angels,
who attend the Lord, to put in execution whatsoever he shall command. At the
birth of Jesus Christ our Savior the Angel that appeared unto the shepherds,
had with him a multitude of the Heavenly Host, Luke 2.13. and that multitude
was of Angels: and they were (by likelihood) created in the first day with the
Heavens, because those sons of God did ^^ ou^ for joy, when God laid and
fastened the foundations of the earth, Job 38.7. These the sons of God, the
Angels, Bartas 1 day, 1. Week.
sweetly described by the Nightingale of France to be, The sacred Tutors of the
Saints; the Guard
Of Gods elect, the Pursuiuants prepared
To execute the counsels of the Highest:
The Heavenly courtiers, to their King the nighest,
Gods glorious Heralds, Heavens swift Harbengers,
Twixt Heaven and earth the true Interpreters;
these, the Sons of God, the Angels, are of the glorious Host of Heaven.

So are the Stars, the Sun, the Moon, the goodly furniture of the visible
Heavens; they are all of the Heavenly host. So shall you find them called,
Deuteronomy. 4.19. The Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, even all the Host of Heaven.
Of this host of Heaven it is prophesied, Esai. 34.4. All the Host of Heaven
shall be dissolved, and the Heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll, and
all their host shall fall down, as the leaf falls off from the Vine, and as
a falling fig from the fig tree. As for the Stars, they in their courses
fought against Sisera, Judge. 5.20. The Sun and the Moon stood still; the
Sun upon Gibeon the Moon in the valley of Ajalon, till the people of Israel
had avenged themselves upon their enemies, the Amorites, Ios. 10.12. The Sun,
the Moon, the S^arres, all the twinkling spangles of the firmament, you see,
are of Gods host.

Nor is Gods host only of Celestial creatures, but also of all other creatures
in the world. In the second Chapter of Genesis v. 1. where it is said, the
heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them, by all the host
of them, we are to understand all creatures in the Earth and Heavens, which
stand as an army servants to the Lord, Psalm. 119.91. Esaias 45.12.
and are by him comm^nded. That all things are Gods servants is auowed, Psalm.
119.91. The Heaven and Earth continue to this day according to the ordinances
of the Lord, for they are all his servants. Heaven and earth and all things
therein contained Continue] safe, sound, and sure, even to this day] wherein we
live, and so shall do to the worlds end, by the ordinance and appointment of
God, for all are his servants; all creatures yield obedience to him, as
servants to their masters. They are all by him commanded. For thus says the
Lord, Esai. 45.12. I have made the earth, and created man upon it: I, even my
hands have stretched out the Heavens, and all their host have I commanded. The
innumerable Hosts of creatures both in Heaven and Earth are all by God
commanded.

Now from this which has hitherto been delivered, the reason is plain, why
this title of God El^^^ harzebaoth, the God of Sabbath, or the God of Hosts, is
by our Prophet added to the two former appellations, Adonai Iehouih, the Lord
God. It is, the more lively to set forth his rule, dominion, and sovereignty
over all. It shows that as an army or an Host of soldiers obeys their
Emperor or commander; so all things, all creatures, celestial, terrestrial,
and infernal, are of Gods host, and do yield unto him, as to their Emperor
and commander, all obedience. They all stand ready in martial order and
battell-ray, pressed to do whatsoever God wills: and therefore is the Lord
God, the G^d of Sabbath, or the God of Hosts.

From this consideration, that our Lord God is the God of Hosts, we are taught
the fear of so great a Majesty. For who is he, that will not fear him, by
whom he shall find himself to be beset and compassed about with very many and
potent armies; above, beneath, before, behind, on the one hand, and on the
other, that there can be no evasion, no escaping from him? Our God, is the God
of Hosts. Man, sinful man, how shall he consist, if God once arm his hosts
against him? The fear of God will be his surest refuge. Fear him, and all his
Hosts shall be on your side, and fight for you. Fear him, and both floods and
rocks shall fear you: all winds shall blow you happiness: ship wracks shall
avoid the place where your foot treads; and as to the apples of Gods own
eyes, so shall all his creatures yield to you reverence: they shall not dare to
approach the channel where your way lies. Hills shall fall down, and
mountains shall be cast into the sea: but who so fears the Lord he shall
never miscary. This fear of the Lord will both land your ships in an happy
haven, and after your travels upon the earth, will harbor your souls in his
everlasting Kingdom.

And thus much be spoken of the first thing observed in this Mandate, even the
Giver thereof, the Lord God, the God of Hosts. I proceed to the rest.

The next is, who they are to whom this Mandate is given, and they are
Sacerdotes and Prophetae* Priests and Prophets. For to them is this passage by
an Apostrophe directed. To them. It appears by the manner of giving the
Mandate; it is given in two verbs Imperative, Audite and Contestamini, Hear
ye, and testify: and it further appears by the specification of the
parties, concerning whom the Mandate is: they are of the house of Jacob. The
house of Jacob, is the Kingdom of the ten Tribes, or the Kingdom of Israel.
Understand then by the house of Jacob, the people of Israel; to whom Priests
and Prophets were ordinary messengers from the Lord. And thus have I couched
together three particulars of the Mandate.

1. To whom it is given: to Priests and Prophets. 2. The manner how it is
given, Audite and contestamini, Hear and testify. 3. The place, which, or the
parties, whom it concerns, the house of Jacob. Hear and testify in the
house of Jacob.
Saint Hierome and Lyra do take this Mandate to be of a larger extent, than to
Priests and Prophets. They will have it to be given unto all: to all people: as
if all people were here commanded to hear what the God of Hosts says,
concerning the subversion of the Kingdom of the ten Tribes, and thereof to
bear witness to the house of Jacob, that they hearing, might be converted
from their evil ways.

Eman. Sa. Christ. a Castro.
But Remigius, Albertus, Hugo, Dionysius, Vatablus, Montanus, and others, do
affirm more truly, that Priests and Prophets are here called upon, to hear
from the mouth of the God of Hosts, the destruction that is eminent and ready
to fall upon the house of Jacob, and thereof to bear witness unto them, vt
credunt and resipiscant, that they may believe and repent them of their sins,
and so be delivered. Valde enim proficuus est concionator, qui dicit, quae
audiit ex ore Domini: for surely he his a very profitable Preacher, who
speaks only that which he has heard from the mouth of the Lord. Wherefore to
Priests and Prophets be it said; Audite and contestamini; Hear and testify.
First hear, and then testify. Whence the observation is, The Minister of the
Gospel is to hear what God sp^^k^th before he presume to deliver his message
to the people.

He is first to hear, and then to testify what he hears. Nemini licet
prophetare, nisi quae prius a Domino audierit, says one: Mercer.
It is not lawful for a man to prophecy, I say, it is not lawful for a man
to preach, but such things as he has heard of the Lord.

But does the Lord now adays speak that he may be heard of his Ministers?
Yes. And I untie the knot by a distinction.

There is a twofold hearing of God when he speaks, or a twofold hearing of
the word of God, Auditus externus and internus, an outward, and an inward
hearing. These two are sometimes severed, and sometimes they are joined
together. For some there are that do hear only outwardly, but within they
are deaf. Of those it may be said, as it is of the Idols of the Heathen, Psalm.
115.6. They have ears but they hear not. They hear but understand not what
they hear, These are they that receive the seed by the ways side, Matthew.
13.19.

Others there are that hear not with the outward ear: all their hearing is
within; it is in the hear^; there they hear God speaking to them by the
inspiration of the holy Spirit. Such was the hearing of the Prophets of old.

Besides these, some there are that hear both outwardly and inwardly, with the
ear and with the heart. Such a hearing i^ peculiar to the faithful: of whom I
understand that, Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word
of God. Faith comes by hearing; that is, faith is bred in the hearts of the
elect by the external hearing of the Word, the holy Spirit working in them.
The Preachers sound unto their ears the doctrine of the Word. The ears convey
it to the mind: but that is blind to conceive divine matters. Wherefore comes
Gods holy Sp^^it, who through the doctrine received in at the care,
illuminateth the understanding, opens the heart, and inclines the will, to
conceive what the Preacher has delivered, to give assent unto it, and to
delight therein. Thus comes faith by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.
Whence we may gather this definition of Faith: Faith (...) persuasion of the
mercies of God merited by our Lord Jesus Christ: and we attain unto it, by the
Spirit of God, giving us this true persuasion through the doctrine of the
Gospel.

Now the hearing, whereby the Minister of the Gospel hears the word of God,
or God speaking to him, is a mixed kind of hearing: it is partly inward, by the
secret operation of the blessed Spirit; and partly outward, by the revealed
word of God, expressed in the Sacred Scriptures.

Exodus 33.11. Numb. 12.8.
For God in the Scripture speaks unto us, as it were face to face, or mouth to
mouth, as plainly as he spoke out of the cloud, Matthew. 17.5. when that voice
was uttered; This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye
him. And surely, if God were now to give his voice from Heaven, he would
speak no otherwise than he speaks in the Scriptures. And therefore are we
commanded, Ioh. 5.39. to search the Scriptures. (...), search the Scriptures,
he says not (...), read the Scriptures, but (...), search them. The truth and
sense of the Scripture is profound and deep; it is as gold, that lies, not
upon the face and outside of the Earth, but in the veins thereof: it is as
the marrow, the pith, the hearth of a tree, that is not in the bark, but is
covered with the bark. Off must the bark, if we will have the pith: and we
must dig deep in the ground, if we will have any gold: so must our search be
with diligence, beyond the bark and outside of the letter, if we will partake
of the treasure that is hidden under it, and hear God speaking unto us.

Christ confuting the Sadduces for the point of the Resurrection, Matthew. 22, 29.
says unto them, (...): You err, not knowing the Scriptures; implying, that,
if they had been diligent in the search of them, God would therein have spoken
to them, and directed them in that truth.

Saint Peter Ep. 2. Chap. 1.19. commending the faithful of his time, for their
diligence in the Scriptures, says unto them, we have a most sure word, (...),
a prophetical word, whereunto you do well that you take heed, as unto a
light, that shines in a dark place; intimating, that, that same (...), that
same prophetical word, or word of prophecy, or word uttered by the Prophets,
is nothing else but the word of God, conveyed unto us by ministry of his
Prophets.

That so it is, we are assured by the Protestation that God himself makes,
Hos. 12.10. I, that am the Lord thy God, I have spoken by the Prophets, and I
have multiplied visions, and used similitudes, by hand or by the ministry of
the Prophets. The like phrase is used by Haggai, Chap. 1.1. to show that his
prophecy was the very word of God: In the second year of the reign of King
Darius came the Word of the Lord by the hand, or by the ministry of Haggai the
Prophet unto Zerubbabel. Haggai was but a conduit to convey the Word; the W^rd
was the Lords. This is that we read, Hebr. 1.1. that God ^^ sundry times and
in diverse manners spoke in time past unto the Fathers by the Prophets.

Hence appears the harmony, consent, and agreement of all the Prophets even
from the first unto the last. Adam, Seth, Enoch, Noe, Abraham, Moses, David,
Esaias, and the rest, not one of them spoke one word of a natural man in all
their ministry; but only the words of him that sent them: they spoke not of
themselves; it was God that spoke in them. Whenever was the time, whosoever
was the man, wheresoever was the place, whatsoever was the people; the words
were Gods. God spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets.

And for this cause when we preach unto you, we say not, you are to believe us
in what we say, quia nos dicimus, because we say it, but quia dicit Dominus,
because the Lord says it. And if it be demanded, whence it may be known that
our sayings are the Lords sayings, we answer it is known ex Scripturis, by
this or that place of Scripture. To the Scriptures we are tied, as the Levites
were to the Law, Deuteronomy. 17.11. From the Law they might not decline either to the
right hand or to the last; nor may we from the Scriptures. They were to teach
according to the Law; and we according to the Scriptures. The voice of the Law
was their rule, the voice of the Scriptures must be ours.

The voice of the Scriptures must be our rule. But says the Romanizing Papist,
the Scripture has no voice at all, but is res muta, Sleid. Com. l. 23.
a dumb thing. The Bishop of Poitiers, in the infamous conuenticle of Trent,
was of this mind, Scripturam esse reminauimem atque mutam, that the Scripture
is a dead and a dumb thing, C^ntron. 3. de Eccles.
as are all other Politic Laws. Albertus Pighius before that time had
discovered his opinion of the point: Esse Scripturas mutos iudices, that the
Scriptures are dumb judges: and therefore unfit to have matters of
controversy put over to their judgment. Petrus a Soto says as much in
effect, Schol. de Euchar. and Defens. 3.
calling the Scripture, Literam mutam, non respondentem, a dumb letter that
gives no answer. This is but one of the many blasphemies which Papists have
uttered to the disgrace of holy Scripture: against whom to the honor thereof,
we maintain this assertion,

Scripturam non esse mutam, ac vocis expertem; the Scripture is not dumb and
speechless, but has a voice, a clear voice, easy to be heard, except we be
deaf.

For the confirmation of this our assertion, I produce that of Saint Paul, Romans
3.19. Whatsoever things the Scripture says, it faith to them that are under
the Law: the Greek word is (...), it speaks to them that are under the Law.
It speaks, therefore it is not dumb.

Moses ascribes to the Law a mouth, Deuteronomy. 17.11. and Paguines translation
there, is ex ore Legis: the Priests were to teach according to the mouth of the
Law. And why, I pray you, has the Law a mouth, if it cannot speak?

If exhortations of holy writ do speak, why may not precepts; prohibitions,
expostulations, and other passages speak as well? There is an exhortation that
speaks unto you as children, Hebr. 12.5. (...), it speaks, and thus it
speaks: My son, despise not thou the chastning of the Lord, nor faint when
thou art rebuked of him.

The Scripture every where speaks: (...), a phrase often iterated in the New
Testament, is a sure evidence that the Scripture is not dumb. (...), Romans 4.3.
What says the Scripture? Abraham believed God; and it was counted unto him for
righteousness. That Scripture is Genesis 15.6. and therefore the Scripture in
Genesis speaks, (...), Romans 9.17. The Scripture says unto Pharaoh. What?
Even for this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might show my power in
thee: that Scripture is Exodus 9.16. and therefore the Scripture in Exodus
speaks.

(...), Romans 10.11. The Scripture says; whosoever believes in him, in Jesus
Christ, shall not be ashamed: that Scripture is Esaias 28.16. and therefore the
Scripture in Esaias speaks.

(...), says the Scripture, from this phrase so often reiterated in the New
Covenant, I may conclude for the whole Scripture, that it has a voice and
speaks: and therefore that it is neither dead nor dumb, as the above
alleged Popish Authors have imagined.

It has a voice and speaks. This voice is the voice of God. For God in the
Scriptures speaks with us familiarly, as a friend speaks with a friend.
Quasi amicus familiaris, fine fuco ad cor loquitur indoctorum atque doctorum,
Augustine to V^l^sian Epist. 3. God in Scriptures daily speaks to us; and he
speaks plainly to the heart, as well of the unlearned, as of the learned, to
the heart of every one of us. Now as God in the Scriptures speaks to us, so
we cannot but acknowledge that he speaks, unless we be without his holy
Spirit. Sic enim loquitur nobiscum, vt nos eius sermonem intelligam^^, Ambrose
to Irenaeus Epist. 5. So God speaks with us, that we may understand his
speech. And this that, which above I undertook to prove, that God now adays
speaks, that he may be heard of his Ministers. And since he so speaks, my
doctrine will thereupon follow: The Minister of the Gospel is to hear what
God speaks, before he presume to deliver his message to the people.

He is to hear what God speaekth, before he make his contestation to the house
of Jacob. It is the order prescribed in my text: Hear first, then testify,
Hear and testify in the house of Jacob.

The use of the point now delivered is twofold: one concerns the Preachers
of the Gospel; the other the Hearers.

The Preachers are to hea^e what God speaks, and then to testify and bear
witness thereof to the house of Jacob, to the people of God. They must
remember they are (...), 2 Cor. 5.20. Ambassadors of God in Christ's stead: and
that to them is committed the ministry of reconciliation: and therefore they
may not broach or publish any vain imaginations of their own, but those things
only which God gives them in charge. They must hear what God says, and that
alone must be their message.

Again, they must remember they are (...), Ioh. 5.27. and Act. 1.8. they are
witnesses for Christ. They are to bear witness to the truth of Christ's
person; to his threefold office, his Priestly, Princely, and Prophetical
office, and to the benefits that do flow from thence for the edification of
the Church. All this they are to hear from the mouth of God speaking in his
holy Word, and thereof to make their contestation in the house of Jacob, to
bear witness thereof to Gods people, not by their preaching only, but if need
be, by their dying too.

The other use is for hearers. For if the Preacher be first to hear what God
speaks, and then to testify the truth thereof to the house of Jacob, the
people of God; then are the people of God, all the house of Jacob, to give
attentive ear to the Preachers message.

Hearers in hearing are to know that they are to deal with God, and are to
receive the Word delivered by the Minister, not as the Ministers word, but as
the Word of God. Such Hearers were those Thessalonians commended by S. Paul.
Epist. 1. Chap. 2.13. For this cause, says he, thank we God without ceasing,
because when ye received the word of God, which ye heard of us, ye received it
not as the word of men, but as it is in truth, the word of God, which
effectually works also in you that believe. The example is well worthy our
imitation.

Beloved, if an earthly Prince speak or send a message to us, we give all show
of reverence, and hear him with diligence. This Word whereof we now entreat,
is not of flesh and blood; it proceeds not from Kings or Emperors, or
Parliament, or from Councels of men, but from God the Father, and from our Lord
Jesus Christ. When this Word is read, Princes and Emperors stand up, and lay
down their sword, and uncover their head, and bow their body in token of
reverence, because they know it to be the word of God, which God himself has
uttered, that it should be as the Deuteronomy. 32.2.
dew of Heaven to moisten our dry souls, as a Ioh. 4.14.
Well of water springing up to everlasting life, as a 2 Cor. 2.16.
savor of life unto life, and the very Romans 1.16.
power of God unto salvation to every one that believes. Without this Word we
are undone, we perish: we receive no comfort, we see not the light; we grow not
in faith, we abide not in the Church of God.

Wherefore, suffer ye a word of exhortation. It shall be in S. Peter's words, 1
Epist. 2.2. As newborn babes desire ye the sincere milk of the Word, that
ye may grow thereby. Be ye so affected to the word of God, as newborn
infants are to their mothers milk. You know well how that is: A little infant
even by the instinct of nature, almost as soon as it is borne, seeks that
nourishment; it is not long well without it; when nothing else will, that will
still it. So, even so be ye affected; long ye after the word of God, as your
spiritual nourishment, rejoice in it, place your happiness in the use of it;
let it be your chiefest comfort.

This indeed has been evermore the right disposition of Gods holy ones. O,
how great was the felicity that David felt in this word of God? In one Psalm,
Psalm. 119. He prefers it before profit, before pleasure, before glory.

Before profit, V. 127. I love thy Commandments above gold, yea, above fine
gold. Before pleasure, verse. 103. How sweet are thy words unto my taste? yea
sweeter than honey unto my mouth. Before glory, verse. 57. Thou art my portion, O
Lord, I have determined to keep thy words, and verse. 111. Thy testimonies have
I taken as an heritage for ever, for they are the rejoicing of my heart. Now
because in a spoil all those things do meet together, Profit in the treasure,
Pleasure in the overthrow, and Glory in the conquest or triumph, he adds
vers^ 162. I rejoice at thy Word, as one that finds great spoil. Thus was
holy David determined and resolved to content himself with the word of God in
stead of all profit, pleasure and glory. For his profit, wa^ his support in
trouble and adversity; his pleasure, was the peace of a good conscience; his
glory, was to be in the favor of God. All which is wrought by the precious and
invaluable word of God.

This word of God was unto Jeremy, Chap. 15.16. the joy and rejoicing of his
heart. And Ezechiels roll, the symbol of this word, was in his mouth as honey
for sweetness, Chap. 3.3. And John's little book, which he received from the
Angel, the badge of this word, was in his mouth sweet as honey, Ren. 10.10.

When Philip was gone down to the City of Samaria, and had preached Christ
unto them, the text says, there was great joy in that city, Act. 8.8. When the
same Philip had taught the mystery of Christ to the Eunuch, the Eunuch went on
his way rejoicing, in the same Chapter, verse. 39. The Angel relating to the
shepherds the Nativity of Christ, said unto them, Fear not, for behold I bring
unto you good tidings of great joy, that shall be to all people, Luke 2.10.

Good tidings of great joy! Happy shepherds to hear so good tidings from an
Angel! Princes would have been glad to have heard it: but they heard it not.
Yet to Princes as well as to others this good tidings of great joy belongs.
Good tidings of great joy! Great joy it is, first in respect of the matter
thereof, which is very great; even our reconciliation with God. Secondly, it is
great joy for the diuturnity and stability thereof; it abides and continues
constant for ever. Thirdly, it is great joy for the universality of it: it
reaches unto all; generibus singulorum, to all kinds of people, though not
singulis generum, to all particulars of all kinds, but only to such as shall
receive it by a true faith. Last of all, it is great joy, quia spirituale,
because it is spiritual, and belongs to the salvation of the whole man, body
and soul. And the good tidings of this great joy is derived unto us in these
our days through the ministry of the word of God.

Wherefore, dearly beloved, let me again put you in mind of your Christian
duty concerning this word of God, that as newborn infants ye desire the
sincere milk thereof to grow thereby. Long ye after it; it is your spiritual
nourishment* rejoice in it; place your happiness in the use of it: Let it be
your chiefest comfort.

Whenever you shall hear this word of God read, or preached, remember whose
Word it is you hear: and think ye thus every man with himself: Surely this
is the word of my gracious God. My God opens his mouth from Heaven above and
speaks to me, that he might save me. He speaks to me to keep me from
error; to comfort me in the troubles and adversities of this life, and to
guide me to the life eternal.

If you stand thus affected to the word of God; if you desire the sincere milk
thereof for your spiritual food, as the little infant does the mothers milk
for its bodily food: if you find your selves truly to love it, carefully to
desire to understand it, and to take comfort in the exercises of it; thank God
for it; it is a good sign; and pray God to increase it.

But if this word of God be a burden to thee; if like a potion it go down
against thy stomach, if thou carest not how little thou be acquainted with it,
if thou esteemest not the exercises of it; take heed, bewail thine estate; it
is a fearful token; pray God, if thou love thine own soul, to remove such
thy dullness from thee.

And let this suffice to have been delivered upon my second observation: which
was, The Minister of the Gospel is to hear what God speaks, before he
presume to deliver his message to the people.

It was grounded upon those words of the Mandate, Audite and contestamini.
Hear and testify. First hear what God speaks, and then make your
contestation, testify and bear witness of that you have heard. Cry aloud,
spare not, Esaias 58.1.
lift up your voices like trump^ts: show unto the house of Jacob the calamities
which I have resolved to bring upon them: Hear ye, and testify in the house
of Jacob. Hereupon I ground my third observation: it is this: God evermore
uses to denounce grievous calamities, before the^ come to pass.

He fore-sheweth them beforehand. The universal del^ge was a v^ry grievous
calamity. God foreshewed it unto Noah, the Preacher of righteousness, long
before he brought in the Flood, Genesis 6.13.

The cry of Sodom and Gomorrah was great, their sin was very grievous, and
therefore was God resolved to destroy them: yet would he not do it, till he
had told Abraham and Lot thereof: the one, Genesis 18.17. the other, Genesis 19.13.

The seven years of famine which were to consume the land of Egypt, God
foretold to Joseph, seven years before they came, Genesis 41.25.

A man of God is sent to Eli, to foretell him of the evil that should befall
his house, 1 Samuel 2.27. The Prophet Jeremy is sent to the Jews to foretell
them of the seventy years of their captivity in Babylon, Ier. 25.12. And here
in my text, Priests and Prophets are called upon, to foretell to the house of
Jacob the miseries that were ready to fall upon them. Thus stands the doctrine
firm; God evermore uses to advertise us of miseries, before they do befall
us.

Our Prophet expressly and confidently avouches it, verse. 7. of this Chapter.
Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reuealeth his secret to his
servants, the Prophets.

In my exposition of those words, I gave of the point in hand a larger
prosecution, than the remainder of this hour will afford. As now, so then I
proved from the evidence of the word, that God never brings any grievous
calamity upon any people or nation, or private person, but he does evermore
first forewarne the same and foretells it.

And hereof I gave two reasons: one in respect of the godly; the other, in
respect of the wicked.

For the Godly. God is unwilling at any time to take them at unawares. He
loves them: he would not have any of them perish, but would they should all
repent, and so prevent his judgments. He is pro^e to do good, but slow to
punish; and therefore praedicit flagella, vt peccantes resipiscant; He
fore-sheweth his judgments, to draw us to the amendment of our lives.

Now for the wicked. He fore-warneth them also of his future judgments,
Rangol. 1 King. ^.27.
ne dicere qu^ant, se illa euentura non audiuisse, that they may not be able to
say for themselves, they had no fore-warning. So are they left without excuse;
their mouths are stopped, and Gods justice is cleared.

Wherefore, beloved, let us acknowledge the great mercy, and wonderful
patience of our good and gracious God, in that he vouchsafes so to deal with
us, to retire us from sin. He needs not, nor is he bound to deal so kindly
with us. For it is our part upon our own peril to take heed of his judgments
that they overtake us not. Yet so good is the Lord, so loving, so merciful, so
patient, so desirous is he, we should escape the misery, which we have
deserved, that he sends unto us his letters of love, the holy Scriptures, by
his Ministers, to fore-warne us of the evil day.

A sly and subtle adversary, would steal upon us when we should least think
of him, and take us at any advantage: but our loving God seeks not for
advantages against us. He rather provides us means for our safety. The
means are the letters of his love, as even now I called them, the sacred
Scriptures. Them he conueyeth to us by his servants, his Ministers, by whom he
inuites us to good, and deters us from evil: propounds rewards for well
doing, and punishments for ill; threatens unto us the torments of Hell, if we
continue in sin, and so bridleth our wantonness; promises the joys of
Heaven if we turn unto him by repentance, and so spurs on our slothfulness.
So gracious a God fore-warneth ever before he strikes.

And now most gracious and loving Father, we most humbly beseech thee, not only
to fore-warne us, before thou strike; but also to give us grace to take heed by
thy warnings that thou strike us not. So will we arise, run, and open unto
thee: arise by faith from the sepulcher of sin; run with hope, to the gates
of thy mercies; and open with love our broken and contrite hearts, that thou
may come in and dwell with us. Even so be it most merciful Father, for thy
sweet Son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

THE Sixteenth Lecture.
AMOS 3.14, 15. That in the day, that I shall visit the transgressions of
Israel upon him, I will also visit the Altars of Bethel, and the horns of the
Altar shall be cut off and fall to the ground.

And I will smite the winter house with the summer house; and the houses of
iuory shall perish, and the great houses shall have an end, says the Lord.


THis passage of holy Writ is a Prosopopaeia. The Almighty is here brought in,
calling upon his Priests and Prophets to give ear unto him, and to bear
witness of the calamities which he was resolved to lay upon the house of
Jacob. His resolution was, when he should punish the Israelites for their evil
deeds, then to visit their Temple and stateliest buildings with ruin and
desolation.

The words I heretofore divided into two general parts: One was, A mandate for
a Testification. The other, The matter to be testified.


That was verse. 13. this verse. 14. and 15.

For the first these particulars have been observed: 1 Who it is that gives
the Mandate. Even the Lord; the Lord God, the God of hosts. 2 To whom he gives
it: Sacerdotibus and Prophetis; to his Priests and Prophets. For to them is
this passage by an Apostrophe directed. 3 How he gives it: Audite, and
contestamini, Hear and testify. 4 The place where this testification was to
be made, in domo Jacob, in the house of Jacob. Hear and testify in the house
of Jacob, says the Lord God, the God of Hosts, verse. 13.


In the other part, which concerns the matter to be testified, we may
observe: 1 A resolution of God, to punish Israel for sin: There shall be a
day, wherein the Lord will visit the transgression of Israel upon him, verse.
14. 2 That this punishment so resolved upon by the Lord, shall reach unto their
holiest places, to their houses of religion; to their Altars in Bethel: the
horns of the Altar shall be cut off and fall to the ground, verse. 14. 3 That
this punishment shall extend to the chiefest places of their habitation; even
to the demolition and ruin of their dwelling houses: The winter house shall be
smitten, so shall the summer house: the houses of iuory shall perish, and the
great houses shall have an end, verse. 15. 4 The seal and assurance of all, in
the two last words of this Chapter, Neum Jehovah, says the Lord.
In the day that I shall visit the transgressions of Israel upon him, I will
also visit the Altars of Bethel, and the horns of the Altar shall be cut off
and fall to the ground.

And I will smite the winter house with the summer house; and the houses of
iuory shall perish, and the great houses shall have an end, says the Lord.



Such are the parts of this Scripture. Of the first general, which was the
Mandate for the testification, and of the particulars therein, I discoursed in
my last Sermon out of this place. Now I am to descend to the second general,
which is of the matter to be testified. The first branch therein is, of Gods
resolution to punish Israel for sin: and that is in the beginning of the
fourteenth verse.

In the day that I shall visit the transgressions of Israel upon him.] By the
words its plain, that a day should come, wherein God would punish Israel for
his transgressions. R. David. R. Abraham.
That day some ancient Rabbines refer to the earthquake, that was in the
days of Vzziah King of Judah, whereof we find mention made in the first
Chapter of this Prophecy, verse 1. and Zach. 14.5.

Some refer it to the time of King Iosiahs reign, when he brake down the
Altar that was at Bethel, and the high place there, 2 King. 23.15.

Others hereby do understand that day, wherein Samaria was captiuated by the
Assyrian King, Salmanassar, 2 King. 17.6.

Whenever that day fell out, it was the day of the Lords visitation, the day
wherein the Lord visited Israel for his iniquities.

This word to visit, signifies a remembrance, providence, care and performance
of a thing spoken, be it good or evil: and it belongs unto God to visit both
ways, either for good or for evil, either in mercy or in judgment.

It was for good that the Lord visited Sarah, Genesis 21.1. The Lord visited
Sarah, Genesis 17.19. and 18.10.
as he had said; and the Lord did unto Sarah, as he had spoken. For Sarah
conceived, and bare Abraham a son in his old age, at the set time, of which
God had spoken to him. This was a visitation for good; a visitation in mercy.

Such is that whereof dying Joseph tells his brethren, Genesis 50.24. I die: and
God visiting will visit you, and will make you go up out of this land, unto
the land which he swear to Abraham, to Isaak, and to Jacob. God visiting will
visit you. He means a visitation in mercy; God will surely vis^^ you in
mercy. And so he did when they had been bond-slaues in Egypt four hundred
and thirty years. Exodus 12.41.
For at the end of those years, even the self same day that those years were
ended, it came to pass, that all the Hosts of the Lord, the Tribes of Israel,
went out from the land of Egypt. Out they went with an high hand in the sight
of all the Egyptians. And so God visiting visited his people Israel, Numb.
33.3.
according to his promise made by Moses, Exodus 3.16. This was a visitation for
good; a gracious and merciful visitation.

But gracious and merciful above all was the visitation of our Lord Jesus
Christ, when with a true and everlasting redemption he redeemed all true
Israelites from sin, and death, and Satan. It is the visitation for which
Zachary in his Canticle blesses God, Luke 1.68. Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel. And why blessed? for he has visited, and redeemed his people. He has
visited his people; visited in the better part; visited in mercy; in exceeding
great mercy.

Beloved, since Christ has visited us in our persons, Math. 25.40. Luke 16.1.
it is our parts to visit him in his members. We are all his Stewards; and the
good things he has lent us are not our own, but his: if the goods of the
Church, we may not appropriate them: if of the Commonwealth, we may not
enclose them. You know it is a vulgar saying: He is the best subject, that is
highest in the subsidy book. Let it pass for true. But I am sure he is the
best Christian that is most forward in Subsidiis, in helping of his brethren
with such good things as God has bestowed upon him.

Besides this visitation for good, and in mercy; there is also a visitation for
evil and in judgment. Thus to visit, is to visit in anger or displeasure. And
so by a Synecdoche of the Genus for Species, to visit is to punish. Thus is God
said to visit, when with some sudden and unlooked scourge or calamity, he
takes vengeance upon men for their sins, which for a long time he seemed to
take no notice of.

So God visited the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, Exodus 20.5. He
visits, not only by taking notice of, and appre^ending children in their
fathers faults, but also by punishing them for the same; in as much as they are
given over to commit the transgressions of their fathers.

David in his devotions calls upon the Lord to visit the Heathen, Psalm. 59.5.
O Lord God of Hosts, the God of Israel, awake thou to visit the Heathen. Where,
to visit, is to visit for evil, to visit in judgment, in anger and
displeasure, it is to correct, it is to punish.

To such as depart from the Law of the Lord, and from that rule of
righteousness which it prescribes them to walk in, the Lord himself
threatens, that he will visit their transgression with the rod, and their
iniquity with stripes, Psalm. 89 32. And there to visit is taken in the worse
part, for, to visit in judgment, in anger or displeasure, for as much as it
brings a rod and stripes with it. It is to correct, it is to punish.

There is, Esaias 10.12. a commination against the King of Assyria, that same rod
of hypocrites, that his pride should be broken. It is thus delivered: I will
visit upon the fruit of the proud heart of the King of Ashur, and the glory of
his high looks. And there also to visit is in the worse part, for, to visit in
judgment, in ire, anger, or displeasure: It is to correct, it is to punish.

As in the now alleged places to visit signifies in the worse part, to visit
in judgment, in ire, anger, or displeasure, and by a consequent, to correct or
punish; so does it in my Text. And therefore for Visitabo, Iunius has
animaduertam. This same visiting is with him a punishing.

In the day that I shall visit] or punish. What? Prauaricationes Israel, says
the Vulgar Latin. The preuarications of Israel. The preuarications of Israel
are his swaruings from truth, reason, and honesty. Iunius translates them,
Defectiones, the reuoltings or slippings of Israel. Our English has the
transgressions of Israel, by which name sins are called, because they exceed
the bounds and marks which God by his Law has appointed unto us, Drusius.
Calvin. Gualter. ^renti^s.
for the moderating of our desires and affections. Some here have Scelera
Israel, the wickedness, lewdness, or naughtiness of Israel.

These general appellations do direct us to particular sins, to
covetousness, to pride, to cruelty, to unjust exactions, to robbing and
spoiling of the poor; these were the sins that reigned and raged in Israel;
in the Kingdom of the Ten tribes, or the Kingdom of Israel, called in the
precedent verse, The house of Jacob: and these were the sins, for which the
Lord was resolved to punish Israel; as it is also signified in the second verse
of this Chapter. There is a Visitabo as well as here: Visitabo super vos omnes
iniquitates vestras. I will visit upon you, or I will punish you, for all your
iniquities: Visitabo, I will do it; I will visit, I will punish. I, the Lord
God, the God of Hosts, will visit the transgressions of Israel upon him. Whence
arises this observation: Whatsoever visitation or punishment befalls any of
us in this life, it is laid upon us by the hand of God, by his good will and
pleasure.

The Visitabo in my Text does warrant this truth. A day there shall be, wherein
Visitabo, I shall visit the transgressions of Israel upon him. I shall do it.

When the world was grown so foul with sin, that it deserved to be washed
with a flood, God himself undertook the visitation, Genesis 6.7. I will destroy
man, whom I have created from the face of the earth. And verse. 17. Behold I,
even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the earth to destroy all flesh.

Concerning the sin of the people, that great and grievous sin, when they
made them Gods of gold, the Lord says unto Moses, Exodus 32.34. In the day when
I visit, then will I visit their sin upon them: When I see good to punish
them, I my self will punish them.

For the disobedient and despisers of the will of the Lord, the Lord has a
Visitabo too. Leuit. 26.16. Visitabo vos velociter; I will visit you quickly
with terrors, with consumptions, with burning agues, that shall consume the
eyes, and cause sorrow of heart, with the sword, with famine, and with
pestilence. Visitabo vo^ velociter, I will quickly visit you. I will do it*

Monstrous and grievous were the sins of Sodom and Gomorrah, that were to be
revenged by so fearful a judgment, as is a rain of brimstone and fire. But
how fell that rain upon them? The Text is, Genesis 19.24. The Lord rained upon
Sodom and upon Gomorrah, brimstone and fire from the Lord out of Heaven. The
Lord rained, says the Text. Then not man, not devil, not necromancy, not any
thing in nature was the cause that this befell those Cities; but the very power
and wrath of God, of a displeased God, at so great abomination as was there
committed, sent down that rain upon them. The Lord was he that gave that
rain.

Prodigious were the plagues wherewith the land of Egypt was visited. I look
into the Sacred story, and there I see above them, Exodus 9.23.
thunder, hail, lightning, tempests: one while Exodus 10.22.
no light at all, another while such fearful flashes as had more terror than
the darkness. I see under them, 7.20.
the waters changed into blood; the earth swarming with 8.6.
frogs and 10.13.
grasshoppers. I see about them 8.24.
swarms of flies, by which the land was corrupted. I see their 9.23.10.15.
fruits destroyed, their 9.6.
cattle dying, their 12.30.
children dead. Turning mine eyes unto themselves, I see them very loathsome
with 8.17.
lice; and deformed with 8.10.
scabs, boiles, and botches. Grievous indeed were these visitations, but who
was he that wrought them? It was the Lord. For so the Text runs, Exodus 7.5.
The Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord, when I stretch forth mine hand
upon Egypt.

Who was it but the Lord that smote Nabal, that he died? 1 Samuel 25.38. Ask of
Esaias, who it is that forms the light, and creates darkness; that makes
peace, and creates evil? he will tell you it is the Lord that does all these
things, Chap. 45.7. It is the Lord does all. ^^ght and peace are the symbols of
prosperity; darkness and evil, of adversity; so the meaning of the place will
be, that the Lord is a doer, not only in the prosperity, but also in the
adversity, wherewith this life is seasoned.

Thus have you the confirmation of my observation, which was, that Whatsoever
visitation or punishment befalls any of us in this life, it is laid upon us
by the hand of God, by his good will and pleasure.

One reason hereof is; because nothing is done in this world, but the Lord is
the principal doer of it. Nothing is done without him: no, not in the carriage
of a lottery, which in man's judgment seems of all things to be the most
casual; yet therein does Gods hand appear. Solomon avouches it, Prou. 16.33.
The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposition thereof is of the Lord.
Let Lots be cast into the lap, some hat, or cap, or pot, or box, some secret
and close place, from whence the drawing of them forth may seem to be merely
accidental: yet it is nothing so. For God by his infinite and eternal
providence does both generally and particularly, wholly and altogether direct
and order them. Now if Gods hand be found in the disposing of Lots; shall it
not be found in the ordering of the visitations and punishments that are
incident to us in this life for our evil deeds?

Another reason hereof may be, because all power is of God and from him alone.
There is no creature in the world, devil, man, or other, that has power any
way to hurt or molest us, but from the Lord. All power is his. He alone makes
the earth to open her mouth, and Exodus 15.12. Numb. 16.32.
swallow up his adversaries. He alone Job 9.5.
remoueth mountains and ouerturneth them. He it is, that says to the North,
Esa. 43.6.
Give up; and to the South, Keep not back; and to the Deep, 44.27.
Be dry. He divides the 51.15.
roaring Sea, measures the Job 28.25.
winds and waters; Dan. 4.25.
rules in the kingdoms of men. Whatsoever he is pleased to do, Psalm. 135.6.
that does He in Heaven and in Earth: in the Seas, and all deep places. There
is no power, but from him. And therefore for this reason also it is true, that
Whatsoever visitation or punishment befalls us in this life, it is laid upon
us by the hand of God, by his good will and pleasure.

From the reasons of this observation, proceed we to see what profit we may
reap from hence, for the bettering and amendment of our sinful lives.

First, from hence we learn in all our troubles and calamities to look up to
God, as the chief and principal Author of them, from whom they come; and upon
our selves and our sins, the sole procurers of them, and for whose sake they
are sent. Eliphar among his aduertisements given unto Job, has this for one,
Misery comes not forth of the dust, neither does trouble spring out of the
ground, Job 5.6. Warning Job thereby to have an eye to God, as the Author of
his affliction.

Its very true, affliction comes not upon us at all adventures: it proceeds
not from the Earth, or the Air, or the Heaven: it is the hand of God that is
heavy upon us for our sins. Great is our folly, that we gaze about here and
there, wandering up and down in our own imaginations, and searching all the
corners of our wits to find out the causes of our calamities without us,
whereas indeed the true and right cause of them is within us. We are evermore
accusing either heat or cold, or drought or moisture, or the air, or the
ground, one thing or other to be the cause of our miseries, but we will not be
brought to acknowledge their true and proper cause, even the sin that
reigns in us. I deny not, but the Lord has secret causes, whereof we know
not, either the manifestation of his own works, or the trial of our faith;
yet the revealed and original cause of all our miseries, has his beginning
and springhead from within us; from our iniquities.

The Prophet Jeremy, Lament. 3.39. makes this enquiry: Wherefore should a
living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sin, wherefore should
he complain? Whereunto he fits this answer, man suffers for his sins:
implying thus much, that it is mere folly for a man to vex his soul, in
mis-iudging of his estate, and seeking bypath to wind himself out of
miseries; since miseries befall no man, but for his sins. Whereupon sweetly
Pelican, Non murmuret afflictus contra Dominum, Let not the man that is in
affliction murmr against the Lord, for the Lord does all things well. Sed si
quid patitur imputet peccatis suis, quae Deus impunita non sinit: But if he
suffer any thing, let h^^h lay the blame thereof upon his sins, which God
leaves not unpunished.

Our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, having cured the man that had been
diseased eight and thirty years, and finding him in the Temple, advised him to
consider the cause of his so long and lamentable a visitation; saying unto him,
Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee,
Ioh. 5.14. intimating, that his disease of so long continuance was laid upon
him for his sins. Out of doubt this diseased man thought himself happy, when
he was restored to health: yet lest he should rest therein, our Savior
tells him, he must change his heart, and sin no more, lest a worse thing
should befall him. Sciebat Dominus ei quem salvum fecerat, meritis peccatorum
illum etiam carnis accidisse languorem: Augustine de fide and operibus, cap.
20. The Lord knew, that that same infirmity of body upon the man, whom he had
healed, befell him for his sins sake.

I need not press other instances of holy Writ for the further illustration of
the point in hand, since my Text is plain for it. By my Text its plain, that
the visitation which the Lord was resolved to lay upon the house of Jacob, was
for the preuarications thereof; it was for their reuoltings, and
transgressions, and wickedness: it was for the sins of Israel. The sins of
Israel were the cause of Gods visitation upon them.

Wherefore, Beloved, let every visitation of God upon us, be unto us a Sermon
of repentance, to put us in remembrance of our sins, and to admonish us, not
to sow any more upon the furrows of unrighteousness, lest we reap a more
plentiful harvest of affliction, and whenever any visitation shall be upon
us, let us desire God to sanctify the cross unto us, that it may consume
sin in us, and provoke us to a more holy conversation. Thus have you your
first use.

Now in the second place, the consideration of this truth, that whatsoever
visitation or punishment befalls any of us in this life, (...) is laid upon
us by the hand of God, may teach us to have patience in our troubles, not to
repine or grudge when we are under the rod of affliction. Since it is the hand
of God that does visit us, we are to take it patiently, as a dutiful child
bears the chastisements of his loving father.

This was the practice of holy David, Psalm. 39.9. where he says, Obmutui and
non aperui os meum, quoniam tu fecisti; Lord I was dumb and opened not my
mouth, because thou did it: Quoniam tu fecisti, because thou did it: this
was the fountain, whence he drew his patience. To the reuilings of the wicked,
to their reproaches, to their malicious detractions, to their scoffings, to
their injurious speeches, Obmutuit, he answered not a word, but was as the man
that is dumb, as he that has no tongue, as he whose mouth is shut: he excused
not himself, he returned no evil language, but he held his peace and bore it
patiently. The fountain of this his patience was, Quoniam tu fecisti, because
thou did it. Lord, thou did it: But thou art a Father, I am thy son:
therefore what thou did, thou did it for my good; and therefore I hold my
peace.

Out of this fountain Job drew his patience. When he had lost his children,
and was deprived of all his goods, he murmured not, nor charged he God
foolishly. All he said was, Dominus abstulit, the Lord has taken away, and he
has done so by good right, Quia etiam dedit, for first he gave it, Job 1.21.
The ground of this his patience was, Domine tu fecisti; Lord, thou have done
it. Thou Lord have taken from me my children, and all my substance; and
therefore I hold my peace.

Out of this very Fountain Christ himself drew his patience; when commanding
Peter to put up his sword into the sheath, he asked him this question, Calicem,
quem dedit mihi Pater, Job. 18.11.
non bibam illum? The cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it?
Domine tu fecisti; my Father has tempered this cup for me, and I will drink
it. This cup is the cup of the Passion of Christ, the cup of his sufferings,
which God gave unto him, Vt Pater, non vt ludex, says Rupertus. God gave this
cup unto him, as a Father^ not as a Judge: and he gave it to him, Amore, non
ira; voluntate, non necessitate; gratia, non vindicta. It was of love, not of
wrath; it was voluntary, not of necessity; it was of grace, not for vengeance,
that this cup was given him. But how did he drink it? Here may we with
Cornelius Mussus, Bishop of Bitonto, in his Passion Sermon cry out; O infinitam
dulcis Jesus nostri patientiam! O the infinite patience of our swe^^ Jesus!
Dedit illis carnem suam, vt tractarent eam pro sua libidine; he committed unto
the Jews his flesh, to do with it at their pleasure. They insulted over him,
and he resisted not; they threatened him, and he answered not: they loaded him
with injuries, and he sustained them; they bound him fast, and he withstood
them not; they smote him, and he endured it; they flouted him, and he held his
peace; they railed against him, and he defended not himself; they cursed him,
and he prayed for them. O the infinite patience of our sweet Jesus, which he
drew from this fountain, Domine tu fecisti; Lord, thou have provided this cup
for me, and I refuse it not!

Domine tu fecisti; Lord thou have done it: It is the bottomless fountain of
patience, never to be exhausted or drawn dry. If thy wife, thy children, thy
kinsfolks, thy friends or others be taken from thee by the stroke of death; if
thou lose thy goods by water, by fire, by war, or otherwise, thou may
refresh thy languishing soul with the water of this fountain; Domine tu
fecisti; Lord thou have done it.

If thy self be visited with sickness, and so, that there is no soundness in
thy flesh, nor rest in thy bones; Psalm. 38.3.
yet if thou draw from this fountain, the sorrow and bitterness of thy
visitation will be assuaged. It must needs be a great comfort to every child
of God to meditate hereupon, that our sickness, yea that every pang and fit of
our sickness is from God; that the manner of it, the measure of it, the time
of it, and the matter of it is of God. And it may give us good assurance that
God will be merciful and gracious unto us, seeing he that strikes us is our
loving Father, and in the stroke cannot ^orget his former compassions, but will
make all things fall out to further our salvation. God is faithful; he lays
not upon us more strokes than we are able to bear, 1 Cor. 10.13.
but makes a way for our escape. Psalm. 41.3.
He strengthens us upon the bed of languishing, and makes all our bed in our
sickness. He puts our tears into his bottle. Psalm. 56.8. Cant. 2.6.
Are they not all in his book? His left hand is under our head, and his right
hand embraces us. Beloved Christians, we should comfort one another in these
things.

Thirdly, is it true, Beloved? Are all our visitations and punishments in this
life laid upon us by the hand of God? Here then may we take direction, whither
to make our recourse in the day of visitation. And whither may that be, but to
the same hand of God that visits? God smites, and no man heals; God makes
the wound, and no man restores. No man heals! no man restores! Therefore
put not thy trust in man; for there is no help in him: but put thy trust in
God; for as he kills, so he makes alive again; as he brings down to the
grave, so he raises up again. So sings Hannah, 1 Samuel 2.6. The Lord kills
and makes alive; he brings down to the grave, and brings up.

What then shall become of the Physician? May I not seek to him in time of
sickness? Seek not first to him, as Asa did, 2 Chronicles. 16.12. lest thou be
condemned, as Asa was, for seeking not to the Lord, but to the Physician. But
seek thou first unto the Lord. First, be thou reconciled to him, who is the
chief Physician of soul and body, and then take thy course. For my part I
have no hope, that the Physicians help shall profit me, and prosper with me,
until I be at peace with God, and have renewed my repentance from dead works
for my daily sins.

And let this suffice to have been spoken of the first branch of my second
general part, which was, the resolution of God to punish Israel for sin. Now
follows the second branch: and that is, that the punishment so resolved upon
by the Lord, shall reach to their holiest places, to their houses of religion;
in these words: I will also visit the Altars of Bethel, and the ho^^es of the
Altar shall be cut off and fall to the ground.

Visitabo super Altaria Bethel] Here is a Visitabo like the former; a visiting
in the worse part, a visiting for evil, and in judgment. Visitabo, I will
visit upon the Altars of Bethel, that is with Petrus Lusitanus, Destruam illa,
vt meum sentiant furorem: I will destroy those Altars: they shall feel my
fury. The like phrase is that, Exodus 12.12. In cunctis Dijs Aegypti faciam
judicia: Against all the Gods of Egypt will I do judgment; and that, Number.
33.4. Dominus in Diis eorum exercuerat vltionem; Upon the Gods of the
Aegytians, the Lord has executed vengeance. In both places the Gods of Egypt,
are the Idols of Egypt; and the Lords doing of judgments, or executing of
vengeance upon them, is all one with the Visitabo here. I will visit the Altars
of Bethel, that is, I will do judgments, or I will execute vengeance upon the
Altars of Bethel.

Bethel] Some Jews, as R. Kimhi, and R. Esaias are of opinion, that there were
two Towns of this name; the one belonging to the Tribe of Benjamin, as
appears Josh. 18.22. the other in the Tribe of Ephraim, as it is manifested,
Judges 1.22. This opinion of two Bethels, Cap. 16.2. and 18.3.
Andrew Masius in his Comment upon Ioshuah rejects as needless.

Bethel here is that, which in former time was called Luz, which name it had
from the abundance of Nuts or Almonds which grew there, Hieron. qu. Heb. in
Genesis Tom. 3.
for Luz in Hebrew signifies a Nut or an Almond. Near to this City Jacob
slept, when he saw the vision of Angels ascending and descending upon the
ladder, from whence he called the name of that place Bethel, Genesis 28.19. and
Bethel is by interpretation the house of God.

This Bethel is not Jerusalem, nor is it the mountain of Moria, as some
Hebrews, and Lyranus, and Caietan do affirm: but as Abulensis, Adrichomius,
and others, it is a City distant from Jerusalem some eighteen miles, situate
in the Lot of the Tribe of Ephraim, near unto Sichem. Here in this City, King
Jeroboam, he that was the son of Nebat, set up a calfe of gold to be
worshipped by the revolted Tribes, 1 King. 12.26.
that they ^eed not be at the pains to go up to Jerusalem to worship. Thus
the place, whereof faithful Jacob said, Surely this is no other, but Bethel,
the house of God, Genesis 28.17.
is by faithless Jeroboam turned into Beth-auen, the house of an idol, and is
named Beth-auen by the Prophet Hoseah, chap. 4.15. and in other places. Hos.
5.8. and 10.5.
Such is the Bethel, the visitation of whose Altars the Lord here undertakes:
Visitabo super Altaria Bethel, I will visit the Altars of Bethel.

The Altars!] What Altars? The words immediately following make mention but of
one Altar, and that whose horns should be cut off: and the sacred story, 1
King. 12.32. speaks but of one Altar in Bethel. How then is it that the
Altars of Bethel are here to be visited?

It may be, here is Euallage numeri, one number for another, which is in use
sometimes with the Latin; as when they say, Flumina Nili, or Montes Sion, the
rivers of Nilus, for the river Nilus, or the mountains of Sion, for Mount
Sion: Or rather in progress of time, other Altars were erected for other
Idols, when the Calfe of gold was worshipped but upon one. And this is the
conjecture of Drusius, because he finds, Hos. 8.11. that Ephraim had made
many Altars to sin: and Hos. 10.1. that Israel had increased Altars according
to the multitude of his fruit. And it is not unlikely, but that in course of
time, they had multiplied and increased their Altars: to which this visitabo
casts an eye; I will visit the Altars of Bethel. It follows: And the horns
of the Altar shall be cut off]

Cornua altaris maximi and principalis: so Lusitanus, the horns of the Altar;
of the greatest and most principal Altar. For of the rest it was said but now,
Visitabo super altaria Bethel, I will visit the Altars of Bethel.

The horns of the Altar shall be cut off] The Altar of burnt offering, Exodus
27.2. had four horns upon the four corners thereof. These horns were
Eleuationes quaedam, as Abulensis speaks in his fourth quest. upon Exodus 29.
they were pieces of wood ascending above the Altar, made like unto horns, of
the very wood of the Altar ouer-laid with brass, and were with the Priests
finger anointed with the blood of the sacrifice, to betoken Quatuor Euangeliis
velatam Christi passionem, Leuit. 47, 9.
as Cyrillus or rather Hesychius upon Leuiticus has observed; the four horns
of the Altar besprinkled with blood, betokened the passion of Christ covered in
the four Evangelists.

Salomons Altar, Ezech. 43.15. had likewise four horns. These Villalpandus
takes to be quatuor taurorum cornua, four bulls horns, which rose upward
from the four corners of the Altar to the height of a cubit, as if they grew
from the head of a bull. These horns were not only for ornament, but they
also served to keep up the sacrifice from falling off.

Such were the horns of this Altar of Bethel, made in emulation of Salomons
Altar, as In Psalm. 78.27.474. ^. Salomonici altaris aemulabatur formam.
Lorinus affirms: and upon these is the sentence of the Lord here gone forth,
Amputabuntur, they shall be cut off and fall to the ground, utter desolation
shall betide them. Thorns and thistles shall grow upon them, as the Prophet
Hosea speaks, Chap. 10.8. A dissipation there shall be, both of Idol and
Idolater.

And now, O ye miserable and wretched Israelites, Dii, qui neque se, neque
altaria sua tueri possunt, Ribera.
quomodo vos tuebuntur? The gods which can neither defend themselves, nor their
Altars, how shall they defend you? The Lord will take your Idols from you, will
overthrow your Altars, the very places of your delight: yea the horns of your
Altars, speciosissima instrumenta voluptatum, the fairest and goodliest
spectacles, wherein you take pleasure, shall be cut off, and fall to the
ground. According to this prediction it fell out, either through the Earthquake
in the days of Vzziah King of Judah, Zach. 14.5. 2 King. 17.6.23.15.
or when Salmanasser King of Assyria carried Israel into captivity, or under
the reformation of Josiah, as already it has been touched.

Now from this commination of judgment against Bethel and the Altars there,
namely, that the Lord will visit the Altars of Bethel, and that the horns of
the Altar shall be cut off and fall to the ground, arises this doctrine:
Places of Idols, together with the Idolaters, shall be punished with desolation
and confusion: the places with desolation, the Idolaters with confusion.

Places of Idols shall be punished with desolation. Gilgal, once famous Gilgal,
ennobled by many accidents, which happened there, became afterward through the
Idolatry there committed, so infamous, and of such bad note, that the people of
Judah are forbidden to resort unto it, Hos. 4.15. But where is she now? Lies
she not under the ruins of desolation? And Bethel once famous too, for that
she was the house of God, by the like abuse became Beth-auen, the house of an
Idol. But where is she now? Doubtless she is measured with the line of
desolation, according to this prophecy.

As the places of Idols are punished with desolation: so are the Idolaters with
confusion.

Idolaters, whilst they flourish with prosperity, they flatter themselves in
their sins, and become hereby more obstinate in their superstitions,
imagining that they are priuileged from Gods judgments, and have the fruition
of all his blessings for their false worship sake: and if the hand of God hap
to lie heavy upon them, then do they double their devotions to their Idols,
that by their help they may be delivered. But when they find their hope
frustrate, and themselves forsaken of their Idols when most they need their
help, then overwhelmed with confusion, they bewail their former folly, that
they spent upon them so much unrewarded cost and bootlesse labor.

Of this confusion or shame, the portion of Idolaters, I thus read, Psalm.
97.7. Confundantur omnes, qui adorant sculptilia: Confounded be all they that
serve graven images, that boast themselves of Idols. And Esaias 42.17. They shall
be turned back, they shall be greatly ashamed, that trust in graven images,
Esaias 1.29.44.9.45.16. Ierem. 51.47. Hos. 4.19, etc.
and say to the moulten images, Ye are our gods. Other places I might produce
to warrant this confusion and shame of the Idolater, but the time forbids me.
Yet an example hereof you have in Baals Priests, 1 King. 18.29. who were
confounded with shame, when they were in the sight of the people abandoned of
his help, when they most needed, and implored it.

Thus is my doctrine confirmed. Will you now see how useful it is? Here then
see condemned all such, as do religiously worship for God, that which is not
God: such are Infidels, who worship devils, men, and other creatures, erecting
to their honor graven and carved images, pictures, and statues. From this
Idolatry we may not exempt the now-Church of Rome, for that she yields
religious worship to creatures, Angels, and men: and to men not such only, as
have been held for Saints in respect of their faith and holy life: but also
such as have been noted for their wicked conversation, as their Saint George,
Saint Francis, Saint Dominick, Ignatius Loiola, and the like: yea such as never
had any being in the world, as their Saint Hippolytus, Saint Christopher, Saint
Catharine, fictitious and counterfeited Saints: to such they have set up
pictures, images, and statues, and those forsooth must be worshipped, and that
with religious worship.

And do they not, think you, deserve it, since they are so wonderously decked
and adorned? Garlands and Coronets are set on their heads, precious pearls
hang about their necks, their fingers shine with rings beset with precious
stones; their bodies are clothed with garments stiff with gold. And are not
these worthy to be adored? If you should see the images of their men Saints,
you would believe they were some Princes of Persia, by their proud apparel:
and the idols of their women-saints you would take to be some nice and well
trimmed harlots, tempting their Paramours to wantonness.

The Churches and Chapels that are thus bedeckt and trimmed, are they not as
this Bethel with her golden calfe? Yes. And if there be no reformation, a time
will come, when the lot of Bethel shall be theirs, even to those Idoll-houses,
desolation, and confusion to the Idolaters.

Secondly, shall idolatrous places and persons be punished, they with
desolation, these with confusion? Let the consideration hereof inflame our
hearts to be more zealously thankful to the Lord, for that having freed us
from Heathenish and ^^tichristian darkness, from idolatry, and the service of
graven images, he has given us the clear light of his gracious Gospel,
through the illumination whereof we may be brought to the right knowledge of
the true worship of him, the only living God. For so, by his sole goodness
are we delivered from all fear of the punishment allotted to Bethel, and the
worshippers of the Idol there.

Thirdly, from this consideration we are to be admonished, that abhorring and
renouncing idols, and all manner of idolatrous superstition, which will leave
us without help and hope in our greatest extremities, we do cleave fast unto
the true Jehovah, performing unto him such faithful and sincere service as he
requires in his Word, without the mixture of humane inventions: so shall we in
the day of visitation be preserved from all evil.

But say, that the Lord for his glory and our trial will bring us to the
touchstone of adversity, and suffer us to taste of some calamity and misery,
yet will he give us such a comfortable feeling of his favor, and will so arm
us with power and patience to bear our troubles, that we shall not need to
fear confusion.

There is no fear of confusion or shame where true religion is. No: there is
none. True religion cleansed from all dregs of Idolatry, makes not ashamed. So
says the kingly Prophet, Psalm. 34.5. They shall look unto him, and run unto
him, and their faces shall not not be ashamed. They, the truly religious, the
humble and faithful, shall look unto the Lord, shall diligently and carefully
attend for aid and succor from him: they shall run unto him with haste in
their troubles, in assurance of finding ease; and their faces shall not be
ashamed. They shall not hang down their heads and countenances for shame, as
they were wont to do, but shall lift up their heads, shall look on high, and
shall go with confidence to the God of their salvation.

That promise of the Lord, Joel 2.26. My people shall never be ashamed,
repeated in the verse following, My people shall never be ashamed, is a promise
to the religious; for the religious only are his people. My people, says he,
shall never ^e ashamed. O what a marvelous benefit a man has by religion,
which he cannot have by any other thing in the world? There is nothing in all
our life, whereof we have not need to repent, except it be our religion, the
fear of God. Our words, our works, our gettings, our spendings, our wanderings
up and down, our negligence in our vocations, our sleeping, our eating, our
drinking out of measure; of all these we have need to repent. Our thoughts, our
toys, our trifles, our wantonness, our lust, our hatred, our wrath, our malice,
our many other enormities; of all these we may well be ashamed: but of true
religion and the fear of the Lord, we neither need to repent, nor to be
ashamed. If thou forsakest the world, and hate Idols, and beleeuest in the
Lord, and mournest for thy sins, and studiest the Scriptures, and hear the
Preachers, and obeyest the Gospel, and prayest, and watchest, and fastest, and
endurest many troubles, and art ready to die if need be; and all for love of
the Lord Jesus: thou need not to repent, or to be ashamed hereof. For happy
art thou. Thou have fought a good fight. Go on with courage; finish thy
course, keep the faith. Henceforth there is laid up for thee a Crown of
righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give thee in that
great day of his visitation: and not unto thee only, but to them also that
love his appearing: even to us all, holy Father, let that Crown be given for
thy sweet Son Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

THE Seventeenth Lecture
AMOS 3.15. And I will smite the winter house with the summer house, and the
houses of Iuory shall perish, and the great houses shall have an end, says the
Lord.


WHen God punishes the sins of a Nation, he uses such severity, that he
spares not the very places, wherein the sins were acted. Hereof this
Scripture yields a demonstration. It presents unto us a resolution of God to
punish the sins of Israel. The places where they sinned, were either
religious or profane. Religious were the places of their public assembly for
the worship of their Gods. Profane places were all other of ordinary and
common use, as their edifices and houses of habitation of all sorts. Both
places, religious and profane, had their parts in the punishment here resolved
upon.

The resolution for the punishment is in the beginning of the fourteenth verse;
there it is intimated, that a day should come, wherein the Lord would visit the
transgressions of Israel upon him.

In this visitation or punishment their religious places or houses of religion,
were to have a portion. It is plain by the latter part of the fourteenth
verse, I will visit the altars of Beth-el: and the horns of the Altar shall be
cut off, and fall to the ground.

Nor were their religious places only to partake of this visitation; but other
places also, profane and civil, their places of ordinary and common use,
their edifices and dwelling houses. Their doom is forespoken in the beginning
of the 15. verse; The winter house shall be smitten; so shall the summer house;
the houses of Iuory shall perish, and the great houses shall have an end.

For the seal and assurance of all, the conclusion of this Chapter is Neum
Jehovah, says the Lord.

Of Gods resolution to punish the sins of Israel, together with the
visitation of their religious places, I entreated in my last Sermon. Now am I
to proceed with the punishment intended to their profane and civil places, to
their places of ordinary and common use, to their edifices and dwelling houses,
thus delivered in this fifteenth verse, And I will smite the winter house with
the summer house, and the houses of Iuory shall perish, and the great houses
shall have an end.

For the easier handling of these words, I am to speak of an action, and of
the object thereof: of a smiting, and of the things to be smitten: The smiting
is the Lords, the things to be smitten belong to the Israelites. Of both in
their order. First for the Action, for the smiting, which is Gods.

Percutiam, I will smite. The actions of God are of two sorts, Immanent, or
Transient. Immanent are those, that remain within himself, as to understand,
to will, to love. For always and from all eternity God in himself
understands, wills, and (...). The Transient actions of God are such as he
in time produces without himself. So he created the world, he rules it, and
works all in all: he justifies, he regenerateth, he punishes. And of this
rank is his action of smiting.

Percu^iam, I will smite. God in holy Scripture is said to smite, either
immediately, of himself, without means; or mediatly, when he uses means; as
Angels, good or bad; or men, godly or wicked, or other creatures.

God immediately, of himself and without means, smote all the firstborn in
the Land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sat on his throne,
unto the firstborn of the captive that was in the dungeon, Exodus 12.29. God
of himself smote them all. And though he oft-times uses means, the ministry
of Angels, men, or other creatures for the smiting of transgressors, yet is
God justly said to smite them. For the axiom of the Schools is, Actio non
attribuitur instrumento proprie, sed principali agenti: Tho. 1.2. qu. 16.1. c.
fi.
the action is not properly attributed to the instrument, but to the principal
agent. The building of a house is not to be ascribed to the axe, but to the
Carpenter that uses the axe. Angels, men, and other creatures are unto God,
but as the axe is to the Carpenter, but as his instruments. When soever
therefore through their ministry any evil shall betide us, we are to
acknowledge God to be the principal doer thereof. He it is that smites us.

2 King. 19.35.
It is true, that an Angel in one night smote in the camp of the Assyrians an
hundred fourscore and five thousand, Esaias 37.36. The Angel smote them, that
is the letter; But it was Angelus Domini; it was the Angel of the Lord. The
Lord sent that Angel to cut off all the mighty men of valor, 2 Chronicles. 32.21.
and the Leaders and Captains in the camp of King Sennacherib. The Lord sent
him. The Lord then was agens principalis, he was the principal doer in that
slaughter, the Angel was but his messenger, to put in execution the work of
the Lord. So the Lord was he that smote the Assyrians.

Israel under the conduct of Moses smote two mighty Kings, Sibon of the
Amorites, and Og of Bashan, Numb. 21.35. there Israel smote them; yet, Psalm.
136.17. the Lord is said to have smitten them. Percussit Reges magnos, He smote
great Kings, and slew famous Kings, Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og the King
of Bashan. The Lord smote them. The Lord then was Agens principalis: he was the
principal doer in this great overthrow; Israel did but execute what the Lord
would have done. So the Lord was he, that smote those Kings.

If a 1 King. 20.36.
Lion smite us upon the way: if either Esaias 49.10.
hunger, or thirst, if the heat or the Sun smite us: if our Vines Psalm. 78
47, 48.
be smitten with hail, our Sycomore trees with frost, our flocks with hot
thunderbolts, our Deuteronomy. 28.22.
corne-fields with blasting and with mildew: if our selves be smitten with
consumptions, with fevers, with inflammations, with extreme burnings, with the
Verse. 27.
botch of Egypt, with the Emrods, with the scab, and with the itch, whereof we
cannot be healed: if we be smitten with Verse. 28.
madness, with blindness, with a stonishment of heart: if we be any way
smitten, whatsoever the means may be, it is the Lord that smites us.

Percutiet te Dominus, the Lord shall smite thee. Verse. 22, 27, 28, 35.
It is in one Chapter, in the 28. of Deuteronomie four times repeated, to show
unto us that if we be smitten with any the now mentioned miseries, or any
other, it is the Lord that smites us.

The Percutiam in my text serves for the corroboration of this truth.
Percutiam, I will smite the winter house with the summer house. If then but a
house be smitten, be it a winter house, or a summer house, the Lord is he that
has smitten it.

So from this percutiam, I will smite, I, I, the Lord will smite, arises this
doctrine: In the miseries or calamities, that do befall us in this life, we
must not look to the instruments, but to the Lord, that smites by them.

Thus have the godly ever done. Holy Job in his time did it. The loss of all
his substance and children by the Sabeans, Job 1.15.
Chaldeans, fire from Heaven, and a great wind from beyond the wilderness,
could not turn away his eyes from the God of Heaven to those second causes.
Those he knew to be but instruments; the Lord was agens principalis; he was the
chief doer. This he acknowledges, and blesses God for it: Dominus abstulit,
The Lord that gave me all, has taken all away, blessed be the name of the
Lord, Job 1.21.

Such was the practice of King David. Shimei, 2 Samuel 16.5.
a man of the family of the house of Saul, comes forth from Bahurim, Verse. 6.
curses still as he comes, meets the King, casts stones at him, raileth upon
him, calls him to his face a man of blood, Verse. 7.
and a man of Belial, a murderer and a wicked man. At so high a strain of
insolency, Verse. 9.
how bears the King himself? Does he suffer the railers head to be cut off?
or, makes he any show of impatiencie? No, His eye is to him, that is agens
principalis, or Primus ^^^tor, even to the Lord, the Principal agent and first
mouer in all this business. Shimei, he knows, is but the instrument to work
the will of the Lord. And therefore he says to Abishai, 2 Samuel 16.10. Let him
curse, because the Lord has said unto him, Curse David. Who shall then say,
Wherefore have thou done so? Suffer him to curse, for the Lord has bidden him.

Not unlike was the carriage of the blessed Apostles, Peter, John, and the
rest, Act. 4.27. Though Herod, Pontius Pilat, the Gentiles, and the people of
Israel, had crucified and put to death the Lord of life, our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ; yet did not the Apostles therefore grow into a rage, or bitter
speeches against them. In that great execution of the Lord Jesus, there was
upon the hand of God. They knew, that Herod, Pontius Pilat, the Gentiles, and
the Jews were but instruments. So their acknowledgement before the Lord, verse.
28. Of a truth both Herod and Pontius Pilat, and the Gentiles, and the People
of Israel were gathered together against thine holy Child Jesus, for to do
whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done.

Thus according to the examples of holy Job, King David, and the blessed
Apostles, we are in the miseries and calamities that do befall us in this
life, to look not so much to the instruments, as to the Lord that smites by
them.

And why so? The reason is, because all instruments are second causes; Angels,
men, or other creatures have no power at all against us, but what is given them
of God. So Jesus told Pilat, who had proudly said unto him, Know thou not,
that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to release thee? No, says
Jesus, thou could have no power at all against me, except it were given thee,
(...), from above, Io. 19.11. I will but touch the uses.

One is, for the reproof of such, who are of opinion, that God does only
suffer many things to be done. If he be agens principalis, the principal Agent
in all actions, and all other agents are but his instruments, then is he not
only a sufferer, but also an orderer, guider, and governor of all actions.

The second is for the confutation of such as in their vain thoughts imagine,
that the miseries and calamities which befall men in this life, are but their
misfortunes. If God be agens principalis, if he be the principal agent in all
that is done upon the earth, then wretched man bleare not thine own eyes to
ascribe that to haphazzard wherein the strokes of Gods hand appear.

The third is for the admonishing of us all, that in our miseries, or
calamities, we behave our selves with patience toward the instruments,
wherewith God smites us. It will very ill beseem a man to be like unto the
dog, that snatcheth at the stone thrown at him, without regard unto the
thrower.

The fourth is for consolation. It will be a comfort to us in misery and
distress, to remember that God is agens principalis, that he has a chief
hand in all our troubles, and that others, of what rank soever, are but his
instruments; and therefore they can no further prevail against us, than the
hand and counsel of God gives them leave. This our comfort may rest upon that
of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 10.13. God is faithful: he will not suffer us to be tempted
above that we are able to bear, but will even give an issue with the
temptation, that we may be able to bear it. Qui eni^^ dat t^ntanti Diabolo
licentia^, ipse dat tentatis misericordia^; Pet. Lomb. upon the place: For God
who gives the devil leave to smite, gives also his mercy to them, that are
smitten.

And thus from the Action, the smiting, which is the Lords, we are come to the
object of the Action, to the thing to be smitten, which do belong to the
Israelites. The things to be smitten were their houses: which are here
described from their use, and precious matter whereof they were; and state. For
use they had their winter houses and summer houses. For precious matter, they
had their houses of Iuory. For state they had their great houses. We will first
take a view of their houses for use, their winter houses, and their summer
houses. Of them it is here said, in the first branch of this fifteenth verse;
Percutiam d^mum hyemalem cum domo aestiua: I will smite the winter house with
the summer house.

Princes and great Lords of the East of old time had their change of houses: a
house for winter, and a house for summer. The winter house was turned toward
the South, and open to the heat of the Sun for warmth. Hieron. Rupert. Cyrill.
The summer house was turned toward the North from the Sun, and lay open to
the cool air. So, for the variety of seasons they would be provided either
for cold or heat.

Iehoiakim, King of Judah, had his winter house. For so we read, Ier. 36.22.
The King sat in the winter house in the ninth month, and there was a fire on
the hearth before him. And it is likely he had his summer house. Else why is
this called his winter house? His summer house may be that, Ier. 22.14. where
the King says, Aedificabo mihi domum latam, coenacula spatiosa: I will build
me a wide house, and large chambers. Those cha^bers R. Iunius. Piscator.
David calls coenacula ventosa, windy chambers, others, perflabilia, chambers
with through air; chambers with windows made of purpose to let in the air.
Look the place and you will find them sieled with Cedar, and painted with
Vermilion. And this might well be his summer house. But if you will have a
summer house in precise terms, turn ye to the book of Judges, Chap. 3.20.
There shall you find Eglou King of Moah sitting alone in a summer Parlour. Our
English Bible in the margent calls it a Parlour of cooling: just as Iunius
does, coenaculum refrigerationis, a chamber or parlour of refrigeration. The
old Latin calls it aestinum coenaculum, a summer chamber or parlour: the
Septuagint, (...), a summer garret in the highest part of the house.

Our Prophet here speaks of both houses together, the winter house and the
summer house, and threatens the demolition or ruin of them both. Tossarius
thus delivers it in his Paraphrase, Demolibor domum hyemalem simul and
aestinam, in quibus rex cumsuis lasciuire consueuit: I will demolish both
winter-house and summer house in which the King was wont with his minions to
play the wanton: I will overthrow them both.

It is not to be doubted, but that Amos by these winter and summer houses
notes the places of Princes and great ones of the State of Israel. As for the
poorer sort, it is enough for them, if they have but a cottage for their
shelter as well in the winter as in the summer season. They have no change of
houses, nor change they parts of their houses to dwell more warmely in the
winter, and more coolely in the summer. Non est ca commoditas pauperibus. No,
the poor are not so accommodated. One habitacle or mansion house suffices
the^ for all their life time. And therefore is this passage directed to the
rich, to the Princes and chief states of the kingdom of the ten Tribes, to
check them for their cost and pomp in building, and to assure them, that
their spacious and magnificent houses shall not stand them in any stead, when
the vengeance of God shall show it self against them.

That the rich are here intended, it is yet more plain by the second branch of
this fifteenth verse, which now follows.

Et peribunt domus eburneae, and the houses of Iuory shall perish] Thus are
their houses described ex materia pretiosa, from the precious matter, whereof
they were. They were domus eburneae; houses were they of Iuory.

The Hebrew calls them (...) Batte hasschen, the houses of a tooth, meaning the
tooth of the Elephant: and therefore these houses with the Greeks are (...),
houses of the Elephant, that is, of the tooth of the Elephant, which is Iuory.

Theophrastus affirms that there is a mineral Iuory found within the ground
as well black as white. Plin. Hist. Not. lib. 36. cap. 18.
But this is not of that. This is of the tooth, and white.

The teeth of Elephants were of a very high price, Plin. lib. 8. c. 10.
for that they yielded the matter of greatest request, and most commendable for
the making of the statues and images of the Heathen gods. In their Temples were
to be seen Elephants teeth of the greatest size; and yet in the marches of
Afric where it confineth with Aethiopia, the very principals and corner posts
of their houses were made of Iuory, yea therewith they made mounds and pales
both to enclose their grounds, and also to keep in their beasts within their
parks, if it be true which Polybius reports from the authority of King
Gulussa.

If Gulussa his testimony be true, it seems they had in those days no wan^ of
Iuory.

In the Sacred volume of Gods word, I read of benches of Iuory, Ezech. 27.6.
of beds of Iuory, Amos 6.4. of a Tower of Iuory, Cant. 7.4. of a house of Iuory
which King Ahab made, 1 King. 22.39. of Palaces of Iuory, Psalm. 45.8. Why then
may not the houses of Iuory in my text stand according to the history? Saint
Hierome thinks they may.

But the stream of Expositors runs another way. They will have these domus
eburneas to be but eburatas: Those houses of Iuory they will have to be only
houses covered with Iuory. With Jonathan in his paraphrase, they are not aedes
eburneae, houses of Iuory, but aedes ebore tectae and caelatae, houses covered
and engraued with Iuory. Nor does Mercerus think, that these houses of Iuory
were so called, as if they were all of Iuory, but because they were ebore
tessellatae, decked with Iuory checkerwise. Homer when he extolleth and sets
out in the highest degree the most stately palaces of Kings and Princes, Plin.
lib. 36 c. 6.
for the matter, wherewith they were wont to be adorned, he names brass, gold,
amber, silver, and Iuory. Iuory then was rather for ornament, than for a maine
building. And therefore well may these domus eburneae be but Eburatae, these
houses of Iuory may be but houses checkered, decked, inlaid, or trimmed with
Iuory. And though they were but such, yet such they were, that the poor could
not compass; so that from hence also it is evident, that this passage is
directed to the rich, to the Princes and chief States of the kingdom of the
ten Tribes, to check them for their sumptuous and proud buildings, and to
assure them that their houses of Iuory shall not stead them, when the vengeance
of God will show it self against them: For Peribunt domus eburneae, their
houses of Iuory shall perish.

There is yet a third branch of this 15. verse, which makes it probable that
this passage is directed to the rich, to the Princes and chief States of the
kingdom of the ten Tribes; and that is, Et deficient domus magnae; and the
great houses shall have an end. And how should the poor come by great houses?
With Iunius and Piscator, they are domus amplae, large, wide, lofty houses, and
of great compass: and are such houses for the poor? With the Hebrew Schools
they are not onl^ amplae, but also splendidae and magnificae, they are gorgeous
and magnificent. They are houses, not only of commodity and use, such as the
houses of the Vulgar and common sort use to b^, but such as have in them
superfluity, splendour, and pomp. And experience teaches that rich and great
men use to exceed, not only in their diet and apparel, but also in their
palaces and dwelling houses. Thus are the houses of the Israelites described
from the state; they are Domus magnae, great houses they are.

Great! yea, and many. For so the Vulgar Latin here reads, Dissipabuntur
aedes multae, many houses shall be brought to naught. Many houses! The reading
is embraced by Luther, Oecolampadius, Brentius, Pelican, Vatablus, Mercer, and
Drusius. Nor will I reject it, since the word in the original (...) Rabbim,
signifies both great and many. (...) great houses or many houses shall be
brought to naught, shall Oeco'amp.
cease, shall Drusius. Vatablus. Mercer. Iunius. Piscator.
have an end.

But is all this to be so for certain? Yes. For (...) Neum Jehovah, the Lord
has said it.

I will smite the winter house with the summer house; and the houses of iuory
shall perish, and the great houses, or many houses, shall have an end, Says
the Lord. Says the Lord] It is the seal and assurance of all, and makes for
the authority of this passage. Authority it had enough from the 13. verse,
Says the Lord God, the God of Hosts. It is here redoubled, Says the Lord.

Has the Lord said it? Then surely be will do it. Has the Lord spoken it?
Then out of doubt he will accomplish it. Numb. 23.19.
For he is not, as man, that he should lie, nor as the son of man, that he
should repent. All his words, yea, all the titles of all his words are Yea, and
Amen; Heaven and Earth shall perish, before one jot or one tittle of his words
shall pass unfulfilled. Matthew. 5.18.
He has said it, and he will not fail to make it good: I will smite the
winter house with the summer house, and the houses of iuory shall perish, and
the great houses shall have an end.

Thus much be spoken for the exposition of the words. Now let us see what
point of observation may from hence arise for our further profit.

In that our Prophet here ^^emeth to reprove and tax the richmen, Princes, and
others in the Kingdom of the Ten Tribes for their variety, cost, and state in
their buildings, by threatening destruction to their winter houses and summer
houses, to their houses of iuory, and to their great houses, this question is
propounded: Whether it be lawful for Kings, Princes, and other men of state to
build such houses?

Petrus Lusitanus thus resolves it. If Kings, Princes, and other men of state
be otherwise godly and faithful, and studious of Gods worship, and mindful of
the poor, they may without sin build such sumptuous and magnificent houses
and palaces, according to their own revenues and estate.

Such houses King Solomon built, and is not reproved. He was building of his
own house thirteen years. He built also the house of the forest of Lebanon:
1 King. 7.1.
and he made a house for Pharaohs daughter. All these houses were of precious
stones according to the measures of hewed stones, sawed with Sawes within and
without, even from the foundation unto the coping, 1 King. 7.9. These
doubtless were costly and magnificent houses, yet is Solomon commended for
building them.

And yet nevertheless is all such building blameworthy, and to be reproved,
if it exceed the measure of the ability and dignity of the builder. For then
there is a necessity of oppressing the poor. Against such builders there is a
woe gone forth, Ier. 22.13. Woe unto him that builds by unrighteousness, and
his chambers by wrong.

Again, though a builder exceed not the measure of his ability and dignity,
yet may his building be reproueable through the vanity of his intention; if
his intendment be not Gods honor, but his own praise; for haughtiness and
pride of mind makes the best action faulty.

So much for the question: proceed we to the observation.

From the demolition and overthrow here threatened, and after in due time
brought to pass upon the winter house, with the summer house, upon the houses
of iuory, and upon the great houses in the Kingdom of the Ten Tribes, w^ may
make this observation: that All the aid and succor a man has from his
buildings whatsoever, is vain, if once the wrath of God break forth against
him.

If once the wrath of God break forth against us, alas, what shall fair,
rich, and great buildings avail us? If these might have yielded any succor in
the day of the Lords visitation, the Israelites might have found it. But they
together with their buildings, though full of state and pomp, are perished and
come to naught. And is it not in like sort fallen out wi^h other most
flourishing common wealths, and most mighty Kingdoms? The daily change of
things does abundantly euict, that there is nothing in this world perpetual.

Here then may Filii huius seculi, this worlds darlings, some rich men, be
reproved for a vanity of theirs. They see that death comes alike to all; to the
rich, as to the poor; and yet they dream of nothing else, than of a
perpetuity of life here. For so they order all their ways, as if they were to
live here for ever. They build them houses, great and goodly houses, and spare
no cost to adorn and deck them gorgeously, supposing hereby to continue a
perpetuity of their name.

This vanity of theirs the Psalmist of old has very well discovered, Psalm.
49.10, 11. They see that wise men also die and perish together, as well as the
ignorant and foolish, and leave their riches for other. And yet they think,
that their houses shall continue for ever: and that their dwelling places shall
endure from generation to generation: and call their lands after their own
names.

By which their vanity they seem to acknowledge no other life but this;
Whatsoever we preach unto them of that better life, that heavenly and eternal
life, they believe it not; but rather they deride it as fabulous. But if at any
time they are convinced in conscience, that there remains after this a better
life, yet they desire it not. Their only desire and wish is, to dwell here for
ever. Their inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for ever, and
their dwelling places to all generations: and for this purpose, they call their
lands after their own names* They will no other Paradise but this.

As vain^ were they that built the Tower of Babel, Genesis 11.4. Go to, say they,
Let us build us a City, and a Tower, whose top may reach unto Heaven, and let
us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole
earth. Let us build us a City and a Tower! One reason is a desire of dominion.
Hugo says, Genesis 10.10.
Factum esse cupiditate regnandi: that Nimrod set forward the work, that it
might be the beginning and chief of his Kingdom. Another reason is, Ne
diuidamur, lest we be scattered. They built them a City and a Tower to
maintain society that they might dwell together, and not be scattered upon the
face of the whole earth. Antiq. Iud. lib. 1. cap. 5.
Josephus thinks they did it of purpose, to oppose themselves against the
ordinance and commandment of God, who would have them dispersed into diverse
parts, that the world might be replenished. A third reason is, Vt celebremus
nomen nostrum, to get us a name. They built them a City and a Tower to grow
famous thereby. De confus. ling. 468.
Philo says, they did write their names in this Tower, to revive their memory
with posterity.

In this their proud enterprise they sinned grievously. They sinned through
their impiety toward God. Erigebant turrim contra Dominum, says S. Augustine;
De Ciuit. Dei l. 16. c. 4. they erected a Tower in despite of God. The Prophet
Esaias, according to this pattern brings in the King of Babel thus vaunting
himself, I will ascend above the height of the clouds, I will be like the most
high, Chap. 14.14.

Secondly, they sinned through vanity. For what more vain than to neglect
Heaven, where only immortality is to be found, and to seek to be famous on
earth, where there is nothing that is not vain, and transitory? See, says
Chrysostom, the root of evil, they seek to be famous, aedificiis, non
elcemosynis, by buildings, not by alms.

Thirdly, they sinned through disobedience. For knowing, that it was Gods
ordinance, that the earth by them should be replenished, they did wilfully
oppose themselves against it. They would live together, and would not be
dispersed, as even now I told you out of Josephus.

Fourthly, they sinned through impudency Philo cries out upon it; O insignem
impudentiam! O notorious impudency! whereas they should rather have covered
their sins, they proclaim their pride, their tyranny, their voluptuousness,
to all posterity.

Absolon was a vain builder too. Too much given to ambitious ostentation, he
built him a pillar to be a monument of his fame unto posterity. And why did he
so? because for sooth he had no son to keep his name in remembrance, 2 Samuel
18.18. Carthusian gives the reason, because he was cupidissimus laudis humanae,
most desirous of the praise of men. But how fared he with this his pride? The
vengeance of God did soon attache him. For besides that, he was smitten
through with darts, as he hung by the hair of the head, so was he also stoned
by Gods just judgment, by whose Law, they which were disobedient to their
parents, were stoned to death: and now in stead of that pillar, he lies
shrouded under a heap of stones.

I have yet one builder more to acquaint you with, and he is as vain as those
that are gone before. It is the rich man in the Gospel, Luke 12.16. When his
ground had brought forth plentifully, he said within himself: What shall I
do, because I have no room where to bestow my fruits? This will I do: I will
pull down my Barnes, and build greater, and there will I bestow all my fruits
and my goods. And will say to my soul, Soul, thou have much goods laid up for
many years; take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry.

Out of doubt this man thought himself passing wise, in his resolution to
build new barnes. But let us a little examine his care. I have, says he, no
room where to bestow my fruit^^ Mentitur, says Stella. He lies; Had he not
the houses of the poor and their bodies, where he might bestow his fruits?
These were the Barnes provided for him by the Lord, where if he would lay up
his fruits, neither moth nor rust could hurt them. Thou can not any way
better preserve thy fruits th^^ if thou distribute them among the poor.
Herewith agr^^^h that of Solomon, Prou. 3.9. Give unto the poor of the first
fruits of thine increas^: so shall thy barnes be filled with plenty.

But the rich man cares not what Solomon says. He holds on his resolution:
Destruam horrea mea and majora faciam; I will pull down my barnes, and build
greater. He speaks, says Stella, as if he were mad, and as one fitter to be
purged with Hellebor. I will pull down my barnes and make greater! He should
rather have said, Aperiam horrea mea, and dabo indigentibus: I will open my
barnes, and give to them that want: or, as Saint Ambrose elegantly enlarges
it; Aperiam horrea mea; ingrediantur, qui famem tolerare non queunt; veniant
inopes, intrent pauperes, repleant sinus suos, etc. I will open my barnes; if
any cannot endure famine, let them come in; let the needy come, let the poor
enter, let them fill their bosoms: down with the walls which exclude the
hungry. Why shall I hide that wherewith God abundantly enableth me to relieve
others? Why shall I with lock and bolt shut up the Corn, which God makes to
grow and abound in the common fields without a keeper?

Thus should the rich man have said. But his note is of another strain: I will
pull down my barnes, and build greater; and ouer-ioyed with the abundance of
his increase, he thus flattereth his soul: Soul, thou have much goods laid up
for many years.

For many years! O coecit as auari! It is Saint Augustines exclamation, Homil.
48. O the blindness of a covetous man! V^a nox ei supererat, and de multorum
annorum vit a satagebat: he had but one night to live, and yet he was as
careful, as if he were to live many years. And in this vein he cheeres up
his soul: Soul, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. It is the voice
of some Sardanapalus, or, of some Hog of Epi^urus his heard.

Soul, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry! (...)! O the folly of this
covetous wretch, says Basil; If thou had had a Swines soul, what else
could thou have said unto it? Of mercy, of alms, of charity, of virtue, here
is not a word; All here is for iollity: Take thine ease, eat, drink, and be
merry.

But what is the issue, what the end hereof? It is no more but this, (...),
thou fool, this night shall thy ^oule be required of thee, then whose shall
those things be which thou have provided?

Thou fool! It is all the commendation he has for his overmuch care and
solicitude. And a fool he is called for diverse reason^.

First, he is a fool, because in his own eyes he seems to be wise. He will
seem to be liberal and magnificent, Prou. 28.11.
whereas indeed he is greedy of money and a niggard. Solomon has a fit censure
of him, Prou. 26.12. See thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more
hope of a fool than of him.

Secondly, he is a fool, because he keeps those things, which are lost by
keeping, and by losing are preserved. Such is your corn. If you keep it, it
will be lost; if you lose it, that is, if you sow it and spread it abroad upon
the earth, it will be multiplied, and will return home unto you with increase.
Whence the advice of Eccles^^^^icus is, Chap. 29.10. Lose thy money for thy
brother and thy friend: and let it not rust under a stone to be lost. You see
there is a losing that there be no losing.

Thirdly this rich man is a fool, because he takes no care for a house or
mansion, wherein he may dwell for ever, and yet builds him great houses and
palaces, where he is to abide but for a night. For, if this life be compared
with that which is to come, it may well be styled a night. Vana nox est, it is
a night that soon vanishes. So is the hope of this rich man: it passes away
as the rembrance of a guest, that tarrieth but a day or a night, Wisd. 5.14.

Fourthly, he is a fool, because though he has no power over days or times,
yet he promises unto his soul the enjoying of many years. Soul, thou have
much goods laid up for many years.

For this, and other reasons, God himself puts the fool upon this man; for
God said unto him, (...), thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required of
thee.

What! A rich man a fool! And that, by the sentence of God! Luke 12.21.
So is every one that lays up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward
God. And so are these other vain builders, of whom even now you h^^rd: who
erecting cities, towers, pillars, winter houses, sumi^^r houses, houses of
Iuory, great and goodly houses, only for monuments to continue a perpetuity of
their names here upon earth, as if there were no other life but this, do
evidently declare, that in heart they say, there is no God. And are they not
fools that say so?

The royal Prophet in express and plain terms says, they are, Psalm. 14.1.
The fool has said in his heart, there is no God. Is it not all one, as if he
had said, Whosoever says in heart there is no God, he is a fool? Now that it
may appear to be no sudden, or rash censure of his, but a thing well conceited
and meditated by him, he irerateth the same again, Psalm. 53.1. The fool has
said in his heart there is no God.

In Prosolog. c. 3. Tom. 3.
But why says he so? Cur, says Anselme, nisi quia stultus and insipiens est?
Why is it, that the fool does say there is no God? Surely, even for this
reason, because he is a fool. But why says he so in heart, In Psalm. 51.
rather than in ^^outh? Saint Hilary will tell you why: Because if he should
utter it in his words, as he smothers it in his thoughts, Stultus esse (sicut
est) publici assensus iudicio argueretur, he should publicly be taken to be a
fool, as he is, even by general consent.

But leave we these fools, these Cosmopolites to their heaven upon earth, since
they look for no other heaven. Leave we them to their planting, tra^splanting,
building, rebuilding, studying for room to lay up their fruits, non in
visceribus pauperu^, not in the bowels of the poor, but in their enlarged
barnes. We ate sure they will build neither Church nor Hospital, either in
cultum Christi, or culturam Christiani, either to the service of Christ, or to
the comfort of any Christian.

Wherefore leave we them, and reflect we our eyes for a while to our own
houses, to see how we may build them fair to the Lord. These our houses
whereof I now speak we build, and God builds: Nos, been vinendo; Deus, vt
been vinamus, opitulando, August. de Ciuit. Dei l. 17. c. 12. We build by
living well; and God by assisting us by his grace, that we may live well. For
Nisi Dominus adificauerit, Except the Lord build the house, they labor in
vain that build it, Psalm. 127.1.

These our houses are not material, but s^^rituall, they are our hearts; Domus
nostrae, corda nostra sunt, so the same Father upon the 74. 73. Vulg.
Psalm: Our houses are our hearts. Here is good dwelling, if they be cleansed
from iniquity. If we love the Lord Jesus, and keep his words, his Father will
love us, and they both will come unto us, and make their abode with us, Ioh.
14.23. their abode will be by grace in these houses of ours, our hearts. Yet
may they in a spiritual understanding be those same houses of Iuory, Psalm. 45.
Houses of Iuory, great and regal houses, the tabernacles of God, are corda
sanctorum, Aug. in Psalm. 44.
they are the hearts of the Saints.

Other houses we have for our solace, as that, Cant. 1.17. The beams of our
house are Cedars, our galleries are of Fur. Such houses are the congregations
of the Saints; the places where we do sweetly converse and walk together.
They are firm and during like Cedars among the trees, not subiect-through Gods
protecting grace to utter corruption: and they are like to galleries of sweet
wood, full of pleasure and contentment, through the favorable acceptance of
God, and his word.

Those beams of Cedar and galleries of Fur, have respect unto the buildings
and palaces of Kings, covered flat with battlements, with galleries on the top:
and do show unto us by the familitude of these two odoriferous and not
putrefying trees, that the joining and coupling of the Bridegroom, Christ
Jesus, and his Spouse, the Church, with-draweth us from the stench and
corruption of this vile world, and makes of our souls and bodies, so many
houses and Temples, dedicated unto God. And for this reason S. Paul calls you
the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 3.16. Know ye not, that ye are the Temple of God,
and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? If any man defile the Temple of
God, him shall God destroy, for the Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye
are. In the same Epist. Chap. 6.19. Ye are the Temple of the Holy Ghost. What?
Know ye not, that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you,
which ye have of God, and ye are not your own? For ye are bought with a
price, therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit which are Gods.

Once more the same Apostle calls you the Temple of God, 2 Cor. 6.16. Y^ are
the Temple of the living God, and he proves it from the test^mony of God
himself: I will dwell in you, Leuit. 26.12. Ezec. 36.26, 27.
and walk in you: and I will be your God, and you shall be my people.

Is the testimony of God himself produced by the Apostle to prove that ye are
Templum Dei vini, the Temple of God, of the living God, and that your body is
the Temple of the Holy Ghost! O, look ye to the trimming up of this house, to
the decking and adorning of this temple. Your body, it is the Temple of the
Holy Ghost; it is the Temple of God, defile it not. Sweetly S. ^d Lombard. ^
Cor. 6.
Ambrose: Si non parcis tibi propter te, vel parce tibi propter Deum, qui sibi
fecit te domum: If thou spare not thy self for thine own sake, yet spare thy
self for Gods sake, who has vouchsafed to make thee, thy body, a house, a
Temple for his holy habitation. What shall I say more, but put you in
remembrance, that we have yet another house in store for the fulfilling of our
joy? For we know, that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved,
we have a building of God, an house, not made with hand, but eternal in the
Heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. This same (...), this house not made with hand, whether it
be the glory of the soul and life eternal, as Photius. Anselm. Thomas. Lyran.
some do understand it; or the body glorified in the resurrection, as
Chrysostom. Theod. Theoph. Ambrose.
others: it is a house full of contentment and beatitude. And we have it.
Lombard.
Habemus spe, habebimus re: we have it in hope, we shall have it in
possession. We have it, says the Apostle, because we shall as certainly have
it, as if we had it already in full fruition. To this fullness of contentment
and beatitude God in his good time bring us all for Christ Jesus sake.

FINIS.

