THE HAVEN OF THE AFFLICTED. A SERMON PREACHED IN THE CATHEDRAL CHVRCH OF
GLOVCESTER Aug. 10. 1613.

BY SEBASTIAN BENEFIELD Doctor of Divinity and fellow of C.C.C. in Oxford.

PSALM. 119.71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might
learn thy statutes.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN CHRIST MILES SMYTH BY THE DIVINE PROVIDENCE L.
BISHOP OF GLOVCESTER GRACE AND PEACE BE MVLTIPLIED.
RIGHT REVEREND,
THis little Sermon preached by your Lordships appointment in the chief City
of that Shire, wherein I first drew breath, now sees the light. The religious
desires of some of my Countrymen there, wishing, that what I then uttered might
not through oblivion perish in the air, have brought it forth. Now they, who
heard it, may record it; they who heard it not, may read it; all, I hope, will
be satisfied. My then endeavors were to arm my self, and that devout
Auditorie with patience against the day of affliction; that day, which we must
look for, if we be the sons of our Heavenly Father. St Hierome in his
Epistle to Eustochium has these words: Quis sanctorum sine certamine coronatus
est? Quaere, and invenies singulos adversa perpessos; solus Solomon in delitijs
fuit, and forsitan ideo corruit: Who of all the Saints was ever crowned without
a combat? Seek, and thou shall find, that every one of them suffered
adversities; only Solomon was lulled in delights, and therefore perchance he
perished. It is but FORSITAN, perchance he perished. His book called
Ecclesiastes, or the Preacher, argues his repentance, and persuades me of his
remission and salvation with the LORD. And why might not Solomon in his time
be, as many in our time are, inwardly in conscience for sin afflicted? It Is
true; the stone has no honorable place in a fair building unless it be much
hewed and hammered; neither can we the lively stones of Christ's Church have
any place of credit in the Celestial building unless we, like the chief
corner stone, Christ himself, be hewed and hammered with adversity. To the
patient enduring whereof this little Sermon has a desire to persuade. Give it
(My good Lord) your favorable countenance, that it may cheerfully go abroad:
and the Author of it shall heartely wish to your L. much increase of grace and
honor, with a daily influence of blessings from Heaven upon your government in
the Church.

From my study in CORPUS CHRISTI COLLEGE in OXFORD, August 27, 1613. YOUR
LORDSHIPS in all Christian duty to be commanded SEBASTIAN BENEFIELD.

August. Enarrat. in Psalm. 97. Vulgat.
QVid sibi volunt tubae ductiles? -- Ductiles tubae aereae sunt, tundendo
producuntur. Si tundendo, ergo vapulando eritis tubae ductiles, ad laudem Dei
productae. Si cum tribulamini proficiatis, tribulatio tunsio, profectus
productio est Tuba ductilis. erat Job, quando repent percussus tantis damnis
and orbitate filiorum, tunsione illa tantae tribulationis factus tuba ductilis,
sonuit: Dominus dedit, Dominus abstulit; -- sit nomen Domini benedictum. THAT
IS, What is meant by those long trumpets? Long trumpets are of brass, and are
by hammering lengthned. If by hammering, then by beating you shall be long
trumpets, lengthned to praise God. If, when you are afflicted, you profit, your
tribulation is your hammering, your profit that comes thereby, is your
lengthning. Job was a long trumpet, when he was suddenly stricken with the
losses of his substance and children. Being made by that hammering of so great
a tribulation, a long trumpet, he sounded out: The Lord has given, the Lord
has taken away, -- blessed be the name of the Lord.

AMOS 3.6. Shall there be evil in a city, and the LORD has not done it?


CHristian profession is by the Holy Spirit, 1. Cor. 9.24. and, Heb. 12.1.
resembled to a race. The runners in this race are the professors of
Christianity, men and women, of all ranks, all Christians. Stadium est haec
vita mortalibus; hic conte^dimus, vt alibi coronemur. Hieron. ep. ad Eustochium.
We al run, non pedum celeritate, sed virtute, pietate, fide: our running is,
not by swiftness of foot, but by virtue, piety, and faith. And we run for a
price. The price is a crown. No A. Gellius Nect. Attic. lib. 5. cap. 6.
murall, no ovall, no civil, no triumphal, no obsidional crown; no such
crown, as worthy champio^s of old contended for; no crown of grass, no
crown of olive, no crown of oak, no crown of gold. Al these were vile and
contemptible in regard of the crown, which we run for. They were all
transitory and corruptible; but the crown which we run for, is a crown of
eternity. S. Peter in his 1. Epist. chap. 5. ver. 4. calls it tn marntinon t
dxe stphanon, a crown of glory, that fades not. S. Paul, 1. Cor. 9.25.
calls it tn stphanon phtharton, an incorruptible crown. Now the place where
we run for this incorruptible and never fading crown is, civitas huius
mundi, the city of this world. Here we Magnis inimicorum circundamur agminibus;
hostiu^ plena sunt omnia. Hieron vbi. supra.
meet with many stops; many lets, many hindera^ces. Temptations upon
temptations do even swarm before us, behind us, beside us, round about us.
Temptations of prosperity, temptations of adversity, temptations of heresy,
these stand in the streets, like Gen 3.24.
the flaming sword, to stop our way to Paradise.

The greatest obstacle or impediment, most likely to overthrow us in this race,
is the temptation of the cross, the temptation of adversity. The godly man, he
who has the 1. Tim. 4.8.
promises as well of the life that now is, as of that which is to come, as well
Deuteronomy. 28 1. etc. Lev. 26.3. etc.
corporal, as spiritual, if he be depressed and kept under in disgrace and
misery, while the wicked man before his face is highly adva^ced to honor and
preferment, how is he discouraged? how discomforted? With this temptation was
David exercised. For when he saw the prosperity of the wicked, and considered,
that they were not afflicted like other men, that they increased in riches,
that whatsoever they took in hand, it went well forward; his feet were almost
gone, his steps had well-nigh slipped. It is his own confession, Psalm. 73.2. Did
this temptation so far prevail with David, Act. 13.22.
a man after Gods own heart? How shall the rest of the Godly withstand it?
Behold for them an anchor, able to keep them, that they be not overwhelmed with
the waves of this temptation; even the words of my text, Shall there be evil
in a city, and the LORD has not done it?

Here are seven interogations together without any interruption. This is the
seventh, and is like the rest. It bears the form of an Interrogation, but
is for matter a vehement Asseveration. It Is usual with the Scriptures then to
propound a matter by way of question, when they will most of all affirm it.
Genesis 18.14. the LORD says to Abraham: Is any thing too hard for the LORD? It
is as if he had said; al things are easy with the LORD; there is nothing
impossible, nothing too hard for him. Mar. 12.24. Jesus answering the Sadduces
said unto the^, Do ye not therefore err, because ye know not the
Scriptures, neither the power of God? It is, as if he had said: doubtless ye
therefore err because ye know not the Scriptures, neither the power of God.
1. Cor. 10.16. St Paul says, The bread which we break, is it not the
communion of the body of Christ? It is, as if he had said: The bread which we
break is the communion of the body of Christ. Many other places of like nature
I might produce: But by these we see, that an Interrogation uses to be put
from an Affirmation; as in my text, Shall there be evil in a city, and the
LORD has not done it?

It is as if our Prophet had said: There shall be no evil in a city, but the
LORD will do it. Or, whatsoever evil is in a city, the LORD has done it.

Durus est hic sermo, happyly will some say, as those fleshly hearers of Christ
said to Christ, Ioh. 6.60. When Christ had told them, that they were to eat
his flesh, and to drink his blood, else they should not live. Durus est hic
sermo, This is a hard saying; who can endure to hear it? Shall there be no
evil in a city, but the LORD will do it? but he has done it? Durus sermo;
This is a hard saying.

This stumbling block, this stone of offense will easily be removed, if you
will be pleased to consider with me three circumstances expressed in the
letter of my text: Quis, Quid, Vbi. An Agent, an Action, The place of
performance. The Agent is the LORD, the Actio^ is a doing of evil, the place
where this action is to be performed, is a City. Shall there be evil in a
city, and the LORD has not done it?

Follow me, I beseech you, in these three, I will pass them over as briefly,
and as plainly as I may. If in my discourse I shall seem for a while somewhat
thorny, or perplexed, help me with your attention.

Shall there be evil in a city, and the LORD has not done it?] The first
circumstance to be now considered is Quis. The Agent. My text calls him JEHOVAH.

JEHOVAH! It is the most proper name of God. No creature is made partaker of
it; nor man, nor Angel. It betokens first the essence of God, secondly the
truth and complement of his promises. First it signifies, that God is vere t
n: a quo pnta t nta; that God is so of himself, that Romans 11.36.
of him, and through him, and to him are all things. Secondly it signifies,
that God is ever faithful in his promises. From whence two things should
deeply, and perpetually be fastened in the memory of every Christian: one is,
that our God is an everliuing God, is the chiefest good, is the author of all
good, and is therefore always, and above al things to be loved: the other is,
that our God is ever true in his promises, and therefore that our whole trust
must ever lie on him. For he only is JEHOVAH: JEHOVAH is his name for ever, it
is his memorial unto all generations. So it is called, Exodus 3. 15. and Hos.
12.5.

This our God, the Lord, JEHOVAH, who is of himself alone, and is only true in
all his sayings, he is not that God of those shameless blasphemers, the
August, de Haeresib. c. 46.
Manichees and Ibid. c. 22.
Marcionites, Zanchius de Attribut. Dei. lib. 4. cap. 1. qu. 1. these 4.
Deus malus, a quo sit omne malum, an evil God from whom comes all evil.
Our God is no such God; there is no evil in him, there proceeds no evil from
him: he is wholly Ps. 33.5. and 73.1. and 103.11, 17. and 136.1. etc.
good: good In se Deus bon' est sua esse^tia, and sum. Pola^ Syntag. Theol.
lib. 2. cap 20.
of himself; and by his essence. Now, if honey, of its own nature and essence
sweet, has no bitterness in it; if the Sun of its own nature and essence
light, has no darkness in it; without doubt God of himself, of his own
nature and essence good, has no evil in him. We confess with David, Psalm.
5.4. O our God, thou art not a God, that has pleasure in wickedness, neither
shall any evil dwell with thee.

Thus you see, Quis, who this Agent is. It is JEHOVAH, the Lord our God, whose
being is of himself, who is true in all his sayings, who is absolutely good,
in whom there is no stain of evil. Such is the Agent. The next circumstance
is Quid, the Action, a doing of evil; Shall there be evil in a city, and the
LORD has not done it?

The naturalist says; Mat. 7.17.
A good tree brings forth good fruit: the Philosopher says; Omne Arist. 2.
Phys. Aquin. 2. Did. 18. qu. 2. Art. 1. ad. 4. Zanch. de Attrib. l. 2. cap. 7.
qu. 3.
agens agit sibi simile; Such as the Agent is, such is the Action: if the Agent
be good, the Action cannot be evil. How then is it, that God of himself and
absolutely Good, is here, in my text, noted, for a doer of evil?

For answer hereunto we must with St Austin cap. 26. contra Adimantum
Manichaeum distinguish of evils: there is malum, quod facit homo, and malum,
quod patitur, there is an evil which man does, and there is an evil which man
suffers: the first is sin, the other is the punishment of sin, of this,
not of that, must God be said to be the doer. This distinction is more plainly
delivered by Tertullian, contra Marcion. lib. 2. cap. 14. There is malum
delicti, and malum supplicij, there is malum culpae, and malum poenae; there is
an evil of sin, and an evil of pain, Suum cuique parti definimus autorem,
says that Father, malorum quidem peccati and culpae Diabolum, malorum vero
supplicij and poenae Deum creatorem. Of the evils of sin and fault the
Devil is the author, but in the evils of pain and punishment, we acknowledge
the hand of God the Creator.

This distinction of evils, says Annot. 82. in locum Tertulliani.
Pamelius, is worth the noting against Calvin, and his followers; as if Calvin,
or the rest, who maintain the truth of that doctrine, which Calvin professed,
denied this distinction of Evils, to make God the cause and author of sin.

This horrible blasphemy and impiety, wherewith De amiss. Great. and statu
reccati lib. 2. cap. 4.
Bellarmine, Octava ratione.
Campian, Defensione. praefationum Bellarm. Tom 1 page 5, and 6.
Gretser, Tom. 1. Opusc. 3. de autore peccati p. 98.
Becan, and Bernard. Dorhoff Apodix 1. cap. 3. page 32. Carol. Scribanius
Orthod. fidei controvers. lib. 2. cap. 3. page 121. etc. Matthew. Kellison, in
his Reply to Sutcliffes answer to the Survey 5. book page 356. etc.
other of that rabble, have branded us, I have elsewhere diverted in a Sermon
upon Hos. 10.2. wherein I confirmed two positions.

One: There is a degree of some forwarder disposition of God, in the actions of
unrighteous men, then his bare toleration.

The other: Though God be a worker in the works of the wicked, yet is the
will of the wicked thereby no way compelled. Whence follows this conclusion;
God is not to any construction, the cause or author of sin. This we affirm
in our books, we teach in our pulpits, we determine in our Schools.

We say, and our adversaries will say no less, that God is the author of all
actions in the world; that he is the author of every motion within us. In him
we live and move, and have our being, Act. 17.28. without him we live not, we
move not, we have no being. Yet we say that sin, is wholly and only of man
himself; we cannot challenge God for any part thereof.

Distinguish then the accident from the subject, distinguish the sin of the
action from the action it self; God in the one shall be glorified, and man shall
be justly condemned for the other. God is not to any co^struction the cause, or
author of sin. Yet, you see my text charge him, as if he were the cause and
author of Evil. Shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord has not done it?

Evil! If by evil you will understand according to my former distinctions
(malum poenae, malum supplicij, malum, quod homo patitur, which you may call,
malum afflictionis) if by Evil you will understand the evil of pain, the
evil of punishment, the evil of affliction, you have the meaning of my
Prophet: Shall there be any Evill] Any evil of pain, punishment, or
affliction, Shall there be any such Evil in a city, and the Lord has not done
it?

These now brought distinctions of evil may serve for the unfolding of other
texts of Scripture: of that, Esaias 45.7. I, the Lord, create Evil; and that,
Lament. 3.38. Out of the mouth of the most high proceeds Evil; and that Ion.
3.10. God repented of the Evil, that he had said, he would do unto them. By
Evil in all those places, as here in my text, we are to understand the Evil of
pain, punishment, and affliction.

The Evil of pain, punishment, and affliction! Why Evil? Doubtless
whatsoever pain, punishment, or affliction befalls us, it is good. 1.
Because it is laid upon us, by God, who is of himself, and absolutely good.
2. Because it is just: and what is just, must needs be good. 3. Because it
tends to the glory of God, and the salvation of the elect; and who will deny
this to be good? For these reasons whatsoever pain, punishment, or affliction
may befall us, it is good. Why then is it in my text, and elsewhere noted by
the name of Evil?.

It is so noted, because in our sense and feeling it is Evil. Things may be
termed Evil two manner of ways: some are Evil indeed, and of their own
nature; in this rank we must place our sins: some are Evil, not indeed and
of their own nature, but in regard of our sense, apprehension, and estimation;
and in this rank we must place whatsoever, pain, punishment, or affliction
God lays upon us in this life for our sins. I say the^, that the Evil in
my text, is indeed good, but improperly Evil; it is good in its own nature,
but Evil only, as we call Evil, whatsoever likes us not, or is not for our
ease. Thus far have you my second circumstance, Quid, the Action, a doing of
Evil: Shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord has not done it?

The third circumstance is Vbi, the place where this Action is performed. My
text calls it a City. Shall there be Evil in a City] In Civitatibus, in Cities,
so Lyranus expounds it. In Civitate aliqua, in any City, it is Mercerus his
exposition. I say, in Civitate huius mundi, in the City of this world.

This universe, and admirable frame of Nature wherein JEHOVAH, the LORD, our
God, Ps. 97.1. and 91.1.
reigns, consists of two Cities: the one is, August. Retract. l 2. c. 43.
Civitas Dei, the city of God, the other is, August. de temp. sermon. 106.
Civitas huius mundi, the city of this world. The one is Aug. de Civ. Dei lib
14. cap. 28.
Celestial, the other is Terrene; the one is of the Aug. de catechizandis
rudib. l. 1. c. 19
Saints, the other of the wicked; the one is Aug. Enarrat in Ps. 61.
Jerusalem, the other is Babylon. In the first, that most glorious city of God,
and his Saints, the Celestial Jerusalem, all tears are wiped away from the
eyes of the Citizens; there is neither death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor
pain, Revel. 21.4. There is no Evil there; no not the Evil of affliction.
Wherefore that City, is not the City in my text.

In the other City, the City of this world, the Terrene city, the city pestered
with the wicked, Babylon, great Babylon, the city of confusion, there is no
sure repose for the Godly there. There may they become a Ps 79 4.
reproach to their neighbors, there may they be a scorn, and derisio^, to
them, with who^ they live; there may they Psalm. 88.9.
mourn daily by reason of affliction. For even the Godly, who are August. de
civitate Dei lib. 15. cap. 1.
by grace cives sursum, Citizens above, citizens of the supernall and
Celestial City of God, they are also by grace peregrini deorsum, pilgrims, or
strangers here below, in this Terrene city, the city of this world. Here must
they pass through many evils; here must they be cut, hewn, and squared, with
sundry tribulations, sicknesses, and diseases, before they can be made fit and
lively stones for the heavenly Jerusalem.

Thus have we found out the City in my text; it is this Terrene City, the City
of this world; and this was my third circumstance. Vbi, the circumstance of the
place, where the Agent performs his Action.

Now the meaning of my text is plain. Shall there be evil in a city; and the
LORD has not done it? Shall there be evill] Any evil of pain, punishment, or
affliction, In a City] Not only in this City, wherein we are now assembled,
but in any City, or other place of the whole world, in the city of this world,
Shall there be any such evil any where, and the LORD has not done it?] Or,
as the diverse reading is, In the margin of the new translation.
Shall not the LORD do somewhat? The doctrine from hence to be commended to
your most serious and religious meditations, is, Whatsoever affliction
befalls any one any where in this world, it is from the LORD.

By affliction in this proposition I understand the suffering of any thing, the
sense, or cogitation whereof our nature shunneth. Whatsoever is any way
grievous, or offensive, to our humane nature, I call Affliction. The
temptations of the flesh, the world and the Devil; the diseases of the body, an
unfortunate husband or wife, rebellious children, unthankful friends, loss of
goods, reproaches, sclaunders, war, pestilence, famine, imprisonment, death;
every cross and passion, bodily or ghostly, proper to our selves, or
appertaining to such as are of our blood private or public, secret or
manifest, either by our own deserts gotten, or otherwise imposed upon us, I
call Afflictions. In a word, all manner of miseries, calamities, vexations, or
molestations in this life from the least to the greatest, from the pain of the
little finger, to the very pangs of death, I call Afflictions.

There are two sorts of men (shall I say, in this city? I say in the city of
this world) there are two sorts of men visited with afflictions: the one, the
Scriptures call the reprobate; the other, the elect; they are the wicked, these
the godly. Whatsoever Affliction befalls the first sort, the Reprobate, the
wicked, it is, (as Divines call it) timoa, a punishment wherewith God as a
fearful judge avengeth himself upon the wicked for their sins; properly a
punishment; a punishment inflicted on men sinning, that the justice of God may
thereby be satisfied.

With the other sort, with the Elect, with the Godly it is not so. Whatsoever
afflictions befall them, they are not properly punishments for their sins;
they are more rightly called Crosses. Punishments they cannot properly be
called; because whatsoever punishment is due to any of the Elect for their
sins, it is fully answered by Christ in his active and passive obedience, in
his life and death. He is become our ltron, he has paid the price of our
redemption, he has fully satisfied for all our sins; our sins past,
present, and to come. And therefore if any afflictions be upon us, we are not
to call them properly punishments for our sins; the name of crosses will
befit them better.

These crosses of the godly are either paidieai or dochima^ai, they are either
chastisements for our sins already perpetrated, to make us the more wary for
the time to come, that we fall not again into the same, or the like sins; or
they are trials, and exercises, of our faith, hope, charity, patience, and
other like Christian virtues. Now all these forementioned afflictions, either
properly punishments for sin, such as are the afflictions of the wicked, or
chastisements, or trials, such as are the afflictions of the Godly, they are
all from the LORD according to the truth of my doctrine, Whatsoever affliction
befalls any one, any where in this world, it is from the LORD.

The LORD, he is (...), the primary cause of all afflictions, and of many the
immediate cause. Of the universal deluge, and flood of waters in the days of
Noah, Genesis 6.17. Of the burning of Sodom, Gomorah, and their sister Cities,
Genesis 19.24. Of the overthrow of Pharaohs host in the midst of the sea, Exodus
14.27. Of the smiting of Nabal to death, 1. Sam. 25.38. of all these was God
the immediate cause.

Some afflictions it pleases God to effect mediate, by secundary, and
isntrumental causes, by Angels, by me^, by other creatures.

First God afflicts by Angels. By an Angel he smote David's people, so that
there died of the pestilence from Dan to Beersheba, seauenty thousand men, 2.
Sam. 24.15. By an Angel he smote in the camp of the Assyrians, one hundred
fourscore and five thousand, 2. King. 19.35. By an Angel he smote K. Herod, so
that he died, Act. 12.23.

Secondly, God afflicts by men. Here might I tell you of the afflictions,
wherewith God exercised his people Israel by Cushan-Rishathaim K. of
Mesopotamia for eight years, Judge. 3.8. By the Midianites for seven years,
Judge. 6.1. By the Philistines, and the Ammonites for eighteen years, Judge.
10.8. By the Philistines again for forty years, Judge. 13.1. Here might I
relate unto you the many afflictions, wherewith God proved his people, the
people of Judah, by sending against them the Egyptians, Assyrians, and
Chaldeans. The books of the Kings and Chronicles are copious in describing
them. I need not remember you of Ashur, Esai, 10.5. how there he is styled the
rod and the staff of the wrath of God, to signify, that he was organum, sieve
instrumentum Dei, the executioner of Gods vengeance upon Hypocrites. I will not
hold you with any long narration of Attila, King of the Hunnes, Medes, Gotthes,
and Danes, how in his title or inscription he called himself, metum orbis,
flagellumque Dei, the terror of the world, and the scourge of God. I pass
over the great Turk, whom you know now to be the hammer of the world, and the
rod of Christendom.

Come we home unto our selves. Here shall we find it made good, that by men God
afflicts men. Else why is it come to pass according to Ieremies words, chap.
9.4. that a neighbor deceives his neighbor, that a brother supplanteth his
brother? Why is it now according to Micah's words, chap. 7 6. that the son
dishonors his father, that the daughter rises up against her mother? Why
are a Micah 7 6. Matthew 10.36.
man's enemies now the men of his own house? Why does the corrupt Magistrate
Amos 2.6.
sell the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes? Why does
the cruel Landlord Amos 2.7.
pant after the dust of the earth on the head of his poor tenant? Why behold
we in our cities biting usury, Hab. 1.2, 3.
violence, oppression, false dealing? Certainly God is even now pleased to
afflict men by men.

Thirdly, God afflicts by other creatures also. This the story of Gods
visitation upon Pharaoh, and the Egyptians, Exodus chap. 8, 9, 10. makes plain
unto us. There we find that frogs, lice, flies, grasshoppers, thunder, hail,
lightning, murraine, botches, and sores, did instrumentally avenge God upon man
and beast in Egypt. Not in Egypt only, but every where else, those and other
like creatures, as fire, and snow, and vapors, and stormy winds, do fulfill
what God commands. So says the Spirit, Ps. 148.8.

Infinite might I be in the prosecution of this point and yet keep my self
within the limits of Sacred writ. But I may not dwell hereon. Only in sum I
say; Jehovah, the Lord our God, the Agent in my text, is Deus exercituum, a God
of hosts. All creatures, Celestial, Terrestrial, Infernal, and the rest, that
are either in the air, or in water; they are all of Gods army, and are ready
to do his Holy will. By these God afflicts us. These are the instruments,
but God is the author of our afflictions. Thus is my doctrine established,
Whatsoever affliction befalls any one any where in this world, it is from the
Lord.

Whatsoever affliction] be it punishment, chastiseme^t or trial, Befalls any
one] wicked or Godly, Any where in this world] either here or else where, in
the city of this world, It is from the Lord] either immediately and primarily of
himself, or mediatly and secundarily, by Angels, men, and other creatures, the
instruments and executioners of his holy and just judgments.

This doctrine thus confirmed and explained is profitable many ways.

First it may serve for reproof of some old Heretics, the Coluthians, and
Florinians. The August. de haeres. cap. 65
Coluthians affirmed, that God does no evil, contrary to my present text and
doctrine. The Florinians affirmed, that God creates evil, contrary to that,
Genesis 1.31. God saw every thing, that he had made, and behold it was very good.
These two sects of Heretics are one against the other, but both against the
dictates of the holy Spirit. S. Austine cap. 66. lib. de haeresib. has fitted
one answer for both: Creat Deus mala, poenas iustissimas irrogando, quod
Coluthus non videbat; non autem malas creando naturas, atque substantias, in
quantum sunt naturae, atque substantiae, vbi Florinus errabat. The sum of his
answer is: God may be said to create evil, to do evil, by laying upon
offenders just punishments, which Coluthus saw not; but not by making evil
natures and substances, which was Florinus his error. God creates evil, God
does evil; understand it not Paulus de Palatio.
de malo culpae and criminu^, but de punitione, poenaque scelerum, understand
it not of the evil Rupertus.
of iniquity, but of the evil of affliction, you are in right. For,
Whatsoever affliction befalls any one any where in this world, it is from the
LORD.

Is it from the LORD? Then in the second place this doctrine serves to reprove
such, as do voluntarily, and wilfully thrust themselves into afflictions, not
expecting the good hour, when God should lay his rod upon them. The offenders
in this kind are the Papists, such as betake themselves to the discipline, as
they call it, (...)
to beat themselves naked with rods and whips: such as superstitiously (...)
wear sackcloath, (...)
go barefooted, and (...).
lie upon the ground; thinking by these, and such toies, to expiate their
sins, and to demerite unto themselves eternal life.

A veil for this their hypocrisy they think they have, in 1. Cor. 9.27.
where St Paul says of himself, I keep my body under, and bring it into
subjection. The words are much stood on by Gretser lib. 1. de Disciplinis cap.
4. He collecteth from them, that St Paul did discipline himself, that is, did
punish himself with strokes of rods or whips. For what else, says he, is
popizein, but to beat with mighty strokes? And what is that, but facere
disciplinam, to use discipline upon himself.

This veil we easily take from them. St Paul takes his popizo tropically, as
translated from the manner of fight between a champion, and his antagonist.
But what is this to the Jesuits purpose, who takes it literally?

St Paul kept his body under, and brought it into subjection. I grant it. So
should we after his example. Jt's our parts also popizein: it is our parts to
keep our bodies under, to bring them into subjection. The meaning is not, that
we should afflict and macerate our bodies with whips, with scourges, with
hairecloths, with lying upon the ground, and the like; St Paul did not do so;
but the meaning is, that we should subdue the relics of the old man within
us, that we should keep under the body of sin within us, that we should
bring into subjection the corrupt nature within us, that thus mortified in the
flesh, we may be quickened by the Spirit, as St Peter speaks. 1. Epist. chap.
3.18. Thus mortified in the one, and quickened by the other, we shall be armed
with patience to bear whatsoever affliction shall light upon us, being well
assured, that every such affliction is from the LORD, according to the truth of
my doctrine, Whatsoever affliction befalls any one, any where in this world,
it is from the LORD.

Is it so beloved? Then in the third place, this doctrine serves to confute
the vain opinion of Fortune, whereunto, like the Philosophers of old, some
carnal ignorant people now adays use to ascribe such their afflictions,
whereof they see not an apparent cause. If by fire, by lightning, by tempests,
by winds, by waters, by unseasonable weather, by thieves, or otherwise, they
receive loss, they ascribe all to Fortune; quasi Deus otium coleret in coelo,
and non curaret res humanas, as if they were to hold it for an article of their
belief, that God lives idly in Heaven, and has no care of man's affairs.

Noli fortunam, quae non est, dicere caecam. Foolish man! why do thou for thy
losses accuse blind fortune, when there is no such thing? Look up to Heaven.
There is the seat of Majesty, whereon he sits, who orders all thy
losses. Be patient toward him. He is the Lord. How know thou, whether he
will not deal with thee, as he dealt with Job, cha. 42.12? It may be, he will
make thy latter end, better then thy beginning was. Forget not therefore what
now thou have learned, Whatsoever affliction befalls any one any where in
this world, it is from the LORD.

Is it from the LORD? Here then in the fourth place we have, wherewith to
comfort our selves in the day of affliction. Whatsoever affliction shall befall
us, its from the LORD: the LORD he is omnipotent, he is merciful, he is ever
present with us; he will not suffer us to be tempted above our abilities; but
will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that we may be able to
bear it. So says S. Paul, 1. Cor. 10.13. Well: we may be troubled on every
side, but we shall not be overpressed; we may be perplexed, but shall not be
in despair; we may be persecuted, but shall not be forsaken; we may be cast
down, but shall not be destroyed. The same Apostle does assure us hereof, 2.
Cor. 4.8. Say, it is our case. We are troubled, perplexed, persecuted, cast
down; what shall we do? We will support our selves with David's confidence,
Psalm. 23.4. Though we walk through the valley of the shadow of death, we will
fear no evil; for thou LORD, art with us. Thou, LORD art with us; Romans 8.13.
Quis contra nos? We Hebr. 13.6.
will not fear, what man can do unto us.

Wherefore to conclude, since there is no affliction, that befalls any man in
this world, but it is from the LORD; and he is a bastard, not a son, that is
not partaker of afflictions, as the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews
witnesses, chap. 12.8. Let us with S. James, chap. 1.2. account it exceeding
joy, when we are afflicted. The Patriarchs, the Prophets, the Evangelists, the
Apostles, have found the way to Heaven narrow, rugged, and bloody: and shall
we think that God will strew carpets for our nice feet to walk thither? He
that is the door, and the way, our LORD and Savior, Jesus Christ, has by his
own example taught us, that by many afflictions we must enter into the
kingdom of Heaven. There is but one passage thither; and it is a strait one.
If with much pressure we can get through, and leave but our superfluous rags,
as torn from us, in the throng, we shall be happy.

Let us therefore, whenever any adversity, cross, calamity, misery, or
affliction shall betide us, let us with due regard to the hand, that smites
us, receive it with thanks, keep it with patience, digest it in hope, apply
it with wisdom, bury it with meditation, and doubtless it shall end unto us
in peace and glory, in peace of Conscience in this life, and in glory eternal
in the highest Heavens. Of this peace of Conscience in this life, and that
immarcessible crown of glory in the life to come, vouchsafe gracious Father,
to make us all partakers for thy best beloved Son Jesus Christ his sake: to
whom with thee in the unity of the Holy Spirit be all praise and power, might
and Majesty, dignity and dominion for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

