The Surueyors Dialogue.

Divided into five Books: Very profitable for all men to peruse, that have to
do with the revenues of Land, or the manurance, use, or occupation thereof,
both Lords and Tenants: as also and especially for such as endeavor to be seen
in the faculty of surueying of Manors, Lands, Tenements, etc.

By I. N.

PROVE. 17.2. A discreet servant shall have rule over an unthrifty son, and he
shall divide the heritage among the brethren.

Voluntas pro facultate.

LONDON, Printed for Hugh As^ley, dwelling at S. Magnus corner. 1607.

To the right Honorable, Robert, Lord Cecill, Baron of Esingdon, Vicecount
Crambourne, Earl of Sarum, principal Secretary to the most high and
magnificent Prince, JAMES, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Master
of his Majesty's Wards and Liueries, of his Majesty's most Honorable privy
Council, and Knight of the most noble Order of the Gar^er.
AS the Earth (right Honorable) was given to man: and man (after divine) was
enjoined the care of earthly things: every man in several place, quality and
state, the greatest receiving thence greatest dignities, even to be called
Princes of the earth. So, is it not the least regard, that men of whatsoever
title or place, should have of the lawful and just means of the preservation
and increase of their earthly revenues. And that especially, by justly
atchieuing, and rightly using Dominion and Lordship* which principally grow,
(omitting public office and authority) by Honors, Manors, Lands, and
Tenants: for, according to the largeness of revenues, are the means to enable
the Honorable, to shelter the virtuous distressed, and to cherish such as by
desert may challenge regard: And according to their will and power therein, is
the vulgar reputation of their Magnificence* But (my good Lord) as mine endeavor
in this rude Dialogue, tends but, as it were, to the plow: So I omit to wade
into the impassable censure of Honor and Dignity, wishing it ever deserved
reverence. And as touching Land-reuenues, wherewith many are (but especially the
Honorable are, or ought to be principally) endowed, I presume only in this
simple Treatise to discourse: So far (according to my sle^der capacity, and
weak experience) as concerns the ordinary necessary means of the
maintenance and increase of Land-reuenues. And because the true and exact
Surueying of Land, is the principal: I have herein endeavored, more of Desire,
then of Power, (for the use and benefit of all sorts of men, having to deal
with land, both Lords and Tenants,) to show the necessity, and simple method
thereof, Most humbly entreating your good Lordship (the fruits of whose, and
of your honorable Fathers favors, I have many ways tasted) to vouchsafe me
your Honorable pardon for presuming, and your like patience in accepting at my
hands, this little mite; which, were it as great, as any wel-wishing heart can
intend good, it were (together with my poor self) in truest service
unfeignedly your Lordships. It may therefore please the same to accept it: so
shall others the more willingly embrace it, or the less disgrace it, humbly
recommending it to your gracious favor.

At my poor house at Hendon, prime Ianuar. 1607. Your Lordships ever to be
commanded, Io. Norden.

To the beneuolent Readers, especially to Landlords and Tenants.
AS God in his high and incompre^e^sible wisdom, ^^th given unto man two
beings, a Spiritual, and Corporal: So has he enjoined him two prescript
cares, the one of divine and heavenly, the other of humane and earthly things.
And although the first be as far more excellent then the second, as the
brightest Sun exceeds the blackest darkness: yet has he not omitted, to
give unto all men an express commandment, to be mindful of the second:
Although it must be confessed, that no man taking an extraordinary care, can
add, a^ of himself, one iott of increase of any good thing, neither can he
of his own proper industry, assure himself of any part of true prosperity in
this life, yet must he not therefore dissolutely neglect his uttermost lawful
endeavor, to advance his own welfare, which he neither can do, without fear
and trembling, if he call to mind the cause why the earth brings forth unto
us of it own accord, nothing but the very tokens of our original
disobedience, wherein ^s imprinted this Motto or Poesy of our shame: With the
sweat of thy face thou shall eat thy bread, al^ the days of thy life. And
this without exception of persons. Whereby it appears, that none is exempted
from labor and travail, in one kind or other to maintain his estate here.
Our Fathers of fame began it. Adam dug the Earth, and manured it. Tubal
wrought in Metals. Noah planted a Vineyard. Abraham, Lot, Moses, David,
Elizeus, Amos, and many other godly and great men were Shepherds. Gydeon was a
Thresher of Corn. Jacob and his sons the Patriarchs, were Herdesmen. Joseph
a Purueyor of Corn in Egypt. Paul made Tents. Matthew was a Customer, or
Toll-gatherer. Peter, Andrew and others were Fishermen. And Saul a keeper of
Asses. If these men began the way of labor in so many kinds, who may say he is
free in one kind or other? And he that in respect of his greatness of birth or
wealth, will pretend a privilege of idleness, or vain and unprofitable
exercises, does discover his forgetfulness, or neglect of the duty in earth,
which every man, even the greatest owes unto the Commonwealth, his own
family and posterity. And he is censured even by the mouth of God, Worse then
an Infidel, that neglects these duties. And none is excused, or exempted out
of this Law of provision for his family, be he never so high or mean; not
that such men as are honorable by birth, office or advancement, should till the
earth, or be Shepherds or Herdsmen. But that they should, according to their
greatness, execute great place in the Commonwealth, whereof (after the care of
Divine things, in respect of God that gave them their greatness) they should
have care to perform some service, in respect of the King, under whom they
enjoy their greatness: To show love and diligent regard, to aid their
inferiors, in respect of whom they have the imputation of their greatness.
To be provident in providing things necessary for their Families, that have
an interest to partake of their greatness. And lastly, in respect of their
posterities, that are to become the more great by their greatness. And how can
they do thus, unless they look into, and use the means of the increase and
preservation of their greatness? And for as much as the same consists, for
the most part, in the revenues of land: what greater care ought they to have,
then to maintain and lawfully to augment the same? which decaying, their Honor
and honorable reputation diminishes. To preserve or augment Revenues, there
must be means: the means are wrought by Knowledge; Knowledge had by
Experience; Experience by view, and due observation of the particulars, by
which Revenues do, or may arise. Wherein are to be considered the Quantities,
and Qualities of Land, with the present Rents, and estimate values, by a
reasonable improouement: which duly found, to have a due regard to proportion
yearly distributions and expendings, with the annual Incoms, in such sort, as
always the present year may rather add unto the next, then the next to be
charged with the year past. For when the present year shall expend more then
the Revenues of the same may bear, the year following cannot but be
surcharged: and so will it surcharge the future so long, that either he shall
be forced to strike the topsayle of his improuident wasting, in time; or at
length, through the furious blasts of excessive prodigality, be blown under
the water of disability, by ouerswelling the sails of his vainglory. I speak
not this in the way of attachment, but of prevention. And so I trust, all men
will take it, and accept of my poor endeavor in this kind, considering that
necessary it is, that al me^ should know what it is to have revenues, namely,
first to know them, and then to use the^ to their own advancement, and to the
good of others* And because it is not the work of the Honorable, and of such
as have high and serious commonwealth imploiments, to be personal actors of
their own affairs in this kind, they are to use the service of such as are
fit in knowledge, and just in dealing, to travel in this kind of business, by
whose faithful and sincere informations, they may know what is just and right
to be done and demanded: And in all favor and clemency to deal with such, as
are in this manner within the compass of their commands, and by whom and by
whose labors they maintain their greatness: for (no doubt) there is none but
well considers, that how great or powerful soever he be in la^d revenues, it
is brought in unto him by the labors of inferior tenants: yea, the King
consists by the field that is tilled. And there is none of these inferiors,
Eccles. 5.8.
of ordinary discretion, but well knows, that what he inioyeth, is by the
favor of his Lord in a sort: And therefore ought there to be such a mutual
concurrence of love and obedience in the one, and of aid and protection in the
other, as no hard measure offered by the superior, should make a just breach
of the loyalty of the inferior: which kind of union is no ways better
preserved and continued between the Lord and tenants, then by the Lords true
knowledge of the particulars that every tenant holds, and a favorable course
in fines and rents: and by the tenants love and thankfulness in all ready
service and duty toward the Lord. And to that end, it is (no doubt)
expedient, that Lords of tenants have due regard of their own estates, namely
of the particulars of all their tenants lands, and that by a due, true, and
exact view and survey of the same, to the end the Lord be not abused, nor the
tenants wronged and grieved by false informations, which commonly grow by
private Inteligencers, and never by just Surueyors. And because the office of a
Surueior (duly waid) is an office both necessary, expedient, and of trust. It
behooves him to be first honestly and uprightly minded, and next, skillful and
judicious in the faculty. Then can he not, but by industry and diligence,
produce an exact discovery and performance of the work he undertakes, to the
true information of the Lord, whose benefit and uttermost lawful profit he
is to seek, in a good conscience, dissuading him yet from distastefull
Avarice, the greatest blemish that can befall a man, seeking true reputation
and renown, by his revenues. For too much severity afflicts the hearts of
poor Tenants, who (by common experience) are found to be more firmly knit in
the band of true duty, loyal affection, and ready service unto their Lords,
by their Lords frugalitie, sweetened sometimes with the cheerful drops of
true liberality, then by the extremes of austeritie, vain prodigality, or
compulsiue exactions. And yet not so, as Lords of Tenants should be so
ouerswayed with abused lenity, or careless looking into their own, as may
breed contempt in Tenants: but rather that they should keep such an eeuen, and
equal hand over their Tenants, as may continue mutual love, and in them a
loving fear: And not to seek the increase of revenues so much for vain
glories, as for virtues maintenance. Which will appear by doing good to
deseruers, by their virtuous life. A work of true virtue, when contrarily,
vaineglorie seeks idle and vain reputation, by unjustly atchieuing, and
either prodigally consuming, or too miserably increasing Revenues, which I
must leave to every man's own fancy, wishing all to fashion their ways in
this kind, to Gods glory, the Kings service, the good of the Commonwealth, and
to other such ends, for which God has given them greatest earthly blessings;
reco^mending unto you this simple rude lump, of which, if some more skillful,
will bestow the re-licking, and bring it to his true shape, my self with many
others, should thankfully embrace it. In the mean time friendly accept it, and
in kindness afford sparing reproof.

Eccles. 7.13. Wisdom is good with an inheritance.


Yours, I. N.

The Printer to the friendly Reader.
THe Author ^ot being present at the examination of the proofs, sundry faults
have escaped, by mistaking the copy, which faults the Author since, for the
most part has reformed, and if you find any not corrected, I pray with
patience bear it, and use the means to reform it.

I pray the Reader to correct these faults committed in Printing, in absence of
the Author. vz.

Page 5. line 20. for under, read over. pa. 7. li. 27. for farm, read same. p.
8. l. 15. for rudely, read readily. ibid. l. 32. for estimate, read extenuate.
p. 9. l. 31. for there, read their. p. 12. l. 3. for Surueyors, read Surueyes.
p. 14. l. 4. for corruption, read compass. p. 45. l. 27. for Manors, read
manor. p. 53. l. 21. for sine, read sine. p. 58. l. 9. for service, read fee.
p. 62. l. 34. for promise, read prouiso. p. 119. l. 19. for former, read form.
p. 88. l. 2. for leaser, read leasee. p. 76. l. 16. for person, read purses. p.
74. l. 32. for our, read one. p. 44. l. 28. for can, read ran. page 39. line
21. for affirms, read assumeth.

The Author to his Book.
Look ere thou light into the hands of some:
Some lay but traps, to catch thee in disgrace;
Disgrace thou none, be silent where thou come,
(Yet thou shall come where Momus is in place,)
Place thee with those, whose hearts aright do see:
And seeing, judge, in favor, faults that be.
Faults be in thee; who says he does not err,
Erres, in conceit, that he alone is free:
And such, not free, will sure thy faults transfer,
And for one fault, transfer them ten in thee:
Not thee in this, but me they discommend,
That I abroad do thee so basely send.
Base I thee send: excuse me what thou can,
If thou can not, plead thus to seeming friends:
Alas, my friends, abortiue I began:
Who me began, thus meanly forth me sends,
That I might send him, how I pass the taunts
Of tanting tou^gs, that seek their praise by vaunts.
I vaunt it not, but am content to be,
Where meanest be, that blush to show their face:
Who sees my face, a picture base may see;
Yet may he see far fayre^ find disgrace.
Disgrace not him, that sends me for good will:
But will him well. Requite not good with ill.
Inuidia sibi, and aliis venenum.
The Contents of the five books of the Surueyors Dialogue.
THe first Book contains a communication between a Farmer and a Surueyor of
land: wherein is proved, that Surueyors of Mann^rs and land, are necessary
both for the Lord and Tenant, and in what manner Tenants ought to behave
themselves toward their Lords, in respect of their tenures. In the second
Book, is entreated between the Lord of a Manor, and a Surueyor, concerning
the estate of a Manor, of the parts and profits thereunto belonging, and how
the Lord of a Manor ought to deal with his Tenants. In the third Book is
contained the manner and method of keeping a Court of Survey, and the Articles
to be inquired of, and the charge: how to enter and inroll Copies, Leases and
Deeds, and how to take the plot of a Manor. In the fourth Book is showed the
manner of the casting up of the qua^tities of acres of al sorts of grounds by
the scale and compass, with Tables of computation for ease in accompting. In
the fifth Book is showed the different natures of grounds, and whereunto they
may be best employed, how they may be bettered, reformed and amended, fit for
all Farmers and husbandmen.
The Surueyors Dialogue, between a Farmer, and a Surueyor: wherein is proved,
that Surueyes are necessary and profitable both for Lord and Tenant: and
wherein is showed how Tenants ought to behave themselves toward their Lords.
The first Book.
Farmer. SIr, I am glad I have so happily met with you, for if I be not
mistaken, you are a Surueyor of Land.


Surueyor. Admit it so, Sir, what then?


Farmer. I have heard much evil of the profession, Surueying rashly condemned.
and to test you my conceit plainly, I think the same both evil and
unprofitable.


Sur. You seem to be but a young man in years, and are you so deeply seen in
the abuse of this Faculty, that you can so peremptorily condemn i^?


Far. Call it you a Faculty? What mean you by that word?


Sur. Ability to perform a thing undertaken.


Far. Then this faculty of yours, I say, Faculty.
is a vain faculty, and a needless work undertaken.


Sur. Speak you this by conjecture, by report of others, or by due experience
of your own*


Far. I speak indeed, as endured to the opinion I hold, by all the three
reasons.


(...) oftentimes you are the cause that men lose their land: and sometimes
they are abridged of such liberties as they have long used in Manors; and
customs are altered, broken, and sometimes perverted or taken away by your
means: And above all, you look into the values of menslands, whereby the
Lords of Manors do rack their tenants to a higher rent and rate then ever
before: and therefore not only I, but many poor tenants else have good cause
to speak against the profession.

Sur. Be you not offended at the comparison which I will make to your
allegations. Why should not such persons as are inhibited by the laws of the
Realm, to commit certain acts within the common wealth, cry out against them,
that by the same laws are appointed Magistrates and Officers to see these
laws executed upon them, as Roagues, Beggars, and other like vagabonds? for if
such officers and overseers were not, these offensive persons might have their
wills: so would it follow, that men of peace, and good members of the
Commonwealth, should be endangered to be sacked of that they have, by such lewd
persons. Necessary therefore it is, that there should be such as should see
unto, inform, punish, and reform these. And by your assertion you may as well
intend, under like reason, against keeping of Courts in a Manor, wherein many
abuses are found out, reformed, and punished, which without such Courts would
lie smothered, festering so long, that there would be few sound members left
within the same.


Farm. It seems, you compare tenants of Manors, that are (many of them)
honest, civil, and substantial men, to Roagues, and vagabonds. You forget
your self.


Sur. My plain words are that as well these evil members of the common wealth
may speak against the Surueyors of the common wealth, which (to speak only of
the under officers) are the Justices of the peace, Constables, and such like,
as may tenants of a Manor speak against the surueying of their lands within
the same.


Farm. That were strange; for by the one, the whole state of the kingdom is
kept in peace, and by the other, Frivolous objections against the Survey of
Lands.
many millions disturbed, that might live quietly in their Farms, tenements,
houses, and lands, that are now daily troubled with your so narrow looking
thereinto, measuring the quantity, observing the quality, recounting the value,
and acquainting the Lords with the estates of all men's livings, whose
auncesters did live better with little, then lo can do now with much more,
because by your means rents are raised, and lands known to the uttermost
Acre, fines inhaunced far higher then ever before measuring of land and
surueying came in, and therefore I think you cannot but confess, that other
men as well as I, have g^^d cause to speak of you and your profession, as I
do.


Sur. I perceive that the force of your strongest arguments is as before I
said, your ^eare and unwillingness that the Lord of the Manor, The faulty are
afraid to be seen.
under whom, and in whose land you dwell, should know his own: and that you
think it better for you, that he should continue still ignorant of what he
has, and that your estates should be always hidden, and what injury you do
should be concealed, then that he should be acqu^^^ted with what you hold, and
your abuses, incrochments, usurpations, intentions, and wrongs disco^^red.


Farm. Sir, we acknowledge that the Lord ought to have his rent, and that is
all, and our services at his Courts, but the land we have, is our own.


Sur. Howsoever you may account them yours, yet the Lord has such an interest
and property in them, as he may also call them his, nay, Tenants may be said
to be the Lords men.
I may say, you are not in such sort your own, but next under the King, you
may be said to be the Lords.


Farm. Fie upon you, will you bring us to be slaves? neither law, nor reason,
least of all religion can allow what you affirm, and therefore as I before
conceived, so I may now protest, that you, and such as you are, are even the
cords whereby poor men are drawn into servitude and slavery, A rash censure.
and therefore I say again* it is pity any of you have any employment in a
Common wealth.


Sur. What Sir, because I say you are in some sort the Lords? I tell you, that
I mistake it nothing at all: for as the King is Supreme head and Prince, and
defendour of all his Subjects, so under the King is every Lord of a Manor
chief and head over his Tenants, namely, The Lord of a Manor, under the King,
is head of his Tenants.

A Lord, why so called.


(...) such as hold of him: And he has a kind of command, and superior power
over them, as they are his Tenants, and for that cause he is called, and they
do acknowledge him to be their Lord. And what does the word Lord import, but a
Ruler or Governor? If he be your Lord, then are you his, to be governed in
causes determineable within the Manor, and as I will hereafter prove, the
Lord of the Manor may command his Tenants to accompany him into the Field
against the enemies of the King, by reason of some tenures, and they are to
follow and be commanded and directed by him, and if they refuse the service,
the Lord may distraine for it, or may enter upon their Lands, and resume it as
his own in some case; so that I may well say, that in a sort, even your lands
and your selves are the Lords. The use and occupation i^ yours, but if the land
were so yours as were none above you, you might then call it yours: but so is
none, but the Kingdom which the King holds of none but of God. And no man is
so absolute within the Kingdom, but he holds his land of some Manor, or
person, or of the King. And of whom such land is holden, the same is called the
Lord of that land after a sort, because it is held of him by some kind of (...)
or serui^^, and by possibility this land may come unto, and by law be cast upon
the Lord (...) whom it is holden, as if you be so willing as you seem to talk
of these mysteries, you shall anon perceive. And therefore you can not but say,
that the land and your selves are in some sort the Lords. And therefore is it
not lawful for the Lord of the Manor, to enquire and examine of the things in
those kinds belonging unto him? And if there be clean and plain dealing among
tenants, The innocent need not fear^ to be locked into.
they need not fear who look into their lands and estates. But if there be
deceits and wrongs against the Lord, policy wills you to banish any man, and
to bar all the means that may discover them, though equity and honesty be
contented to discover all things to the manifestation of truth. Are not these
the matters of chief importance that disquiet you? The measuring of your
lands, the observation of the quality, and estimating the value of your lands.


Farm. It is true: for these are the causes that our rents are increased, and
our fines raised, and this would the Lord never do, if such as you did not
inkindle the Lords desire, by your so severe scrutations, examinations,
impositions, and imputations: for were the Lords of Manors ignorant of these
things, us in former times, poor tenants might have things at the rate they
had in former times.


Sur. My friend, if I compare you to a dead Image, be not offended, for I
perceive you have eyes to see, and yet you see not, you have a heart to
understand, and yet your understanding is amiss.


Farm. I am beholden to you Sir, to make me worse then a beast, for a beast
has the things you say I want: how prove you what you have said?


Sur. Because you impute your great impositions unto the act of an honest
Surueyor, when I will assure you and prove, that the cause is in and of your
selves.


Farm. Then in deed you might account us brutish, if we would work our own
woe.


Sur. I perceive, though you may be a good worldly Farmer, you are but a mean
obseruer of the course and carriage of things passing daily under your nose. He
that has seeing eyes and an understanding mind, may easily see and perceive,
that there is no Manor, nay, no Farm, be it great, or little, far off, or
near hand, but has bin, and daily is discovered, by private intelligencers,
lurking in or near the same, prying into estates, Private intelligencers, and
not honest Surueyors, give false informations to their Lords.
^yming at the quantity, wide, short, or over, seldom hitting right, observing
also the quallity, and glauncing at the value of every man's land, and therefore
secretly and underhand do inform the Lords of the Farm, and they being
credulous overmuch, and not a little covetous, build their demands both of
rents and fines, upon these most deceivable informations, whereby the Lord is
abused, and the Tenant wronged; whereas were the things seem, viewed, and
surueyed by a judicious and faithful Surueyor, who upon due consideration, and
discreet observation of all particulars, gives in a true and indifferent
certificate unto the Lord, using* rather his uttermost endeavor to moderate and
mitigate the Lords excessive demands, The course of an honest Surueyour.
then aggravating the validity beyond reason* or a good conscience, you would
be of another mind, and I protest, I hold that Surueyor a very bad man, that
will either for affection or bribe carry a parciall hand between the Lord and
his Tenants ye since he holds as it were the beam of the ^^^tance, he should
rather give the better weight to the weakest, respecting nothing but a
charitable course to be held by the Lord, for whom he trauaileth with the
Tenant, against whom if he speak not, he shall be often suspected of the Lord
to be parciall. But if there be equal consideration on all sides, the Lord
will believe the Surueyor deals justly, and the Tenant rest satisfied,
willingly to leave, or r^dely to accept, as his own judgment agrees or
disagreeth with the things propounded. For this have I observed, that
oftentimes Tenants consider not when they are kindly used, neither see they at
all times when they are abused.


Farms. Truly I believe you in part: for indeed there are even amongst us, to
ye Manor wherein I dwell, officious fellows, that to procure the Lords good
opinion, will pry into men's estates, and indeed as you say, into ye quantity,
quality, and value of men's lands, and give false information oftentimes, and I
know it is a foul abuse, Officious Informers dangerous for Lord and Tenant.
and of the two, I rather allow a true survey, then a false report: for such
fond fellows as are thus busy in other men's causes, are of all me^ least to be
believed; for they speak always for affection or gain: for they will (...) the
value of them they love, or have gain by, and aggrauate the same, as their
hope is of the Lords reward: all this I know without your report. But what is
that to the thing you charge poor tenants withal, that they art the cause of
their own hard measuree (...).


Sur. That can (...), and I think I shall have the whole world to witness it
for your further satisfaction, who can not your self be ignorant of the same
thing; for you have in part (...) of whom you ^ast spoke, (...) case the^ not
all, nay, I ^^cuse none in particular for I have seen and observed among them
a kind of madness, as I may call it, but in the best sense it is a kind of
ambitious, or rather auaricious emulation, Tenants striving in lowing and
bidding, inhanceth fines and rents.
wherein they strive one to outstrip another in giving most: as where my self
have had business of this nature, namely, of letting, setting, or selling of
land for years or lives, being, or near being determined, in farms or other
like, whereby the Lord has bin at liberty to dispose thereof at his will, for
best advantage, by choice of a new tenant, Proclamation to that effect has bin
made in open court, where I have seen, and it is daily in use, that one will
outbid another, as at an outcry in London, in so much as I have wondered at
their emulation, and could not have asked what they have raised it unto
themselves. And should any that is in authority in this case (who in duty is
not to hinder the Lord, or the Lord himself) inhibit such hot spirits to clyme
as high for the Lords advantage, as the ladder of their own will, and supposed
ability will reach* This is not as one Swallow in a Summer, but they are many,
and every where Winter and Summer, and yet are other me^ accused and condemned
for the^ and their faults, if there will be a fault in itself: but I should
think it greater madness for a Lord, wilfully to refuse what is so voluntarily
offered, and so willingly by given. Now, who is the cause of raising rents and
fines?


Farm. I know, such rash and over forward me^ there are in the world not a
(...) every Manor* who are especially priched forward to this revelation
through envy and a (...), having mean^^ to atchieue their desires. But this
bidding and out-bidding is in things, wherein the Lord i^ at his liberty to
take a tenant whom holist. But in (...) tenem^nts of inherit^nce the case is
otherwise, where the rent is and the fi^e (for the most part) certain^, what
needs the Lord have this surueyd, or any freehold lands?


Sur. It is fit the Lord should know what hi^ tenant hold to, be it free or
customary, though at this day there be a needless niceness in some
freeholders of Manors, who seem to conceal their estates, and to kick
against the view of their lands: but if they knew what they did, they would
reform that error.


Farm. Call it you, an error, for a freeholder to refuse to show his estate to
the Lord, or not to suffer his land to be surueyd?


Sur. I may well so call it, nay, I may call it a great fault, or an injury
done against the Lord, and hurtful to himself. There is none (it may be you
know it) that holds of any Lord land, but he holds the same by some kind of
rent or service, and when he comes to take up his land after the death of his
auncester, or upon purchase, but he does or ought to do homage and fealty,
Homage and fealty by freeholders.
or one of them, unto the Lord of whom he holds it; the doing whereof, how
ceremonious it is, if you be a Tenant to any such land, you know, and wherein
he makes a solemn vow and oath, to be true Tenant unto the Lord for the land
he holds. And some^^mes the Tenant of such a Tenure, is forced to be aided by
his Lord for the same land, if he be impleaded for it: now, if such a Tenant
refuse to show his estate, or to permit his land to (...) see^^, (...), to ^e
true Tenant, and to (...) are due unto the Lord, among which, this, A needless
^icenesse in freeholders to show their deeds and lands to the Lord, or his
Surueyour.
of permitting the Lord to know his own, is not the least, nay, he ^^ght by
his oath of fidelity, to further it by all means, both by his proper knowledge
and e^idence, not only his own, but other (...) lands, and thereby he shall
not only not prejudice himself, but he shall fortify his title so much the
more, by having his evidence enrolled, and his land recorded ^n the Lords book
of Survey, that when his heir shall take up the land, or he al^en the same, it
appears that he is true Tenant unto such lands for such rent, and for such
services: but there be so many scruples thrust into men's heads, by such as have
a pretended skill in matters of policy in this kind, and Lords (...) Manors
have been so remiss in taking knowledge of the things in this manner
appertaining unto them, Some Lords too remiss in surueying their land.
that questions of Titles and tenures are daily had and moved, to the great
trouble oftentimes both of Lord and Tenant, as is seen by experience daily as
well of land holde^ of the King, as of inferior Lords, which may be reconciled,
if Tenants were not too curious, and Lords too negligent. Besides this, there
are other reasons to move the Lord to know what land is holden of him, and by
what title, rent, and service: for freeholders may forfeit their land, and
their land may escheat unto the Lord: if then he should be ignorant what land
it is, where it lies, and how much it is, he may be easily abused for want of
records* and so are many Lords of Manors, who for want of due knowledge of
their tenants and of their land and tenures, other men are entitled to their
right.


Far. You have said more then I heard or dreamed of, and it holds in some
sort by reason, how it is by law I cannot dispute: but in all yt you have said,
you have not satisfied me in the thing before I spoke of* touching the (...)
which (as I said before) (...) ^ig^er then in former times, ^y your (...).


Sur. You strike always one string, and I find the ^ound of your meaning, you
would always (...) easily charged in your ^i^es as might bed and in that I
blame you not, (...) man's case to bear as light a burden as he can. But if you
remember what I spoke before, touching the cause of this raising of fines,
where I proved it came most by your own mean, you may be the sooner
satisfied in this, for it is in nature like the former. Although this kind of
Tenant has seldom any competitor to emulate his offer, because the Tenant
leaves commonly one either in right of inheritance, or by surrender to succeed
him, and he^by custom of the Manor is to be accepted Tenant, always
provided, he must agree with the Lord, Information hurtful in fines of land of
inheritance customary.
if the custom of the Manor hold not the fine certain, as in few it does:
now this composition is commonly made by demand of the Lord, and offer of the
Tenant. The Lord asks according to his conceit of the value of the thing, and
either his knowledge must arise by his own experience, or by information: the
information is either by secret intelligence of same officious neighbor, or by
due judgment of an indifferent Surueyour, (...), such a one as carries equal
respects to Lord and Tenant. And although, as you allege, former times did
afford Tenants more favor in rating and arbitrating fines, as you suppose, if
you consider it well, it is now as then it was.


Farm. There you much mistake you: for I will show by ancient Court ^^lls,
that the fine of that which is now twenty pound, was then but thirteen
shillings four pence, and yet will you say they are now as they were then?


Sur. Yea, and I think I (...) in it* Former fines and rents, and the present,
not unequal.
For if you consider the state of things then and now, you shall find the
proportion little differing: for so much are the prices of things vendible by
Farmers now increased, as may well be said to exceed the prices then, as much
as twenty pound exceeds xiii. s. iiii. d.


Farm. You speak far from truth, and I marvel you will err so much,
pretending to be a (...) of that reach, that men employ you ^o over reach
others.


Sur. To show you then ^n instance, look into the Chronicle in the time of
Henry the sixth, John Stow.
and you shall find, that a quarter of Wheat was sold at Royst^n* in
Hartfordshire for twelve pence: and I trust, Wheat at twelve pence the quarter.
if you be a Farmer, you are a Corne-seller, and I think, if a man offer you
thirty times as much for a quarter, you will say it is better worth.


Farm. Was it possible that ^^ane was then and there so cheap, and to rise
since to this ra^^? it is very strange.


Sur. Not at all: Rents of la^d, and prices of things grow together.
for since (...) grew such emulation among Farmers, that one would ou^ bid
another* (which in the beginning was little seen) it grew at length, that he
that bought dear, must sell dear, and so grew the prices of things by degrees
to this ^^te as (...) they be, and a Farmer gets as much by his Farm no^, a^
then he did.


Far. You err therein, I assure you: for else could Farmers keep as good
houses and hospitality now, as they did then, and alas, you see how unable they
be.


Sur. It is true, and the reason is manifest: for where in those days Farmers
and their wives were content with mean dye^, and base attire, The causes why
things have grown to this extremity.
and held their children to some ^^stere government, without haunting
Alehouses, Tauerns, Dice, Cards, and vain delites of charge, the case is
altered: the Husbandman (...) so publicly: for Vin^ mendibi^^ susp^^^sa heder a
non est upos. A g^^d workman needs not stand in the streets.


Sur. I confess, in this you have said truly: for none that is in deed fit
for employment, will, or needs to crave it, in such manner, The perfection of a
Surueyors office consists not in one part.
for they will be sought unto and solicited. But every one that has but a part
of the art, nay, if he can perform some one, two, or three parts, is not
thereby to be accounted a Surueyor, as some Mechanical men and
Countrey-fellowes, that can measure a piece of Land, and though illiterate, can
account the quantity by the parts of money, as a penny to a (...), a groat to a
day-worke, ten groats to a Roode, and consequently, a mark to an Acre, which
manner of calling suffices, and satisfyeth them in their small accompt^, but
the manner of their measuring to (...) erroneous, as I will show you hereof
(...) serve. Some have the skill of plotting out of ground, and can neatly
deliniate the same, and by Arithmetike can cast up the contents, which is a
necessary point of a Survey on office.


Farm. Saving your (...), we poor Country men due not think it good to have
our Lands plotted out, and we thinks in deed it is to very (...) all purpose:
for is not the Field it self a goodly Map for the Lord to look upon, better
then a painted paper? And what is he the better to see (...) out in colors? He
can add nothing to his land, nor diminish^ut^: and therefore that labor above
all may be saved, in mine opinion.


Sur. They that speak at any time against any thing done, or propounded to be
done, do either show their reasons against it, or else they conceal their
conceits, and without any good argument, inueigh only against the thing: And I
know your meaning in misliking plo^^ing of your land, A plot of land necessary.
and yet you (...) do what you think: for a plot rightly drawn by true
information, describes so the likely image of a Manor, and every branch and
member of the same, as the Lord sitting in his chair, may see what he has,
where and how it lies, and in whose use and occupation every particular is
upon the sudden view; which tenants mislike, not that the thing it self
offends them, but that by it they are often prevented or discovered of
deceitful purposes. For a tenant that is both a freeholder and a copyholder
for life* or by indenture for life or years, holding these lands inter^^^^,
Great abuses that grow by Farmers and tenants that are freeholders.
may easily (unless the land for life or years, be very specially butted and
bounded in their copies or leases, as seldom they are, through the sloth of
some stewards, or for default of a true survey led guide them) appropriate unto
himself copy or leased land to a free, and especially having time enough to
alter names and properti^^, to remove meeres, and to call down ditches, to
stock up hedges, and to smothee up truth and falsehood under such a (...)
conueniency, as before (...) be suspected (...) view, it will be clean for
gotten, (...) shall be able to say, This is the land: whereas if it be plotted
out, and every parcel of free copy leased, and the rest be truly
distinguished, no such (...) can be done against the Lord, but it shall be
(...) readily reconciled. And I dare presume to say, that the want of due plots
and descriptions of land in this form, Want of plots of land prejudicial to
Lords.
has bin the occasion of infinite concealements, and losses of many men's land,
and many intrusions and in^ro^hmen^s have bin made, and to long continued, that
now neither memory or record can reform them; besides infinite other abuses,
which are daily done to the prejudice of Lords, for want of such a monument to
be always at hand for their instruction.


Far. You aim unhappily, I think, to some men's purposes: but for my part, I
promise you I had no such thought in me, and yet what you say, may indeed be
easily wrought in mo^^ Manors, if they be as yt Manor is wherein I am a
Tenant: for I am persuaded, there has not bin any view taken of it, or
perumbulation made, or survey had within the memory of any man alive. And to
tell you truly, I think the Lord has much wrong both by his own Tenants, and
by confining Lords; for so the Lord have his rent, and his other duties of us,
he is contented: but I may tell you, Tenants commonly wish not for surueys.
if he did better look into it, it would be better for himself and his
hereafter, yet we wish he would let it rest as it does, for we may do in manner
what we list, and if a Surueyor come, we shall not do as we have done, nor hold
that that some have held, long, without any trouble: but that I leave. Then you
say, that plotting is the chief part of a Surueyors skill.


Sur. I say not so, but I say, it is necessary for him that is a Surueyor, to
be able to do it, and that he be painful and industrious, and having this
quality with the rest more necessary, he may be then called a Surueyour. Who is
a Surueyor.



Farm. What are they I pray you?


Sur. To little purpose I think I shall tell you, yet because you may know
that every one that has the name, is not indeed a Surueyor: What a Surueyor
must be able to do.
for besides the former faculty of measuring and plotting, he must have the
understanding of the Latin tongue, and have some sight in the common laws,
especially of Tenures and Customs, and must be able to read and understand
any ancient deeds or records, French and Latin, and to judge of the values of
Land, and many other things, which if time will permit, I will hereafter
declare more at large unto you.


Farm. Why is there such a precise knowledge required in a Surueyor?


Sur. Because they are imployd in such businesses as concern greatest persons
in their estates: for although men be endowed, by the providence of God and in
his ^ounty, with Honors, Manors, Castles, houses, lands, tenements, woods, and
other like revenues, which indeed are the sinnewes and ligaments which conioyne
and tie Honor and Habiliti^ together, Revenues the sinnewes of Honor.
yet if these be not managed, guided, and carefully continued and increased by
a discreet and honest Surueyor, for and in the name and behalf of his Lord,
and the Lord again proportion his expense and charge, according, unto or
within the compass of his known Incomes, the Lord may be disabled to
maintain that which he has gotten, the title of Honor: and where Honor is
without means, it wants the substance, and has only ye shadow of it self to
look upon.


Far. It behaues not only men of Nobility, but inferior me^ also to look unto
themselves, for ye preservation of their estates, but they indeed yt have but
little may quickly view it: Sufficit exigno strigilatio curta caballo. But he
that has many Honors, Manors, Lordships, Tenements and Farms, can not of
himself take view with ease; for indeed they lie for the most part dispersed
in many parts, and they must be aided by the skillful and industrious travail
of some judicious Surueyor, who finding by his view and examination, the true
values and yearly possibilities of his Lords Lands, may be a good mean to
retain his Lord within compass of his revenues, A discreet Surueyor may be a
good mean to manage the Lords revenues.
and to work him to be good to his Tenants, and by that means the Surueyor
shall deserve praise, and his Lord win more honor. But I marvel how such great
persons did before surueying came up: for this is an vpstart art found out of
late, both measuring and plotting.


Sur. You speak, I think, according to your conceit, but I will prove it far
otherwise, that measuring, Plotting of land, and measuring, is very ancient.
plotting, and surueying has bin used in ages of old. As for description, it
was used in Egypt by Ptolomy the King, who described the whole world. And where
the River Nilus in Egypt ouerflowed the bancks (as at this day it does about
harvest) the violence of the inundations were such, as they confounded the
marks and bounds of all the grounds that were surrounded, in such sort as none
knew his own land: whereupon they devised to measure every man's land, and to
plot it: so that afterward always at the waters recesse, every man could
find out his own land by the plot.


Far. Truly that was a most excellent invention, and I think it indeed a most
necessary course to be held in some grounds yt I know in England, which are
subject to like confusion: many marsh lands near the sea coast in Kent,
Sussex, Essex, Suffolk, Lincolneshire, Cambridgeshire, and other Shires
confining the Sea, or subject to great waters, Grounds subject to surrounding,
fit to be plotted.
and if they were thus plotted out as you say, I must needs confess it were a
good work, howsoever these kind of grounds should be hereafter surrounded,
increased or diminished by the force of Seas continual rage, whereunto they
are daily subject: for by ye means, if the ditches, which are the ordinary
meeres, meats and bounds between several men's lands, be confounded, this
device might after the winning of these surrounded grounds again, truly
reconcile them, and allot every man his own* which otherwise will be impossible
to bring to true appropriations. And this, in my conceit, is not the least part
of your profession, to lay out grounds in their true forms, that every
several parcel may be distinguished from other: for I know where great strife
has risen by confounding one Manor with another, where ye sea has won and
lost ground, and devoured ye true bounds* of which I am not alone witness, and
it is daily seen, ye questions do rise by like casualties, where towns,
houses, fields, woods, and much land has been and are daily devoured, and in
some places augmented, Rivers by force turned out of their right courses, upon
other confining lands; whereof time has taken such hold, as ye truth is now
brought in question, to the stirring up of quarrels between parties, which if
these places had been formerly laid out in plot, the doubt would be easily
answered. In these things I can not but agree with you, that your profession
may steed men that have use of your travail in this kind, although no such
art has bin, nor is it reported to have had any use in ye word of God.


Sur. Is there a necessity to produce the use of this, from examples out of the
word of God, when these indifferent things are left to the discretion of man
for matters of politic and civil society? If every profession should be
driven to fetch authority from the use in sacred things, Every matter in
modern use among men, can not be proved to have had use in holy Scriptures.
many things plentiful amongst us that live in a Commonwealth, would be found
profane: but because you seem to urge it, I will not stuck to let you know,
that it is not without example in the divine old Testament. If first you will
have the proof of measuring, look into the second Chapter of Zachary, and
there shall you find, that the Prophet reports, that he saw a man with a
measuring line in his hand, and he asked him whither he went? and he said unto
him, To measure Jerusalem, that I may see what is the breadth thereof, and what
is the length thereof.


Farm. I do remember now that I have read such a thing indeed, but as I take
it, this measurer was an Angel of God.


Sur. Then is the warrant of measuring so much the more strongly confirmed unto
me^. But you may perceive that measuring was then in use in other things: for
had not there bin the use of the measuring line before, how could the Prophet
have known it to be for that purpose?


Farm. Yes, being a Prophet.


Sur. He could not have called a thing by it proper phrase, that had not been
in use before, neither could his relation thereof been understood of them to
whom he declared it, unless they also had before known the like.


Farm. Can you prove the like of Surueying?


Sur. Joshua commanded the children of Israel, that every Tribe should choose
out three men, Joshua 18. Surueying proved by Scripture.
that he might send them through the land of Canaan, to view, survey, and to
describe it: for so is the word, Ye shall describe the land into seven parts,
and bring them hither to me. And what description could they make, without
viewing and surueying the places?


Farm. It is true that you say, such a view was taken at that time, that every
Tribe might have his portion of inheritance. And surely in these Surueyors was
much trust reposed by Joshua the chief head of those children of Israel: for
according to their report, did Joshua divide to every Tribe his portion. This
surely was a works of great discretion and judgment in the Surueyors, and
great providence in Joshua: for indeed he could not travail in all those
parts himself, and therefore he did wisely to appoint such as were fit to
perform the service, and it makes me remember your former defense of the
profession, in travailing for great persons, who can not afford time nor
pains to view their own lands themselves. And it is not every man's gift to be
able to divide lands into equal, Every man can not equally divide Lands into
many parts.
or certain unequal parts, that men that are parties therein, may hold them
equally trait withal, unless it be such a one as has skill in dividing and
opportionating, which thing comes often in use among men in this (...).


Sur. If you had time and experience to look into, and to understand what has
bin done concerning this matter long ago, you should find in the records of the
Tower even before the Conquest, matter to satisfy you, that this profession
was then in use, and there shall you find the fruits. And since the Conquest,
the book called Dowes day, lying in the Exchecker, will confirm you I think
sufficiently, that it is not as you say a new inuencion. Beside, the same art
has been in sum and substance established by act of Parliament, 3. Edw. 1.
Extenta Manerii.
called Extenta Manerii: upon which Statute, that learned Judge Master Fitz
herbert, has written a little commodious and compendious Treatise; so that if
you stand upon any further authorityes, I will leave you to the present general
use thereof, which men of best discretion and greatest revenues do hold and
continue, and none sp^r^ie against it, but the malicious or ignorant.


Farm. I confess, I was lately ignorant of the things which now in part I
know, but I was never malicious: as for the records and Statute whereunto you
refer me. I believe you without f^rther search, and for my own part I am
sorry that over I have so with others backbitten the profession, and slandered
the honest professors thereof* for I now do well see and plainly understand,
that the same i^ lawful and expedient, and not any way hurtful unto ye
Tenants, if the Surueyor be skillful and honest, and his information given by
his assistants, which (...), ^e true, and his help of the Lords (...) ready:
The Lords records, and the Tenants informatio^s, are the pillars of a survey.
for these are the two pillars, upon which a Surueyor must of force build his
work, information and record, as I take it, although record be always
preferred before verbal intelligence, ye* if records be never so autentique,
and true, of things unknown to him that has the examination of them, what can
be effected or done, but as by a blind man that knows his face is to his way,
but how and where to step he is uncertain? and although he desire none to
bear him, because his legs are sound, yet he will not refuse to be led by the
hand the way he would go. So a Surueyor, in my poor opinion, yt has a
bundle, nay a whole trunck full of records of several tenements, and parcels
of la^^^ whose names he can read, whose buts and bounds he can relate, but yet
he sees not the way of himself to go to the^, or can say without direction,
This is it: and therefore I know, that Tenants must give aid to a Surueyor, or
else he will fail in his art much.


Sur. You have said well, and it appears, your apprehension is good in this
business, and in deed the aid of the Tenants is a good help in this case,
especially when records are also present: for if record and their informatio^
concur, then is the Survey or in the right way. But many times if the
Surueyor can not help the Tena^ts by his records when they are at fault, The
Survey or by the Lords records may in some things guide the Tenants.
he shall hardly find which way his game goes: for a skillful Survey or
carrying his record in his hand, in his perambulation of a Manor, shall after
the first entry be able to guide himself, and go from place to place, from
field to field* even by his own evidence, if they be truly made, and the buts
and bounds right, especially at the names continue vnal^^ed, and that the
Tenants can (...) it as he cites it, and nothing then ^s required to be
altered, but the names of owners, who change often. And for this business, the
fittest me^ to accompany the Survey or abroad, are the most ancient, The
auncientest Tenants fittest to guide the Surueyor.
and longest inhabitants within the Manor, for the Surueyors instruction, and
the youngest, to the end they may also learn to know the like, to give like aid
by their experience to posterities.


Farm. Me thinks it were a good course (if I be not too saucy) that a Surueyor
should after his perambulation made, and the particulars entered, publicly
read the same before the Tenants in open Court, to the end that they may
approve or reprove what is true or mistaken, for the best may err in setting
down of many things.


Sur. I like your advice well, and surely he that does not so, and compare it
also with former records, does not as behooves. But I know, and have found by
trial, that Tenants think it a hard imposition, Tenants unwilling to
accompany the Surueyor.
once in their life time to attend such a business, they had rather do any
work, then to do their Lord service, and themselves this good: for many of
them are so wise in their own conceits, as they think the^ fools that give
any assistance unto this work; and some so wilful, that if they knew that
they and theirs should be for ever benefited by it, they will stand aloof, and
any small occasion of their own will easily withdraw them from it; and some
again are so worldly, that they think no day well spent, but that is spent
upon their present profit: and lastly, some are so given to their vain
delights, as neither love of their Lord, or fear of forfeiture of their
tenements, or doing good to their neighbors, or securing their posterity, can
get any duty in this behalf to be done by them.


Farm. As far as I conceive, the Lord of a Manor may force his Tenants at
such a time, to give their attendance, else you may well think, not a few
would finds excuses ynow to absent themselves.


Sur. You say well, and therefore has the Law provided a punishment for those
that will not do their duties in this, The law punishes Tenants that will
refuse to aid him in his Survey.
or in any thing that the Lord has to do within his Manor, for ordering of
his Tenants. And because Tenants should not be forgetful of their duties, they
were in former times, and may be still, summoned to the Lords Court every three
weeks. And the Lords remissnes in calling them, has bred in many places a
kind of contempt, whereby grows their slacknes in times of their Lords
service. But the Lord of a Manor has power to punish them, and they are
remediless without submission, if the pain be within the compass that the
Court will bear, which is large enough to weary him that is most arrogant.


Farm. You have satisfied me in many things whereof I doubted, you have
cleared the profession it self of many slanders, and for my part I will
henceforth speak more sparingly, and advise such as I hear too forward, to be
better advised. And were I persuaded fully, that I my self might be a
Surueyor, and yet retain a good conscience, I should wish I were also capeable
of the same faculty.


Sur. And if I were persuaded, that you would give an indifferent care, and
afford an impartial censure of what I would deliver unto you, I could be
contented to bestow some time, to show you what were fit to be done, to the
attayning unto such a measure of knowledge in the same, as might enable you to
steed your self and your friends in that kind of office.


Farm. I would think it well, if I could attain but to some part of this
faculty, I would leave the rest to better capacities: but my desire is far
from it, I may not be (...) that the practice is lawful, A good mind.
for I would deal with nothing, wherein I might stand fearful that God
allows it not.


Sur. I like you well, I wish him that you seem to fear, to favor all your
honest desires, and name, and that his blessing may follow every our good
endeavors: for whosoever undertakes any profession, be it never so lawful or
expedient and necessary for Church or Commonwealth, No profession without the
fear of God can prosper.
and has not the grace and favor of God to guide him, he may for a time seem
to prosper in it, and to flourish and ruffle it out with shows of great
blessedness, but it is but like Iozahs Gourd, that grew up in one night very
great and fair, but withered the next day.


Farm. That I thank God I have learned, and to tell you truly, for my part I
had rather live in a mean estate in my calling, free from bribery, extortion,
and wrong, serving God, then to get infinite wealth thereby, yea, although not
the world, but mine own conscience can reprove me for it: for I see, The
brauest is accounted most skillful.
such riches continue not many generations, neither has it a promise of any
blessing, although I know, that they that can so rise and flourish, and brave
it out, are the men best accounted of; for they are held wise and politic, and
to have skill in their profession, whe^eas others that bear not the mind to
deal corruptly, can not keep way with them in show, and thereby are condemned
to be ^mp^e fellows, and their honest ca^^age and (...) ^^^ate in the world,
The simply honest, most suspected.
makes their (...) to perform what they undertake suspicious; (...).


Sur. You are in the right way of a good conscience, which is a continual
feast, such a feast, and of such sweetness, Though the wicked seem not to see
their own errors, God sees them, and will discover them.
as the world can not see or understand the same, but happy is he whose
conscience accuses him not: for howsoever men may seem to set a good face on
evil actions, as if he could not accuse himself (...) his due examination of
his own heart, yet* it will come no pass that his conscience will one day
bewray it, to his intolerable terror, and he shall be forced to accuse,
judge, and condemn himself, without any further witness. And this I tell
thee is the end of all such as fear not God, and live not uprightly and justly
in their callings: for it is not the calling it self that corrupts the man,
but the man may be corrupted in his calling, and abuse his best profession*
therefore I say, see that thou find thine inclination apt unto this
profession, Some are naturally inclined to some profession.
and in thy desire thou tremble not to attempt the same, for some professions
are more natural then others to every man, and all mysteries and sciences
whatsoever, are attained by some with greater facility and ease then by others;
and some by small industry, study, and endeavor shall attain quickly to that
perfection in some faculty, wherein another shall never excel, live he never
so long, and be he never so studious and paynefull.


Farm. I find mine inclination in conceit, pliable unto this course of life,
how it will succeed, must be seen by practice: but that is the least doubt,
all my fear is, whether I may do it and yet (...) God*


Sur. Know this, that if thou be already of a godly conversation, having the
true fear of God sealed up as it were in thine heart, and do not desire this
profession, as Simon the Magician did, for lucres sake, divine knowledge, thou
may assure thee, this profession will not hurt thee, although the workman is
worthy of his hyre: for none will force thy labor for naught: dulci^ labor cum
lucre. If men did not get by their honest pains, it were mere slavery to
undertake any kind of faculty. But to come to the lawfulnes of it, The manner
of the execution, not the matter executed hurts.
know, that it is the manner of the execution, and not the matter of the
profession that wounds the conscience. Every man is not borne nor bound to
one faculty or trade, neither consists the common wealth of one member, but
of many, and every one a several office, too long to express them all in
kind. Is not the eye surueyor for the whole body outward, Surueyers of the
body.
and the heart the searcher within? And has not every common wealth overseers
of like nature, which imports as much as Surueyors? A Manor is a little
Commonwealth.
And is not every Manor a little common wealth, whereof the Tenants are the
members, the Land the bulk, and the Lord the head? And does it not follow,
that this head should have an ouersee^ or Surueyor of the state and government
of the whole body? And follows it of necessity, that the office is unlawful?
An unjust officer makes not the office unjust, no more then a crabbed face
impaireth the fair glass wherein it looks, or a dusky cloud corrupt fair
water whereon it lowreth. In case of Survey of Land, against which you have so
much inueighed, if you consider it in reason, and make it your own case, you
will say perchance, The case is altered. Private and mean men survey their
small things, even their little Farme^.
You have now peradventure a small Farm, will you be careless and dissolute
of the estate thereof? will you not wey and consider with your self what Land
is fit for Pasture, what for Arable, what for Meddow, and the like? and will
you not command your servant to view it daily, that no trespasses be done
therein, and to see unto the hedges, ditches, fences, watercourse, gates, and
such like? Will you not regard the estate of your Cattle, their number,
health, and safety? And have you not a continual watch over all your servants
and children, and to the preservation of things within and without? If you do
thus in one small Farm, what would you do in ten? could you see unto them all
your self? If you had as many Manors, would you sit at home and receive the
rents and fines that your Tenants would bring you, without consideration of the
estate, or values, qua^tities or qualities of the things for which you receive
their money? And why have you this care, or would you look into these things?
Is it not, because it is your living and liuelyhood, If revenues decay, a ma^s
estate decays.
by which you and yours are maintained? And how much the more it is neglected,
so much the more it decays: and if it decay in quantity, you can not continue
equal in quality. And can you therefore think it a hard course in that Lord
(that having his Lands which are his liuelyhood, dispersed in diverse parts of
the Realm, to which, through greater employments of importance, he can not
personally resort, Great Statesmen can not survey their own Lands.
if he could, it is neither his experience, nor fit for his calling to
travail therein) to authorize and send such as may take view of his revenues,
and of the estates of his Tenants, who are by custom and law in many things
bound unto him, and that by such his substitute, he may be truly advertised of
what he has, and how his means do arise, that he may proportion his charge
and expenses accordingly? The charge imposed upon a Surueyor.
and whether he be abused by his Tenants, or his Tenants by his officers, or
one Tenant by another, or the Lord wronged by confining Lords, by intruding too
far into his Lands, how rents be answered, and customs continued, how
freeholders do perform their suits unto his courts, how his tenements are
mayntayned and repaired, how his woods are preserved, his fishings, fowling,
and prerogatives mayntayned? All which, by how much the more they are neglected
and let run without view or survey, Wherein honorable persons do offend, in
neglecting their revenues.
so much the more does the Lord weaken his estate, and prejudice his heir:
wherein, it can not be denied, he offends God, deceyueth the King, and
defraudeth the Commonwealth. God, in that he is careless of his blessings
bestowed upon him. The King, in that he wilfully disableth himself to do him
the service he owes him in body and goods: and the Commonwealth, in that he
disableth himself to give it that assistance, that his quality and place ought
to afford; and consequently, shows himself unworthy to ouersee matters of
State and Commonwealth, that is careless to see unto his own. Furthermore,
where a due and true survey is made and continued, True surueys continue peace
between Lord and Tenant.
there is peace mayntayned between the Lord and his Tenants; where, if all
things rest between them confused, questions and quarrels arise, to the
disturbance o^ both. In private familyes, if there be none to ouersee and to
manage things domestical, what disorders, what outrage, what uncivil and
ungodly courses, and what spoil and ruin of all things do follow? The like
of necessity, where Tenants are left unto their own will: and yet, as the
unruly company in a family could be contented to be masters of themselves,
and to have no controulement. So Tenants can well brook their Lords absence,
and that they might be their own caruers, and that the Lord should have what
they would yield of their own accord. I speak not of the honestly minded: but
where a multitude is without a guide or governor, there is disorder; and
disorder breeds complaynts; and complaynts are unsavory to a kind Landlord,
who must be forced for redress, to punish the offenders: and the most
offensive will speak most of their wrong, and will soonest exclayme against
any course that may keep order. So that, to conclude, I affirm, The faulty
will first find fault.
that it is most requisite and expedient for due order sake, that every Lord of
a Manor should cause his Lands to be duly seen, and truly surueyd and
certifyed, A Survey must be renewed once in seven or ten years.
and once in seven or ten years to have it reuiewed: for the inconveniences
that grow by the neglect thereof, are of so many kinds, and they so
dangerous, (like the most perilous disease long concealed) that they work
contempt in the Tenants, and loss to the Lord. Now, to keep this upright
between the Lord and his Tenants, I think you can not deny, but a true and
honest Survey is necessary and lawful, and may be performed with a good and
safe conscience, and in the fear of God; if (as I have said) the conscience
be not before stained with the corrupt desire of unlawful gain, and (as I
said before) I think few or none will mislike the course, None mislike true
surueys, but deceivers.
but such as are fare gone in some disease of deceyuing their Lord, which can
not endure to have this kind of salve to come near their sore.


Farm. Truly Sir, I know not how to answer you, but do consent to that you
affirm: For, for mine own part I can not but confess, I can find nothing in
mine experience to contradict your speech. But pity it is that Surueyors
should be ignorant, or dishonest: for the one especially abuses the Lord, and
the other wrongeth both Lord and Tenants.


Sur. But whether is there cause, in your conceit, to approve or reprove the
profession, as it is simple in itself? Deliver your mind plainly, leave not a
scr^ple in the minds of your neighbors, that have exclaymed with you against
them that never offended them, reproouing as much as they durst, Lords, for
looking into their own land: and unless Lords were dead images or pictures of
men, Lords that will not look to their own Lands, are as dead images.
having only the name of Lords, and could not at all command their Tenants,
that could neither hear, see, nor consider what were fit to be done with their
own proper revenues, I can not but wonder, that any should spu^ne against them
herein.


Farm. I think you speak something too forceably against Tenants in general:
for surely all are not opposite to this course, though some be.


Sur. I condemn none, but I reprove some, that of mine own knowledge have
given testimony of their inward dislike, by their outward murmors, for what is
done with an evil will, Evil will is never dutiful.
can not be said to be done at all. Such as come cheerfully to the service,
are dutiful, and I hold it impiety to abuse them, but the unwilling deserve
little favor.


Farm. What should Tenants principally do in such a business?


Sur. Nothing but that law, custom, and duty requires at their hands, to give
their best aid to the Surueyor, What Tenants should do in the Lords survey.
to travel with him about the circuit, buts, bounds, and limits of the Manor,
to inform him of the same, and of every particular man's land, and rent, to
show him their copies, leases and deeds, to the end he may enter and inroll
the^ all together in a fair book, for the Lords use, and for a perpetual
record for themselves.


Farm. For, information, and showing the particular grounds and bounds of the
Manor, indeed is fit, but for their evidences, as their copyes and leases, the
Lord has the Court-rolls of the one, and counterpanes of the other; and for
f^ee holders deeds, their Land is their own, and whether they may be compelled
to show them or not, I can not tell.


Sur. These are ^^iuolous doubt^ that some have formerly made, but they have
bin answered to their cost, for the law compels them all. For, admit the
Lord of the Manor have the rolls wherein the copyes are recorded, View of
Evidences necessary.
may not copyes be abused after their entryes, or counterfetted in some things
prejudicial to the Lord, as may also the Lease, as has been found oftentimes,
names and lives of men, parcels of Lands, dates of years, and such like,
^azed, inserted, or altered? And is it not fit therefore that they be seen and
entered together, that without search of so many court rolls the Lord may be
satisfied, and the Tenants justified? And what preiudiceth it the Tenant, to
have his evidences truly recorded, if he mean plainly, be it copy, lease, or
free deed? he will think it a confirmation of his estate* Entry of deeds
convenient for the Tenant.
what casualty soever come to the same, he may be the better assured that such
a record will witness with him; whereas if none such appear, his intrest will
be the more suspicious: and therefore such as are wise and discreet, will not
only consent to this good course, but be thankful unto the Surueyor as
behooves. If it be just and right, that the Lord should know his own, who
should manifest it, but the Tenant himself* and how should he do it, but by
his evidence? And most unjust it is in that Tenant, that by any wilful or
sinister means or covert practice, does either detract his fellow Tenants from
the service, or concealeth any thing that may further the same.


Farm. This I can not deny, although indeed some ^oly fellows will (...)
doubt herein, but I see it is to good purpose, and for our better security,
The Tenants duty.
to do all things requisite in this business, and that all the Tenants within
the Manor should conioyne in (...), and every one for himself, and all for
one* and one for all, should seek, examine and declare the uttermost truth of
euerything, toward the exact performance of this service, and that the
Surueyor should know the quantities, qualities, and indifferent pain^^^ of
every man's Tenement and Lands, their rents, services, customs, wor^s, and
whatsoever the Tenant is in law or conscience bound to yield or perform to
his Lord; and indeed thus (...) have I heard given in charge at a Court of
Survey, with many other articles, which are now out of my mind^* all which may
be done by Tenants with a good conscience, both by relation in Courts, and in
the perambulation: but the concealing of these can not stand with an honest
mind, for these things of themselves can not prejudice the Tenants, but the
misconceiuing misen^ring by the Surueyor, may be erroneous, and the
ouer-racking, What things are evil in a survey.
urging* and ouerburdening the Tenants by the Lord, may be extortious. These
things may fall out by means of an unjust and unskillful Surueyor, and a
covetous Landlord. And the fear of this makes the Tenants to exte^^ate the
values, and to smother the truth of things to their souls danger: therefore
happy are those Tenants, that have a gracious Lord, and an honest Surueyor; for
then there can not be but an equal and upright course held between them* then
can not the Tenants but be faithful and loving to their Lords, The principal
causes of instituting Manors.
and their Lords favorable to them, so should the Tenants be defended by their
Lords, and the Lords fortified by his Tenant^, which were the two principal
causes of the original foundation of Manors as I have heard.


Sur. You say rightly, and I am glad to hear you conceive so well of this
apparent necessity; for so may I say, that it is of necessity that the Lord
should know the full and absolute estate of his Manor, and of every particular
thereof: for howsoever of late days Tenants stand in higher conceits of their
freedom, then in former times, Tenants ar now in conceit more free, then in
former times.
if they look a little back into antiquity, they shall see that Tenants (for
the most part) of every Manor in England, have been more service unto their
Lords, and in greater bondage then now they are, whom the favorable hand of
time has much infranchised, and it can not be altogether every where
forgotten, because they may see as in a glass, the picture of their servitude
in many ancient custom rolls, Ancient bondage.
and in the copyes of their own auncesters, and many servile works have been
due and done by them, and in many places yet are, though the most are now
turned into money: but neither their infranchisements, nor the conversion of
works into rents do so far free them, but that they still owe services unto
their Lords, in respect of their tenures, as well freeholders as customary
Tenants, as both in most of their copyes and deeds is expressed by these words,
Pro^editu and seruitiis vnde prius debit. and de iure consuet. Every inferior
estate is conditional.
which proves their tenures in a sort to be conditional: which condition if
it be wilfully broken by the obstinate carriage of any such Tenant, he
indangereth his estate.


Lord. It were hard, if for not doing some small service unto his Lord, a man
should forfeit his living.


Sur. And it were very foolishnes in a Tenant, for wilful refusal thereof, to
endanger the ^ame: for if the Lord be in law tied to maintain the right of
his Tenant, and to defend him against any other that shall pretend a false
title unto his Land, the Tenant is again bound to perform all such services,
and to pay all such duties as of right he ought. And it is expedient that the
Lord should see these duties continued, and it has been and is daily observed,
that the neglect thereof extinguisheth the remembrance of them, The Tenants
service is parcel of the Lords inheritance.
and so the Lord loses his inheritance: for every service of the Tenant is
parcel of the same, and the remisnes of looking into these tenures, has
brought it to pass, that infinite within this kingdom, that hold in fee
quillets of Land, and some Manno^s, know not how or of whom they hold; so that
hereby Lords of Manors, of whom these quillets were heretofore known to hold,
Discontinuance of service hurtful to the Lord.
have lost their tenures and services, and such as hold the Land by unknown
tenures, are cast into the danger, to hold to their, and their posterities
further hurt.


Farm. If Tenants will be wilfully obstinate, and refuse to do and continue
their uttermost services unto their Lords, as bound by their tenures, being
(as you say) parcel of the Lords inheritance, they are worthy to be attached
of disobedience, and to pay for their contempts: and if Lords will be so
negligent, as they will not look unto their own, they are worthy to lose
their right: and therefore I hold it discretion in the one to do his duty, and
providence in the other to continue what is due; and if by age or impotencie
the Tenant be disabled in person to perform his service, Service of the
Tenant.
to crave dispensation, or to do it by another; and if the Lord be far off
and can not be present, to substitute one to receive it for him. But Sir, in
all your discourse, I have observed, you have pleaded (as it were) for the
Lord, against the Tenants, exacting sundry duties from them to their Lords, but
I have not heard you speak much against the Lords in favor of the Tenants,
and yet I know there is a kind of reciprocal bond of duty each to the other,
and may be broken of either side.


Sur. It is very true, for as children are bound to their parents by the bond
of obedience, so are the parents bound to the children by the bond of
education: and as servants are bound to their masters in the bond of true
service, so are the masters bound to their servants in the bond of reward. In
like manner, Tenants being bound unto their Lords in the bond of duty, Lords and
Tenants are bound each to other.
so are Lords bound unto their Tenants in the bond of love: and though I have
said little at this time of the duty of Lords to their Tenants, the occasion
has not bin offered at this time.


Farm. I trust you have said enough concerning the duty of Tenants, for they
can but pay rent, and do service, more can not be exacted.


Sur. Yet rent and services are diverse and diversely answered and done, which I
could be content to show you more at large, but that yonder comes a Gentleman
that will interrupt us: know you what he is?


Far. I will tell you by and by as he comes near. Oh Sir, it is my Landlord, a
man of great possessions, Lord of many Manors, and owner of diverse Farms, who
has been inquisitiue for a man of your profession, but to tell you truly* I
altogether dissuaded him before this time: but now having heard your reasons, I
will solicit him for your employment, and I would wish you might undertake
first the Manor wherein I dwell.


Sur. At his disposition and pleasure be it: and so for this time I leave you.


The end of the first Book.
The Surueyors Dialogue, between the Lord of a Manor, and a Surueyor: wherein
is entreated of the state of a Manor, of the parts and profits thereunto
belonging: and how the Lord of a Manor ought to deal with his Tenants.
The second Book.
Lord. FRiend, of late I met with a Tenant of mine, who told me you are a
Surueyor of Land.


Surueyor. I have been, and am sometimes imployd in that kind of service.


Lord. I have at this time some occasion to use the aid of one of your faculty:
and I have heard by my Tenant, that your skill and diligence may satisfy my
desire therein.


Surueyor. I shall do mine endeavor wherein you please to command me.


Lord. There be many, I know, that bea^e the name of Surueyors, but when they
are put to it, they come far short of some principal points required in the
absolute performance of the work, All that profess it, are not Surueyors.
and either leave it half done, or so shuffle it up, as the Lord is abused,
and the Tenants wronged, by the blind and uncertain returns of the Surueyors
travails: for a Lord of a Manor knows not, but by such as he uses therein,
the estate of things, and how the particulars stand between the Lord and his
Tenants. If the Lord of the Manor have never so good a mind to deal well with
his Tenants, and the Tenants be never so inclinable to do true duty to their
Lord, Ignorance in Surueyors, dangerous.
they may be both misled by an unskillful Surueyor, to the unjust condemnation
or suspicion of both. And therefore I think it behooves men of worth, that
have use of such as you are, to be well assured of the skill and ability which
you pretend to have in your profession; and because I have no further
experience of you then the bare report of my Tenant, I must entreat you to
discourse unto me a little of your knowledge of such particulars, as are to be
considered in the absolute survey of a Manor.


Surueyor. Sir, you seem to oppose me far, and the thing you demand, will
require a longer time, and a larger discourse, then either my leisure, or
peradventure my present memory of every particular will readily permit. And it
may be, that you that pretend little knowledge in the art, may apprehend both
the truth of the thing, Some not having the name of Surueyors, may have the
skill.
and an error committed in the performance, as well as he that assumeth the
title of a Surueyor, although neither your leisure nor your quality may in
reason permit you the travail in it: for I know many Gentlemen of good worth,
that have the speculatiue parts of the whole, and the practick of the deepest,
and yet they will not be seen to tread that path that a Surueyor is forced to
do, in the whole business. You have the matter and subject whereon a Surueyor
works, and without which a Surueyor loses both art and name, and therefore
you cannot be altogether ignorant of the things required in the business, as
the Master of a feast can not dress the dainties, but the Cook, yet can the
Master reprove the Cook if he do not his duty therein.


Lord. Thou say true in thy comparison: but for my part, although (...) I
have Land, and I know how many Manors I have, their names, and where they lie,
and the most of my Tenants, and their rents, and if you should err in these,
it may be I might be able to reprove you, yet for matters of farther search, I
assume not to be skillful, for then I needed not your service, as of
quantities, qualities, values, validities of estates, tenures, customs, and
other things incident to a Manor, which are not in all Manors alike, the true
discovery whereof belongs to the Surueyors off^ce, yet none but such as are
truly skillful, can sufficiently discharge the duty herein required: and
therefore by your leave, you shall briefly (I will not be tedious) relate unto
me what you can say of the def^nition of a Manor, whereof it consists, how,
when, and by whom it was erected, with other such things as shall be expedient
for the Lord of a Manor to know the particulars whereof I will leave to your
relat^on, and first tell me What a Manor is.


Survey. Since you will needs diue into my poor skill, by your opposall, and
since indeed I do in some measure profess the art, wherein I think no man is
or has been so exquisit, A man may err in whatsoever art.
but he might err in some point or part much or little, as in other arts,
yet to answer your demands, I will as briefly as I can, satisfye your desire.
And first, where you demand what a Manor is, A Manor in substance is of
Lands, What a Manor is. Perk. fo. 127
Wood, Meddow, Pasture, and Arable: It is compounded of demesnes and services
of long continuance. As touching the beginning of a Manor, and the institution
thereof, the beginning of Manors was, The beginning of Manors.
when the King gave Lands unto his followers, in such quantity, as did exceed
the proportion of a man's manurance and occupation, as a thousand, two thousand
Acres more or less: which quantity of Land being at that time as it were in a
lump or Chaos, without any distinction of parts, or qualities of Land, he to
whom such Land was given to hold to him and his heirs for ever, enfeoffed some
others in parts thereof, as one in ten, another in twenty, and some in more,
some in less Acres, and i^^onsideration of such feoffements, every of these
were to do the feoffer some kind of service, as he and they agreed upon,
reserving such a part unto himself, as he might conveniently occupy in his
own hands, and by this means the Land thus given by the King, and thus
proportioned out to others by the Donee, became to be called a Manor. And he
that was thus invested in this Land by the King, was in respect of such as he
infeoffed, called the Lord, Lords and Tenants why so called.
and such as were infeoffed, were called Tenants: Lord, in respect of
government and command; and Tenants, in respect of their tenures, and manner
of holding under the Lord whom they were to obey.


Lord. But when or about what time was this erection of Manors?


Sur. As I take it, and as it seems, in the time of the Normans: When Manors
began.
for among the Saxons was no such name as the name Manor, yet the thing even
in substance was then, for they had Demeisnes, and services in substance,
Inlandt. Vtlandt.
but the demeisnes they called Inlands, and the services Vtlands, so that it
differs only in name, but in Jurisdiction little or nothing at all.


Lord. Whereof is it called a Manor?


Sur. There is some difference of opinions whence the wo^d Manor should be
derived: it is in Latin called Manerium, Whence a Manor takes name.
yet a word not used among the Romans or ancient Latins, and therefore to find
the etimon by it, cannot be: for the word is used among our Lawyers, as many
other made words are, which have bin terms raised by our Laws, and are not
elsewhere in use; and therefore the nearest way to find the signification of
the word, is by the quality of the thing; so that some hold, it should proceed
of the Latin verb, Maner^, which signifies to abide, or remain in a place,
as the Lord and his Tenants did in this, whereof the head house, or the Lords
seat was called Berrye, Berrye. quid.
which signifies in the Saxon tongue, a dwelling place, which continues yet
still in Hartfordshire, and in diverse other places, and is also taken sometimes
pro castro, which was also the seat of the Lord of some Mannor^. Manor houses
were also, and yet are called in some places, Halls. Courts.
Halls, as in Essex, and Northward: Courts and Court-houses Westward, as in
Somerset, Deuon, etc. as also Manor places all which are places of the Lords
own abode, and therefore it may not unfitly be said, to take name of abiding
or dwelling. Some think, and not improperly, that it takes name of the French
word Manemirer, which signifies to till and manure the ground. And of the two,
I take this latter to be the most proper deriuation of the word Manor: for
thereof are many chief houses of tillage, called Predia, Predi^.
Graunges. It may also take name of Mainer, to govern and guide, because the
Lord of the Manor had the managing and direction of all his Tenants within the
limits of his jurisdiction. Of these deriuations qualem mauis accipe* necessity
ties to neither.


Lord. These significations of the word may stand all with sense, and much
material it is not whence the word arises, but the likelyest is indeed that
which most agrees with the property of the thing. But I have within my
Manors sundry mesuages: whence is the name derived?


Sur. Of meisus, or mesuager, which is as much to say, as familiam
administrare, Mesuage, whence it takes name.
to govern a household: for every of the Tenants had his family, and of diverse
of them and of the Lords family did a Manor consist.


Lord. Then no doubt, if a man have a thousand Acres of Land more or less, to
him and his heirs, which lies in one entire piece not yet divided, may be
divided into parts, as a portion for the Lord himself, and some parcels to
erect such mesuages for Tenants to do him service, as he may make a Manor
where none was before.


Sur. No Sir, for although a man have a competent quantity of Land in his
manurance, and would convert it to the end you speak of, were it never so
great, and could establish many mesuages, A Manor may not be made at this day.
and could erect whatsoever services, this would not become a Manor, because
all these must have long continuance, which can not at this day be confirmed by
any private man, but by the King only: but he may have thereby a kind of
seignory, a Lordship or government in gross over his Tenants by contract or
covenant, but no Manor. No man at this day can create a service or a tenure,
or by any means raise or erect a Manor: for there must be very Lord and very
Tenant in fee-simple, and that of ancient co^mencement and continuance, or
else it can inure no Manor. For a man may have demeisns to occupy, and Tenants
to do him services, and that of continuance, and yet no Manor. As if a man
that had Land, did give part of this Land in former time to some others in
tail to do him services, here are demeisnes in the donor, and services in the
donees* and a tenure: yet because there be not very Tenants in fee simple,
remaketh no Manor.


Lord. Whether are all Lands holden of a Manor, parcel of the same Manor?


S^r. No, Lands may be holden of a Manor by certain services, the service may
be parcel of the Marnor, and yet the Lands not.


Lord. But may not this Land be made parcel of the Manor at this day?


S^r. By no other means but by escheat, for if the Land fall unto the Lord by
escheat, then it comes parcel of the Manor: for then is the service
extinguished, and the Land comes in place of it.


Lord. May not a man purchase Land that lies near his Manor, and annexe the
same, and make it parcel of the Manor, though it held not of the Manor
before?


Sur. Foreign Land newly purchased, though it lie within the precinct and
bounds of the Manor, can not be annexed, though the Tenant thereof be willing
to do his services there: for this is in nature of a new creation of a tenure,
which at this day the law will not admit, only the King by his prerogative may.


Lord. What if it were tied unto the Lord of a Manor for the payment of an
annuity, is not the annuity then parcel of the Manor? And if that Land be
purchased by the Lord, and thereby extinguish the annuity, does not that Land
come in place of the annuity, and so become parcel of the Manor, as the Land
you spoke of before, which by the escheat ran in place of the service*


Sur. The case is not alike: for the annuity was not parcel of the Manor, 22.
Edw. 4.44.
neither can it be by such means as you propound by the way of Mortgage. But
in another sort it may: as if a Manor be to be divided into sundry parts, 22.
lib. ass. 53.
and because the parts fall out unequal in value, there must a rent or annuity
be apportioned to make up the value, which rent becomes parcel of the Manor.


Lord. If the Manor be divided, as you say, and a rent allotted to one part,
how can the rent be parcel of the Manor, forasmuch as in my understanding,
the Manor becomes by this partition, to be no Manor: for if there can be no
addition to a Manor, there can be no division of a Manor, and yet the Manor
to continue still a Manor.


Sur. Yes Sir, of one Manor may be made diverse at this day.


Lord. How I pray you?


Sur. If a Manor descend to diverse partners, 26. H. 8.4.
and they make partition, and every one has demeisnes and services, every one
has a Manor, and every one may keep a Court Baron.


Lord. What if a man make a feoffement upon conditions of parcel of his
Manor, or do grant a Lease to another for life of part, or do intayle part,
are not these parts still parcels of the Manor?


Sur. If parcels of a Manor be once thus severed, they immediately become no
parcels thereof: yet may they all reuert and become parcels of the Manor
again, as if the condition of the feoffement be broken, if the Tenant for life
dye, or the limitation of the entayle discontinue for want of heirs.


Lord. Then a man may say, that though such Land be not, yet the reuersions are
parcels of the Manors.


Sur. So it is intended.


Lord. Well, you have reasonably well satisfied me in these points, yet would I
gladly have some further satisfaction of some other matters, touching the state
and profits of a Manor.


Sur. I would be willing to do my best to content you, but you partly hinder me
of other business. What else would you know? I wish breuity.


Lord. It shall be so, neither shall you lose your labor: for I mean to use
you, if my future satisfact^on be answerable to this former. May every Manor
keep a Court Baron*


Sur. Every Manor in the beginning, no doubt, might keep a Court Baron, Every
Manor may keep a Court Baron.
and so it may at this day, unless the Manor be so dismembered, as it wants
that which may warrant the keeping thereof: for if all the freeholders of a
Manor do escheat, or all but one, the Manor is then disabled to keep a Court
Baron, for the Court cannot be kept without suitors, which are the freeholders.
35. H. 8.



Lord. Then me thinks, the Manor loses the name of a Manor: A Manor may
lose the property, and so the name. Fitzh. 3. C. A Seignory.
for if it lose the quality, it is not the thing, no more then a logge that had
fire, can be said a fire-logge, when the fire is extinct.


Sur. It is true, it becomes no Manor, but a Seignor^, having no power to
keep a Court Baron.


Lord. An ignorant Surueyor, I see, may be easily deceived, in terming that
which is no Manor, a Manor, and that no Manor, which indeed is a Manor.
But satisfy me in this one thing. A man having two Manors lying together, and
the one of them is decayed, and has lost his power to keep a Court Baron, and
the Lord is willing to have the Tenants of both these Manors to do their
suites and services to one Court, namely, to that which stands yet in force,
and that me thinks were good for the Tenants to ease them, and it would
preserve the Lords right without prejudice to any* for then one homage would
serve both, and both serve as one, one Bailey, and other officers, as if it were
an future Manor.


Sur. Yet this can not be, for this union of the Manors can not extinguish
their several distinctions, for they will be still two in nature, howsoever
the Lord covet to make them one in name, and the more powerful Manor has no
warrant to call the Tenants of the decayed Seignory, but every act done in one
to punish an offender, in the other is trauersable, and therefore it is but
lost labor to practice any such union; if it be considered by such as are
forced to service in this kind, they may refuse it: yet if they will
voluntarily submit themselves to such a nouation, and the same be continued
without contradiction, How two distinct Manors may be made one.
time may make this union perfect, and of two distinct Manors in nature, make
one in name and use, and I do not think but such there are.


Lord. Then is there, as it seems, no mean to annere two Manors in one,
howsoever necessary it were both for the Lord and Tenants.


Sur. Yes Sir, two Manors may become as one, if one Manor do hold of another,
and it escheat to the Lord, the escheated Manor may be annexed, and united,
and of two distinct Manors become one, if the Lord will, in use.


Lord. I am answered in this point, and it stands with more reason indeed
then the former: now I pray you tell me what things do properly belong to a
Manor.


Sur. There do belong to a Manor, Lands, Tenements, rents, and services, as I
showed you before in part, which are a parcel in demeisne, and parcel in
service.


Lord. But speak, I pray you, something more at large of every of these, and
first tell me what demeisnes are.


Sur. Demeisnes are all such Lands, as have bin time out of the memory of man,
used and occupied in the Lords own hands and manurance, as the site of the
Manor house, Meddowes, Pastures, Woods, and arable land, that were reserved
for the maintenance of the Lords house from the beginning.


Lord. This then is that you call parcel in demeisne: what is that you call
parcel in service?


Sur. Parcel in service.
All those lands, tenements, and hereditaments, which yield rents of Assize, as
rents of freehold, copyhold, or customary land: all which are parcel of the
Manor, yet no demeisnes.


Lord. But are not all customary land copyhold land? Copy and customary La^d,
and their difference.
why then make you a distinction between copy and customary?


Sur. All copy hold Land is commonly customary, but all customary is not
copyhold: for in some places of this Realm, Tenants have no copyes at all of
their Lands or Tenements, or any thing to show for that they hold, but there is
an entry made in the Cou^t-booke, and that is their evidence, and this
especially of the ancient Duchy land of Cornwall, and other places.


Lord. These Tenants then may be called Tenants by Court-roll, according to the
custom of the Manor, but not Tenants by copy of Court-roll.


Sur. It is true, but they are held only a kind of conuentionary Tenants, whom
the custom of the Manor does only call to do their services at the Court,
Conuentionary Tena^ts.
as other customary Tenants do.


Lord. The word conuenire, where of they be called conuentionary, does, as I
conceive, import as much as to call together, or convent: but what say you to
the Rents of Assize? What mean you by Assize?


Sur. Truly, for my part I take it to signify, set in certainty: Rents of
Assize, why so called.
for these kind of rents are as in the beginning, neither risen nor fallen, but
do continue always one and the same, and only they and none else can be
properly called rents of Assize.


Lord. I think you take it rightly: and are all rents of one kind?


Sur. No: there are properly three kinds, as rent service, Rent seck, and Rent
charge. 3. kinds of Rents.



Lord. These terms are strange to me, though I be Lord of many Manors, and no
doubt, I receive rentes of every of these kinds, but how to distinguish them,
I can not tell. And whether I have bin abused by mine Officers or no, I know
not: for they never told me of these many kinds of rentes, and therefore let me
entreat you, for my satisfaction, a little to explain their several natures?


Sur. These Several rentes are paid upon several considerations, How every
kind of rent is to be paid.
and have several grounds and commencementes, and are diversely to be levied
and recovered if they be denied. That which is called Rent service, is so
called, because it is knit to the tenure, and is as it were a Service, whereby
a man holds his Lands, or Tenements. As, where the Tenant holds his Lands,
by Fealty and certain rent, or by Homage, fealty, and certain rent, or by any
other service and certain rent, the rent is called Rent service: for, as the
Service follows a Tenure, so the Rent follows the service. And if this rent
be behind, the Lord of Common right may enter and distrayne for it. The Rent
charge is so called, because when a man grants any Land, whether it be in
fee-simple, ^ee tail, for life, for years, or at will, and in his deed
reserueth a rent, with clause of distress for non payment, by virtue of this
clause, the Land is charged with payment of the rent, by express words, and
by force of it the Lord may distraine for his rent behind.


Lord. This kind of rent is at this day, I think, most common: for few will
grant Land, Rent charge most common at this day.
but they will make such provision, that the Land shall stand charged with the
rent.


Sur. It is true, for at this day, there can be no rent service raised, because
it cannot be without a tenure, which can not be at this day created.


Lord. What is that you call Rent seek?


Sur. It is a bare rent reserved upon a grant, wherein there is no mention
made of charging the Land by distress, Rent seek.
and it signifies redditum siccum, a dry rent, for the recovery whereof the
Land is not charged.


Lord. Few such rents are now adays, for a man had n^ede to make all the
provision he can to secure his rent, and yet he may be driven to try his
uttermost means to recover it. But you have satisfied me also touching these
rents: now let me entreat you to show something of o^^er things incident unto
a Manor, by which the Lord receives profit or prerogative.


Sur. Profits may rise by infinite means and ways out of a Manor to the
Lord, Profits of Manors are infinite, and in all Manors different.
but all Manors yield not profits or commodities alike neither in nature, or
value.


Lord. I think indeed all Manors are not alike profitable to the Lord,
neither has every Manor like means, yet I desire to know for my experience
sake* what may grow out of a Manor, that I may the better look into the
natures and qualities of such as are under my power and comm^^nd.


Sur. If you have a Manor or Manors, there is (as I said before) a Court
Baron at the least, incident thereunto, and to some a Lee^e, or Law-day, which
is called the view of franck pledge, Profits of Court.
by which Courts do grow many, and diverse perquisites and casualtyes, as fines
of land, Amerceaments, heriots, rehefes, wayues, estrayes, forfeitures,
escheates, profits growing by pleas in Court, and such like.


Lord. You may do well to show me, though briefly, what every of these former
things do properly import, for to tell me the names, and not the natures of
the things, is, as if I should know there is a Sun, but whether he give light
and heat, to be ignorant. Therefore before you pass further in any discourse,
show me how fines of Land do arise unto the Lord, and what amerceaments are,
and the rest.


Sur. Fines of Land are of sundry kinds, Fines of land.
and yet properly and most especially they arise of copyhold, or customary
Lands and Tenements, which are in diverse Manors of diverse kinds: for there are
customary Lands, which are called copyhold of inheritance, and they are such as
a man holds to him and his heirs, according to the custom of the Manor, at
the will of the Lord. When such a Tenant dies, and the heir comes to be
admitted (if the custom of the Manor bear a fine certain) he gives but the
accustomed fine: If it be uncertain and arbitrable, he agrees and compoundeth
with the Lord, or Surueyor, or Steward, for the fine. Some hold Customary Land
for lives, as for one, two, or three lives, whereof the fine is always at the
Lords will, as is also the fine for years. There are also fines for licenses
of Surrenders of Customary Land, and for alienation also of freehold Land, and
these are called Fines, which signifies as much as a final composition: Fine
why so called.
and when the fine which is the end of the contract is answered, all but the
yearly rent during the term agreed upon is paid. These and such like sums
of money raised a^ a Court^ar^^, are parcel of the pe^quisites of the Court,
as are all amerceaments, which are sums of money imposed upon the Tenants by
the Steward, Surueyor by oath and presentment of the homage, for default of
doing suit, or for other misdemeanors punishable by the same Court, infinite
in number and quality.


Lord* Whence takes the word Amerceament name?


Sur. Of being in the Lords mercy, to be punished more or less, Amercements.
crumenally at the Lords pleasure and will. It is no doubt, a borrowed word, as
many other words used in our common laws are: for he that is amerced, is said
to be in misericordia, that is, in the mercy of some body.


Lord. These words may be understood by use, and by the manner of the use of
things: but he that should seek the etimon, among the Latins, of the
substantine Amerc^^mentum, and the adjective Amerciatus, might seek long, and
be never the n^ere. But I perceive, we must take it as our ^athers first framed
it and left it, I understand what it means in our common sense, and that
suffices.


Sur. Other words, not a few, in like sort to be understood, we find in use
amongst us, which doubtless the Romans never knew: and yet they that have to do
with the things wherein they are used, understand the meaning, although their
deriuations be strange, as amongst others it is questionable, whence the name
of a heriot may be derived.


Lord. Heriots.
That would I be glad to learne^ for I have to do sometimes with Herio^s* But
because I know not why they are so called, what they be, how, where, when, by
whom, and for what they should be answered, I do fear I am sometimes abused.


Sur. I may tell you as I have heard, and of my self coniectured, whence the
word comes. But I have no certain authority for it. I^ may be^ said, and
most likely it is, that it should come of the word H^rus, Heriots whence so
called.
a Lord and Master: and Heriot^^ belonging to the Lord. And it was in the
beginning a thing for the wars, as the best Horse a man that died had at the
time of his death. (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) Six Control^ 11/26
makes a Barony. 25600. acres, whose relief is 100. Marks. Mag. Cart. Ca. 3.
An Earldom.
One Barony make an Earldom 38400 acres, whose relief is 100. pound.


Lord. Do these proportions of Land always hold, with their titles of honor?


Sur. Surely no* for we may observe, they are increased, and diminished, as men
are in disposition to spend, or save, to add to, or to dismember their
patrimonies. But these were the proportions at the first institution of these
particular allotments, and the denominations do hold, though the quantities of
the Land be more or less: the lesser parts we see, as yard lands, plow-lands,
etc. differ, as the custom of every Country drawn by time, does at this day
hold and allow: but that is no prejudice to the first purpose, which allotted a
certainty to every part, and a certain relief to be paid, according to the
first institution of every part, and the payment follows the title, not the
quantity.


Lord. You have said enough of reliefs: now speak of the rest: and as I
remember, the next after reliefs was waynes, what are they?


Sur. Waynes, or wayned goods, are goods or chattels of what nature soever,
stolen, Waynes, or wayned goods.
and in the fugacie of the thief, he le^ues them behind him for want of
convenient carriage, or conueyance, being pursued; and wheresoever such goods
are, they are ye Lords of that Manor o^ liberty wherein they are found, if the
prerogative of ye Manor will bear it: for every Manor will not, but such as
have it by grant from the King.


Lord. Whence comes the word Waiffe?


Sur. The goods thus stolen and left behind the thief, are called in Latin
Bona, or catalla waniata: Waife, whence derived.
a word, which our common Lawyers only use, and the signification is gathered
by the use: for I think, none that is a stranger to the (...), he be never so
well seen (...)* can say this word signifies the thing for which it is now
^^ken.


Lord. Well then, as long as we understand the meaning, by the use it
suffices, without further examination, or disputation about the word it self.
But how is it to be (...) goods? for it may be as (...) casually l^st, as (...)
stolen.


Sur. Therefore when any such thing is found within a Manor, How to prove
wayned goods.
the Bayliffe, or other the Lords officer, seizes it to the Lords use, as a
thing wherein at the instant no man claymeth property. And if it be nor
evident by the pursuit of the thief, that it was stolen, it is proclaymd and
presented the next Court, and found by the Jury of what nature it is, and that
the property is in the Lord: and because these and estraye^ are spoken of at
large at every Court Baron by the Steward, no man can pretend ignorance of
them, therefore I will omit to speak any more of them. Forfeitures.
But, a little of forfeitures, though no doubt, you being Lord of many Manor,
know right well what they are, and how they grow, and the (...) no doubt, could
wish you and other Lords knew less then generally you do.


Lord. Tush, if there were no penaltyes, men would commit offenses without
fear, and if there were no forfeitures for abuses done against Lords of
Manors, Forfeitures fit to curb offenders.
Tenants would too boldly make waste^ ^ spoils of the Lords inheritance,
without regard of law, love, or humanity: and therefore let me hear your
opinion what forfeitures are, and for what causes, Lords of careless Tenants
may take advantage of forfeitures.


Sur. I know many Lords too forward, in taking advantage of forfeitures upon
small occasions, and if manifest cause be given them, they show little
compassion: And if I knew you were a man desirous to take advantage in this
kind, I would be^ sparing to discover any thing tending to that liberty: for,
I well conceive, that the law did not to much provide, to enrich the Lords of
Manors, by their Tenants forfaytures, as to keep Tenants in good order, The
chief end of forfaytures.
and to restrain them (with fear of losing their Tenements) from rash and
wilful abuses. And therefore in all forfaytures, there are diverse
circumstances to be considered; as whether the Tenant did it ignorantly,
negligently, or as constrained through necessity. In these cases, whatsoever
law in extreme justice allows, a good conscience forbids to take
advantage, though the second be worthy to suffer some smart: for negligence
cannot be excused: for nature it self teaches beasts, and they in their manner
of living, use a kind of providence. But if the forfayture be committed
wilfully or maliciously, it deserves in the first, little, and in the second
less pity. Yet where a good mind is, there lodges no revenge, or covetous
desire. And where neither of these are, there all extremities die. Yet I wish,
that in these last two cases, the offenders should be punished more in
terrorem, for examples sake, then to satisfy the greedy desire of a covetous
Landlord, who (though he may say, he does no more then the law warranteth) does
yet strain a point of Christian charity, A good mean to make Landlords
sparing to take forfaytures.
by which men are bound to measure all men's cases by a true consideration of
their own. So shall he that is Lord of much, and of many Manors, looking into
the law of the great Lord, of whom he has received, and (...) whatsoever he
has, find, (...) himself has committed a forfayture of all, if his high
Lord should take advantage of all the trespasses (...) wrongs he has done
against him.


Lord. You are out of the matter, whereof our talk^ consisted, I desire you not
to tell (...) I may take a forfeiture by a good conscience* but what a
forfeiture is? and (...) the taking and lea^ing the advantage, unto such as
have the power to punish or forgive.


Sur. So must I when I have spoken all I can. But I hold it not the part of an
honest mind in a Surueyour, The part of a good Surueyour.
to be an instigator of the Lords extremities toward his Tenants: though I
confess he ought to do his uttermost endeavor to advance the Lords benefit in
all things fit and expedient, yet ought his counsel and advice to tend no
further, then may maintain obedience in the Tenants toward their Lords, and
love and favor of the Lords toward their Tenants, which being on all side^
unfeigned, neither of them shall have just cause to complain of, or to use
r^go^ to the other, for it is not the actor himself of any extremity, that is
only to be reproved, but the abetter there unto: and if I wist that any Lord,
who shall ^^quire the use of my poor trauaile^, would expect more at my hands,
then the performance of my duty with a good conscience, I had rather leave then
take the reward for such a travail. Neither do I find that you, howsoever you
reason of this point, will commit any act toward any Tenants you have, that
may not be justified by the law of love: therefore I leave further to persuade
or dissuade you herein. Forfaytures diverse in diverse Manors.
And as touching the matter and manner of forfeitures, I pray you understand,
that they be of diverse kinds, and diverse ways committed for in some Manors it
is lawful to do that, as ^ath in others incurr^s a forfeiture. Forfeitures
grow either by br^^ch of a custom, as in Customary or copy hold Land, or of a
condition or promise in a Lease or grant, of which last, the Tenant can not
say he did not think it was so, because the meaning is expressed in his deed:
but of (...) in some sort ignorant (...) them to lead them. A customero^
necessary
But for the most part causes of forfeitures are apparent, and known of all
within a manner; as non payment of their rent, not doing his service* (...)
where custom inhibits it, Causes of forfeytures.
letting his (...) to f^ll (...) the Lords (...) waste, and such like, which as
I said before* are not alike in all places, and therefore it is most convenient
that the customs of every Manor were known, and the Tenants made acquainted
with them, that when question grows for any cause of forfeiture, they may not
say they knew it not: for Lords commonly know better how to take advantages of
such casualties, then the Tenants know how to avoid them.


Lord. You speak that is reason, I confess. But may a Lord enter immediately
upon a forfayture?


Sur. The forfayture must be first presented to the homage at the next Court
holden for the Manor, How and when a Lord may enter after a forfeiture.
and there found, and recorded, and then has the Lord power to show Justice
or mercy. It were inconvenient, that the Lord should be judge in his own
cause; and ^his present caruer of things doubtful. And therefore has the Law
ordained, in all controversies, even in these inferior courts, a just manner
of trial by Jury.


Lord. May none, but Copyhold Tenants, forfayt their land?


Sur. I showed you before, that Tenants by deed indented for life or years,
may forfeit their estates, but that is by covenant or condition expressed in
the deed, according to the prescript agreement made, and interchangeably
confirmed between the Lord and his Tenant.


Lord. What is an Escheat for* as I remember, that follows in your formerly
r^cite^ perquisites of Court.


Sur. What escheates are.
Eschete is, where a freeholder of a Manor commits felony, the Lord* of
whom his Land is holden, shall have his Land, and that kind of forfeyture is
called escheat.


Lord. The Lord may then enter immediately into this Land, because the law
having tried the felony, it casts the Land upon the Lord


Sur. The King has it for a year and a day, and then comes it unto the
Lord, and his heirs for ever.


Lord. Is this all the causes of escheats?


Sur. Escheat for want of heriots.
Escheat may also be, where a Freeholder, Tenant in ancient demeisne, and a
customary Tenant of inheritance, dies without heir general or special, and
none of the blood coming to claim the same, it falls unto the Lord, by way
of escheat.


Lord. This then is immediately the Lords, and the King has no part, or time
therein, and without any further ceremony, he may enter and dispose of that his
pleasure.


Sur. How escheates are found.
It must be also first sound, and presented by the homage of the Manor whereof
it is holden: and after proclamation made to give notice unto the world, that
if any can come and justly claim it, he shall be received, the homage then
finding it clear, does entitle the Lord thereof, as a thing escheated for want
of an heir.


Lord. You speak of an heir general or special, what difference is there*


Sur. The heir general, is of the body of the deceased, and the special, of
his blood or kin.


Lord. So have you satisfied me thus far: now what say you to the pleas of
Court? for I remember, it is part of that you before spoke of*


Sur. It is true: they are parcel of the Perquisites of Court. Perquisites of
Courts.



Lord. Whereof comes the word Perquisites?


Sur. Of the word Perquir^* (as I take it) which signifies to search for: or
to enquire diligently, as also to get or obtain.


Lor. It may well be so: for these things before rehearsed under the name of
Perquisites, are all casual, and not at all times alike: and therefore may be
called Perquisita, things gotten by diligent enqui^^e. And to that end, so many
things are given by the Steward to the Jury of a Court Baron, and Lee^e in
charge, Perquisites, why so called.
that they should diligently enquire of them, find them, and present them: and
yet scarcely one of forty, of the several things, wherewith they are charged,
are found by the Jury. And some things happen at one Court, that happen not
again in twenty Courts after: and therefore are also called Casualties, as
happening now and then, as I conceive it, having little experience in them.


Sur. Yes: it seems you have the better part of experience, namely, coming in
of the profit of the things: where some know the same, but they know them as
appertaining to others, not to themselves. But of this nature are the profits
that arise by Plea^ of Court, which because they are diverse, and do diversely
arise, there need^ no long relation of them.


Lor. Are there no other Perquisites of Court, but such as you have already
remembered, nor other (...) Manor*


Sur. There be many other profi^s that may grow also unto a Lord of a Manor:
yet they not certain, nor in all Manors alike.


Lord. Then are they also casual* and may ^e called also Perquisites of
Courts, (...)


Sur. Perquisites, but not perquisites of Court.
Casual: But no^ perquisites of Court, yet fo^^e of them may be called
perquis^^ in some sense, because they be gotten by search and inquitie, as
those that are hidden in the earth: as Treasures, which, as long as they lie
unknown, benefit not the Lord: but when they are found, they are called
Treasure troue, as Silver, Gold, Plate, Jewels, and such like, Treasure troue.
before time hidden, which appertain unto the Lord. So do minerals of Lead,
Ti^^e, Copper, and such like: And quarries of stone, Freestone, S^a^e-stones,
Marking-stones, and all such: which may long lie undiscovered* As may also
Col^, Lime, Chalk, and such: for which search being made, are happily found: yet
because the benefit is uncertain upon the present, and what continuance and
vent it may afford, they may pass under the name of Perquis^^es, How
casualties may become certain.
and Casualties: as may also Fishing and Fowling, unless the Lord can bring
the same to be a certain con^^^uing rent: Then are they no more casual
during the grant, but are in nature of other rents certain. And of these
kinds, are infinite other things, incident to some Manors, but not to all. As
the profits of Faires, and Markets, Woodsales, sales of heath, flags, and
Turburie, pa^^nage and such like. All which are in themselves uncertain, as
touching the value, unless they be turned into a rent certa^ine.


Lord. ^


Sur. Yet the Lord must be (...) how he lets these casual things, before he
know what they are, how they rise, and what profit they may yield, how they
will continue* and to whom, and upon, what conditions he grant them. Otherwise
he may be overtaken and much abused: for a secret once ^et, can not be revoked
a^ pleasure*


Lord. ^


Sur. Therefore I say, it behooves the Lord, to whom such casualties shall
befall* first to make due and diligent trial by men, both of trust and
experience, what may be made of any such thing by the year: for such is the
wa^y dealing of some, Policy in Bailies, and overseers.
that have the guiding of things of this casual nature, that they will observe
the conditions and qualities, circumstances and value to themselves, and
disable the thing, and estimate the value to the Lord, to bring him out of
conceit with the goodness and validity thereof, to the end they may obtain a
grant, as has fallen out in many things, and to many men, whose future
profit of the things thus achieved, have approved the Lord to be much
abused. This I know by experience, in the grant of a cole mine, which as long
as it was in the Lords hands, it yielded a small yearly reuenew, until he that
managed the same, got a grant of the Lord, and then the profit was twice
qua^rebled by the lessees own confession. The like of a Sa^^ on fishing, wherein
the Lord lost two parts in three, and yet at the time of the letting, made to
believe, it was hardly worth the rent: yet would I wish that Lords of Manors
in these casual things, would be contented, after true trial made, to grant
the same for a reasonable ^e^t, though the lessee gain* for the travail and
hazard in these uncertain (...) whereby I may apprehend truly the full estate
of my Manor as belieeue (...), and what commodities do rise, or may by any
means lawfully be raised in the same.


Sur. If a painter should draw your picture, Sir, and you having a blemish in
your face, or defect in your limbs, would you think he dealt truly with you,
if he omitted the blemish, and made your live ame^ts perfect and straight,
being deformed and crooke^?


Lord. I know your meaning: I like no such flattery, neither would I he should
make a straight leg crooked, but true conformity in all parts.


Sur. So will I as near as I can: for neither in quantity, quality, nor
value, will I, A Surueyor should be equal between Lord and tenant.
for I ought not be partial: for these are the things wherein in^u^^e may be
done to the tenants: neither will I, for I ought not co^ceale or counterfeit
their estates, terms of years, lives, covenants or conditions, rents,
services, forfetures or offenses, neither whatsoever profits, emoluments, or
commodities that may any ways arise or grow unto the Lord. For a parciall eye
seduceth the heart, and the heart, the hand, and the hand the pen, which cannot
but witness against a corrupt entry of these collections, many years after
the Surueyor is in his grave.


Lord. Thou speak as an honest man, and I mislike thee not, if thy words and
thy works agree. And seeing we are grown thus far, I pray thee make an end
of thy whole discourse, and tell me what else appertains to a Manor.


Sur. I have already declared the most. But Manors much differ in their
profits. For a Manor of small quantity of land, and few tenants, may be more
beneficial to the Lord, then a far greater.


Lord. How may that be?


Sur. Diverse Lordships yield extraordinary commodities, Commodities under the
earth.
some under the earth* some of the earth, some above the earth: as Ti^ne, lead,
copper, cole, stones, milstones, and such like, found under the earth, which
every Manor has not.


Lord. But these are chargeable commodities to get.


Sur. So is the Lord of the Manor at no cost in planting, plowing, setting, or
sowing them.


Lord. That is true, but commonly the land is barren where these things are
found. And therefore it is a great work of divine providence, The wisdom of
nature.
to yield such a commodity from under the barrenest soil, to supply the want
thereof in plates more fertile, of other things more behoouefull for the
relief of man. And yet in many of ^hese barraine places, grows by the
diligence of man, corn in abundance, as the Psalmist says: Psa. 70.16.
A handful of corn shall be sown: upon the top of the Mountain, and the
fruit thereof shall shake like the Trees of Lebanon.


Sur. Where diligence is and the fear of God, there no doubt, God blesses the
labors of men, and waters even the highest Mountains from his Chambers. For
when Israel turned to God from their Idolatry, Psa. 104.13. Ezech. 36.9. Psa.
109.3, 4.
he promised by Ezechiel, that their desolate places, and high Mountains,
should be tilled and sown. But he makes a fruitful land barraine, for the
sins of them that dwell therein. So that whether God send his blessings under
the earth, upon the Mountains, or in the Valleys, whether in grass for
Cattle, in herbs for the use of men, whether in Wheat, Oil, or Vines: he
truly int^tleth none unto them, but such as fear to offend him, and show
thankfulness.


Lord. Though these words digress from our present matter in hand somewhat*
yet it is good, that both Lords and tenants should know and acknowledge indeed,
from whom all these good things do proceed. For although they come, Lords and
tenants must acknowledge all to come from God.
some from under the earth, some of the earth, and some above the earth, they
^e not yet the gifts of ye earth, but of God that has provided the earth to
bring them forth to our use. But what mean you by the things of the earth?
come not these of the earth?


Sur. Yes, I confess i^: but some things are more perfect of themselves then
other. But such as by an extraordinary working of man's art, are made of the
earth, I term things of the earth, and they also rest to the benefit of the
Lord of that Manor where such earth is found: as the earth whereof Allome,
Things made of the earth.
Copras, Salt-P^ter, Glass, or other such is made, together also with Fullers
earth, Brick, Tile and Potters clay, which are not common.


Lord. Is there any other thing Material, incident to a Manor


Sur. Yea, and amongst all the rest of the privileges which the Lords of
Manors have to raise their further benefits by, are two not yet mentioned,
wherein if they be not very precise and circumspect how they bestow them, and
in what sort they dispose of them, there will follow a fearful account, when
the great Lord of all Lords shall take survey of the things done by the Lord of
the earth.


Lord. What are these things, I pray you, that you make such scruple to utter
them?


Sur Things of themselves lawful by the laws of the Land, where they be
iudiciously and carefully handled, as they are by the laws intended, and by
the chief disposers meant: namely, the marriages of Wards, Wards. Presentatio^s
and disposition of their lands in their minorities, and the presentations of
benefices in the gifts of private men.


Lord. For the first, I have yet no occasion to make proof, how or what they
are, but the second, I have had some power to bestow, wherein I was not so
remiss, as that I presented such as were not fit for ye fun^tion, which I
think is your meaning: and therefore let that pass awhile, and learn me what
a Ward is, and how he and his land is to be disposed by the law, that I may
learn it against the time I may have use.


Sur. The word Ward, whence taken.
The word Ward is as much as guard, which signifies tuition or defense, and he
that is in ward, is under some man's government and keeping: and the word has a
passive signification, as it is used in our common speech, and yet the same
word is also used in the active sense: as they that watch or attend for the
defense of any, are called the ward or guard of that person or thing they do
protect. But the wards whereof we are now to speak of, are the sons or
daughters, heirs to some person, that held his land either of the king in
chief, Wards what they are.
or of some inferior person by knights service: whose heir male being under
the age of 21. years, and the female within the age of 14 years, the Lord
shall have the ward, guard, or custody of the body and of the lands so holden
of him, to his own use, until they come to these ages, without making account
to the heir when he or she comes to age, as law books will tell you.


Lord. Then me thinks, the word as it is commonly used, is improper, namely,
to call ^uch an he^^e, a ward: it is more proper to say, he is in ward, or as
the Law^er says, a ward.


Sur. I take it as y^u do.


Lord* But what is the reason that the Lord should have the land to his own
use? why rather do not ye profits redound to ye use of ye heir in his
minority.


Sur. This kind of wardship had some reason for it in the beginning. For you
must understand, that he whose son or daughter is to be thus guarded, and his
land to be disposed by the Lord, was in his life time bound, by the tenure of
his land, to do manly and actual service in person in the time of war: or to
keep a castle, ^ith some kind of warlike weapon, in the time of war and peace.
And these kinds of capital services were called either tenures in capite, What
tenure draws wardship.
as holden of the king, who is the chief E^^nage uncertain, grand seri^^^tie,
or some other like service, and was called seruici^m mi^^tare, service of a
soldier, now called knights service. These services were not to be
discontinued, for to that end, were the lands first given by the king and other
inferior Lords of Ma^nors, that they might have the continual service of their
tenants. And therefore whenever the tenant of such a tenure died, having none
to supply the place of like manly service, the heir being under age, and not
of power, the Lord was and is supposed to be bound for the defense of the
Realm, to perform the service by a person, for whom he must answer in the
heirs minority. And because the charge was in former times great and
dangerous, The cause.
and the land given only for that cause, the Lord was to keep the heir, and
to see him trained up, and to be made fit for the same service: and for his
maintenance and supply of the service, to have the use and profit of his land,
until he became able to perform the service himself in person.


Lord. I think this to stand with great reason: for if it had not been thought
reasonable, the laws would not have provided in that case as they have done:
as it appears by your relation.


Sur. Many Statutes indeed have been made touching Wards* Mag. cart. ca. 4.7.
and 28. Statutes for the confirmation of wardships.
Ma^l. cap. 6.7.8. etc. Westminster. 1. Westminster. 2. and many Statutes since, to which I
refer you, too long here to relate.


Lord. What needed you then give such a strict caveat touching Wards?


Sur. Truly, to put Lords and others, into whose hands they often happen, in
mind to be careful of their education and disposing: because many
inco^uenienc^s follow, if their Guarders be not faithful, and provident for
their well bestowing.


Lord. How, in bestowing?


Sur. Marriage of Wards.
In marriage. For the Lords have the marriage both of the Male and Female, if
they be unmarried at the time of their ancesters decease. And it falls out
many times, that partly for their land, and partly for their marriage, they are
bought and sold, and married young, and sometimes to such as they fancy not,
and when they come to riper judgment* they bewray their dislikes too late. And
sometimes their education is so slenderly regarded, that when they come to
govern themselves and their familyes, their estates and patry moneys, they
discover what their education was, good or evil.


Lord. There be three especial ends whereunto the good education of such an
Infant should send. Three ends whereunto the good education of Wards tends.
The (...) and principal, is the fear of God, in true Religion: the second
is, the benefit that the Commonwealth shall reap, by his virtue and
sufficiency: the third and last, the ability by which he may govern his
family, and manage his patrimony, for his best maintenance. But what can you
now say, touching the second of these chief points? Namely, the presenting of
Clerks unto Ecclesiastical (...)* and how it comes to pass, that our Lay
man (as he is called) may nominate and present a Clarke, to a Parsonage,
Uicarage or (...) Chapel, Why lords of manors do present Clarks.
whose function is high, and divine.


Sur. The reason why these Lay-lords of Manors do pres^n^, as aforesaid, is in
right of the Parsonage, Vicarage, or free Chapel, belonging to their Manors,
and where the Lord of the Manor is very and undoubted patron of such an
Ecclesiastical gift, he may make his choice of the parson, or vicar. Always
provided, by divine ordinance and humane institu^ions: he must be Idoneus, fit
for the place.


Lord. But lie that in the Lords power, only to nominate and present such a
one? and is it then sufficient if he deem the party fit?


Sur. No, he must be approved fit by his Ordinary, the Bishop of the Diocese,
by whom he must be instituted and (...).


Lord. Then is the Lord in his nomination* and presentation, cleared of offense
to the Church, if the party prove after insufficient.


Sur. He is in some sort. But he is bound in conscience to be very circumspect
in his choice. For i^ any carnal consideration moved him to the party, he
stands not clear before God, into whose stead he intrudeth himself after a
sort in this case. But if he do it in a godly zeal of the good of Gods church,
he will aim only to the virtues of the man, No carnal consideration must
move a Lord to present a Clark.
and not to any humane respect. For, although the party have an higher
probation namely, by the Bishop, that is especially of his literature, which is
easily found by examination* But his qualities, conditions, and conversation*
by time and experience, and that most the present or have good trial of, What
a Patron must consider in his choice.
before he either name him, or present him. For he is as it were the hand, that
reaches him forth to be received of the church. A matter far higher and of
g^eater moment, then every man that couers ad^ousons for such presentations
sake, can reach unto by their rashness. For if they weyd the matter in the
balance of divine judgment, they should find their understandings far too
light to perform it as they ought. For if he prove unprofitable, of scandalous
to the Church, as too many do, he that presented him so unadvisedly, will
fearfully answer it in time to come.


Lord. Now surely, although peradventure some may think these things digress
much ^^ou^ matters of Survey, yet I hold thy words within the compass of it,
for these are necessary observations and admonitions to us that are Lords of
manors, and ^o whose lot it often falls to perform this work. And I hold
thou have in this, done no more the^ a^ honest Surueyor should, (...) aduising
men, to be wary how they dispose of this part of their patrimon^e.


Sur. Sir, I hold it neither part of their patrimony, A Parsonage or Vicarage
no part of a Manor.
nor part of a manor, neither a thing unto them of any advantage to their
person: but a thing appertaining unto the Manor, i^ such sort as the Lord may
dispose of it, as before is said: and the greatest benefit is, that he may
upon the vacation, appoint a worthy man to teach himself, and his tenants,
which as I conceive it, is a sweet gain: for by the godly Minister, he and they
may gain heavenly riches.


Lord. As thou say, it is a great benefit, nay, it is a high blessing to
have a godly teacher of ye people: and it is a blessing of God an him, that
h^uing a godly care, finds, names and presents such a one: and woe to him,
that negligently or wilfully does the contrary. But what say you ^^
impropriations? for they also are within the compass of a Survey,
Impropriations.
where the Lords take the tithes and nominate a Minister, Vicar, or other
hireling, and he (oftent^mes unworthy) serves the turn, as is commonly
observed in too many places of this Realm.


Sur. I know too many such, the more to be lamented, and that in Ma^nors of
great value, and parishes very populous: whose continued ignorance of divine
duties, bewrays the original to proceed, first from that Satanicall beast,
to foster monastical idleness. And as a matter too high for me, to aim at
the (...) formation, I reverently leave to their (...) have authority to
reprove it, and power to reform it.


Lord. (...) is there to be considered, touching the (...)


Sur. Nothing Sir, that I now remember: but a matter almost out of use, a
tenure called Villanage: Tenure in villanage.
that is, where the Tenants of a Manor were Bondmen and Bondwomen, the men
were called Villains, and the women Neiffes.


Lord. It has a base title: A Villain is an appro^rious (...), howsoever it
took beginning.


Sur. As the word is how used and taken, it is indeed a word of great
dishonor: but the time has been, the word has been of no such disgrace. And
it is now but as the thing is meant by the speaker, and taken by him to whom it
is spoken* although some say, that a villain is quasi ser^u^: which name
indeed is of a more tolerable construction in our common sense, then is now the
name of (...), which is indeed no more then villanus, Villain quid.
a Rustique or Countrim^n, which word is in sense contrary to Ci^es, or (...)
that since the Conquest by the Normanes, these villains became bondmen: for
where the Conqueror came and prevailed by force, Villains came by conquest
bondmen.
there the Country people became Captives and Slaves. But Kent, which was not
subdued by the sword, but by composition, retained their freedom still, as did
also many Cities.


Lord. Why then should the name villain be so odious, if it (...) but a
Countriman: for there are many honest* civil, and wealthy Countrymen?


Sur. Because they endured, under that name, many (...) (...) (...) too much
fruga^itie, and that he needs not to care for getting more, he has no rent to
pay, but some to receive which will maintain him: and when he is gone, all is
gone, spending is easier then getting. And thus by little and little roweth
himself and the hope of his posterity under water, in the calm weather.
Whereas he, that has a rent to pay, is not idle, neither in heart nor hand: The
farmer cares to pay his rent, and labors for it.
he considers the rent day will come, and in true labor and diligence prouides
for it, and by his honest endeavors, and dutiful regard, gets to pay rent to
his Lord, duties to the King, relief to the poor, and maintains his estate
more pleasing to God, more obedient to the King, more profitable for the
commonwealth, and more truly contented in mind, then sometimes his
thriftlesse Landlord. I infer not yet by this Sir, that because they
sometimes thrive well, that live upon rackt rents: therefore you Landlords,
should impose the greater rent or fine: that were to do evil, that good might
come of it, nay rather, to do evil, that evil may follow: for if there be
not a mean in burdens, Happy is the Tenant, that has a good Landlord.
the back of the strongest Elephant may be broken. And the best and most
careful, and most laborious, and industrious husband, may be ouercharged with
the rent of his Land. Happy therefore is that Tenant, that meets with a
considerate Landlord, and happy is that Landlord, that may see his Tenants
prosper and thrive, and himself have his due with love. And on the contrary,
I think it will be very unpleasant to a good mind, to see his Tenant to be
ouercharged, and be forced to fall under the burden of ouer-heauie an
imposition.


Lord. Well, I have heard all thy discourse with patience: and indeed my desire
was to hear thee in these things, and I mislike not any thing in thy whole
relations, and thy conclusion is not amiss, though perchance some young
nouices of the world might censure thee: reason will not but allow wh^^ thou
have said. And I wish that all the Tenants that I have, may live under me with
comfort: for to tell the truth, I had rather buy a smil^, and a good report of
my faithful tenants, A good resolution in a Landlord.
something to my loss, then to get their frowns to my gain. For there is no
comfort in a discontented people, though some have said: Rustica gens, optima
flens, pessima gaudens: which may hold among Infidels, and vnde^ Tyrants, but
not among Christians, that should not grieve one another.


Sur. I am right glad, Sir, you are of so qualified a disposition, your example
may do good to others, if not, it will give evidence against the contrary
minded in time to come. And so for this time I must entreat you, I may take my
leave of you. I will attend your other occasions forthwith.


Lord. That is my will. But who comes yonder?


Sur. I take it is your Tenant, that lately departed from us.


Lord So it is, I will leave you two together: far^ you well. You know the
place^ where mine occasions will draw you, and in the mean time I will make
you a warrant to go in hand with it.


The end of the second Book.
The Surueyors Dialogue between the Farmer and Surueyor: wherein is showed the
manner and method of keeping a Court of Survey: with the articles to be
inquired of, and the charge how to inroll Copies, Leases and Deeds, and how to
take the plot of a Manor.
The third Book.
Farmer. YOu are happily met here again, Sir, have you ever since had
conference with my Landlord?


Sur. Yea.


Farm. He is a man of good understanding, and very inquisitiue of things of
profit. And yet to tell you truly, he is a good man to his tenants.


Survey. Love him then, for such deserve love. Good Landlords deserve love.



Farm. He is beloved of his tenants indeed: for they will go, and ride, and
fight for him.


Sur. It is the part of good tenants, and an argument of a good Landlord. But
fare you well, I cannot now stay, I have been long let by your Landlord and
you.


Farm. Are you presently to undertake the survey of my Landlords Lordships?


Sur. I am now going about it.


Farm. I think it be in your choice where to begin, let me therefore entreat
you to begin with Beauland, a Manor of his here at hand, whereof I am both
tenant and Bailey: and therefore I will and must attend you, and yield you my
best aid, both by my travel, information, and records of the Ma^nor.


Sur. Keep you the Lords records?


Bay. The key is in my keeping that leads to the Chest, but the key of the
Chest is in my Lords keeping: but I will send for it, that you may have ye full
view of the evidence.


Sur. A Surueyor ought to see the Lords evidence.
So it behooves. Is it a large Manor?


Baylie. It is spacious in circuit, and of great appearance of Tenants, full of
diverse commodities, both under and above the earth, as also of fishing, and
fowling, and bears not the name for naught: for the Manor is fair, and very
commodious.


Sur. Be you then my guide: Is yonder it, with the fair house by the Woods
side?


Baylie. That is it, and a stately house it is indeed.


Sur. It seems to be a large and lofty cage, if the Bird be answerable.


Baylie. What mean you by that?


Sur. I mean, that a Titinus may harbor in a Peacockes cage: Great houses
with small revenues, cannot suit well.
and yet the cage makes her not a Peacocke, but will be a Titinus,
notwithstanding the greatness of the cage: So if this lofty Pyle be not
equalized by the estate and revenues of the builder, it is as if Paul's
steeple should serve Pan^ras Church for a Belfrey.


Baylie. I think my Landlord sent you not instea^e of surueying his Land, to
deride his house.


Sur. The house is beautiful and fair: I deride it not, you do your self
wrong in attaching me, neither discommend I the builder. For he that has gold
enough, let him build a house of gold, with Ner^, Mart. lib 2. Great houses fit
for great men.
who made unto it a pond Mari^ i^st^r, and woods full of all kind of wild
Beasts. Publius Clodius whom Mil^ slew* bought a house which cost him 147000,
Sest^rties. Let Princes have their Palaces, and great men, their pleasant
seats: for the poorest will please his fancy, if he be wilful. But to tell
thee by the way, (for this is but idle communication) that I have observed in
nothing more sudden and serious repentance, then for building: Building often
repented.
I could point out places and persons too with my finger, but what needs that?
I wish their repentance could redeem the thing repented of, but it cannot, no
more then Quintus Curtius could redeem himself out of the devouring gulf. We
have in our days many and great buildings, a comely ornament it is to the face
of the earth. And were it not that the smoke of so many chimneyes, did raise
so many duskie clouds in the air, Many chimneys, little fires.
to hinder the heat and light of the Sun from earthly creatures, it were the
more tolerable.


Bailey* Nay truly, I will excuse that fault, the fire is made most in the
kitchen.


Sur. Then it besmoketh not the hall, as old worthy houses did, whose kitchins
smoke sent forth clouds of good meat, and showers of drink for the poor.


Bailey. Yea, Sir, that was a comfortable smoke: but Tempora mutantur, and omnia
mutantur in illis: no earthly thing continues constant, but has his change.
Lo, Sir, now you are come to the house it self.


Sur. Truly, here is a pleasant ascent, The best situation of a house.
neither too steep, nor too flat, and of a good length. And now we are come to
the top of the hill: here is a goodly prospect and pleasant. And these springs
I like well. For a house without lively water, is maimed: and the water is well
conveyed, that it cannot annoy the foundation of the house, and yet serves the
most necessary offices very commodiously: and I see the Conducts are made of
earthen pipes, Earthen Conducts.
which I like far better then them of Lead, both for sweetness, and
continuance under the ground. The trees are well placed about the walks, but
that they are somewhat too near together, their branches confound one the
other, they are but twenty foot, and I like better, thirty. It stands warm
and comfortable toward the South-east, to which the best lights are made fitly
to serve: but i^ the ground would have served, I like plain South, the better
point for the comfort of the Sun, at all times of the year. And nature has
planted this wood most commodiously in the North side of the house. And it is
delicately advanced upon the edge of the hill: it is not possible to seat a
house more delightfully, for Winter and Summer, in mine opinion. Now, if upon
view of the dem^^snes, and the rest of the parts, it be not found like unto a
child borne in Chesshire, with a head bigger then the body, I shall like it
well. Now to our business: you are Bailey, take this Precept, and summon the
tenants to make their appearance, according to the purport of the same.


The form of the Precept.
THese are to will, and in the name and behalf of the Lord of this Manor,
Beauland Manerium.
to require you, to gi^e notice and warning unto all and singular the tenants
of the same Manor, that they make their personal appearance on Monday next,
being the tenth of this instant ^une* at the place where the Lords ^ourts of
this Manor are usually kept: And also to warn them, and every of them, to
bring with them all such Deeds, Copies, Leases, and other Evidences, whereby
they, or any of them do hold or claim to hold of the Lord of this Manor any
lands, tenements, or hereditaments: And that they then and there show, or cause
the same to be showed unto the Lords Surueyor, at the Court then and there to
be holde^ for that purpose, and to give their further attendance, as occasion
of the service shall require. Whereof fail you not, etc. Dated the 3. of June,
in the fourth year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord, James by the grace of
God, King of great Britain, France, and Ireland, etc.

Per I. N. Superuiss.

To the Bailey of the Manor of Beauland, or to his Deputy.
Commonly the Lords of Ma^nors do direct their letters of warrant unto the
tenants, unless the Surueyor be a known Surueyor by patent, and performs
the service, when and where he thinks most fit for the Lords use.

The order of a Court Baron being performed (for a Surueyor has not power to
administer an oath ex officio, unless he be a Surueyor by patent, or by
commission out of the Chancerie or Exchequer, Duchy Court, Court of Wards, or
such like) by a particular Steward, or by the Surueyor, who for the time may
supply the Stewards office and the charge of the Court Baron ended, the
Surueyor may proceed to his admonition and charge, to the effect following*

First, taking note of the names of every tenant, both Freeholder,
Copyholder, Leaser, and tenant at will in a paper, to whom (after they be
sworn) the Surueyor may say:
You that have been here presently sworn to perform our uttermost duties, in all the things that are and shall be given to you in charge, do, or at least you
may conceive, that as the Court Baron (the charge whereof you have already
heard) is with you ordinarily twice a year, and (if the Lord will) every 3.
weeks: this kind of Court, which I have now to admonish you in, tending to the
survey of the Ma^nor, happens not (perchance) in the time of a man's age, though
the Lord has power, and (no doubt) occasion to keep it oftener. You must
therefore show your selves so much the more diligent in this, by how seldom you
are troubled therewith. And it behooves you to call to mind, what by oath you
have assumed to perform, namely, all that shall be given you in charge, whereof
part has been delivered unto you already: which being so ordinary amongst
you, it must needs be more familiar, the^ the things you have seldom heard of.
And for that this business of Survey stretches a little further then the Court
Baron, let your du^ attentio^ and examination, and faithful presentation
witness your true affections to the persons, and ends to which the purpose of
our present meeting at this time aymeth. The particulars inquirable are many,
and of many kinds: but the persons and ends few. The first is God, in whose
presence we all stand: who loves truth from the inward parts, that is, when
the action and the will concur, and hates dissimulation. The second is the
King, whose we al are, under God, whose laws we are to follow, as well in this
business, as in any other: for that it tends to the seeking and settling of
truth, (the mother of true peace) between you and your Lord, in giving both to
you and him, what is equal and just. The third, is the Lord of the Manor,
whose you are under God and the King: and therefore requires at your hands at
this time, equal dealing, neither to discover for malice, nor to conceal any
thing for favor to either party. The fourth, is your selves, who^ you can in
no better sort befriend in this action, then to keep your hearts and lips
pure, in co^ceiling or uttering: for there is as great a danger in conceiling
truth, as in uttering a falsehood. And ^here is no such burden, as the burden of
a guilty conscience, which is laid on no man, but of himself. And lastly, the
persons to be considered in this business, are your posterities, whom your
true or false relatio^s will either help or hurt. The ends whereunto it aymeth,
are first, to explane unto the Lord of the Manor, what is his by the
examination of your estates, rents, and customs, and to establish you in all
things that are rightly you^^: both which being truly found, and duly recorded,
cannot but preserve amity between you and your Lord: which should be the
principal end of all endeavors. And since God is the first and the last, and will
be present in the beginning, in the middle, and in the end of all your
consultations, and will be a witness for you, or against you, even in your most
secret counsels, set him before the eyes of your hearts: so shall you tremble to
conceal truth, or utter falsitie, whether it be with or against your selves,
or dearest friends* yea, or the Lord of the Manor himself* whose purpose in
this service is, that the manifest truth might be confirmed, the hidden
revealed, and errors abandoned. And all this lies in you, and at your hands it
is required to search, and by searching and examination, to find out; and
found, to deliver and present the whole, and not a part of your sincere
knowledges, for from your mouths must that be taken and had, which must be
recorded for the direction of your posterities as a perpetual glass, wherein
the estates of all the particulars within this Manor, may be at all times
seen and confirmed: wherein you shall discharge your duties to God, who
commands, and commends truth: to the King, who by the sword of his Justice,
maintains truth: to your Landlord, who desires only to know, and have his
own: to your selves, who by this means shall possess your own in peace: and
to your posterities, who by this your travail, diligence and true information,
shall partake of your sincere and faithful service, being inrowled, and
recorded under your names, to your perpetual commendation: whereas if you
delude me, and abuse the Lord of the Manor that has sent me, I by your
sinister information may commit error, and leave it to your posterities by
record: yet shall I be free of the wrong, and you shall answer it. And if you
should frame any defense against the service, and plead either ignorance, or
show obstinacy, pretending thereby to stand dispensed of your oath, because
you do it not, you deceive your selves: for the service is so inseperably knit
to your tenures, and your tenures to the Lord of the Manor, deny or refuse to
do the one, you forfeit the other: howsoever some may say, that they are
freeholders, and they are customarie Tenants of inheritance, which in their
conceit implies a kind of freedom: let them not deceive themselves, their
estates are conditional, as both by their deeds and copies, they may be
easily resolved, by these words: Habendum sibi et haeredibus suis (in the deed)
advoluntatem domini, secundum consuetudinem manerii (in the copy.) In both pro
reditu et seruici^s inde prius debitiet de iure consuet. And because some of
you do not (perchance) understand the meaning of the words: thus they
signify, that you are to hold your Tenements, to you and your heirs, etc. For
such rent, and doing such services, as have been heretofore due, and of right
accustomed. Is not this a condition? for if you pay not the rent, or deny the
service, you are at the Lords mercy to be compelled. I do not think therefore
that any of you, of any discretion, will adventure the loss of his intrest,
for not performing a service at his Lords command, that tends also to his
own benefit, and to no prejudice at all. The end therefore of all mine
admonition is, to move you (being a thing of common right) to show your
selves like unto your selves, true and faithful Tenants unto the Lord,
concurring all in one mind, to do the Lord this service in love, and the
Lord, no doubt, will recompense it with like favor, although there be no
recompense due, for that which duty binds to be done. By this means you
shall confirm your own strengths, by gaining and retaining the Lords kind
countenance: and he again shall be the more fortified, by your true
affections toward him: for what a joyful thing is it, for Lord and Tenant to
dwell together in unity? Now having thus prepared you to attention unto the
matters of your charge: I will here read, and explain unto you such
Articles, as shall be for your instruction, and leave them with you in writing
for your better memory: for I know, and have often found, that a bare
delivery of many words, and of diverse things (as in the charges commonly given
in Courts Baron, and leet^) even to cares well prepared, may be little
effectual, less to him that hears, and regards not: but least of all to
him that will not hear at all. Such hearers there are of divine things, but
many more of humane of this kind: but were they matters of carnal pleasure and
delight, they would be both heard and practiced: And therefore I the more move
you to attend unto the things which I now am to deliver unto you.

The substance of the charge of a Court of Survey, contained in the Articles
following.
Beauland. Manerium.
1 First, as no doubt you all know, that A. B. Knight, the reputed Lord of this
Manor, is the true and undoubted owner of the same, and of all the lands,
meddowes, pastures, and other hereditaments within and belonging to the same:
And that you, and every of you do hold your lands belonging unto this Manor of
him: Owner of the Manor
if not, who has the interest and right of the same, to your knowledges?

2 You shall duly and diligently set down, or show unto the Surueyor in his
perambulation of the Manor, Bounds of the Manor.
all the circuit, buttes, bounds, and limits of the same, and upon what, and
whose Ma^nors, Lordships, lands, and parishes it bordereth on all parts. And
whether any confining Lord, or his tenants, do any where intrude or incroche
upon this Manor, where it is, by whom, and how much is so incroched.

As for the bounding of the Manor, it is fittest to be delivered unto the
Surueyor, when he treades the circuit, and that the best experienced tenants
accompany him for information, and some of the youth, that they may learn to
know the bounds in times to come.

Manors intermixed.
3 Whether there be any other Manor or Ma^nors, lying within the limits or
circuit, or extending in part into this Manor, what are the names of the
Manners, and who are owners of them, and how they are distinguished from this
Manor. And whether this Manor do any way extend into, or lie within any other
Manor.

It is often seen, that one Manor lies within another, and intermixed one
with another in such sort, as the true circuits, buttes, and bounds, become
confounded: necessary therefore it is, that their distinctions should be
carefully observed and recorded, for oftentimes one is devoured, or otherwise
injured by the other, when Lords are remiss, and Tenants careless, to bring
that to certainty, which is or may become doubtful.

4 What Freeholders there are within, or do belong unto, and hold their land
of this Manor, Freeholders.
what are their names, what land hold they, what rent pay they, by what tenure
do they hold, and what services owe they to the Lord?

The negligence of Lords in the due continuance of the substance of this
Article, has bred prejudice to many: for where Freeholders dwell out of the
Manors, whereof they hold and pay unto their Lords but a small
acknowledgement, as a rose, a pepper corn, a Ielsoflower, or some such trifle:
or are to do some service, at times whereof in many years has been no use,
they have not been looked for, neither have their suits been continued for
long time, insomuch as they and their tenures have grown out of memory, and
their services out of use, and other Lords have entitled themselves to the
land, and the right Lord lost all possibilities of estate, wards, marriage,
etc. As common experience makes more plain, by the daily questions and suits,
which rise, when profits apparent, may grow by any of the former casualties.

And therefore it is most necessary to have always a true suit roll, whereby
the Steward should every Court call the Freesuters by name, and to express
what rent he should pay and what services he ought to do, and that at the death
of every suter, his heir with the land, rent and services, would be inserted
in his stead. The profit that will hereby grow unto the Lord and tenants, is
manifest, and this roll is to be made by the Surueyor, and to be indented, the
one for the Lord, the other for the tenants, upon view of every Freeholders
land.

Felony. Treason.
5 Whether you know, that any Freeholder within, or belonging to this Manor,
has committed any felony or treason, and has been thereof convicted, the
Lord not yet having the benefit of the forfeiture: or whether has any such
tenant died without heir general or special: If so, who has the present use
and possession of the land, and by what right* what land is it, where lies it,
how much in quantity, and of what value?

It is a great defect in the Survey of a Manor, which remains to
posterities, being enrolled or engrossed for perpetual memory, when the
Survey or does superficially pass over the observation of the lands of every
Freeholder, their tenures, quantity of land, the place where it lies, the
rent and services. For upon sundry necessary occasions, the Lord is to seek
in every of these: and some are worthy, because they love not to be at charge
to find out and continue that which is not presently profitable.

Bastard.
6 Whether does any Bastard hold any land belonging to this Manor, as heir
unto any, what is his name, what land is it, and where lies it, and what is it
yearly worth?

A Bastard, though he be known to be the son of that father that leaves him
the land, cannot inherit (...) hareditario, but by conueyance. Neither, if he
purchase land in his own name, can any inherit it after him of his supposed
blood, unless he be married, and have children lawfully begotten to inherit.
Because it is contra formam Ecclesia, as appears more at large, Merton. cap.
9. For a Bastard is no man's, or every man's son.

7 What Demeysne lands has the Lord within or belonging to this Ma^nor, what
and how much woods, Demeysnes.
underwoods, meadow, pasture, arable, moors, marshes, heathes, wastes, or
sheep walks: And what is every kind worth yearly by acre, how many sheep
may the Lord keep upon his walk winter and summer, and what is a sheepe-gate
worth by year, and what is every acre of wood worth to be sold?

Although this Article, and sundry other hereafter mentioned, be in substance
enacted by a Statute made Anno g. Ed. 1. called extenta Mannerii, to be
inquired of by the tenants, yet it is the part and office of a Surueyor, to
see, examine, and judge by his own experience and knowledge, every particular,
comparing the Iuries presentment with his own opinion: so shall he more truly
attain to the true understanding of the things he seeks: and the more if he
discreetly feel the minds of foreign inhabitants, that are ignorant of the
cause of his inquisition.

8 What demeisne Lands has the Lord lying in the common fields of the Manor,
Demeisne in common fields.
how much in every field, and every furlong: And what is an acre of field
arable land worth by year? The like you are to present touching demeisne
meddow, lying in any common meddow within the Manor.

9 Also you are to present the names of all your common fields: and how many
furlongs are in every field, Common fields, and common meddowes.
and their names, and the common meddowes, and their names. And what beasts,
and sheep, every Tenant ought to keep upon the same, when the corn and hay
is off. And what a beast gate, and sheep gate is worth by year. Also at what
time your field; and common meddowes are laid open: and how are they, or ought
to be used. And whether is it lawful for the Tenants, to enclose (...) part of
their common fields or meddowes, without the license of the Lord, and consent
of the Tenants.

This Article is duly to be considered, first in setting down in certainty,
what every man is to keep upon the fields, and common meddowes, because injury
is daily done by some of greatest ability, to the meaner sort, in oppressing
the fields, with a greater number of Cattle, then according to a true
proportion will fall unto their share, which is very e^tortion, and a
punnishment is to be inflicted upon the offenders.

Also enclosures of common fields, or meddowes in part, by such as are most
powerful and mighty, without the Lords license, and the Tenants (...), is more
then may be permitted: the reason is, that the rest of the Tenants love (...)
much right (...) the same, when the corn is off, as he has that encloseth the
same.

Bailey. But Sir, if they lay it open at Lammas, or at such time as custom
requires, I think he does neither Lord nor tenants wrong.


Sur. Yes: for first, be depriueth the^ both of the feed, of as much as his
hedges, ditches and enclosures take: besides, whether is it as convenient for
pass and repasse for cattle at one little gappe or two, as when there is no
esto^ell at all?


Bailey. You like not enclosures then.


Sur. I do, and I think it the most beneficial course that tenants can take,
to increase their abilities: for one acre enclosed, is worth one and a half
in Common, if the ground be fitting thereto: But that it should be general,
and that Lords should not depopulate by usurping enclosures.


10 What Commons are there within the Lordship, Commons.
which do properly belong to the Lord and tenants of this Manor, and how are
the tenants stinted, whether by the yard-land, plow-land, oxegang, acres, or
rent: how many may every tenant keep, after either proportion or rate.

In this, the like consideration is to be had, as of the former: but that this
kind of pasture is called in the Statute of extenta Manerii 3. E. 1. pastura
forinsica, foreign herbage or pasture, because no part of it is proper in any
sort to any peculiar tenant, no not to the Lord himself, as are the common
fields and common meddowes. This kind of Common or pastura forinsica is in
three sorts: the one is, where a Manor or towne-ship having and holding their
land in seueraltie, have by consent lymited a certain parcel of ground, to
lie common among them, and from the beginning have stinted every man according
to a proportion between them agreed, and that is commonly by the acre, which
the pasture contains.

Another manner of such kind of common pasture is, where certain waste grounds,
one, two or more lie within the Ma^nor or township, and the Heard of the whole
Town is guided and kept by one appointed by the Tenants, and at their general
charge, to follow their Cattle: in which kind of pasture, there is also a
limitation or stint both of the number, and kinds of Cattle.

A third kind of this pasture, or common feeding is, in the Lords own woods,
that lie common to the Tenants: as also common Moors or heathes, that were
never arable.

In all the former commons of pasture, there should be a certain stint and
allotment, both to the Lord and his Tenants: but in this latter, it seems
that the Lord should not be limited, because all these latter commons are
supposed his own, and the Tenants have no certain parcel thereof laid to
their holdings, but only bit of mouth with their Cattle. But the Tenants ought
to be stinted in all sorts of common, lest, as I said before, the rich devour
the poor: for the one can provide sheep, and other Cattle for the summer, and
have enclosed pasture for the winter, or can sell again, when the foreign
pasture is gone: but the poor cannot do so.

11 Whether has any man, to your knowledges, incroched any part of the Lords
waste, by enclosure, or adding any part thereof to his own land: Incroching
the Lords waste.
present who has so done, where, how much, and how long it has continued.

This kind of incrochment is not rare, especially where great wastes and
mountanous grounds are, where the Lord nor his officers walk not often, and
where Tenants, for favor or affection, will wincke at evil doers, or for
their own private lucre, commit the same error themselves, with hedges,
ditches, pales, walls, shed is, etc.

12 Whether has the Lord any Park, Park, demeisne woods.
or demeisne wood, which by stocking may turn to the Lords better benefit, by
pasture, Arable, or meddowe: and what is an acre worth, one with another the
stocking, and how many acres is the wood, and what will an acre of the wood be
worth, and what will an acre of land be worth by the year to be let, when the
ground is stocked and cleared.

Although it be the part of the Jury, to yield their opinions in this case:
yet it behooves the Surueyor to have so much judgment, in every of these
points, as he may be able to satisfy himself and his Lord, by sufficient
reasons, lest he be deceived, and the Lord abused, either through ignorance or
parciality. And above all it behooves the Surueyor, to look into the nature
of the soil of the wood: for there are some wood grounds that are good for no
other use, as a dry or cold grauelly ground, whose virtue and disposition may
be easily observed by the herbage.

13 Also you must present the names of all customarie Tenants, within or
belonging unto the Manor, what mesuages, Tenements or lands they hold, and
what every mesuage or Tenement is called, what rent it pays: and what profit
arises to the Lord, by the death of any such customarie Tenant, or by the
death of any freeholder, Customary Tenants.
by fine, heriot, or relief by the cu^tome of the Manor.

Commonly these customary tenants, upon death and alienatio^ do pay a fine,
which in some places is certain, and in some, even in the most they are at the
Lords will: and in most places they are also heriotable.

Bailey. In this manner there be some customary tenants heriotable, and some not,
how comes that? can there be two custo^^ in one Manor?


Sur. There may be so. And the reason may grow by the escheating of a Manor,
that had in this point a contrary custom to the Manor, to which it was
escheated and annexed: and so the customs of either may hold under one Court.


Bailey. Your reason in good: and I take it, it may also be, that these that pay
no heriots, are tenements of a newer erection, and so upon their first grants,
the heriots were omitted.


Sur. That is not so likely: for that if any such new erections were, they were
granted in such form as other tenements, with these words: Habindu^, etc. ad
voluntatem Dom. secundum consuet. Manerii: which words do imply all duties and
services, which the most ancient tenements are bound unto.

There is also a copyhold estate, called ancient demeisne, and the tena^ts,
Briton sol. 165.
S^kemains, whereof some are of frank-teneme^t, and some of base tenure. Tenants
of Base tenure, are they that hold by verge at the will of the Lord, and the
Franktenement thereof is in the Lord.

It is to be noted, that Copyhold lands are very ancient, before the Conquest,
in the Saxons time, who called this kind of land, Folkland, and their Charter
lands were called Bokeland.


14 How does the Customary land of this Manor, Descent of customary land.
by your custom, descend after the death of an Auncestor, to the younger or
elder son? And whether will the custom of the Manor allow an intaile by
copy, and whether does it bear widows estate, or whether may she have it
during her life, though she marry: and whether may a man hold by the courtesy?

Sundry differences there are in sundry Manors, touching the substance of
this Article.

The custom of some Manors is, Heir.
that the youngest son shall inherit, as in Borough English: if he have not
a son, his youngest Brother, as at Edmunton in Middlesex.

The custom of some Manors is, that all the sons, and all the daughters
shall inherit alike* as in Gauelkind at Islington near London.

The custom of some Manors is, that if the tenant die seized of five acres or
under, then the youngest son shall inherit, but if above, then all the sons
shall inherit, as in Gauelkind. (...).

The custom of some Manor is, that neither the wife shall have dowre, neither
the husband hold by Courtesy. And the custom of some other Manor is, that
she shall have the third part of the rent, as at Bushie in Middlesex, and no
part of the land in dowre.

In some Manors, the wife being a virgin at the time of her marriage, shall
have all the Copyhold land for her franckbanck, whereof her husband died
seized. And many such.

15 Whether are there any customari^ tenements that are heriotable dismembered,
Heriotable tenements dismembered
and divided into parcels, to the weakening of the tenement, and who be they,
that have these heriotable parcels, and what quantity has every of them?

Although there be no immediate profit can accrue unto the Lord, by the
presentme^t of the substance of this Article, yet it behooves the Lord to know,
who be the tenants to any part of the land, belonging to an heriotable
tenement, because every part continues heriotable, and draws unto the Lord
the best goods of the teneme^^ of such land deceasing, though the land, in
regard whereof he pays it, be but an acre, and he have elsewhere free or
copy, that maintains hors^, or other cattle of great value, the Lord may
seize the best for his heriot.

Fines.
16 Whether are not the Fines for admittances, of a new customarie tenant, being
heir, or coming in by purchase, or upon Surrender at the will of the Lord, or
are the Fines always certain*

This is an Article, whereat some close-hearted tenants will seem to stagger,
being the nature of all men to favor themselves, and their posterities, and ^o
work so, as they will (if it be possible) make the Fines certain, by looking
back (...) past, wherein they have found by old R^cords* stand by report of
tenants before, that the fines have been certain, and so they may be in some
places, though in few at this day* And it may be, former times did afford such
favor, until land became of more value: but of late years, that course has
been broken, and Fines become arbitrable. Wherein I wish, that Lords and their
ministers would use a mean in exacting.

17 How, Forfeiture of Copyhold
and by what means may a customary tenant forfeit his Copyhold tenement?
whether for felling of timber trees, plowing up ley grounds, or meddowes never
tilled before, or for suffering his houses to decay, or for pulling down any
houses, or for committing any other wilful waste, or devising his customarie
tenement or lands, for longer term, then the custom of the Manor will bear:
Or for committing any other act, contrary to the custom of the Manor? And
whether has any tenant of the Manor offended in any of the former things? who
it is, and wherein is any such offense committed?

Diverse Acts there be, whereby a tenant in one Manor may forfeit his
Coppy-hold tenement, which Act is no forfeiture in another Manor. For Customs
are very different in diverse Manors: for in some Ma^nors a man may cut down
wood and timber trees upon his Coppy-hold land, and sell them at his pleasure,
which in some manors is a forfeiture.

Some Manors do allow the customary tenants of the same, to let their land for
3. years, some for more without the Lords license: and in some Manors to let
the same above a year and a day, is a forfeiture.

In some Manors a man may let fall all his customarie houses, which in some
other Manors is a forfeiture.

In some Manors a man may not plow up or sow his Coppy-hold meddow, or ley
ground, that has not been used to be tilled, in some Manors contrary.

So that these kinds of forfeitures are according to the custom of every
Manor.

Customs.
18 What are the customs of the Manor in general, both in the behalf of the
Lord, to perform or suffer to the benefit* of his tenants, and of the tenants
to perform to the service of the Lord.

In every manor there has been such a mutual concurrence of aid between the
Lord and tenants, as through the force of time has bred a Custom. And the
Lord may exact it of his tenants by law* if they deny the performance of the
things to be done, in the right of their Customarie lands.

And these customs are of diverse kinds, and diversely to be performed. Some in
the course of inheriting of land, some in the way of women's dowries, some in
the estates of land, some in matters of forfeitures, some in works, some in
rents, some in fines, some of the Lords benevolence in allowing his tenants
meat, drink, money, etc. in time of their works: as these customs in several
Manors, severally are allowed.

And because it behooves every tenant to know whereunto he is bound by custom,
if there be no ancient Custom roll to lead them, it behooves the Surueyor to
renew the same, wherein he is to set down every tenants name, his tenements,
lands, meddowes, pastures, etc. the rent and service due for every of them,
Custom roll.
and whether works be turned into rent, and to indent the same, that the Lord
may have the one part, and the tenants another. The neglect whereof has bred
many inconveniences, both to Lords and tenants.

19 Whether is there within this Manor any villain or niefe, namely,
Villains, and Nieffes.
any bondsman or bondwoman: if there be, what are their names, what land do they
hold and keep, and what is the same yearly worth.

Although this kind of tenure be in manner worn out of use, yet some there are
(no doubt) though conceiled in some Ma^nors, never infranchized, or manumized.

20 Whether has any tenant or other person within this Manor stocked up any
hedge-rom, plowed up any Baulke or land-share, removed any Mere stone,
Removing of Meeres or bounds.
land-marke, or other bound between the Lords demeisnes, and the tenants
Freehold, or customary la^d of inheritance, or between his Freehold and
customary land, or between this and another Manor or Lordship, where is any
such offense committed, by whom, and where ought the same bound so removed,
altered, taken away, or displaced, to stand.

This is a necessary Article to be duly considered, because that by this
means of removing or taking away Meere-stones and land-markes, the Lord
oftentimes incurreth great prejudice: for that when a Leassee of the Lords
demeisnes being either a Freeholder, or a customary tenant of inheritance,
has land of his own adjoining unto the demeisnes or intermixed, and he take
away the marks of division, leaves the matter doubtful which is the Lords,
especially where a long lease or patent is, whereby the Tenant has time to
make alteration: and it is no new or strange thing, to attach some by name and
place, that are culpable, and have yielded to reformation, being found out
before their intents were fully ripe. And above al, such are most worthy to be
punished, for altering any such known marks, under whatsoever pretense of
ease or necessity, which is the common cloak of the mischief, used most in
the Kings lands, where long Patents are granted.

21 What customarie Cotages are there within this Lordship, Cotages.
tostes, croftes, or curtelages: what are the Tenants names, what rent pay
they, and what services do they.

It is to be understood, that the word C^tagium, signifies as much as casam, a
little house or a place of abode only, or a little dwelling, whereunto little
ground belongs but an Orchard garden, or some small toft, croft, or
Curtelage: but Cotages of themselves are not ancient, as I take it.

22 Whether are there within this Manor, any new erected Tenements or Cotages,
barnes, Walls, sheddes, Ho^ells, Hedges, Ditches, or such like erected, set up,
or made: or any Watercoarses, or Ponds, dug upon any part of the Lords
waste, without the Lords license: where is it, and by whom was it done, and by
whose license, and upon what consideration.

The overmuch liberty of too many new erections, breeds sundry
inconveniences, not only to a Manor, and the Lord, and Tenants thereof, but to
a whole Commonwealth, and therefore not to be permitted without good
consideration: although it is most convenient, that the poor should have
shelter and places to shroud them in, if they be found honest, virtuous,
painful, and men of ability, to gain their own and their families relief.

But it is observed in some parts where I have traveled, where great and
spacious wastes, Mountains, and heathes are, that many such Cotages are set
up, the people given to little or no kind of labor, living very hardly with
Oaten bread, sour whay, and Gotes milk, dwelling far from any church or
chapel, and are as ignorant of God, or of any civil course of life, as the
very Sal^ages amongst the Infidels in manner, which is lamentable.

23 What Tenants are they within this Manor, that do hold any lands or
Tenements by Indenture of lease; what are their names, Indentures.
what land hold they, for what rent, under what conditions and covenants, for
what terms of years, or lives.

This Article is most especially to be observed, touching the covenants by
view of the Tenants leases, but the Jury is to find the names, and to present
them with the land and rent.

24 Whether has or does the Lord employ any land to Iustment, Iustments.
as in taking in cattle to pasture and herbage: who has the disposing of the
same, what quantity of land is so disposed, and how many cattle will it
pasture, and what is a Cow, Ox, Horse or sheepe-gate worth by the year, or
by the week.

Much land is thus used in Yorkshire, and other places Northward very
beneficially.
25 Whether has the Lord of this Manor any customarie Water-mill, Custom mil.
Windmill, Horse-mill, Griest-mill, Mault-mill, Walk-mil, or Ful^ing-mill*
Whether is there within this Manor any other Mil, Iron-mil, Furnace, or
Hammer, Paper-mill, Sawing-mil, Shere-mil, or any other kind of Mill: what is
it worth by year, and in whose occupation is it?

Where sufficient rivers, brooks, stagnes, ponds, or watercourse are, there
are commonly some kinds of Mils, or other profitable devices, that humane wit
and invention has set up for necessary uses, for the benefit of man, and for
the Lords profit of the Manor, where such devices are erected. And yet all
kinds of devices are not convenient in all places: as where no Lead or Tin
is, there is no need of the use of water, to move a wheel, to blow the fire
for the melting and trying thereof: yet there may be like use for Iron oar:
and where neither of them is, there may be use of Walk-milles, or
Fulling-milles; and where those are not, yet there may be use of Corne-milles,
and such like. And in some places the force of watercourse is used, to raise
water out of one place into another, where the natural current denies the
coming, and mounting thereof: with infinite other devices, according to the
situation of the place, and necessity of the thing required. Which, although
they be not all Mils to grind corn, yet may they bring profit to the Lord,
which is the thing the Surueyor should covet, not only to observe what is
already, but must have also some judgment to erect some, if the watercourse
will conveniently afford the same.

To the Corne-mils, which are custom milles, does belong a kind of duty from
the tenants, that is, that they are bound to grind their corn at the Lords
mill: and that kind of custom is called Socome. Socome.


Bailey. Must a customary tenant of a Manor, where such a mill is, be forced to
grind all the corn he spends in his house, at the Lords mill?


Sur. Of necessity, if it grow upon the Manor: or else the Lord may amerce
him for his default.


Bailey. What if he be forced to buy it in the market?


Sur. Surely then it is a question, whether he be bound to grind it there or
not. But I take it, he is at his liberty, to grind it where he will, even where
he finds himself best served. For there is bond-Socome, that is, where the
tenant is bound by custom, and lone-Socome, where he grindeth of free will.


Bailey. We that are tenants would be glad, if you could tell us, what toll our
Miller may take: for we are much abused in it, as we think, and because we be
bound by custom, we cannot conveniently leave the mill, and yet we find no
remedy of the millers abuses*


Sur. As touching T^ll, (which word comes of the verb t^ll^, to take away,
as it seems) there are so many differences, by grants made by Lords of
Manors, that the certainty in general can hardly be declared. Some Millers
take a twentieth, some four and twentieth part: tenants at will should pay a
sixteenth part, and a bond tenant a twelfth part, and some are toll-free. But
howsoever the toll be, fear not, the Miller will be no loser. And for his
abuses, you have your remedy in the Lords Court, or at the common law.


Fishing.
26 Whether has the Lord of the Manor any peculiar fishing within any river,
brook, mere, stagne, pond, or other water: where, and how far does it extend,
and what is it yearly worth, and who be Farmers thereunto, and what common
fishings are therein, and waters within the Manor, and how is the same used?

As this Article is little needful to be propounded in Manors where no rivers
or sufficient waters are for fishing, so is it very necessary to be examined,
where such waters are. For it is daily observed, that many abuses are committed
against the Lord himself, by such has usurp his peculiar fishing, and against
the Commonwealth, in destroying fish, as appears by the punishment ordained
against of^endors therein, 25. He. 8. cap. 7. and 31. Hen. 8. cap. 2. Therefore
it behooves the Surueyor to be more careful in seeking the mean how to raise
a profit unto the Lord by his fishing, then to find the present abuses which
are inquirable, and punishable at every Leete, although, if any apparent
offenders be found, he is to advertise the Lord for reformation: but it is no
part of the matter inquirable, and to be enrolled in his book of the Su^uey.
For nothing is therein to be inserted, but matter of perpetuity, in
recommending the present state of the Manor unto posterities, and for the
Lords immediate use. And therefore besides the ordinary fishing in small land
rivers, brooks and ponds, there must be also remembered what profit may arise
by fishing in the sea, if the manor be nere it, or any creek thereof, in
oysters, muscles, cockles, crabs, creuishes, and such like.

27 Whether has the Lord of the Manor any Fowling within this Manor, Fowling.
by means of any moors, marshes, waters, brooks, reeds, or such like: as of
Ducke, Mallard, Widgine, Teale, Wildgeese, Busterd, Plouers, Bitters, Swans, or
such like foul: or any woods wherein do breed any Herinshoes, Shoutlers,
Storke, or such like: or any Pibble, Peach, or Sea-bank, wherein breed sea-Pyes,
Olives, Pewets, or such, who takes the profit of them, and what are they
worth by year.

These kinds of commodities are not in every Manor: and therefore as in all
other things it behooves the Survey or to consider of these particulars, and
give no more unto the Jury to be inquired of, then he either knows to be
inquirable, or likely by examination to be found in the Manor he intends to
survey.

8 Whether has not the Lord of this Manor (time out of mind) had and received
all waiues, Wayues, estrayes.
estrayes, felons goods, treasure found, within the Ma^nor, and such like
profits, and whether has he been answered of them from time to time truly, or
not, and who is the officer that does ouersee, and take notice of the same to
the Lords use.

Although these kind of profits may redound unto the Lord by prescription, yet
most commonly they are confirmed by charter, and therefore the Lords evidences,
together with the use, must be examined.

Mines. Quarries.
29 Whether are there within this Manor, any Tin-mines, Lead-mines,
Copper-mines, Cole-mines, Quarryes of stone of Marble, Free-stones, Mil-stones,
Lime-stones, Grinding-stones, Marle, or Chalke-p^ti, (...) or moorish earth,
fit for soyling of land, or any Potters cla^, clay for Brick or Tile, or any
Fullers earth, or any sand, or grauel-pits, or such kind of commoditie^, and
what is every such kind worth to the Lord, or may be made worth by year.

These are casualties, and seldom or never at all happen in any Manor, and
few Manors but have some or one of them.

30 Whether has the Lord of the Ma^nor any Turff^, Peates, Turffes and Peates.
Heath, Broom, Furz^, or Flagge, which are, or may be yearly sold within the
Manor, and what may they yield the Lord by year.

These things are not in every country, much less in every Manor: for I think
Essex can afford little of them, unless it be of Turffes and Peates, if they
were sought in some low grounds, in some creek of the sea* Northumberland,
Westmerland and those wild fields, yield store of peates and turffes: so does
Yorkshire some, and other places, many.

Bailey. What mean you by Turffes and Peates? are they not heath Turffs you
mean?


Sur. There are heath-Turffes, which are also meant in this Article, but the
Turffe and Peate is of another kind: for they are taken in bogges, and such
rotten grounds as cattle cannot feed upon. And those that are first cut up, are
called Turffes of the upper part, and such as are taken downward, are called
Peates.


Bailey. How mean you downward?


Sur. Under the first cut: for you may cut a spears length deep in some
places in the summer time, and that kind of earth will burn very excellently.
And if it be cut never so deep, it will fill again in few years, and then
may it be dug again.


Bailey. Then it is beneficial ground.


Sur. So it is: and I think there be many grounds would serve to this purpose,
if they were sought out, where scarcity of other fuel is.


Bailey. You spoke of Furze, I take that to be no good fuel, but to brew or
bake withal.


Survey. Yes: it is good firewood in Devonshire and Cornwall, where they make
great profit in venting it for that use, in many the greatest towns, and in
Excester especially.


Bailey. Then are they better then our ordinary Furzes about us.


Sur. The country people do call them French Furzes, they have a very great
stalk, and grow very high, and their prickle very strong: but that they grow
thick, and the body is commonly bare to the coppe, where is only a green
bush of the tender and small branches, and seldom elsewhere, so that they
easily make them into Faggots.


Slate stones. Marking stones.
31 Whether is there within the Manor any Slate-stones for ^iling, red or
black Lead, or Oker for marking stones.

These kind of Slate stones are full in Cornwall, and the marking stones most
about Darbyshire, and those parts.

Dear.
32 What Dear has the Lord of this Manor in his Park, red and fallow: how
many of Antler, and how many rascal: who is Keeper, and what is his Fee by
year: whether has he any Warren of Conies, or Hare^, who is Keeper of either
of them, and what Fee has he by year, and what is the Warren of Conies worth
by year, and what were the Park worth by acre to be let by year, if the
Dear were destroyed, and how many acres is there within the (...)

A Park for Dear is more for the pleasure then for the profit of the Lord, or
Commonwealth, and yet fit that Princes and men of worth should maintain them
at their pleasures, yet not so fit, that every man that listed should maintain
that game, for his private pleasure, that depriueth a Commonwealth of more
necessary commo^ties. But men of late are grown more considerate, and have
disparked much of this kind of ground, and converted it to better uses. As for
war^ens of Conies, they are not unnecessary, Conies.
and they require no rich ground to feed in, but mean pasture and craggy
grounds are fittest for them. It is therefore in the discretion of a good and
circumspect Surueyor, to advise his Lord* how to dispose of these things for
his best advantage.

33 What pentions, portions, payments, or fees are, Reprises and payments.
or ought to be yearly paid out of this Manor: to whom are they paid, and
for what, and what rent or annuitie is there paid, or ought yearly to be
paid out of any Manor, or by any person, unto the Lord of this Manor: and
whether has the same been duly paid, or discontinued: what is the annuitie or
rent, by whom ought it to be paid, for what thing, and how long has it been
discontinued.

These things are very duly to be examined, both which go out of a Manor, or
be paid to a Manor, although in many places they be much neglected, not in
calling for, I confess, but if such payments be denied, the Lord, to whom such
things are due, can hardly say or a^ow, for what, or in consideration whereof
they are due: and by that means men (...) right, both of the pay^^ (...) of
the land, if it escheate, yea whole Manors.

34 Whether is there within this Manor any Market weekly, Markets. Faires.
or Fair at any time of the year kept, on what day or days, who has the
toll and profits of the same, and what is it, or may it be worth unto the Lord
by year.

Faires and markets are commonly by patent from the King.

Pawnage.
35 Whether does the Lord, or may he take in any ^^ine to pawnage yearly into
his park or woods, what i^ the pawnage worth by year.

Bailey. Sir, you need little to enquire of that, for Oaks and Beech that have
been formerly ^ery famous in many parts of this kingdom, for feeding the
Farmers veni^^n* are fallen to the ground and gone, and their places are
scarcely known where they stood.


Sur. It is very true: and it is pity, that Lords of Ma^nors have no more care
of their posterities. For assuredly there will be greater want of ^^mber in
time to come in this Realm, then may be supplied with little charge from any
part else whatsoever. And therefore might Lords and Farmers easily add some
supply of fu^^^e hope, in setting for every twenty acres of other land, one
acre of Aco^^es, which would ^ome to be good timber in his sons age,
especially where there is, and like to be more want.


Bailey. The course ^^ere good, but you (...): for Oaks are (...) it will be
long ere they come to be ti^ber.


Sur. I know in Suffolk, where in twenty years Acornes have yielded fruit,
already ^ere as high, as a steeple of ordinary height.


Bailey. Truly it is pity it were not enjoined to men of ability and land to
do it. But I think men imagine, there will be timber enough to the end of the
world.


36 Whether has any of you any Deeds, Evidence.
Evidences, Court-rolles, Rentals, Sute-rolles, Custome-rols, Books of Survey,
Accounts, or any other escripts, or miniments, touching or concerning this
Ma^nor. If you have any such, produce them at this Court for the Lords use and
service: or if you know any that have any such, deliver their names, that the
Lord may procure them to show the same.

37 Who has the ad^ouson, nomination, Ad^ouson.
presentation and gift of the Parsonage, Vicarage, or Free-chappell whereunto
this Manor belongs: or whether is it an impropriation, belonging to the Lord
of this Manor, who is incumbent of the Parsonage or Vicarage, or who has the
impropriation in use, and what is it worth by year

Some have taken, and set down, a Parsonage or Vicarage to be parcel of a
Manor, but I take it otherwise: for a matter of spiritual or ecclesiastical
function, cannot be parcel of a secular living. But a Manor as touching the
tithe, may belong to an ecclesiastical charge: neither do I think, that an
impropriation, though it belong unto the Lord, yet is it not parcel of his
Manor: because that ab origin, even from the f^r^t institution, it was
dedicated to a spiritual office. And although the profits were afterward
disposed to a secular person, yet are not the profits parcel of the Manor.

38 Who is the Lords Baylie, what is his name, what yearly fee has he, and
whether has he a patent for life, Lords Baylie. Steward.
or is at the Lords will: and who is Steward of the Lords Courts: what is his
fee, and whether does he hold it by patent or at will: who is also keeper of
the lords park, warrener, or woodward, and what other officers are there
within, or belonging to this Manor, and what are their fees.

Sundry Manors have sundry officers: some of the Lords election and
appointment, and some of the Tenants, among whom they are yearly chosen, as
Hayward, Reeues, etc.

39 Within what Diocese, and Deanery, within what division and hundred lies
this Manor: Diocese, hundred, etc.
and to what place are you that are the Tenants, usually called to do your
services, to muster, and to show your Armor, and weapons* and what Beacons
are you appointed to watch and ward at.

It were a simple part of a Surueyor, if his Lord should ask him these
questions, and he should answer, I cannot tell: and yet are they things fit
for the Lord, to be acquainted with.

Market Towns.
40 What Marke^ Towns are nearest unto this Manor, and what commodities are
there especially vented at every of them.

This is also necessary to be known of the Lord, that dwells remote from
his Manors.

Thus much for the charge.
^^^andum*
Every Surueyor is in discretion to order his own business, and none is tied
to this method of charge: yet he must take the substance of these Articles,
Every Surueyor is to use his own method.
or such and so many of them, as in his conceit (guided by some foreknowledge
of the state of the Manor which he is to survey) are fittest to be delivered
unto the Jury: and withal he is to explain unto them, the sense and meaning
of every Article more at large, then he will give them in the letter. And
having thus finished the charge, I hold it fit to give the Articles in writing
unto the Jury, to the end they may answer their knowledges, to every of them
in writing. And because the Jury (perchance) cannot so methodically set down
their own plain meanings, as is fit to be engrossed in the Lords book, the
Surueyor must correct the former, still keeping himself within the compass of
the meaning of the Jury, and then to read the same unto the^ distinctly, that
they may allow or disallow the same: and because they shall hau^ sufficient
t^^e, to consult and deliberate upon every Article, they may have day given
them, until such time as the Surueyor does think he shall finish the
Perambulation, and view of the Manor in sort as he intends: and then to
take their verdict, and accordingly to ingrosse the same.

Immediately after the charge thus ended, the Surueyor is to make proclamation,
in the name of the Lord of the Manor, that every Tenant do presently produce
his deeds, copies, Leases, and other Evidences, to the end that the Surueyor
and his Clarke may enter them roughly in a book, and afterward inroll them
fair in a bo^ke of Parchment for continuance.

And if any man make default, he may find it by the catalogue of the names of
the tenants, which he must take at the beginning of the Court, and cross them
as they bring their evidences to be entered: the manner of which entries does
briefly follow.

Intrationes omnium and singularum chartarum, Beauland Manerium.
Copiarum, Indenturarum omniumque aliarum Evident. tenentiu^, ibidem factae
tertio die Nouemb. Anno Regni* Domini nostri Iacobi, Dei gratia, magnae
Britanniae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regis, fidei Defensor^s, etc. 4. vt
sequuntur. viz.

Chartae Liberorum tenentium.
W. P. de F. in Co^*. M. Yeoman, per charta (...) dat. tertio die Martii, Anno
regni Henr. 7. secundo, tene^ libere sibi and haer edibus suis (if it be
intailed, then according to the limitation) ex donat. R. S. vnum mensuagium
sine tentm. vocat. Whytlocks situat. in quadam venella vocat, Potters-street,
(...) ^esuag. R. L. ex. ^^str. and quandam viam vocat. Loue-lane ex part Bor.
abut^^an. fuper magnam communiam vocat. Hownes Moore in Occiden. and super com.
campum, vocat. Beggars Bushfield in Orientem, and continet in longitudine
quadragint. pertic. and in latitudine nouem pertic. and dimid. vnum ^lm. prati,
vocat. Moss meddow. cont. per estimat. quinque acr. and quinque acr. prat.
iac. in commun. prat. vocat. Colliers meade, and tres clausur, terrae arabilis
insimul iacent. vocat. Bathyes, cont. in se in to. per estimat. dece^ act. vnum
clm. pastur. vocat. Abbots close, iacent. etc. cont. per estimat. tres acr.
Quod quidem mesuagium pred. R. S. nuper perquisiuit, de quodam A. B. habend.
etc. per redd. vnius libr. Piperis, and per seruic. inde debit. and consuet. 1.
libr. Piperis.
In hac forma ceterae omnes irrotul^nt^r chartae, secundum particularia in
eisdem specificata.

Copiae Custumariorum Tenentium.
B. C. pe^cop. Cur. dat. nono die Maii Anno regn^ Elizabeth. 30. tenet exsursum
reddic^one W. R. vnum tentm. iacent. in quodam vico vocat. Church-street, int.
etc. (according to the buttles) and vnam clm. terrae voc. Haywood, Finis 3. po
6. shill. 8 pe.
iac. etc. cont. per estimat. duas acr. vnum pratum voc^t. Dear meade, cont.
quinque acr. and december acr. terr. in com. ca^pis. Habendum sibi and haered.
suis ad voluntatem Domini, secundum consuetudinem Ma^ern, and dedit Domino pro
fine 3. pounds, 6. (...). 8. pence, and reddit per annum 2 shil. 6. pence.
If the estates be for lives, as in the most Ma^^^rs in the West, then the
entries of the Copies must be according to the words of the copy: and at the
foot of the entry of every copy, it is fit to set down the ages of the tenant
in possession, and of them in reuersion.

Also it behooves a Surueyor in the entry of all Deeds and Copies, to set
down the names of all mesuages and tenements, and the names of every
particular close, and parcel of land, as they are set down in the Copy. And
not only the present tenants name, but the former tenants, for two, three, or
four descents, if it be expressed in the copies.

It is a fault in some Stewards, that in making out Copies, do set only down
the name of him that surrenders, and the name of him to whom the surrender is
made, without further relation of any former tenants name, and do also set
down the mesuage, without setting down the particular parcels of land
belonging unto it* using only general words, which in all things import
incertaintie. Whereas, if he did well, he should observe and set down every
parcel both in quality and quantity: namely, what is meddow, pasture, arable
wood, etc. with the principal buttes and bounds, by the Surueyors book.

De intratione dimissionum, sieve Indenturarum, in quibus ea quae sequuntur,
obseruanda sunt.
Dies mensis and annus.
Parts inter quas facta est Indentura.
Consideratio concessionis.
Particularia, quae per Indenturam traduntur.
Habe^dum, cum termino annorum aut vitarum, pro quo aut quibus conceduntur.
Redditus, and tempora solutionis.
Clausa districtionis, a^t forisfacturae.
Conuentiones, and Prouisiones breuiter.
Quomodo obligatur ad warrantizandu^ Concessor, etc.
This suffiseth for the form of the entry of Deeds, Copies, and Leases.
Bailey. Is this all that is required in the making up of a book of Survey?


Sur. Some think it sufficient to come into a Manor, and to call the tenants,
and to cause them to show their evidences, and to enter them, and so to give
the Lord a book of the estates, end think they have done a great work. Which
is as much as if a Caterer should provide meat, and the Cook to send it to the
table raw for his Lord to eat. The Caterers office does as much toward the
Lords diet, as the bare knowledge of the estates of a Manor, does toward the
performing of an absolute Survey. Yet is the Caterers office, a good
inducement, and without this provision the Cook can do nothing: and without
the knowledge of the estates, a Surueyors trauail: is to little purpose.


Bailey. Yet you will enter every man's particular lands again: will you not,
notwithstanding the entering of their Evidences?


Sur. It must be so, after the view had, and made of all the Manor.


Bailey. What else require you at my hands to be d^ne then at this time? for I
perceive you have given the Jury their charge, and limited them a day to bring
in their verdict: and you have seen and entered all the Deeds, Copies and
Leases of the t^nants which have appeared. What will you now do in the mean
time? Tena^ts must accompany the Surueyor in his pera^bulation.



Sur. I must now command you (the Lords Baily) to appoint me some sufficient
^enants, to accompany me in the perambulation and description of the Manor.


Bailey* What, will you make a plot of the Manor?


Sur. It is very expedient and necessary for many causes, A plot of a Manor
necessary.
which I showed you in our first conference.


Bailey. Will you do it by instrument?


Sur. Yea.


Bailey. Then you need the less help, for you will use no chain.


Sur. I will, and it behooves to use the chain, notwithstanding the
instrument.


Bailey. I have heard some of your profession say, they could plot out a Manor,
and never use line or chain, with the instrument.


Sur. A Painter can by his art delineate the proportion of any creature,
without using perspectiue glass, or a compass, even by the eye and serious
observation: so may a man, having the true use of any topographicall instrument
by rules geometrical, describe a Manor in a kind of form, without line or
chain, or other measure. But if he will say he does, or that he can truly
delineate a Manor with all the members, as every street, highway, lane,
river, hedge, ditch, close, and field, in form with true curnings, angles,
lengths, and bredths, so that by the plot which he so makes, a stranger by
scale and compass may truly find the quantities of the particulars, I will
then say he is rara auis, he is to be admired, because I must needs speak as
I find, that it is a matter both unnecessary and unprofitable: unnecessary,
because it is as if a man should build a house, without pin or nail, by
ingenuous excellent geometrical conclusions, to magnify the art, when with
more certainty it may be done by the ordinary aid of pinns, and nails: and it
is unprofitable, because it will require a tenne-fold time more then the
ordinary course of the instrument and chain. And yet when curiosity has done
all that it can in this behalf, he shall find (though the conclusions be true)
the work false.


Bailey. vainglorious Artists.
Then I perceive, there be some vainglorious of your profession: for I have
seen one come into a field, and set his instrument in the middle, or in some
part thereof, and has taken upon him immediately to say, the content is thus
much.


Sur. He that so assumeth unto himself admiration, may be more admired for his
presumption, then for his truth in performance: for a piece of ground cannot
lie in any such form, as he with an instrument at one station can find the
quantity, though he may aim at it at two station^* but a piece of land may so
lie as he shall err, let him ^ake as many stations as he can, and yet he must
measure between his first two stations at the least, and toil himself and
his companions, more then if he went the true course of art and reason.


Baylie. What you mean by stations, I am not acquainted, but I hold the
plainest way, the truest way in all conclusions, if art and reason be not
against them: and since the chain, I perceive, is necessary to be used with
the instrument, I will provide you help, both for your aid in that behalf,
and for your information, hoping that you will not be against me to view your
manner of working, and if I do ask you a question now and then, for my better
satisfaction, you will not be curious in aduising.


Sur. I will not only not be curious, but I will gladly impart my poor skill
unto you, if you be willing: and I will bestow demonstration, if you will
afford attention and practice.


Baylie. What call you this instrument?


Sur. Some call it the plain table.


Baylie. Is there no other instrument used in plotting of ground?


Sur. Yes, according as men of skill do fancy.


Baylie. But which do you approve most? for as there be diverse, so men
diuersely affect them? As instruments are diverse, so men diuersely affect them.



Sur. Affection is often blind, and it may mislead a man, but reason seldom or
never: and therefore he that can maintain the credit of that he affects by
reason, I hold that a fit instrument for his use: there are but two principal
instruments, fit indeed for the plotting of grounds, and that is this that
has the name of a plain table, and the Theodelite which sometimes I use.


Baylie. But I have seen many, and diverse forms of instruments, and are they
all comprehended under these two names?


Sur. No, they have sundry names, All instruments have one ground.
but they are all grounded upon like principles: and as a man may make sundry
kinds of clockes, one differing in a kind of form, from other, and call them
by diverse names, yet they are all found upon one ground; and as every clock
brings forth like effects, as to strike and to distinguish times: So these
instruments, though they differ in form and name, yet they produce like
effects, if they tend to this part of Geometry, which is most principally
called planimetry: Planimetria.
namely, the measuring of the length, and breadth of any thing, as of a Manor,
and of all sorts, and forms of grounds.


Baylie. But I have heard of an instrument called a Circumferentor, which some
do use about this business.


Sur. It is true, it is a new name given to the very Theodelite, used in a sort
otherwise then the Theodelite, but not contrary. For as the working upon the
Theodelite, is performed by reducing the needle always upon the point North,
as it is marked in the box, the Index turning to the degree, and pointing out
of the line of opposition: So the Circumferentor having his Index fixed,
points to the opposite, and the needle falls at adventure upon some degree
marked in the box: And the difference is only in the protraction: for where
the one protracteth the work, by the degrees, found by the fall of the
wandering Index: so the other protracteth from the degree, whereupon the needle
falls.


Bailey. This differs as much, as if the bell should strike the hammer to make
it strike: where it is more ordinary, that the hammer should strike the bell:
but if the sounds be like certain, and sencible, it makes no great matter
whether do strike the other. And if either of these instruments will perform
the work, let men use whether they list. But I pray you, let us proceed in our
intended business: we have company sufficient both for your instruction of
every man's land, and to aid you to carry the chain: as for your instrument, I
will carry. Is it much material where you begin?


Sur. Where ^o begin to describe a Manor.
Truly no: yet I hold it most fit to begin about the middle of the Manor, and
then to take a course, as the convenient lying of the land will move us, or at
one end or side, all is one.


Bailey. Then I think here is a convenient place to begin the business: here is
a spacious waste, and near about the middle of the Manor.


Sur. I pray you then set down your instrument there.


Baylie. What will you do with that paper* Sir.


Sur. I must fasten it upon the table, that as I go, I may draw out the form
of every particular.


Bay. But what is that bra^se Ruler, that you have taken out of the ^ase?


Sur. It is the Index of the plain table.


Bay. Wherefore strike you that line upon the paper, throughout the table, at
adventure?


Sur. It is a meridian line, upon which, at every station, as you shall see, I
lay the Index, observing to lay it always alike, lest I mistake the North
point for the South, and the contrary.


Bay. Wherefore serves this great box, and needle upon the middle of the
Index.


Sur. It directs to set the table always precisely upon one point.


Bay. Must it stand always one way, and direct always to one point? how then
can you find the true curuings of the angles?


Sur. When the needle of the Index stands true, as I take it now it does:
Look upon it. The manor of describing.



Bay. Indeed, it is right over the line.


Sur. Then I pray you, let me have one to go before me, always to stand with
a mark at ^uery angle.


Bay. There is one gone.


Sur. I see him: Lo, I stir not the table, now it is truly rectified, and
upon this line I make a prick, which is the very station where the instrument
is supposed to stand: and now from this prick, laying the Index hard unto it,
I, by the sights of the Index, lay it unto the mark, which is set up in yonder
angle, let him not remove it till I come to it: and then as you see, I draw a
line from the prick by the index as it lies, truly and firmly to the mark.
Come on with the line. How many sticks is it?


Baylie. Sir, it is 25. sticks.


Sur. That is 75. pole.


Baylie. Is your chain three pole?


Sur. Yea.


Baylie. Oh Sir, what do you now with your compasses, that you first laid to
your Index, and after to the paper?


Sur. I lay out the true distance, which is from the place where we begun, to
the place where the mark stands.


Bailey. How do you know whether you strike that line too long, or too short? do
you aim at it, as a man would divide a thing in diverse parts by his eye?


Sur. No, there is in all arts sundry parts, and every part has his several
practice. A man is not presently a Musician, as soon as he can say his
Gamma^th. There are steps and degrees to every perfection. But this little
note that you take hold of, is not the least of the practice in this faculty.


Bailey. What call you it? For as Arts have diverse parts, so every part has his
several denomination.


Sur. The use of the scale.
And this whereof we are now in hand, is called The use of the scale.


Bailey. I pray you, if I trouble you not too much, let me see the
demonstration.


Sur. You see in this Index diverse inches, diversely divided: The dividing of
the scale.
one you see, is divided into 16* equal parts, another into 20. another into
60. these are called scales of ascending, or descending, to a higher or lower
computation and extention, according to the number of perches found between
station and station. This (as you see) is 75. pole, and the scale or divided
inch, which I have chosen, is 20. as you see the inch so divided.


Bail. But how can you take 75. out of 20. for that you say is your scale?


Sur. I cannot take a greater out of a lesser: How to find the number of
perches in the scale.
therefore you see me apply my compasses to more inches then one, though some
of them be divided more or less, I must conceive every inch in the whole Index
to be 20. Then I lay the one foot of my compass over 3. inches, which makes
60. the^ I lack 15. to make 75. Therefore I set the other foot of my compass
into the scale of 20. and reduce it only to 15. which 15. and the three inches
next adjoining, being imagined 20. a piece, makes 75. And as you see the
compass thus spread, I apply it without altering, to the line, which I drew
from the first prick, and where the other foot of the compass falls, there
is the second station: namely, the place where this mark stood.


Bail. Truly, Sir, I thank you, I conceive it well for I perceive, I must
always account the inches, not as they are in themselves divided, but every of
them 20. And if it be under 20. then I must re^erre me to the very scale it
self, which is divided 20. and take the number out of it: and if it be above
20. I must take the next inch or inches to the scale, and take the odd out of
the scale it self.


Sur. If your sudden apprehension have as strong a retention, you will do well:
but commonly quickest conceits do soonest forget. Quick conceit^ soon forget.
Therefore must you often chew it in your mind, and apply it to your memory,
and as we pass in this business, you may make some practice.


Bai. Sir, I thank you.


Sur. What call you this common?


Bai. Ye^ that are Tenants, and are sworn^, inform the Surueyor.


Jury. Sir, it is called, Water-hurst common.


Sur. So, you that carry the mark, I pray, go to the next angle, and set up
your mark, and stir it not till I come. Master Baily, set down the
instrument again, here where the mark stood.


Bai. I perceive you lay the Index upon the line again: and then you turn the
table, till it be by direction of the needle, North and South, as before.


Sur. I do so.


Bai. But why do you now lay the Index, and by it look back again?


Sur. Only to try whether the needle be right: for if the Index from this last
prick, do fall truly upon the first station, then may I be bold that I shall
make the next angle true.


Bai. Now you lay the Index, to the yonder mark before you, and the line that
you have stricken from the last prick, is the line that directs to it: but
because you know not yet how many pole it will be, you omit, applying your
compasses to the scale, until you come to the mark, and know the number of
petches.


Sur. I must do so: now come on with the chain. How many pole is it in the
whole?


Bai. 37. pole: I see you take almost 2. inches for this number, namely one
entire inch* for 20. and 17. parts of ye scale of 20. which in ye whole makes
37. and I see truly, as 37 is ye half almost of 75. so is this last line, the
answerable half^ of the first, and the angle falls out in the paper, just
alike unto the angle of the field. Surely this is a perfect way, and I conceive
the doing of it very plainly.


Sur. Then we may go on the faster: for this does a little hinder our
business: but if you think fit to ask any question, do it freely, and I will
answer you willingly.


Bailey. When I come to any doubt, I will be bold. Sir: now we have gone round
about the Common of Water-burst, and you have closed it up as rightly like it
in form, as one form may be made like another. Whither will you go next?


Sur. Into the next field. What field call you this?


Jury. Oxe-leaze.


Sur. Whole is it?


Jury. Thomas Turners.


Sur. How does he hold it?


Iur. He holds it by Copy of Courtroll.


Sur. It is meddow.


Jury. Yea.


Baylie. I perceive you write the names of the Commons and closes you take, and
the name of the owners and occupie^s, and the quality of the ground, and how
it is held in every particular close.


Sur. I must of necessity do so for: memory may not be trusted to retain so
many things, as are to be noted in this business.


Bailey. I pray you proceed to the rest.


Sur. What river call you this?


Bailey. Will you have the names of the rivers too? The names of all
particulars, are to be set down.



Sur. Yea, and the name of every other particular else whatsoever: for it is
very material, whether it be river, Brook, lane, high way, cross, tree,
pond, hill, hedge, corner, gate, style, gravel, or sand-pit, meerestones,
baulkes, land, shares, or any matter or thing memorable, because they are often
mentioned in records: butts, boundaries, deeds, copies, leases, and to
distinguish between land, and land, Manor, and Manor, parish, and parish,
and such like.


Bay. In deed, I perceive it is very needful to remember them all: this river
indeed is called Otter brook, and is indeed the bounds between this Manor
of Beauland, and the next Manor.


Sur. What call you the next Manor, on the other side the river?


Bay. The Manor of Littleton. But will you observe the names of all the
Manors, that border upon this our Manor?


Sur. Yea, of necessity, and whose Manor it is: for it were a simple part in
me, Conf^^ing Manors are to be noted.
to take the circuit of this Manor, and if the Lord should ask me what
Manors lay about it, I should answer, I cannot tell: it is fit the Lord should
know who were his neighbor Lords, and what Manors were near him. Whose is
the Manor of Littleton?


Bay. The kings Manor: and therefore whether you may boldly set it down, you
may be advised.


Sur. There is no fear, where is no purpose of offense: and in this it is not
only not offensive, but expedient that the true bounds, meeres, and marks of
division between Manor, and Manor, should be observed and set down, that
either may know how far his own extends.


Bai. It is, I confess, very necessary. But Sir, how will you do now? here
is a great pond, through which you cannot measure. how can you find the breadth
of it, that when you come to the other side, you may take the lust distance?
for as I conceive, if you should lay it down by your scale, as you call it, too
far, or too short, you should bring all the land near it out of rule, making
it either too much or too little.


Sur. I perceive you understand well, for you say truly. Therefore if you
observe what I do, you shall find that I will not commit that error.


Bai. How, I pray you?


Sur. You see how the instrument stands, How to take a distance.
truly erected as before, and you see a little Molehill upon the further
bancke of the pond: I lay (as you see) the Index upon it, and take it for my
mark just in the middle of it, and from this last station I strike a line at
adventure, in the extention, but truly upon the mark: then without moving the
instrument, I turn the Index from this station, where the instrument stands,
unto the staff which the marke-bearer has set up yonder, and strike likewise
a line to it, as you see: now I measure from this station to the staff, and I
find it is 16. perches, that you see how I take it with my compasses upon the
scale, as I showed you before, and where the foot of my compass falls,
there is the place where the staff^ stands. Now see, I erect mine instrument
again, and then I place my Index upon this place measured unto, and turn the
same unto the middle of the former Molehill: and you see, that the Index does
cross the first line, and I draw a third from the place of the sta^^e, to the
Molehill, and it crosses it, you see, at this place, then I find, that the
very point of the cross lines is the place of the Mole-hil.


Bailey. But how know you by this, how far the river or pond is over?


Sur. I will tell you presently. Lo, I lay the one foot of the compass upon
the first station, and the other upon the prick of the Molehill: and now mark,
I lay the compass, without stirring the feet, unto the scale, and as you see,
it takes three inches and a half: therefore I lay the compass so, as the one
foot may rest upon the scale, which I have chosen, which is the inch divided
into twenty parts, and that, you see, is just in the middle of the inch, which
is ten perches, and the other three whole inches, are twenty apeece: so the
whole breadth of the pond is 70. perches, deducting as much on either side, as
is between the brincke of the pond, and the marks on either side, because I
could not plant mine instrumen^ so near ^he water, but that some space must be
of necessity between.


Baily. I understand this well: and I see, that by this rule a man may take the
distance of a place ^arre off, and never measure to it.


Sur. So may you, and to tell how far distant diverse things are one from
another, though neither of them be near you. But for these things, if you
covet more instruction, you may refer you to diverse in London, or elsewhere,
that are practizers and teachers of these Geometrical conclusions: for now
time will not serve us, neither for me to teach, nor you to understand the
things at full, which are required in the Mathematickes, whereof this is but a
p^r^.


Bailey. I thank you for your present willingness: when better your
opportunity and leisure will permit you, I will be bold ^o trouble you further,
and I will be thankful. I will not now let you: I pray you proceed.


Sur. What house is this?


Bailey. These men of the Jury will tell you better then I* for I am but a
stranger here to speak of, and I dare not be too bold to speak either by
guess, or by report, of things which must be recorded to posterities.


Sur. You do better to forbear, and to be silent indeed, then to speak what
may lead us into error, They that inform, must know what they say.

Raw reports without knowledge, are unfit to be recorded. Houses are called
after the names of Tenants.


as many busy and forward fellows do, to the hurt sometimes of the Lord,
sometimes of the tenant. And some Surueyors over credulous, will take their raw
reports for matter of record, and so leave doubts or untruths to them that
shall come after. But what say you that have been sworn?


Jury. The name of the house is Fullers: but why it is so called, we cannot
tell.


Sur. It is so called (no doubt) of some former tenant of that name: for houses
and farms are oftentimes called after sundry names, according to the variety
of the tenants names: and it is a good course to set down all the ancient
names of a farm, because in ancient records, names are found both of farms,
and closes, and such like, that are out of knowledge, for want of the
continuance of expressing them in their Copies, Deeds, Leases, Rentals, fute
Rols, and custom Rols. But whose is the house now?


Jury. It is now in the renure of W. Sands.


Sur. How does he hold it?


Jury. By Lease for 21. yeer^s.


Sur. When I come to any of the land that belongs to this house, let me
understand it: for it is convenient to mention, in setting down every piece of
ground, to what house, farm or tenement it belongs.


Bailey. Here you are now come to the Lords wood.


Sur. What call you this wood?


Bailey. I take it, it is called Frith-wood.


Sur. It is parcel of the Lords demeisnes, is it not?


Jury. It is so, Sir.


Sur. Here are good timber trees, we will number them.


Bailey. To number trees.
Number them? how is it possible to number them, they are so many, and stand so
thick?


Sur. I confess (especially if it be thick of bushes and underwoods) there is
difficulty in numbering them: yet if you will follow my direction, we will come
near the number.


Bailey. How, I pray you? we will all give any aid we can.


Sur. Then go you along by this hedge, and when I bid you stand, stand you
still: and let another go up this path, and when he comes right against you,
let him stand: likewise another must stand here at the end of the wood, and
must not move, until I call him to remove: and I and my man will account the
number of the trees, that are within the square, which you three and the corner
of the wood does make. Sir, go you along by the hedge, and let your eye be
always upon the trees that are between us, and as you see me move, so move
you: and I will number the trees as I go. So, now call away the (...) that
stands at the end of the wood, and place them again in another square, and do
as before: and so from place to place, till all the wood be viewed, and the
trees numbered.


Bailey. To what end is this? what is the Lord the better, to know the number of
the trees?


Sur. Howsoever the Lord be pleased to think of the service, a Surueyor ought
to know it, A Surueyor should seek to know the number of timber trees.
that when he shall be demanded of the Lord, what he thinks the wood to be
worth to be sold, he may be able to answer it; and give a reason for that he
says, and not to speak at randon or by guess, without some ground of reason
or proof. For how can a man value a wood, when he knows not what crop it
bears? For a wood may have an hundred trees in an acre, some woods not
twenty, some not five: and therefore it were great negligence in a Surueyor,
that would pass by a wood of the Lords, and would not take note of the trees,
yea, and of the reasonable value of them one with another, that he may be
readily able to satisfy the Lord, when he shall demand the Surueyors opinion,
though he cannot answer precisely, yet near.


Bailey. You say truly: But what if there be no trees at all in the wood, as
here is a wood adjoining, called Buckes-groue, that has the name of a wood,
but has no trees at all?


Sur. Then is it underwood, Difference between timber trees and underwood.
which must be considered in another kind: for there is difference between
timber trees, and underwoods: for an acre of timber trees may be worth forty
pounds, and far more, or much less, when an acre of underwoods can not lightly
exceed five pounds, and may not be worth twenty shillings. Therefore must the
Surueyor be heedful, I say, to note what trees are among the underwoods, and
must also have skill to judge of the values of the trees: namely, to judge what
a tun of timber, or a load is worth, and how many loades a tree will make.
And because this is not alike in all places, he must be careful to observe the
plenty or scarcity, the use and little use of timber or firewood in the
place where he is to deal, and accordingly in discretion to judge of the
values of that he has in hand, else may he deceive himself and his Lord much,
The place to be considered.
if he prize wood in the wield of Sussex, as it is worth about Salisburie
plain.


Bailey. Saving your speech, the like is to be considered in the letting and
sale of land.


Sur. It is true: we have had a good walk between these two stations, and a
long discourse of woods. But me thinks, I see a quarry of very good stone here.


Bail. Yea Sir, here is both excellent freestone and good Marble, and as we
shall go, you shall find diverse sorts of minerals and earths: which you can not
note upon your plot, because they are things hidden under the earth.


Sur. To note special places of profit.
Yea, but I will (for so I ought) set down in the plot, the places where every
of these commodities are found. But for the matter and substance, and the
profit and value, I know, the Jury will bring in, in their verdict: for they
are all given them in charge.


Bail. It is true: these things are necessarily given them in charge. But here
is a Mill, Sir, will you take note of it upon your plot?


Sur. In any case: for it is not the least ornament of a Manor, a fair
stream and a well conditioned, A good Water-Mill, an ornament to a Manor.
and well wrought Mill upon the same. In whose use or occupation is this Mill?


Bailey. It is one G. Iohnsons.


Sur. By what right?


Bailey. Let them of the Jury speak.


Jury. He holds it freely for a pepper corn a year. But it was parcel of
the Lords demeisnes, but he sold it: and it was a custom Mill very profitable.


Sur. He that persuaded the Lord to sell away his custom Mill, Not good for a
Lord to al^^n his Custome-Mill.
had little respect to the Lords profit or royalty: the profit comes easily,
and the custom confirms the antiquity of the Manor. And such a member of a
Manor, I would wish none to put away. But humor and necessity, Humor and
Necessity, two Emperors opposite.
are two opposite Emperors; the one commands, wills, and does what he
lists, the other forced to do what it would not. And therefore men that may
do what they list, and will do what they may, if they err to their own hurt,
are not to be lamented. But they that are constrained to do what they would
not, to their prejudice, I pity them. But I take it, we have near trodden the
whole Manor.


Bailey. Almost indeed. Here are some few closes more, and then an end.


Sur. But here are certain cottages, me thinks, builded upon the Lords waste.
Cottages on the waste.



Bailey. Yea, but let them pass, never meddle with them: for they are only
shelter for poor people, and yield the Lord little or no commodity, and
therefore spare labor of observing them.


Sur. Nay, it is a parcel of my task, I must omi^ nothing, that may inform
or benefit the Lord.


Bailey. Be it then as you will.


Sur. What are we now at an end?


Baylie. Yonder corner is the last: for it is the place where you began in
Water-hurst common.


Sur. So, then we will retire.


Baylie. What will you then command to be done?


Sur. Cause the Tenants all to appear, and let the Jury bring in the verdict.


Bailey. The Tenants are at the Court house, and the Jury ready with their
verdict.


Sur. I will go with you and take it: call the Jury by poll: make proclamation.


Baylie. They all appear.


Sur. You sworn men of the Court of Survey, have you agreed upon the Articles
that were given you in charge, and are you provided with answer unto every of
them in writing?


Jury. Yea Sir, here it is fairly written.


Sur. You have well done in your endeavors, though peradventure, there may be
defects in the form of your answers, yet if you have kept the main aim, which
is the seeking out, and delivering the truth, you have discharged the parts of
honest Tenants, and men fearing God. And because that it may be somethings may
be omitted, which you may now instantly call to mind: blush not to declare it
here, before you be deprived of that you have written* for this paper I must
have, and that under your hands.


Jury. What need we set to our hands?


Sur. Because if I err from it, your hands shall testify against me: if you
have erred, The Jury must subscribe their verdict.
and I err through you your hands shall justify me.


Iur. The thing is reasonable, we will subscribe.


Sur. Now will I read the Articles of your charge, and to every Article your
answer, that you may yet correct or add what shall be thought fit, and
therefore I pray you listen.


Iur. Read you Sir.


Sur. You agree to all these things willingly, whereunto you have set your
hands.


Iur. We do so, and do here confirm it by the delivery thereof, by our foreman
in the name of us all, to the behoof of our Lord. And what you else require at
our hands, we are ready to perform.


Sur. You do kindly, and like dutiful Tenants, and be you assured, that your
forwardness herein shall not be concealed from the Lord, but with true report
of your endeavors for the furthering of the business, which cannot but draw a
kind consideration from the Lord again to you. Which both to gain for you,
and to retain it, I will truly do my best: and so for this time, I will leave
to trouble you further, until I have set my other collections, which I have
taken in the perambulation of the Manor, in some order, then will I be bold to
trouble you again, to the end that you may all approve, what is done, whether
I have truly set down the particulars: namely, the Lords demeisnes, the free,
copy, and leased lands, under their true names and due owners: if not, that by
your help I may reform it, before I ingrosse it, to continue to your
children. For what we do, will be hereafter a light unto them that shall come
after you: and if it should be erroneous, it would be prejudicial to your
posterities.


Sur. I pray you therefore, let there be an examination, and we will gladly
give both our attendance and best aid to perfect it.


Bail. I shall then make an Oyes, and adiourn the Court, until they have
notice again.


Sur. Do so.


Bai. You will now keep your chamber, until you have made your collections
perfect, and cast up the land.


Sur. I purpose so.


Bailey. I would gladly see the manner of your casting up of the acres as you do
it: for the rest, I shall see, when you have done. For the Iuries examination, I
will leave you till the morning, and then will I come to your chamber.


Sur. Do so.


The end of the third book.
The Surueyors Dialogue, showing the manner of casting up o^ sundry fashions of
land, with the scale and compass, with Tables of computation for ease in
accompting.
The fourth Book.
Bailey I See you are busied, and I perceive you are casting up the quantity of
this square piece of land.


Sur. So I am.


Bailey. This, I take it, is plain and easy to be measured.


Sur. I pray let me see your skill, what contains it?


Bailey. I think, if I were upon the ground, I could tell you: but upon the
plot I cannot, because I remember, you do it by your scale: I would gladly see
the use of it, and how you apply your scale to the perches: and if I saw it
once, I think I could then guess at it. Where is your scale?


Sur. This that you see like a ruler divided.




Bailey. If you will give me leave, and if I trouble you not, I will try how
near I can come to it. I apply the compass to the ene side of the figure of
the close, and then letting the compass stand, I lay the compass to the
scale, and I find it is just one inch, which is* third part^ (...) of the whole
scale: and as I remember, you made your scale twenty perches to an inch.


Sur. You say right.


Bailey. Then is the one side 20. perches. And having laid my compass to the
rest of the sides, I find them twenty of each side. What now is to be done?


Sur. Multiply the one side by the other.


Bailey. Then I must say twenty times twenty, that makes four hundred perches.
But now am I at a s^and again, how shall I know how many acres is in this
figure?


Sur. You must know, that there go 160. perches to one acre, 80. perches to
half an acre, 40. perches to one roode, The parts of an acre.
on fourth part (...) of an acre, ten day-works to a rood, four perches to a
day-worke, 18. foot and a half to a perch.


Bailey. Then I perceive, that as many times as I find 160. perches in 400.
perches, so many acres the piece is, and if the overplus come to 80. perches,
it makes half an acre more, it to forty, one roode, it is four perches, a day
work: and so according to the (...) perches, it makes parts of an acre,


Sur. You take it rightly.


Bailey. Then I divide 400 by 160. and I find 160. twice in 400* and 80. over:
so it amounts to two acres and a half.


Sur. It is well done: but I would have you observe, a form in setting down
your quantities: for as the parts are four, so set them down in four
columns: as for example: 2-2-0-0: the first is acres, the second is roodes,
the third is day-workes, and the fourth perches.


Bailey. I thank you Sir, I pray let us see some other form.


Survey. This form following is also a square, let me see how you will cast it
up.


Bai. I have laid the compass to the sides, as before, and by the scale* all
the sides are twenty perches a p^^ce, as were ye first, (...) I find no
difference in the quantity.


Sur. But you shall find you are in an error: for it is not the length o^ the
sides that iustifies the quan^titie: but the angles must be considered: Pieces
of equal sides, may make unequal quantities.
for you see there is great difference between the angles of the first figure,
and the angles of this: for the angles of the first are all right angles, but
this has two sharp or acute angles, and two blunt or obtuse angles, which
makes difference in the quantity, though the sides be equal every way to the
former.


Bay. I pray you show me the reason.


Sur. Your eye may discern, there is inequality in the bigness of these two:
but you shall prove it thus: the first is a just square of twenty perches every
way, which makes the Area and content as big as possible like sides may make:
but this last, by ben^ing two sides, makes the 2 angles unequal to the other,
and must be measured by drawing a line from the two sharp angles, and then
raising a perpendicular from that base, to one of the obtuse equal angles:
multiply the base, How to cast ^p a triangle
which is 34. by half the perpendicular, (...), and that makes in the whole
2-0-0-3. the base and both the perpendiculars being equal.


Bai. This is almost two parts of an acre less then the former. And by this
reason there may be a piece of land 20. perches every side, that shall not
contain above two parts of an acre.


Sur. It is true.


Bai. I see in your plot a crooked piece of land to be measured as I take it,
and I think it be the Lords wood, called Frith-wood.




Sur. This is that you see, and it is troublesome to measure indeed: and
without a Geometrical instrument, it can very hardly be measured, because
there are woods about it, and the wood it self thick of trees and bushes.


Bai. You have indeed laid it out in his true form: but it has so many angles
and curuings, that I dare not adventure to measure it upon your plot. I pray
what course take you in the casting up of such a piece of land?


Sur. The truest course, for that it is so irregular, is, to put it into as
many triangles as you conveniently may, making no more then necessity
requirech: and if you can do this, you may do any other form.


Bai. I pray you show me the manner.




Sur. I will make a demonstration unto you, and mark it: you see the figure:
there are contained within this figure 7. triangles, and one long square: the
base of the first triangle is 22. perches, the half perpendicular thereof is
two perches, and that contains 0-1-1-0. The second triangle has his base 37.
perches, the half perpendicular, two and a half, which makes 0-2-3-1. The
third has the base 37. the half perpendicular 6* which makes 1-1-5-2. The
fourth has the base 21. the perpendicular 3. makes 0-1-5-3. The fifth is in
the base 12. perp. two and a half, and makes 0-0-7-2. The sixth base 12.
perp. 2 makes 0-0-6-0. The long square 6 in length, and 4 in breadth, 0-0-6-0.
The two last are equal triangles, base 8. perp 1. and a half, 0-0-3-0. All
which several sums being added together, do amount unto 3-0-8-0.


Bai. But which do you call the base, and which the perpendicular lines?


Sur. The longest line in any triangle is the base, and the perpendicular is a
line imagined to rise from the base to the obtuse or blunt angle: Base and
perpendicular, quid.
as in the example following.


Bai. That which is done with pricks, you call the perpendicular, Base and
perpendicular questions.
and the lower line, you call the base, as in this figure.


Sur. So it is.


Bai. But how lo you cast up the quantity, by a triangle thus? you cannot as I
take i^, by multiplying the base by the perpendicular, find the content: for it
is by that computation, more ite^ indeed the triangle contains. The base
mult^plied by the perpendicular.



Sur. You say true, if you multiply the whole base, by the whole perpendicular:
but you must multiply the one, by the half of the other.


Bai. Do you imagine that the truest measure, i^ by triangles?


Sur. Triangles surest measuring.
Yea, where you find many angles in one field: there are other kinds, and
manners of measuring, but this is speedy and certain.


Bai. How if a piece of land lie directly round? I think you measure it round,
and then cast it into a square, as if the circle be 40 perches round, it makes
10 square.


Sur. Indeed, many vulgar measurers do use to measure many sorts of land
round, and cast the whole into a square, which is for the most part false. But
for a round, and circular piece of land, you must indeed measure it round, A
circular form.
and take the half of the number of perches for the length: then take the
semidiamiter, namely, as many perches, as are from the Center, to the extreme,
and multiply the half of the circle by the semidiamiter. And for a half
circle, multiply half the half circuit, by the Sem^diamiter, and divide as I
showed you.


Bay. I thank you Sir: I keep you from your business, yet I pray you let me
ask you one question more for my learning: how are hills, and valleys measured?


Sur. There is indeed some difficulty in them, without great industry: for
commonly, hills, Measuring hills and valleys.
and valleys lie very irregularly, sides, heights, and depthes, very unequal.
And therefore, to demonstrate any certain rule for these kind of contents,
many have endeavored to do, to whom as unto uncertainties I refer you: but for
such kind of grounds, there must special diligence be had, in bringing them
into certain parts, distinguishing the parts by marks, and so by degrees to
bring these parts into a certain content general, and that upon the ground:
otherwise I see not, Irregular forms must be measured by regular parts.
how by measuring a whole irregular circuit together, as irregular heights or
depths, and applying the numbers to a general computation, according to the
rules of arithmatike, a certainty may be procured: although the rules be true,
yet in regard of the inequality of forms, the working may fail, upon a
plain plot.


Bay. Sir, loath I am to be troublesome unto you, for that I know you have much
business, and the casting up of the particulars of this whole Manor, will be
very laborious: for to cast up every particular angle of a ground by
arithmaticke, will be very tedious.


Sur. But I have certain tables of ease, which yield more speedier dispatch,
then to cast up every content with the pen.


Bai. I pray you let me be bold, to crave the sight of those tables.


Sur. I have set them down in a little book, and here it is.


Bai. Were these of your own invention?


Sur. No truly: many have endeavored several manners and methods of computation:
as one Benese a Canon of Murton Abbey* Many rules of casting up contents.
Benese, a Canon.
near Mecham in Surrey, who did it by sundry square tables, increasing by ten,
as from one, to ten times ten, from one time 20, to ten times twenty, and so
increasing by ten, until he come to an hundred times 120. that is, from one
perch to 75. acres.


Bai. Truly, these are very necessary tables, is yours in another form?


Sur. It is in that kind, but it works by the increase, from twenty times
twenty, from one to forty times forty, from one to sixty times sixty, eighty
times eighty, etc.


Bai. This differs not much from the former, yet I take it to be more ready.


Sur. So it is.


Bai. Who, I pray you, found out this way (...)*


Sur. Surely I had certain papers of that method, of M. Ran. Agas, but they
were imperfect in the due progression: Randolph Agas. Valentine Lea. M. Digges.
for they contained the first, wanting the middle, and some of the end of the
Tables: that I have been forced to calculate them since, to make them perfect.
But surely his diligence deserves commendation.


Bai. Did M. Agas first contain them so?


Sur. So I take it, but M. Valentine Lea, and M. Digges had in manner the like,
increasing by the multiplication of greater sums; but of all other, I take
this to be the most ready.


Bai. Is this the book, and are these the Tables?


Sur. These are they: but that I have set them into this form, because they
may the better fall into leaves of a portable book, being before in long and
troublesome rolls, and in another form.


Tabulae primae, pars prima. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 1 2 3 1 1 1 1 2 1 3 2 2 1 2
2 2 1 1 2 2 2 2 3 3 2 4 4 2 5 3 2 1 3 3 3 4 2 5 1 6 6 3 7 2 4 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 5 6
1 7 2 8 3 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 6 9 1 2 1 2 1 3 2 1 5 7 1 2 1 1 4 1 5 3 1 7 2 8 1 6 1 8
2 9 2 1 2 2 2 10 2 5

Tabulae primae, pars secunda. 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 1 2 3 3 3 1 3 2 3
3 4 4 1 4 2 4 3 5 2 5 2 6 6 2 7 7 2 8 8 2 9 9 2 1 3 8 1 9 9 3 1 2 1 1 1 1 2 1 2
3 1 3 2 1 4 1 1 5 4 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 ^ 1 8 1 2 2 5 1 3 3 1 5 1 6 1 1 7
2 1 8 3 2 2 1 1 2 2 2 2 3 3 2 5 6 1 6 2 1 8 1 9 2 2 1 2 2 2 2 4 2 5 2 2 7 2 3 2
3 7 1 9 1 2 1 2 2 3 2 4 2 2 6 1 2 8 2 7 3 3 1 2 3 3 1 3 5 8 2 2 2 4 2 6 2 8 3 3
2 3 4 3 6 3 8 1 9 2 4 3 2 7 2 7 1 3 1 2 3 3 3 3 6 3 8 2 1 2 1 2 3 1 3 10 2 7 2
3 3 2 2 3 5 3 ^ 2 1 1 2 2 1 ^ 1 ^ 2 1 1 11 3 1 3 3 3 5 3 3 8 2 1 1 1 1 4 1 6 3
1 0 2 1 1 1 ^ 1 1 5 12 3 6 3 9 1 2 1 5 1 8 1 1 1 1 1 4 1 1 7 1 2 13 1 2 1 1 5 2
1 ^ 3 1 1 2 1 1 5 1 1 1 ^ 2 1 2 1 3 1 2 5 14 1 9 1 1 2 2 1 1 6 1 1 9 2 1 2 5 1
2 6 2 1 2 15 1 1 6 1 1 2 1 2 3 3 1 2 ^ 2 1 3 1 1 1 3 5 16 1 2 4 1 2 ^ 1 3 ^ 1 3
6 2 17 1 3 2 1 1 3 6 2 2 3 2 5 18 2 1 2 5 2 2 1 19 2 1 1 2 2 5 20 2 2

Tabulae secundae, pars prima. 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 1 5 1 5 2 5 3 6 6
1 6 2 6 3 7 7 1 7 2 2 1 2 1 1 1 1 2 1 2 1 2 2 1 3 1 3 2 1 4 1 4 2 1 5 3 1 5 3 1
6 2 1 7 1 1 8 1 8 3 1 9 2 2 1 2 1 2 1 3 2 2 2 4 2 1 2 2 2 3 2 4 2 5 2 6 2 7 2 8
2 9 3 5 2 6 1 2 7 2 2 3 3 3 3 1 1 3 2 2 3 3 3 3 5 3 6 1 3 7 8 6 3 1 2 3 3 3 4 2
3 6 3 2 3 9 1 2 1 2 1 3 2 1 5 7 3 6 3 3 8 2 1 1 1 2 1 3 3 1 5 2 1 7 1 1 9 1 1 3
1 1 2 2 8 1 2 1 4 1 6 1 8 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 4 1 1 6 1 1 8 1 ^ 9 1 ^ 1 1 9 2 1 1 1 3
1 1 4 1 1 6 1 1 1 8 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 5 1 1 2 7 2 10 1 1 2 2 1 1 5 1 1 ^ 2 1 2
1 2 2 2 1 2 5 1 2 ^ 2 1 3 1 3 2 2 1 3 5 11 1 1 7 3 1 2 2 1 2 3 1 1 2 6 1 2 8 3
1 3 1 2 1 3 4 1 1 3 7 1 3 9 3 2 2 2 12 1 2 3 1 2 6 1 2 9 1 3 2 1 3 5 1 3 8 2 1
2 4 2 7 2 1 13 1 2 8 1 1 3 1 2 1 3 4 3 1 3 3 2 1 1 2 4 2 2 7 3 2 1 1 2 1 4 1 2
1 7 2 14 1 3 3 2 1 3 7 2 2 2 4 2 7 2 2 1 1 2 1 4 2 2 1 8 2 2 1 2 2 2 5 15 1 3 8
3 2 2 2 2 6 1 2 1 2 1 3 3 2 1 7 2 2 2 1 1 2 2 5 2 2 3 3 2 3 2 2 16 2 4 2 8 2 1
2 2 1 6 2 2 2 2 4 2 2 8 2 3 2 2 3 6 3 17 2 9 1 2 1 3 2 2 1 7 3 2 2 2 2 2 6 1 2
3 2 2 3 4 3 2 3 9 3 3 1 3 7 2 18 2 1 4 1 2 1 9 2 2 3 2 2 2 8 2 3 2 2 2 3 7 3 1
2 3 6 3 1 2 3 1 5 19 2 1 9 3 2 2 4 2 2 2 4 1 2 3 4 2 3 8 3 3 3 2 3 8 1 3 1 3 3
1 7 1 3 2 2 2 20 2 2 5 2 3 2 3 5 3 3 5 3 1 3 1 5 3 2 3 2 ^ 3 3

Tabulae secundae, pars secundae. 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 1 7 3 8 8 1 8 2
8 3 9 9 1 9 2 9 3 1 2 1 5 2 1 6 1 6 2 1 7 1 7 2 1 8 1 8 2 1 9 1 9 2 2 3 1 3 1 2
4 2 4 3 2 5 2 2 6 1 2 7 2 7 3 2 8 2 2 9 1 3 4 3 1 3 2 3 3 3 4 3 5 3 6 3 7 3 8 3
9 1 5 3 8 3 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 1 3 3 1 5 1 6 1 1 7 2 1 8 3 1 1 6 1 6 2 1 ^ 1 9 2 1 1
1 1 1 2 2 1 1 4 1 1 5 2 1 1 7 1 1 8 2 1 2 7 1 1 4 1 1 1 6 1 1 7 3 1 1 9 2 1 2 1
1 1 2 3 1 2 4 3 1 2 6 2 1 2 8 1 1 3 8 1 2 2 1 2 ^ 1 2 6 1 2 8 1 3 1 3 2 1 3 4 1
3 6 1 3 8 2 9 1 2 9 3 1 3 2 1 3 4 1 1 3 6 2 1 3 8 3 2 1 2 3 1 2 5 2 2 ^ 3 2 1
10 1 3 7 2 ^ 2 2 2 2 5 2 7 2 2 1 2 1 2 2 2 1 5 2 1 7 2 2 2 11 2 5 1 1 1 2 1 3 2
1 3 2 2 1 6 1 2 1 9 2 2 1 3 2 2 4 2 2 2 7 1 2 3 12 2 1 3 ^ 1 6 2 1 9 2 2 2 2 2
5 2 2 8 2 3 1 1 3 4 2 3 7 3 13 2 2 3 2 2 ^ 2 2 7 1 2 3 2 2 3 3 3 ^ 3 7 2 1 3 3
2 3 6 3 3 1 14 2 2 8 2 2 3 2 2 3 5 2 2 3 9 3 1 2 3 6 3 ^ 2 3 1 3 3 1 6 2 3 2 15
2 3 6 1 ^ 31 3 3 7 2 3 1 1 1 3 1 5 3 1 ^ 3 3 2 2 2 3 2 6 1 3 3 16 3 4 3 8 3 1 2
3 1 6 3 2 3 2 4 3 2 8 3 3 2 3 3 6 4 17 3 1 1 3 ^ ^ 1 3 2 1 3 2 4 ^ 3 2 8 3 3 3
3 3 3 7 1 4 1 2 4 5 3 4 1 18 3 1 9 2 ^ 2 ^ 3 2 8 2 3 3 3 3 3 7 2 4 2 4 6 2 4 1
1 4 1 5 2 4 2 19 3 2 7 1 ^ 3 ^ 3 3 6 3 4 1 1 4 6 1 4 1 1 4 1 5 2 4 2 2 4 2 5 1
4 3 20 3 3 2 4 4 5 4 1 4 1 5 4 2 4 2 5 4 3 4 3 5 1

Tabulae secundae, pars tertia. 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 21 2 3 1 2 3 5 2
3 3 3 6 3 1 1 1 3 1 6 2 3 2 1 3 3 2 7 3 3 2 1 3 3 7 2 22 3 1 3 6 2 3 1 2 3 1 7
2 3 2 3 3 2 8 2 3 3 4 3 3 9 2 4 5 23 3 1 2 2 3 1 8 3 2 3 3 3 2 9 2 3 3 5 1 4 1
4 1 6 3 4 1 2 2 24 3 2 4 3 3 3 3 6 4 2 4 8 4 1 4 4 2 25 3 3 4 1 4 2 2 4 8 3 4 1
5 4 2 1 1 4 2 7 2 26 4 9 4 1 5 2 4 2 2 4 2 8 2 4 3 5 27 4 2 2 1 4 2 9 4 3 5 3 5
2 2 28 4 3 6 5 3 5 1 29 5 1 1 5 1 7 2 30 5 2 5

Tabulae secundae, pars quarta. 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 21 4 2 3 4 8 4 1
3 1 4 1 8 2 4 2 3 3 4 2 9 4 3 4 ^ 4 3 9 2 5 4 3 5 1 22 4 ^ ^ 4 1 6 4 2 1 2 4 2
7 4 3 2 2 4 3 8 5 3 2 5 9 5 1 4 2 5 2 23 4 8 ^ ^ 4 2 4 4 2 9 3 4 3 5 2 5 1 1 5
7 5 1 2 2 5 1 8 2 5 2 4 1 5 3 24 4 ^ 6 4 3 2 4 3 8 5 4 5 1 5 1 6 5 2 2 5 2 8 5
3 4 ^ 25 4 ^ 3 5 5 6 2 5 1 2 2 5 1 8 3 5 2 5 5 3 1 1 5 3 7 2 6 3 3 6 1 26 5 ^ ^
5 8 5 1 4 2 5 2 1 5 2 7 2 5 3 4 6 2 6 7 6 1 3 2 6 2 27 5 9 5 1 6 5 2 2 3 5 2 9
2 5 3 6 1 6 3 6 9 3 6 1 6 2 6 2 3 1 6 3 28 5 7 5 2 4 5 3 1 5 3 8 6 5 6 1 2 6 1
9 6 2 6 6 3 3 7 29 5 ^ 4 ^ 5 3 2 5 3 9 1 6 6 2 6 1 3 3 6 2 1 6 2 8 1 6 3 3 2 7
2 3 7 1 30 5 ^ 2 ^ 6 6 7 2 6 1 5 6 2 2 2 6 3 6 3 7 2 7 5 7 1 2 2 7 2 31 6 6 8 6
1 5 3 6 2 3 2 6 3 1 1 6 3 9 7 6 3 7 1 4 2 7 2 1 1 7 3 32 6 1 6 6 2 4 6 3 2 7 7
8 7 1 6 7 2 4 7 3 2 8 33 6 3 2 1 7 2 7 8 3 7 1 7 7 2 5 1 7 3 3 2 8 1 3 8 1 34 7
9 7 1 7 2 7 2 6 7 3 4 2 8 3 8 1 1 2 8 2 35 7 2 6 1 7 3 5 8 3 3 8 1 2 2 8 2 1 3
8 3 36 8 4 8 1 3 8 2 2 8 3 1 9 37 8 2 2 1 8 3 1 2 9 3 9 1 38 9 1 9 1 2 9 2 39 9
2 1 9 3 40 10

Tabulae tertiae, pars prima. 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 1 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 1 1
1 1 1 1 2 1 1 3 1 2 1 2 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 2 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 2 3 2 2 4 2 4 2 2
5 3 3 3 3 1 2 3 2 1 3 3 3 3 3 3 4 2 3 5 1 3 6 3 6 3 3 7 2 4 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5
1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 1 1 5 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 1 1 2 3 1 1 5 1 1 6 1 1 1 7 2 1 1 8 3 1 2
1 2 1 1 1 2 2 2 6 1 2 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 4 2 1 2 6 1 2 7 2 1 2 9 1 3 2 1 3 2 1 3 3 2
1 3 5 7 1 3 1 3 1 3 3 2 1 3 5 1 1 3 7 1 3 8 3 2 2 2 2 1 2 4 2 5 3 2 7 2 8 2 2 2
4 2 6 2 8 2 1 2 1 2 2 1 4 2 1 6 2 1 8 2 2 9 2 1 2 1 2 1 4 2 2 1 6 3 2 1 9 2 2 1
1 2 2 3 2 2 2 5 3 2 2 8 2 3 1 2 3 2 2 10 2 2 2 2 2 2 5 2 2 7 2 2 3 2 3 2 2 2 3
5 2 3 7 2 3 3 2 2 3 5 11 2 3 2 3 3 3 5 2 2 3 8 1 3 1 3 3 3 3 6 2 3 9 1 3 1 4 3
3 1 7 2 3 2 1 12 3 3 3 6 3 9 3 1 2 3 1 5 3 1 8 3 2 1 3 2 4 3 2 7 3 3 13 3 1 3 1
3 1 6 2 3 2 9 3 3 2 3 3 2 6 1 3 2 9 2 3 3 2 3 3 3 6 3 3 ^ 1 4 2 2 14 3 2 3 2 3
2 7 3 3 2 3 3 4 3 3 7 2 4 1 4 4 2 4 8 4 1 1 2 4 1 5 15 3 2 5 3 3 3 7 2 4 1 1 4
5 4 ^ 3 4 1 2 2 4 1 6 1 4 2 4 2 3 3 4 2 7 2 16 4 4 4 8 4 1 2 4 1 6 4 2 4 2 4 4
2 8 4 3 ^ 4 3 6 5 17 4 1 4 1 4 1 8 2 4 2 2 3 4 2 7 4 3 1 1 4 3 5 2 4 3 9 3 5 4
5 8 1 3 1 2 1 18 4 2 4 2 4 2 9 4 3 3 2 4 3 8 5 2 2 5 7 5 1 1 2 5 1 6 5 2 2 5 2
5 19 4 3 4 3 4 3 9 2 5 4 1 ^ 9 5 1 3 3 5 1 8 2 5 2 3 1 5 2 8 5 3 2 3 5 3 7 2 20
5 5 5 1 5 1 5 5 2 5 2 5 5 3 5 3 5 6 6 5 6 1

Tabulae tertiae, pars secunda. 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 1 1 2 3 1 3 1 3 1
1 3 2 1 3 3 1 4 1 4 1 1 4 2 1 4 3 1 5 2 2 5 2 2 6 2 6 2 2 7 2 7 2 2 8 2 8 2 2 9
2 9 2 3 3 3 8 1 3 9 3 9 3 1 2 1 1 1 1 ^ 1 2 3 1 3 2 1 4 1 1 5 4 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 1
3 1 1 4 1 1 5 1 1 6 1 1 7 1 1 8 1 1 9 1 2 5 1 2 3 3 1 2 5 1 2 6 1 1 2 7 2 1 2 8
3 1 3 1 3 1 1 1 3 2 2 1 3 3 3 1 3 5 6 1 3 6 2 1 3 8 1 3 9 2 2 1 2 2 2 2 4 2 5 2
2 7 2 8 2 2 1 7 2 9 1 2 1 1 2 1 ^ 3 2 1 4 2 2 1 6 1 2 1 8 2 1 9 3 2 2 1 2 2 2 2
1 2 2 5 8 2 2 1 2 2 4 2 2 5 2 2 8 2 3 2 3 2 2 3 4 2 3 6 2 3 8 3 9 2 5 4 3 2 3 7
2 3 9 1 ^ 1 2 3 3 3 3 6 3 8 ^ 3 1 2 3 1 ^ 3 3 1 5 10 3 7 2 3 1 3 1 2 2 3 1 5 3
1 7 2 3 2 3 2 2 2 3 2 5 3 2 7 2 3 3 11 3 1 ^ 1 3 2 3 3 2 3 3 3 2 3 2 3 3 1 1 3
3 4 3 3 6 3 3 3 9 2 4 2 1 4 5 12 3 3 3 3 3 6 3 3 ^ 4 2 4 5 4 1 4 1 1 4 1 4 4 1
7 4 2 13 4 5 3 4 9 4 1 2 1 4 1 5 2 4 1 8 3 4 2 2 4 2 5 ^ 4 2 8 2 4 3 1 3 4 3 5
14 4 1 8 2 4 2 2 4 2 5 2 4 2 9 4 3 2 2 4 3 6 4 3 9 2 5 3 5 6 2 5 1 15 4 3 1 1 4
3 5 4 3 ^ 3 5 2 2 5 6 1 5 1 5 1 ^ 3 5 1 7 2 5 2 1 1 5 2 5 16 5 4 5 8 9 1 2 5 1
6 5 2 5 2 4 5 2 8 5 3 2 5 3 6 6 17 5 1 6 3 5 2 1 5 2 4 1 5 2 3 3 5 2 9 2 5 3 3
3 5 3 8 6 6 2 6 1 3 6 1 5 18 5 2 9 2 5 3 4 5 3 8 2 6 ^ 6 7 2 6 1 2 6 1 6 2 6 2
1 6 2 5 2 6 3 19 6 2 1 6 7 6 1 1 2 6 1 6 2 6 2 1 1 6 2 6 6 3 3 6 3 3 2 7 1 7 5
20 6 1 5 6 2 6 2 5 6 3 6 3 5 7 7 5 7 1 7 1 5 7 2

Tabulae tertiae, pars tertia. 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 21 5 1 5 1 5 2 2 5
2 5 3 5 3 1 5 3 6 1 6 1 2 6 6 3 6 1 2 6 1 1 1 6 2 2 2 22 5 2 3 2 5 3 1 5 3 6 2
6 2 6 7 2 6 1 3 6 1 8 2 6 2 1 6 2 9 2 6 3 5 23 5 3 5 3 6 1 2 6 7 1 6 1 3 6 1 8
3 6 2 4 2 6 3 1 6 3 6 7 1 3 7 7 2 24 6 6 6 1 2 6 1 8 6 2 4 6 3 6 3 6 7 2 7 8 7
1 4 7 2 25 6 1 6 1 6 2 2 2 6 2 8 3 6 3 5 7 1 1 7 7 2 7 1 3 3 7 2 7 2 6 1 7 3 2
2 26 6 2 6 2 6 3 3 6 3 9 2 7 6 7 1 2 2 7 1 9 7 2 5 2 7 3 2 7 3 8 2 8 5 27 6 3 6
3 7 3 2 7 1 1 7 1 7 7 2 3 3 7 3 2 7 3 7 1 8 4 8 1 3 8 1 7 2 28 7 7 7 1 4 7 2 1
7 2 8 7 3 5 8 2 8 9 8 1 6 8 2 3 8 3 29 7 1 ^ 1 7 2 4 2 7 3 1 3 7 3 9 8 6 1 8 1
^ 2 8 2 3 8 2 8 8 3 5 1 9 2 2 30 7 2 7 2 7 3 5 8 2 2 8 1 8 1 1 2 8 2 5 8 3 2 2
9 9 7 2 9 1 5 31 7 3 7 3 8 5 2 8 1 3 1 8 2 1 8 2 8 2 8 3 6 2 9 4 1 9 1 2 9 1 ^
3 9 2 7 2 32 8 8 8 1 6 8 2 4 8 3 2 9 9 8 9 1 6 9 2 ^ 9 3 2 10 33 8 1 8 1 8 2 6
2 8 3 4 3 9 3 9 1 1 1 9 1 9 2 9 2 7 3 9 3 6 10 ^ 1 10 1 2 2 34 8 2 8 2 8 3 7 9
5 2 9 1 4 9 2 2 2 9 3 1 9 3 9 2 10 8 10 1 6 2 10 2 5 35 8 3 8 3 9 7 2 9 1 6 1 9
2 5 9 3 3 3 10 2 2 10 1 1 1 10 2 10 2 8 3 10 3 7 3 36 9 9 9 1 8 9 2 1 9 3 6 10
5 10 1 4 10 2 3 10 3 2 11 1 11 1 37 9 1 9 1 9 2 8 2 9 3 ^ 3 10 7 10 1 6 1 10 2
5 2 10 3 4 3 11 4 11 2 3 1 11 2 2 2 38 9 2 9 2 9 3 9 10 8 2 10 1 8 10 2 7 2 10
3 7 11 6 2 11 1 6 11 2 5 2 11 3 5 39 9 3 9 3 10 2 10 1 9 1 10 2 9 10 3 8 3 11 8
2 11 1 8 1 11 2 8 11 3 7 2 12 7 1 40 10 1 10 2 10 11 11 1 11 2 11 3 12 12 1 12
2

Tabulae tertiae, pars quarta. 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 21 6 2 7 3 6 3 3 6
3 8 1 7 3 2 7 8 3 7 1 4 7 1 9 1 7 2 4 2 7 2 9 3 7 3 5 22 7 2 7 6 7 1 1 2 7 1 7
7 2 2 2 7 2 8 7 3 3 2 7 3 9 8 4 2 8 1 23 7 1 ^ 1 ^ 1 ^ 7 2 4 3 7 3 2 7 3 6 1 8
2 8 ^ 3 8 1 3 2 8 1 9 1 8 2 5 24 7 2 6 7 3 2 7 3 8 8 4 8 1 8 1 6 8 2 2 8 2 8 8
3 4 9 25 7 3 8 3 8 5 8 1 1 1 8 1 7 2 8 2 3 3 8 3 8 3 6 1 9 2 2 9 8 3 9 1 5 26 8
1 1 2 8 1 8 8 2 4 2 8 3 1 8 3 7 2 9 4 9 1 2 9 1 ^ 9 2 3 2 9 3 27 8 2 4 1 8 3 1
8 3 3 3 9 4 2 9 1 1 1 9 1 3 9 2 4 3 9 3 1 2 9 3 8 1 10 5 28 8 3 7 9 1 9 1 1 9 1
8 9 2 9 3 2 9 3 9 10 9 10 1 3 10 2 ^ 29 9 9 3 9 1 7 9 2 4 1 9 3 1 2 9 3 8 3 10
6 10 1 3 1 10 2 2 10 2 7 3 10 3 5 30 9 2 2 2 9 3 9 3 7 2 10 5 10 1 2 2 10 2 10
2 ^ 2 10 3 5 11 2 2 11 1 31 9 3 3 1 10 3 10 1 3 10 1 8 2 10 2 6 1 10 3 4 11 1 3
11 9 2 11 1 7 1 11 2 5 32 10 8 10 1 6 10 2 4 10 3 2 11 11 ^ 8 11 1 6 11 2 4 11
3 2 12 33 10 2 3 10 2 9 10 3 7 1 11 5 2 11 1 3 3 11 2 2 11 3 1 11 3 8 2 12 6 3
12 1 5 34 10 3 3 2 11 2 11 1 2 11 1 9 11 2 8 2 11 3 6 12 4 2 12 1 3 12 2 1 2 12
3 35 11 6 1 11 1 5 11 2 3 3 11 3 2 2 12 1 1 12 1 12 1 8 3 12 2 7 2 12 3 6 1 13
5 36 11 1 9 11 2 8 11 3 7 12 6 12 1 5 12 2 4 12 3 3 13 2 13 1 1 13 2 37 11 3 1
3 12 1 12 1 1 12 1 9 2 12 2 8 3 12 3 8 13 7 1 13 1 6 2 13 2 5 3 13 3 5 38 12 4
2 12 1 4 12 2 3 2 12 3 3 13 2 2 11 1 2 13 2 1 2 13 3 1 14 2 14 1 39 12 1 7 1 12
2 7 12 3 6 3 13 6 2 13 1 6 1 13 2 6 13 3 3 3 14 5 2 14 1 5 1 14 2 5 40 12 3 13
13 1 13 2 13 3 14 14 1 14 2 14 3 15

Tabulae tertiae, pars quinta. 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 41 10 2 1 10 3 2
11 3 11 1 1 11 2 1 1 11 3 1 2 12 1 3 12 1 2 12 2 2 1 12 3 2 2 42 11 1 11 1 1 2
11 2 2 11 3 2 2 12 3 12 1 3 2 12 2 4 12 3 4 2 13 5 43 11 2 2 1 11 3 3 12 2 3 12
1 4 2 12 2 4 1 12 2 5 1 12 3 6 13 1 7 2 44 12 4 12 1 5 12 2 6 12 3 7 13 8 13 1
9 13 3 45 12 2 6 1 12 3 7 2 13 8 3 13 2 13 5 1 1 14 2 2 46 13 9 13 2 2 13 3 2
14 3 2 14 1 5 47 13 3 2 1 14 4 14 1 5 2 14 2 7 2 48 14 1 6 14 2 8 15 49 15 1 15
1 2 2 50 15 2 5

Tabulae tertiae, pars sexta. 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 41 13 ^ 3 13 1 3 13
2 3 1 13 3 3 2 14 3 3 14 1 4 14 2 4 1 14 3 4 2 15 4 3 15 1 5 42 13 1 5 2 13 2 6
13 3 6 2 14 7 14 1 7 2 14 2 8 14 3 8 2 15 9 15 1 9 2 15 3 43 13 2 5 1 13 3 9 14
9 3 14 2 2 14 3 1 1 15 2 15 1 1 3 15 2 3 2 15 3 4 1 16 5 44 14 1 14 1 2 14 2 3
14 3 4 15 5 15 1 6 15 2 7 15 3 8 16 9 16 2 45 14 1 3 3 14 2 5 14 3 6 1 15 7 2
15 1 8 3 15 3 16 1 1 16 1 1 2 16 2 3 3 16 3 5 46 14 2 5 2 14 3 8 15 9 2 15 2 1
15 3 2 2 16 14 16 1 5 2 16 2 ^ 16 3 8 2 17 1 47 14 3 4 1 15 1 1 15 2 2 8 15 3 4
2 16 6 1 16 1 8 16 2 9 3 17 1 2 17 1 3 1 17 2 5 48 ^5 1 ^ 15 2 4 15 3 6 16 8 16
2 16 3 2 17 4 17 1 6 17 2 8 18 49 ^5 2 ^ 3 15 3 7 16 9 1 16 2 1 2 16 3 3 3 17 6
17 1 8 1 17 3 2 18 2 3 18 1 5 50 15 5 ^ 2 16 1 16 2 2 2 16 3 5 17 7 2 17 2 17 3
2 2 18 5 18 1 7 2 18 3 51 16 1 1 16 2 3 16 3 5 3 17 8 2 17 2 1 1 17 3 4 18 6 3
18 1 9 2 18 3 2 1 19 5 52 16 3 6 17 9 17 2 2 17 3 5 18 ^ 18 2 1 18 3 4 19 7 19
2 53 17 2 2 1 17 3 5 2 18 8 3 18 2 2 18 3 5 1 19 8 2 19 2 1 3 19 3 5 54 18 9 18
2 2 2 18 3 6 19 4 2 19 2 3 19 3 6 2 20 1 55 18 3 6 1 19 1 19 ^ 3 3 19 3 7 2 20
1 1 1 20 2 56 15 2 4 19 3 8 20 1 2 20 2 6 21 57 10 1 2 1 20 2 6 21 1 21 1 5 58
21 1 21 5 2 21 3 59 21 3 1 22 5 60 22 2

Tabulae quartae, pars prima. 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 1 1 5 1 1 5 2 1 5 3
6 1 1 6 1 1 6 2 1 6 3 1 7 1 7 1 1 7 2 2 3 2 3 1 3 1 2 3 2 3 2 2 3 3 3 3 2 3 4 3
4 2 3 5 3 1 5 3 1 6 2 1 7 1 1 8 1 8 3 1 9 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 1 2 2 4 1 2 1
1 2 2 1 2 3 1 2 4 1 2 5 1 2 6 1 2 7 1 2 8 1 2 9 1 3 5 1 3 6 1 1 3 7 2 1 3 8 3 2
2 1 1 2 2 2 2 3 3 2 5 2 6 1 2 7 2 6 2 1 1 2 2 1 3 2 1 4 2 2 2 6 2 1 7 2 2 1 9 2
2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 2 2 2 5 7 2 2 6 3 2 2 8 2 2 3 1 2 3 2 2 3 3 3 2 3 5 2 2 3 7 1 2
3 9 3 3 3 2 2 8 3 2 3 4 3 6 3 8 3 1 3 1 2 3 1 4 3 1 6 3 1 8 3 2 9 3 1 7 1 3 1 9
2 3 2 1 3 3 2 4 3 2 6 1 3 2 8 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 5 1 3 3 7 2 10 3 3 2 2 3 3 5 3
3 7 2 4 4 2 2 4 5 4 7 2 4 1 4 1 2 2 4 1 5 11 4 7 3 4 1 2 4 1 3 1 4 1 6 4 1 8 3
4 2 1 2 4 2 4 1 4 2 7 4 2 9 3 4 3 2 2 12 4 2 3 4 2 6 4 2 9 4 3 2 4 3 5 4 3 8 5
1 5 4 5 7 5 1 13 4 3 ^ 1 5 1 2 5 4 3 ^ ^ 5 1 1 1 5 1 4 2 5 1 7 3 5 2 1 5 2 4 1
5 ^ 7 2 14 5 1 3 ^ 5 1 7 5 2 2 5 2 4 5 2 7 2 5 3 1 5 3 4 2 5 3 8 - 6 1 2 6 5 15
5 2 ^ 3 5 3 2 2 5 3 6 1 6 6 3 3 6 7 2 6 1 1 1 6 1 5 6 1 8 3 6 2 2 2 16 6 4 6 8
6 1 2 6 1 6 6 2 6 2 4 6 2 8 6 3 2 6 3 6 7 17 6 1 9 1 6 2 3 2 6 2 7 3 6 3 2 6 3
6 1 7 2 7 4 3 7 9 7 1 3 1 7 1 7 2 18 6 3 4 ^ 6 3 ^ 7 3 2 7 8 7 1 2 2 7 1 7 7 2
1 2 2 2 6 7 3 2 7 3 5 19 7 9 3 7 1 4 2 7 1 9 1 7 2 4 7 2 8 3 7 3 3 2 7 3 8 1 8
3 8 7 3 8 1 ^ 2 20 7 2 5 7 3 7 3 5 8 8 5 8 1 8 1 5 8 2 8 2 5 8 3

Tabulae quartae, pars secunda. 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 1 1 7 3 1 8 1 8 1
1 8 2 1 8 3 1 9 1 9 1 1 9 2 1 9 3 2 2 3 5 2 3 6 3 6 2 3 7 3 7 2 3 8 3 8 2 3 9 3
9 2 1 3 1 1 3 1 1 1 4 1 1 4 3 1 1 5 2 1 1 6 1 1 1 7 1 1 7 3 1 1 8 2 1 1 9 1 1 2
4 1 3 1 1 3 2 1 3 3 1 3 4 1 3 5 1 3 6 1 3 7 1 3 ^ 1 3 9 2 5 2 ^ 3 2 1 2 1 1 1 2
1 2 2 2 1 3 3 2 1 5 2 1 6 1 2 1 7 2 2 1 8 3 2 2 6 ^ 2 6 2 2 2 8 2 2 9 2 2 3 1 2
3 2 2 2 3 4 2 3 5 7 2 3 7 2 3 5 2 3 7 3 4 1 3 6 1 7 3 3 9 2 3 1 1 1 3 1 3 3 1 4
3 3 1 6 2 3 1 3 1 3 2 8 3 2 ^ 3 2 4 3 2 6 3 2 8 3 3 3 ^ 2 3 3 4 3 3 6 3 3 3 4 9
3 3 5 3 4 2 4 4 1 4 6 2 4 8 3 4 1 1 4 1 3 1 4 1 5 2 4 1 7 3 4 2 10 4 1 ^ 2 4 2
4 2 2 2 4 2 5 4 2 7 2 4 3 4 3 2 2 4 3 1 4 3 7 2 5 11 ^ 3 5 3 4 3 8 2 5 3 5 3 2
5 6 1 5 9 5 1 1 3 5 1 4 2 5 1 7 1 5 2 12 5 1 3 5 1 6 5 1 9 1 5 2 2 5 2 5 5 2 8
5 3 1 5 3 4 5 3 7 6 13 5 3 3 5 3 4 5 3 7 1 6 2 6 3 3 6 7 6 1 1 6 2 3 2 6 1 6 3
6 2 14 6 ^ 2 6 1 2 6 1 5 2 6 1 ^ 6 2 2 2 6 2 6 6 2 9 2 6 ^ 1 6 3 6 2 7 15 6 2 6
1 6 3 6 3 3 3 6 3 ^ ^ 7 1 1 7 5 7 8 3 7 1 2 2 ^ 1 6 1 7 ^ 16 ^ 4 7 8 7 1 2 7 1
6 7 2 7 2 4 7 2 8 7 3 2 7 3 6 8 17 ^ 2 ^ 3 ^ 2 6 7 3 1 7 ^ 4 2 7 3 8 3 8 3 8 7
1 8 1 1 2 8 1 5 3 8 2 18 ^ 3 ^ 2 8 4 8 ^ 2 8 1 3 8 1 7 2 8 2 2 8 2 6 2 8 3 1 8
3 5 2 9 19 ^ 1 ^ 1 8 2 2 8 2 6 3 8 3 1 2 8 3 6 1 9 1 9 4 3 9 1 2 9 1 5 1 9 2 20
^ 3 ^ 9 9 5 9 1 9 1 5 9 2 9 2 5 9 1 9 3 5 10

Tabulae quartae, pars tertia. 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 21 8 1 8 5 2 8 1 3
8 1 6 8 2 1 1 8 2 6 2 8 3 1 3 8 3 7 9 2 1 9 7 ^ 22 8 1 5 2 8 2 1 8 2 6 2 8 3 2
8 3 7 2 9 3 9 8 2 9 1 4 9 1 9 2 9 2 5 23 8 3 3 8 3 6 2 9 2 1 9 8 9 1 3 3 9 1 9
2 9 2 5 1 9 3 1 9 3 6 3 10 2 2 24 9 6 9 1 ^ 9 1 8 9 2 4 9 3 9 3 6 10 2 10 8 10
1 4 10 2 25 9 2 1 2 9 2 ^ 2 9 3 3 3 10 10 6 1 10 1 2 2 10 1 8 3 10 2 5 10 3 1 1
10 3 7 2 26 9 3 6 2 10 3 10 9 2 10 1 6 10 2 2 2 10 2 9 10 3 5 2 11 2 11 8 2 11
1 5 27 10 1 1 3 10 1 8 2 10 2 5 1 10 3 2 10 3 8 3 11 5 2 11 1 4 1 11 1 9 11 2 5
3 11 3 2 2 28 10 2 7 10 3 4 11 1 11 8 11 1 5 11 2 2 11 2 9 11 3 6 12 3 12 1 29
11 2 1 11 7 2 11 1 6 3 11 2 4 11 3 1 1 11 3 8 2 12 5 3 12 1 3 12 2 1 12 2 7 2
30 11 1 7 2 11 2 5 11 3 2 2 12 12 7 2 12 1 5 12 2 2 2 12 3 12 3 7 2 13 5 31 11
3 2 3 12 2 12 8 1 12 1 6 12 2 3 3 12 3 1 2 12 3 9 1 13 7 13 1 4 3 13 2 2 2 32
12 8 12 1 6 12 2 4 12 3 2 13 13 8 13 1 6 13 2 4 13 3 2 14 33 12 2 3 1 12 3 1 2
12 3 9 3 13 8 13 1 6 2 13 2 4 2 13 3 2 3 14 1 14 9 1 14 1 7 2 34 12 3 8 2 13 7
13 1 5 2 13 2 4 13 3 2 2 14 1 14 9 2 14 1 8 14 2 6 2 14 3 5 35 13 1 3 3 13 2 2
2 13 3 1 1 14 14 8 1 14 1 7 2 14 2 6 1 14 3 5 15 3 3 15 1 2 2 36 13 2 9 13 3 8
14 7 14 1 6 14 2 5 14 3 4 15 3 15 2 2 15 2 1 15 3 37 14 4 1 14 1 3 2 14 ^ 2 3
14 3 2 15 1 1 15 1 2 15 1 9 3 15 2 9 15 3 8 1 16 1 2 38 14 1 9 2 14 2 9 14 3 8
2 15 8 15 1 7 2 15 2 7 15 3 6 2 16 6 16 1 5 2 16 2 5 39 14 3 4 3 15 4 2 15 1 4
1 15 2 4 15 3 3 3 16 3 2 16 1 3 1 16 2 3 16 3 2 3 17 2 2 40 15 1 15 2 15 3 16
16 1 16 2 16 3 17 17 1 17 2

Tabulae quartae, pars quarta. 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 21 9 1 1 3 9 1 8 9
2 3 1 9 2 8 2 9 3 3 3 9 3 9 10 4 1 10 9 2 10 1 4 3 10 2 22 9 3 2 9 3 6 10 1 2
10 7 10 1 ^ 2 10 1 3 10 2 3 2 10 2 9 10 3 4 2 11 23 10 8 1 10 1 4 10 1 9 3 10 2
5 2 10 3 1 1 10 3 7 11 2 3 11 8 2 11 1 4 1 11 2 24 10 2 6 10 3 2 10 3 8 11 4 11
1 11 1 6 11 2 2 11 2 8 11 3 4 12 25 1^ 3 3 11 1 11 1 6 1 11 2 2 2 11 2 8 3 11 3
5 12 1 1 12 2 2 12 1 3 3 12 2 26 1^ 2 1 2 11 2 ^ 11 3 ^ 2 12 1 12 7 2 12 1 4 12
2 2 12 2 7 12 3 5 2 13 27 1^ 3 9 1 12 6 12 ^ 2 3 12 1 9 2 12 2 6 1 12 3 3 12 3
^ 3 13 6 2 13 1 3 1 13 2 28 1^ 1 7 12 2 4 12 3 1 12 3 8 13 5 13 1 2 13 1 9 13 2
6 13 3 3 14 29 12 3 4 3 13 2 13 9 1 13 1 6 2 13 2 3 3 13 3 1 13 3 ^ 1 14 5 2 14
1 2 3 14 2 30 13 1 2 2 13 2 13 2 ^ 2 13 2 5 14 2 2 14 1 14 1 7 2 14 2 5 14 3 2
2 15 31 13 3 1 13 3 8 14 5 3 14 1 3 2 14 2 1 1 14 2 9 14 3 6 3 15 4 2 15 1 2 1
15 2 32 14 ^ 14 1 6 14 2 4 14 3 2 15 15 8 15 1 6 15 2 4 15 3 ^ 16 33 14 2 5 3
14 3 4 15 2 1 15 1 2 15 1 3 3 15 2 7 15 3 5 1 16 ^ 2 16 1 1 3 16 2 34 15 ^ 2 15
1 2 15 2 2 15 2 ^ 15 3 ^ 2 16 6 16 1 4 2 16 2 ^ 3 16 3 1 1 17 35 ^5 2 1 15 3 15
3 8 1 16 7 2 16 1 6 1 16 2 5 16 3 ^ 3 17 2 2 17 1 1 1 17 2 36 ^5 3 9 16 8 16 1
7 16 2 6 16 3 5 17 4 17 1 3 17 2 2 17 3 1 18 37 ^6 1 6 3 16 2 6 16 3 5 1 17 4 2
17 1 3 3 17 2 3 17 3 2 1 18 1 2 18 1 3 18 ^ ^ 38 ^6 3 ^ 2 17 4 17 1 3 2 17 2 3
17 3 2 2 18 2 18 1 1 2 18 2 1 18 3 2 1^ 39 17 1 2 1 17 2 2 17 3 1 3 18 1 2 18 1
1 1 18 2 1 18 3 3 19 2 19 1 1 19 2 40 17 3 18 18 1 18 2 18 3 19 19 1 19 2 19 3
20

Tabulae quartae, pars quinta. 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 41 15 2 5 1 15 3 5
2 16 5 3 16 1 6 16 2 5 1 16 3 6 2 17 6 3 17 1 7 17 2 ^ ^ 17 3 ^ 2 42 16 2 16 1
1 16 2 1 2 16 3 2 17 2 2 17 1 3 17 2 3 2 17 3 4 18 4 2 18 1 ^ 43 16 1 5 3 16 2
6 2 16 3 7 1 17 8 17 1 8 3 17 2 9 ^ 18 1 18 1 1 18 2 1 3 18 3 2 2 44 16 3 1 17
2 17 1 3 17 2 4 17 3 5 18 ^ 6 18 1 7 18 2 8 18 3 9 19 1 ^ 45 17 6 1 17 1 ^ 2 17
2 8 3 18 ^ 18 1 1 1 18 2 2 2 18 3 3 3 19 5 19 1 ^ ^ 19 2 7 2 46 17 2 1 2 17 3 3
18 4 2 18 1 6 18 2 7 2 18 3 9 19 1 2 19 2 2 19 3 3 2 20 5 47 17 3 6 3 18 ^ 2 18
2 1 18 3 2 19 ^ 1 3 19 1 5 2 19 2 7 1 19 3 ^ 20 1 3 20 2 2 2 48 18 1 1 18 2 4
18 3 6 19 8 19 2 19 3 2 20 4 ^ 20 1 6 20 2 8 2^ ^ 49 18 2 7 1 18 3 ^ 2 19 1 1 3
19 2 4 19 3 6 1 20 ^ 2 20 2 3 20 3 3 21 5 1 21 1 7 2 50 19 2 2 19 1 5 19 2 7 2
^0 20 1 2 2 20 2 5 20 3 7 2 21 1 21 2 2 2 21 3 5 52 19 1 7 3 19 3 2 20 3 1 20 1
6 20 2 8 3 21 1 2 21 1 4 1 21 2 7 21 3 ^ 3 22 1 2 2 52 19 3 3 20 6 20 1 9 20 3
2 21 5 21 1 8 21 3 1 22 4 22 1 7 22 3 53 20 8 1 20 2 7 2 20 3 4 3 21 8 21 2 1 ^
21 3 4 ^ 22 7 ^ 22 2 1 22 3 4 1 23 ^ 2 54 20 2 3 2 20 3 7 21 1 2 21 2 4 21 3 7
^ 22 1 1 22 2 4 ^ 22 3 5 23 1 1 2 23 2 5 55 20 3 8 3 21 1 2 2 21 2 6 1 22 22 1
3 3 22 2 7 3 23 1 1 23 1 5 23 2 8 3 24 1 2 56 21 1 4 21 2 8 22 2 22 1 ^ 22 3 23
4 23 1 8 23 3 2 24 6 24 2 57 21 1 9 1 22 3 2 22 1 7 3 22 3 2 23 6 1 23 2 2 23 3
4 3 24 9 24 2 3 1 24 3 7 2 58 22 4 2 22 ^ 9 22 3 3 2 23 8 23 2 2 2 23 3 7 24 1
^ 2 2^ 2 6 25 2 25 1 5 59 22 1 9 3 22 3 4 2 23 9 1 23 2 4 23 3 8 3 24 1 3 2 24
2 8 1 25 3 25 1 7 3 25 3 2 2 60 22 3 5 23 1 23 2 5 24 24 1 5 24 3 25 5 25 2 25
3 5 26 1

Tabulae quartae, pars sexta. 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 41 18 ^ 3 18 1 8 18
2 8 1 18 3 8 2 19 8 3 19 1 9 19 2 9 1 19 3 9 2 20 9 3 20 2 42 18 2 5 2 18 3 6
19 6 2 19 1 7 19 2 7 2 19 3 8 20 8 2 20 1 9 20 2 9 2 21 43 19 3 1 19 1 4 19 2 4
3 19 3 5 2 20 6 1 20 1 ^ 20 2 7 3 20 3 8 2 21 9 1 21 2 44 19 2 1 19 3 2 20 3 20
1 4 20 2 5 20 3 6 21 7 21 1 ^ 21 2 9 22 45 19 3 8 3 20 1 20 2 1 1 20 3 2 2 21 3
3 21 1 5 21 2 6 1 21 3 ^ 2 22 8 3 22 2 46 20 1 6 2 20 2 8 20 3 9 2 21 1 1 21 2
2 2 21 3 4 22 5 2 22 1 7 22 2 8 2 23 47 20 3 4 1 21 6 21 1 7 3 21 2 9 2 22 1 1
22 1 3 22 2 4 3 22 3 6 2 23 ^ 1 23 2 48 21 1 2 21 2 4 21 3 6 22 8 22 2 22 3 ^
23 4 23 1 6 23 2 ^ 24 49 21 2 9 3 22 2 22 1 4 1 22 2 6 2 22 3 8 3 23 1 ^ 23 2 3
1 23 3 5 2 24 7 3 24 2 50 22 ^ 2 22 2 22 3 2 2 23 5 23 1 7 2 23 3 24 2 2 24 1 5
24 2 7 2 25 51 22 2 5 1 22 3 8 23 1 3 23 2 3 2 23 3 6 1 24 9 24 2 1 3 24 3 4 2
25 7 1 25 2 52 23 3 23 1 6 23 2 9 24 2 24 1 5 24 1 8 25 ^ 1 25 1 4 25 2 7 26 53
23 2 1 23 3 4 24 2 1 24 2 2 24 3 3 3 25 1 25 2 1 25 3 3 2 26 6 3 26 2 54 23 3 ^
2 24 1 2 24 2 5 2 24 3 ^ 25 1 2 2 25 2 6 25 3 ^ 2 26 1 ^ 26 2 6 2 27 55 24 1 6
1 24 3 25 3 3 25 1 ^ 2 25 3 1 1 26 5 26 1 8 2 26 3 2 2 27 6 1 27 2 56 24 3 4 25
8 25 2 2 25 3 6 26 1 26 2 4 26 3 8 27 1 2 27 2 6 28 57 25 1 1 3 25 2 6 26 1 26
1 4 2 26 2 9 3 2^ ^ 3 27 1 1 1 27 3 1 2 28 5 3 28 2 58 25 2 ^ 2 26 4 26 1 8 2
26 3 3 27 7 2 27 2 ^ 27 3 6 2 28 1 1 28 2 9 2 29 59 26 7 1 26 2 2 26 3 6 3 27 1
1 2 27 2 6 1 28 1 28 1 5 3 28 3 2 29 ^ 1 29 2 60 26 2 5 27 27 1 5 27 3 28 5 28
2 28 3 5 29 1 29 ^ 5 30

Tabulae quartae, pars septima. 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 61 23 1 1 23 2 5
2 24 3 24 1 6 24 3 1 1 25 6 2 25 2 1 3 25 3 7 26 1 2 1 26 2 7 2 62 24 1 24 1 6
2 24 3 2 25 7 2 25 2 3 25 3 8 2 26 1 4 26 2 9 2 27 5 63 24 3 2 1 25 8 25 2 3 3
25 3 9 2 26 1 5 1 26 3 1 27 6 3 27 2 2 2 64 25 2 4 26 26 1 6 26 3 2 27 8 27 2 4
28 65 26 1 6 1 26 3 2 2 27 8 3 27 2 5 28 1 1 28 1 7 2 66 27 9 27 2 5 2 28 2 28
1 8 2 28 3 5 67 28 2 1 28 1 9 28 3 5 3 29 1 2 2 68 28 3 6 29 1 3 29 3 69 29 3 1
30 7 2 70 30 2 5

71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 61 27 2 3 27 1 8 ^ 27 3 3 1 28 8 2 28 2 3 3 28 3
9 29 1 ^ 1 29 2 9 2 30 ^ 3 30 2 62 27 2 2 27 3 6 28 1 1 28 2 7 29 2 2 29 1 ^ 29
^ ^ 2 30 ^ 32 2 ^ 2 31 63 27 3 8 1 28 ^ 4 28 2 4 3 29 5 2 29 2 1 1 29 3 ^ 30 1
^ 3 30 2 ^ 2 31 4 1 31 2 64 28 1 6 28 3 2 29 3 29 2 4 30 30 1 ^ 30 3 ^ 31 5 31
2 ^ 32 65 2^ 3 3 3 29 1 ^ 29 2 ^ 1 30 2 2 30 1 ^ 3 30 3 5 31 1 1 1 31 2 ^ 2 32
3 2 32 2 66 29 1 1 2 29 2 ^ 30 4 2 30 2 1 30 3 5 2 31 1 4 31 3 2 32 ^ 32 2 ^ 2
33 67 29 2 9 1 30 6 30 2 2 3 30 3 4 2 31 1 6 1 31 3 ^ 32 ^ 3 32 2 6 2 33 ^ 1 33
2 68 30 7 30 2 4 31 1 31 1 ^ 31 3 5 32 1 1 32 2 ^ 33 ^ 33 2 3 34 69 30 2 4 3 31
2 ^ 30 1 9 1 31 3 6 2 32 1 3 3 32 3 1 33 ^ 1 33 2 5 2 34 2 3 34 2 70 31 2 2 31
2 31 3 ^ 2 32 1 5 32 3 2 2 33 1 33 3 ^ 2 34 ^ 34 2 2 2 35 71 3 2 1 31 3 ^ 32 1
5 3 32 3 ^ 2 33 1 1 1 33 2 ^ 34 6 3 34 2 4 2 35 2 ^ 35 2 72 32 1 6 32 3 4 33 1
2 33 3 34 8 34 2 6 35 4 35 2 ^ 36 73 33 1 2 1 33 3 2 34 8 3 34 2 7 35 5 1 35 2
3 2 36 1 3 36 2 74 34 9 34 2 7 2 35 6 35 2 4 2 36 3 36 1 2 37 75 35 6 1 35 2 5
36 3 3 36 2 2 2 37 1 1 3^ 2 76 36 4 3 2 3 37 2 37 2 1 38 77 37 2 1 37 2 1 2 38
3 38 2 78 38 1 38 2 2 39 79 39 1 39 2 80 40

Bay. Surely this is a necessary book for him that is employed in matters of
great quantity. For if it should be all cast up with the pen, it would ask
much labor, and waste much paper: and yet I know, Country land measurers will
cast by memory.
simple Country fellows will cast it up very speedily, eue^ by their
memories, by money; as one penny to a Perch, four perches to a day-worke* ten
day-workes one Roode, four Roode one Acre, three shillings four pence, is
forty pence, and forty Perches, one Roode, one hundred and threescore pence,
make thirteen shillings and four pence, or a Mark of money, Casting by the
parts of money.
and one hundred and three score Perches one Acre. So that twenty pound makes
thirty Acres, forty pound threescore Acres, a hundred pound one hundred and
fifty Acres; and so forth. But this kind of casting is troublesome, when it
rises to great portions, and many parcels. And therefore for my part, I could
willingly embrace these tables for my ease, and leave this account by money,
unto such as have not the use of learning to aid their memories.


Sur. I have observed, that many unlearned men have better and more retentiue
memories, then have some Scholars.


Bay. So have I noted, and I know some, All Scholars have not best memoryes.
that will by memory do very much, and no doubt, the reason is, because
Scholars do commit their memories to the pen* where such as have not the use
of the pen, must use the memory only, which being fed with continual
pondering the things they delight in, becomes as a Calender of their accounts.
Admirable memories of some great persons.
King Cirus could name al his soldiers by memory. And Pliny reports of
Methridates, that having under his government 22. kingdoms, or nations, could
speak all their languages, and understand any tongue without an interpreter.
And Scipio could remember the names of the soldiers of all the Roman army.


Sur. Use memory, and have the use of memory, either Scholars or unlearned; if
they use not their memories, they ca^ make little use of their memories. On the
other side, he that imprinteth too many things in his memory, shall, and some
have oftentimes wished, Some would forget, and cannot.
they could not remember so well, and that they had the art of forgetting, to
clear the memory of yt they would not retain in memory: for many t^mes a
fresh and free memory heapeth up so many things in his thought, that it
breeds such confusion, that what it should indeed retain, is often
confounded with that which it would forget.


Bay. I wish therefore that my memory could retain according to occasion, to
forget things whereof I have no necessary use, and to remember things
expedient: yet surely, although the thought can apprehend but one object at one
instant, the memory may well apprehend and retain many things. But Sir,
omitting this, I entreat you to show me the use of these Tables which you
have showed me.


Sur. The use is very plain and easy: propou^d you a number of perches, The
use of the former Tables.
the length and breadth of a ground.


Bay. If a piece of ground be in length fifty two Perches, and in breadth
twenty six, where, and how shall I find the content in the Tables?


Sur. Look the third Table, the fourth part of the Table, in the upper rank,
whereof in the third Collum, you shall find 52. then look in the first Collum
for 26. then refer your finger and eye toward the right hand, till you come
right under 52. and that square answers the content to be thus


Bay. What mean you by making the figures in the angles of the square?


Sur. Because the 4. angles do demonstrate the acres and parts of an acre. The
upper angle on the left hand shows the Acres, the upper angle on the right
hand, the roodes; the lower angle on the left hand, the day works, and the
lower angle on the right hand, the odd perches.


Bay. This is very easy. But I see there are no figures in the 2. angles on
the right hand, neither above nor below.


Sur. When it falls so out, that there are none of the denominations found in
the number, then his place is left blanke.


Bay. Then this abouesaid quantity is 8. acre and 5. day-works, which is
twenty perches, and twenty perches is Roode.


Sur. You are right.


Bay. Then if the number of perches be less, I must seek them in the lesser
Tables; if greater, in the greater.


Sur. You must do so.


Bay. Yet there rests one scruple in my mind, which if it should happen
before I be resolved, would breed a great doubt, and therefore I am bold to
ask it. That is, if the length of a ground be more perches, then is expressed
in any of the Tables, how shall I find it, when no Table reaches so far? How
to find the quantity, when the number of perches exceed any table in the
book.



Sur. You do well to cast all doubts. If the length be more then the tables
will yield, whereof indeed the most is four score perches: Take first 80.
perches out of the whole sum, and then seeking the breadth in the Table as
before is showed, you shall find the content of that part. Then if the breadth
be more then the remanent of the length let the breadth be the length, and the
remanent of the length, the breadth. And seek them likewise in the Tables, and
what arises of both the numbers, add together: As for example: A ground is
119. perches in length, and 67. in breadth: the whole length is not in the
Tables to be found* then I find 80. and that is the length, and 67. the
breadth, which the Table shows to be 33-2-0-0. There remains of the whole
length 39. which is a lesser number then the breadth: therefore I make 39. the
breadth, and 67. the length, which the Table shows to be 16. 1-3-1. which
added to the first number 33-2-0-0. makes in the whole 49-3-3-1.


Bay. I see, this Table will serve for the finding of the quantity of any
sum, and I do understand it well. But I pray you what Table is that you have
here?


Sur. A necessary Table for some purposes. It shows how to lay out a just
Acre of land, the length, or breadth being given.


Bay. Indeed it is a necessary Table: for every man can not upon the
sudden: for I take, it is very hard without Arithmeticke, to lay out a just
acre to every length or breadth.


Sur. This can indeed hardly be done by guess, it requires art.


Bay. This is the Table, I pray you show me the use of it.


Breadth. Length of an Acre. Perches broad. Perches long, and their parts.
Feet, and their parts. 1 160 2 80 3 53 1 4 40 5 32 6 26 3 7 22 1 11/12 8 20 9
17 6 10 16 11 14 9 12 13 1 13 12 1 14 11 3 15 10 3 16 10 17 9 2 ^/12 18 8 1 19
8 3 20 8 Breadth. Length of an Acre. Perches broad. Perches long, and their
parts. Feet, and their parts. 21 7 2 2/12 22 7 ^/12 23 6 3 2/12 24 6 2 8/12 25
6 2 6/12 26 6 2 7/12 27 5 3 28 5 3 29 5 4/12 30 5 4/12 31 5 2 7/12 32 5 33 4 1
8/12 34 4 3 4/12 35 4 1 2/12 36 4 3 2/12 37 4 1 3/12 38 4 3 5/12 39 4 1 8/12 40
4

Breadth. Length of an Acre. Perches broad. Perches long, and their parts.
Feet, and their parts. 41 3 2 7/12 42 3 1 43 3 3 ^/12 44 3 2 45 3 11/12 46 3 3
7/12 47 3 2 48 3 1 49 3 50 3 3 1/6 51 3 2 52 3 1 53 3 54 2 3 3/12 55 2 2 ^/12
56 2 1 9/12 57 2 ^/4 11/12 58 2 ^/4 1/6 59 2 3 5/12 60 2 2

Breadth. Length of an Acr^* Perches broad. Perches long, and their parts.
Feet, and their parts. 61 2 2 1/6 62 2 1 63 2 2/3 64 2 65 2 3 5/12 66 2 2
1^/15 67 2 2 68 2 1 2/3 69 2 1 1/6 70 2 7/12 71 2 1/12 72 2 3 7^ 2 3 74 2 2 75
2 2 2/6 76 2 1 77 2 1 78 2 11/12 79 2 80 2

Sur. The use of this Table is only to be required, when a man is suddenly to
set forth an acre of land lymited in length or breadth, how far it shall
extend. As for example. There is a piece of land containing many acres, and
there are to be set out of this 1 2, 3.4. or more acres. First, the length must
be considered. If the length be 77. perches: find that in the first Collum of
the Table, and right against it, you shall find the breadth to be two perches,
1. foot, 4. inches, which makes an acre.


Bay. But where you say, I shall find the length in the first Collum of the
Table, it is in the head of the Collum noted for the breadth.


Sur. It is so in deed: for that Collum may be reputed to contain both the
length and breadth.


Bay. How can that be?


Sur. Until the breadth do exceed the length, it may be said the Collum of
breadth. But when the breadth surmounteth the length, the length may be said the
breadth.


Bay. I understand you: reason will observe that, without serious instruction.
But this Table, I see, extends but to the length and breadth of one acre: if a
man be occasioned to lay out more, he is as far to seek, as if he had no
Table at all.


Sur. Not so: for if you observe it, you are to double, treble or quadreble,
the length or breadth, as you have occasion. As for example: How to lay out many
acres by the former Table.
If you would lay out 3. Acres, and admit your length be 48. perches, which to
make one Acre, is to have in breadth 3. perches, and a quarter, 1. foot and
four inches, which three perches, 1. foot, and being taken three times, make
nine perches, and four foot. And thus of length and breadth, how many Acres so
ever are to be set out.


Bay. I see in deed, this Table may serve by due observation for the laying out
of any quantity. But now Sir, there is one thing which will breed some
difficulty: Perches diverse in diverse Countries.
for the difference of the quantities of Acres, is great in diverse Countries,
by the custom of the Countries* for by the custom of some Countries, their
measure is 24. foot to the Pole, in some 20. in some 18. and yet the statute
allows only 16 foot.


Sur. You say truly. Yet, when a Surueyor undertakes to lay out the land in
any of these, he is to measure it by the standard chain: that is, by the
chain of 16 foot.


Bay. But the Country people, peradventure will be obstinate, and will have the
custom measure, because they will have the content of their land seem the
less: and so shall they rent their ground the more easily, having it by the
greater measure.


Sur. That is but a conceit that they shall have it the cheaper: for admit that
an acre were as big as the Cornish acre, A Cornish Acre.
near 140. statute Acres: will any man think a Lord or his officers so simple
as to grant the same, because it has but the name of an acre, as he would let
the statute Acre? It is nothing to the Lord what measure they take: The great
or small measure all one to the Lords. ^ood measure.
for he must, and will apportion the price, according to the quantity and
quality, be the Acre great or little.


Bay. But woods are always measured with the Pole of 18. foot.


Sur. It is as the Buyer and Seller agrees: for there is no such matter
decreed by any statute, neither is any bound of necessity.


Bay. Why is it then in use (...)


Sur. I take it, Why woods are measured with the 18 foot pole.
(...) they are they that are thus measured for (...) they have in many places*
sundry void places and g^lles, wherein grows little or no wood, or very thin.
And to supply these defects, the buyer claymeth this supply by measure.


Bay. The difference is but a foot, and in a pole, which is nothing.


Sur. Yes, it is some thing, Great difference between the 18. and 16 pole.
Whence an Acre takes name.
for in every 5 Acre, it gayneth above an Acre*


Bay. So might I have been deceived. For truly, I did not think it had
gotten so much. But I pray whence is the word Acre derived?


Sur. As I take it, from the Latin word, Actus. A deed: a days work of a
plowe, in tilling the ground.


Bay. It may be so. For a plow will air an Acre a day.


Sur. We read in 1. Sam. 14.14. that half an Acre of land was as much as 2.
oxen could plow; And that is it which the Burgundians; and others in France do
call Iournaux, which I take, is as much as Ingerum in Latin, which contains
as much, as two Oxen or Horse can till in a day: in length 240. foot, and in
breadth 120. which seems near to agree with our Acre.


Bay. We have 4. or 5. horses, or 2 or 3. yoke of Oxen to till an Acre a day,
where the former Ingerum has but 2. But the French have another kind of Acre,
which they call an Arpent, An Arpent, or French Acre.
which amongst them differs in quantity, as ours do differ in several
kinds of Poles: And their Arpent is 100. Pole, howsoever the Poles do differ.
One Pole they have, which contains 22. foot, and that is called The Kings
Arpent, The kings Arpent.
and used most in measuring of (...): another of 20 foot, another of 19 foot,
another of 18. foot. So that in d^^de, their Arpent does little differ in his
several quantity, from our Acre.


Sur. I observe one thing by the way, because you speak of the Kings Arpent in
France, and other measures there. I have seen in ancient Records, and books
of Survey of great antiquity, which do show, that the Lords demeisnes were
measured with a Pole of 20. foot, which was called mayor mensura, Mayor and
minor mensura.
and the customary by a Pole, called mensura minor: which I take to be but 16
8/2 foot, though in some places the Tenants claim the 18. foot Pole.


Bay. Then, let me ask you another question: You shall shortly come into a
Manor of my Landlords, where the Copyes do speak of an Acre ware, or war:
which I never could find, or hear what it truly meant, nor what quantity it
contains. But the Tenants make good use, in their conceits, of the name: for
under that title, they will carry away 2.3.6.10. Acres, though they lie in 20.
parcels, it is all but an Acre war: and yet I have seen some, under that
title not 3. Roodes of ordinary measure. How comes it to pass, think you?


Sur. To speak truly, I cannot precisely tell you: for I have seen the like,
especially in Suff. Norff. and Essex: But as I conjecture, it is a measured
acre, as an Acre by warrant. Acre war, an approved Acre: and the true sense
being lost by time, they make it like a finger of wax, to draw it more or
less, as will best serve their purpose.


Bay. I have also seen Land, under the name of Molland, Molland.
and I have heard much disputation about the etimon of the word: Some hold it
to be de Mollendo, of custom grinding at the Lords mill. Some otherwise, and
leave it uncertain.


Sur. There is no difficulty in it: Molland and Fenland contrary.
for Molland is vp-land, or high ground, and the contrary is Fenland, low
ground, a matter ordinary, where they use to distinguish between these two
kinds. But we will leave these ambiguous words, and so take my leave, and
betake me to my task.


Bay. Sir, I will not be troublesome unto you: only, when you have cast up
your particulars, and finished your business of this Survey, I will be bold to
trouble you again, to see what every man holds, and the value both of the
customary leased lands, and the Lords demaynes. May I be so bold?


Sur. It is a thing which I seldom consent unto; for I must tell you this, A
Surueyor must be secret for his Lord.
he is no true Surueyor for the Lord, that will make the same known to
strangers. I have undertaken the business for the Lord, not for strangers: And
as he puts me in trust, so will I be secret in these things, and therefore
I pray you in this pardon me.


Bay. You show me reason, and I was too rash. But by your leave, how shall the
Jury give their allowance to your doings (as you say, you will acquaint them
with them) unless you deliver every particular plainly?


Sur. You must think, there are some things which may be public, as the
names of grounds, the owners, their estates, buts, bounds, and such like, and
their answers to the Articles; And some things private, and to be concealed, as
the quantities, and supposed yearly values. These are for the Lord.


Bay. I thought I should have seen the whole method of your collections and
observations, to the end, that seeing I have waded thus far into the Art, I
might be somewhat instructed, how to have marshialed and engrossed my Book,
when such a work were done.


Sur. Every man in that case, may use his own method: yet if you be desirous
to see an exact course, in that kind, I must refer you to the most
commendable work of Master Valentine Leigh, M. Leas book of Surueying.
whom in that if you imitate, you shall tread the right way to the mark.


Bay. Then, I shall only rema^^^ thankful unto you, for your patience, and
puyn^^: and be studious evermore, to do you any service.


Sur. I thank you, I have a desire to have some communication with you, when I
have past over this little work in hand.


Bay. Willingly, Sir, I will give my diligent attendance. But I pray you, Sir,
in what especially do you purpose to confer wi^h me? to pose me, I fear,
whether I have forgotten that you taught me.


Sur. Not so: but you being Bailey of this Manor (about which I have, as you
see, taken a serious perambulation) have not, as I persuade me, been so
careful and provident for the Lords profit, as you may: for there be diverse
grounds, which good and industrious husbandry would be much bettered, as I will
tell you further, at our next leasurable meeting. For this time, fare you well.


The end of the fourth Book.
The Surueyors Dialogue, showing the different natures of grounds, how they may
be employed, how they may be bettered, reformed, and amended.
The fifth Book.
Bai. I Perceive, Sir, you are now at some leisure, you are walking abroad to
take the air, after your long and tedious sitting, and I think indeed you are
weary.


Sur. I am somewhat weary: but a man that undertakes a business, must apply
it, and not be weary, or at least, not to seem to be so.


Bai. But me thinks, you apply it too hard, you might sometimes ease you, and
give your self to some game for recreation.


Sur. They that are idle, may take their pleasures in gaming: Labor that
lawfully gets is a game of delight.
but such as are called to live by their labors, and have a delight therein, and
(as all men ought) take pleasure, and think it a pleasing sport, to get means
by their lawful labors to live.


Bai. You say truth indeed: for the old Proverb is, Dulcis labor cum lucro.
But I pray you, whither walk you?


Sur. Into this next piece of ground.


Bai. Nay, it is an ill ground to walk in: for it is full of bogges, a very
moorish plot, overcome with weeds, and indeed, is of no use.


Sur. I therefore go to see it, and worthily to attach you the Lords Baily, of
remissness and negligent looking unto the Lords profit, suffering such a piece
of ground as this, to lie idle and waste, and to foster nothing but bogges,
Sedges, Flagges, Rushes, and such superfluous and noisome weeds: where, if it
were duly drained, and carefully husbanded, it would make good meddow in short
time.


Bailey. I think that impossible: for there be many such plots you see in this
level, and in many men's occupations, and some of them think themselves good
husbands, I can tell you: and they see, that it is a matter of difficulty and
charge, and therefore they think, and so do I, that it is to no purpose to
begin to amend it.


Sur. I think they have more land, then they, or you have experience how to
convert to best use, they their own, and you your Lords.


Bailey. If you be so skillful, I pray tell me for the Lords profit, how it may
be amended.


Sur. If you be ignorant how to amend it, and simply desire to learn, it were
a fault in me to conceal from you the means how to do it. But if you be
careless or wilful, it were good to leave you in your ignorance, and to
inform the Lord of your unfitness, that a more skillful might take the place.


Bailey. That is the woorst that you can do. But I trust I may be a Bailey good
enough, and yet want one part of that, which my place requires to perform^.


Sur. Even as well as a horse may be said to travel well enough, and yet lack
one leg.


Bai. I would be sorry, that comparison should hold: for than I could not but
confess, that I were a same officer, as there be in other kinds, ^uen of your
own profession many. But, I am not only not wilful, but I am willing to
learn: and I do not think any man so absolute in his place and calling, but
he may learn some point of his function, if at least he will confess his own
imperfections. Al men may learn.



Sur. Whether he verbally confess them or not, the execution will bewray them,
and the world will observe them in him. And therefore it behooves all such as
undertake, and enter into any office or function, to examine the duties
appertaining to such an office: and finding his fitness or unfitness, to
perform it: so to leave or take, (though few stagger at any:) If his ability
be weak, reason and duty may move him to seek expedient knowledge, lest he
shame himself, and slander the place he is in. And therefore I wish you to
ask advice, not only in this case, but in all other belonging to your charge.
For as it is commendable to know more and more: so is it no shame to ask often.


Bay. I pray you then tell me, Sir, how must this piece of ground be handled,
to be made meddow (as you say it will be made) or good pasture.


Sur. It must be drained.


Bailey. If that be all, I think, I can say it is to little purpose: for I have
made trenches to that end, as you may see where and how. But it became little
or nothing the better, and therefore I think, cost will be but cast away upon
it.


Sur. It is a true Proverb: Ignorance enemy to art
Ignorance is an enemy to art and experience. What you did, it may be, you had
good will to do the Lord service in it: but the course you took, was not in
the right kind. It is not enough to make such ditches, as appears you have
done, they are too few and too wide. Neither did you rightly observe the fall
of the water.


Baylie. That were hard to be done in such a place as this, where the water
has no fall at all, neither is ye water seen much, as you see, but it is the
moistnes of the earth, that ^arres the land.


Sur. But the moisture comes by water, and the water is swallowed up in this
spung^e ground, and lies unseen: ye^ if you mark it well, you may observe,
which way it re^les: for as you see, though this plot of ground be very level
in appearance, yet if it were tried by a true level, it would be found
declining toward yonder forlorn brook, which you see is stop^ up with
weeds, that i^ permits not the water convenient pass. Therefore the first
work is, to rid the sewer or chief watercourse, and then shall you see, that
the grounds near the cleansed brook, will become more dry, by the moisture
soking into the sewer: then make your other draines, using discretion therein,
namely, in cutting them straight, from the most boggie places, to the maine
brook, every of them as it were paralelly: then cut you some other draines
sloping, which may carry the water into these first draines, which again will
convey it into the maine.


Bailey. You see the ditches that I made, they were broad enough and deep, fit
to convey much water, yet they did no good: can you prescribe a better form*


Sur. Your ditches, for the form, were too broad, and (as it seems) too
deep, and that makes the water to stand in them, and being broad above, and
narrow in the bottom, makes the loose earth to fall in and choke the ditch.
But if you will make profitable draines, you must first observe, how the water
will run in them: for so will it appear presently, and to make them as
narrow above, as at the bottom, which at the most must not be above one foot
and a half broad^, and the crust of the earth will hold, that the earth fall
not in again. So will it in short time make it appear, that the moisture will
decay, and the grounds become more dry, and as it becomes, freed of the
superfluous moisture: so will the weeds that are nourished by it, begin to
wither, as they are deprived of their nouriture, which is too much water, which
breeds too much cold: Cold ground breeds weeds.
and too much cold is the life of such weeds as increase in this ground: and
therefore the weeds should be often cut down in the spring time, and by that
means they will consume, and better grass come in their stead: and the
better, if cattle feed the ground, upon the draining, as bare as may be.


Bailey. But the ^raines you speak of, may be dangerous for cattle, especially
for sheep and lambs.


Sur. Not, if they be kept always cleansed, and open, that sheep and cattle
may see them: Bridges over draines.
for the bigger sort may step over them, and the lesser may have little
bridges of the same crust, by undermining the earth some three or four foot,
that the water may pass under.


Bail. Indeed, if the crust of the earth will hold it, this course is
necessary. But there is much land in England lost for want of draining, as the
Fennes and low grounds in Lincolnshire, Cambridg-shire, The Fennes.
Northfolke, and other places, which I did think impossible ever to be made
dry* by the art or industry of man. And yet as I hear, much of it is made
lately firm ground, Captain Louell.

M. William Englebert.


by the skill of one Captain Louell, and by M. William Englebert an excellent
Ingenor. And truly it is much to their own commendation, and to the common
good of the inhabitants near. But these grounds are not drained by such means
as you speak of.


Sur. Indeed, the draines are of unlike quantity, but like in quality: one
and the same rule of reason does work both the one and the other. But to say
truly unto thee, the people of those countries (especially the poorer sort)
where this kind of public benefit is thus gotten, had rather have the want by
their Fathers error, then to reap good, and more plenty by other men's art and
charge. And in their conceits they had rather catch a Pike, then feed an Ox.


Bailey. They are either very unwise, or very wilful. But (no doubt) authority
is above such country wilfulness, and does or may inioyne them, for the common
weal, to consent and yield all aid in the business. But if they will needs
fish and fool, and refuse rich relief, we will leave them to their wills, till
reason in themselves, or compulsion bring them to a more general desire of so
great a blessing.


Sur. Let it be so: What Alders are in the next ground?


Baylie. They are the Lords too, Sir: but the ground is so rotten, that no
cattle can feed in it.


Sur. The Alder treee enemy to al grounds
The Alder tree is enemy to all grounds where it grows: for the root thereof is
of that nature, that it draws to it so much moisture to nourish it self, as
the ground near it, is good for no other use.


Baily. Do you think this ground would be good, if the trees were gone?


Sur. Yes: for commonly the ground is good enough of it self, only it is
impaired by this kind of woo: and therefore if the cause were taken away, the
effect would die.


Bailey. Then will I cause them to be stocked up.


Sur. Nay, first it behooves you to consider, whether it be expedient or not:
for although this tree be not friendly to pasture, meddow, or arable land, yet
it yields her due commodity too, without whose aid, in some places where other
wood is scant, The Ald^r necessary for many purposes.
men can hardly husband their lands without this. For of it they make many
necessary implements of husbandry, as Ladders, Rayles, Hop poles, Plow-stuffe,
and Handles for many tools, besides fiering.


Bailey. If it be so commodious, it is not only not good to stock them, but
expedient to cherish them, and where none are, to plant.


Sur. There is great difference between necessity and the super abundance of
every necessary. Necessity a co^mander.
For want is a great commander, and inforceth oftentimes: and in many places
they desire and search for that, which will in the time of plenty merely
neglects. And therefore where none of this kind of wood grows, (the place
destitute of other means, and fit for this kind of commodity) will may be
forced to give place to occasion: as in other things.


Bailey. I have heard, that this kind of wood is also good to make the
foundations of buildings, in rivers, fennes, and standing waters, as also piles
for many purposes in moorish and wet grounds.


Sur. It is true: this kind of wood is of greater continuance in watery places,
then any other timber: Alder good to make piles
for it is observed, that in these places it seldom or never rots.


Bailey. It loved the water and moisture well in growing, and therefore it
brooketh it the better, being laid in it. Fur tree lien in the ground since
the flood.
But I think the Firre-tree is much or the same nature: for I have seen
infinite many of them, taken out of ^he earth in a moorish ground in
Shropshire, between the Lordships of O^westry, and Elsemere, which (as is
supposed) have lien in the moist earth ever since the Flood, and being da^ly
taken up, the people make walking-staues and pikes of them, firm and strong,
and use the chips in stead of candles in poor houses: so fat is the wood to
this day, and the smell also strong and sweet.


Sur. I know the place well, where I saw pales made of an Oak taken out of the
same ground, of the same continuance, firm and strong, black as Ibony, and
might have fitly been employed to better uses: and I take it, that most wood
will last long under the earth, where it never takes the open air. But the
wood now most in use for the purposes abouesaid, is Alder and Elm.


Bailey. May a man sow the seeds of the Alder?


Sur. Alder has no seed.
It bears a kind of seed, yet some have affirmed the contrary. But the seeds
will hardly grow by art, though by nature they may. The branches of the tree
and the roots, are aptest to grow, if they be set so, as the water and
moisture may be above the plant: for it delights only in the moistest
grounds. Is not this next close the Lords, called Broad-meddow?


Bailey. It is for I perceive you have a good memory being but once, and to long
since, upon the ground.


Sur. It is most necessary for a Surueyor to remember what he has observed,
and to consider well the natures and qualities of all kinds of grounds, and to
inform the Lord, of the means how to better his estate by lawful means,
especially in bettering his own demeisnes. So shall he the less need to
surcharge his tenants by uncharitable exactions. And forasmuch as of all other
grounds, Meddowes.
none are (of their own nature) so profitable, and less chargeable, as meddow
grounds, which are always ready to benefit the owner, summer and winter,
they especially are to be regarded.


Bail. That is true indeed, and peradventure it taken the name of the
readiness: for we call it in Latin Pratum, as if it were semper paratum,
either with the fleeze for ^ay, or with the pasture to feed: Pratum, quasi
semper paratu^*
and this meddow wherein now we are, is the best meddow that I know: and I
think, for sweetness and burden, there is not a better in England.


Sur. You do well to advance the credit of the Lords land, and you speak, I
think, as you conceive, because you are not acquainted with the meddowes, upon
D^ue-banke, in Tan Deane, Best meddowes in England.
upon Seauern-side, Allermore, the Lords meddow, in Crediton, and the meddowes
about the Welch-poole, and many other places, too tedious to recite now.


Bai. These he like are made so good by art, but naturally, I think, this may
match the best of them.


Sur. Indeed, meddowes very mean by nature, may be made excellent by charge:
but they will decay, unless they be always relieved. But these that I speak
of, require little or no help at the owners hand, only the aid of these
rivers ouerflowing, do feed them fat, gives great burden, and very sweet.


Bailey. These yearly ouerflowings of fat waters after floods, no doubt, are
very beneficial, Rivers ouerflowing good
as appears by the annale and yearly ouerflowing of the river Nilus in
Egypt, Nilus in Egypt, Ios. 3.15.
which makes the adjacent grounds so fat and fruitful, as they be famous
through the world for their fertility, and was allotted to Joseph's brethren in
Egypt.


Sur. You speak of a matter wonderful in the conceits of some, that the river
should so ouerflow in the summer, and yet it never raines in those parts at any
time of the year.


Bai. So I have heard indeed: and that the floods grow in the heat of the
year about harvest, between Iulie, and September, with the snow melting,
that falls in the winter time, among the Mountains.


Sur. The Lauent and the Leame.
We have in England matter more strange, as the river near Chichester in
Sussex, called the Lauent, which in the winter is dry, and in the driest
Summer, f^ll to her banckes: So is the Leam, a river in Barkeshire, near
Leambourn.


Baily That is strange indeed: one studious in natural Philosophy, could
tell the cause of this.


Sur. I take it to be, because they are only fed with springs, which run
only, when springs are at the highest. And that also is the reason, why many
bournes break out of the earth in sundry places, Bournes.
as we may read it has done sometimes near Merga^e, in Hartfordshire,
corruptly called Market, and near Croydon in Surrie, near Patcham in Sussex,
and in many other places in this Realm: which breaks forth suddenly out of
the driest hills, in Summer.


Bay. Water smelling like violets.
Because you speak of Angleton, I can assure you, there is a Well, that
sometimes yeldeth water, which when you wash your hands with, it smells like
violets. Some would (no doubt) give much for such excellent water.


Sur. Though the smell be sweet, I hold not the water so wholesome: for we
doubt it is in it self, Leuis putredo, Leuis putredo.
a kind of light putrefaction, which passing lightly by the sense of smelling,
deceives the sense, which if it took a more serious note of it, would find ^t
a kind of stincke: as your purest musk and C^uet, Sense deceived.
the more nearer the sense it comes, and the more the s^^ce charge it self
with the whole sent, the more loathsome it will prove. But these are things
coming into our talk by the way: let us return to our matter of meddowes,
the cause of whose goodness is the soil, and ouerflowing, with the most muddy
water.


Bay. No doubt, Boggie grounds helps by ouerflowing.
it is an admirable help unto them: nay, I by small experience that I have
found, can tell you a pretty paradoxe, how say you to this? Boggy and spungy
ground, whereof we discoursed before, though in it own nature it be too moist,
yet, if it be ouerflowed with water often, it will settle and become firm:
which howsoever in my poor understanding, it should seem opposite to reason,
that water should help watery ground, yet experience finds it so.


Sur. All ouerflowing waters do bring a slymy and fat substance with them, and
leave it behind them: which together with the working of the water, through the
spungie ground you speak of, works that effect in all grounds, where it
comes.


Bai. But water cannot be brought into all kinds of boggy grounds, nor into all
kinds of meddowes.


Sur. No, for there are two sorts of meddowes, Two sorts of meddowes.
low and moist, and vpland, and dry meddowes, of these kinds the low is
commonly the best: because they are aptest to receive these falling and
swelling waters, which for the most part brings fatnes with it: and besides, it
moistneth the ground, and makes the grass to grow cheerful: yet howsoever
fat and fruitful they be, continual moving yearly without intermission,
may weaken them and impair their goodness, and will require some help, unless
they be such meddowes as I recommended unto you ye^ while, that are so fed with
fat ouerflowing waters, as do still maintain them in strength.


Bai. Then must the vpland meddow, by often and continual sheering, needs
decay.


Sur. The vpland meddowes have but the name of meddowes: Vpland meddowes have
but the name
for indeed, they are but the best pasture grounds, laid for hay. And to
distinguish between that kind of meddow and pasture ground, or between
pasture and arable, is frivolous: for that kind of meddow is most properly
pasture, and all pasture grounds may be tilled. For when we say arable, it is
as much, Hard to distinguish grounds.
as if we said, it is subject to the plow, or land which may be plowed: and why
then may not a man say, that which is now pasture, is arable? that is,
convenient to be tilled. And on the contrary, that which is now tilled, may be
pasturable: namely, apt to graze, and to feed cattle?


Bai. You prove, that it is superfluous in manner, to distinguish the
qualities of grounds.


Sur. I confess, a Surueyor may note the quality of every kind, as he finds
it in the time of his perambulation and view. But peradventure, the next year,
he that comes to distinguish them, may enter them clean contrary to the
former. And therefore it is not amiss, in all such entries, to add the word
(now:) as to say, now tilled, or now pasture, now used for meddow: unless it
be low meddow always mowne. But he that shall enter a piece of vpland ground,
(though it be sometimes mowne) under the name of meddow, erreth in his entry.
But for that, let all men follow their own fancies. But because we speak of
vpland meddowes, we will accept all mowable grounds in that sense. Meddow of
different natures.
And of such I will first speak. They are either of a clay soil, and so
naturally fat, or stiff: or a sandy earth enriched and made fat by industry:
and both of these by moving yearly without intermission, and supply of help,
may be so impaired, as it will yield little benefit to the owner. The nature
therefore of every ground must be considered: for the vpland and high ground,
may be also watrie, and consequently cold and moist, which kind of grounds are
generally clay: for a sandy and grauelly ground lying high, and depending, is
seldom or never found moist by nature, but dry, and consequently hot. So that
all vpland grounds are commonly either too cold and moist, o^ too hot and dry:
either of which must have his several help. For as the constitution of a man's
body, is found by the effects of fatness, leanenesse, heat and cold: So do
the earths discover their natures by their fruit, which nature causes them to
bring forth in infinite kinds. The cold and watery grounds yield long, but
four and unprofitable grass, rushes, and rank Moss: which kind of ground
must be cured, if need require, with draines, but commonly these grounds are of
clay: and clay will never give way, or euacuation to the water, because the
ground is hard and stiff, contrary to the open and spungy ground, which is
thin and open. And therefore the hottest chalk or lime, is best to kill the
four grass, and unprofitable moss. So is cole-dust ashes, and chimney foot,
if sufficient quantity could be gotten: and after these things thus laid, it is
expedient to give it a tilth or two, and then to let it lie again, if it be to
be used for meddow or pasture. And for the other grounds which are hot and dry
by nature, the contrary is to be used, by using means to cool the heat; and
to moisten the dryness: and that i^ by bestowing some fat and slimy Marle upon
them, which will much cherish and revive the parched grass, and kill the
hungry moss, that grows by the dryness of the (...), as a scurfe or tetter
on the body, by the heat that proceeds of a salt humor. The natures of these
two kinds of grounds are also found out, whether they be cold and moist, or
hot, and dry, by the quantity, and quality of their fruits, as the seasons
of the year be dry or moist: for that ground that grows best in a moist
year, Clay ground.
is hot and dry. The clay ground in a moist year (if it be not too moist) may
be also comforted, because in too dry a year, the clay becomes so strongly
bound, that the tender grass can hardly make way, through the obdurate earth:
whereas moderate moisture molifieth the same, cherishes the root, and gives
way for the grass: and if it have too much moisture, it becomes so slimie,
and the roots so drenched, as it turns the grass into a spirie kind, and
that but short, and by the cold that comes of the too much moisture, it
increases rushes abundantly, and thick moss: So that it appears, that the
seasons of the year do either help or hinder the increase of all kinds of
grounds: which the art or industry of man cannot prevent. Helps intended
sometimes hinder.
For many times the helps, that man uses to assist and help nature, do
binder it: as where compost and stable soil is laid upon a dry ground,
reserved for grass, if a dry year follow, the heat of the soil and the
dryness of the year, do so impouerish the grass, that it yields the owner
less increase, then if he had bestowed no soil at all: yet men ought not to
be remiss, in soiling their lands: for if it prevail not in one year, they
shall find it at another time very profitable: Bringing of street water into
grounds profitable.
and for all seasons, I persuade men to make means, where it may be done, to
induce out of streets, lands, ways, and ditches, all the water, that by some
extraordinary rain passes through them, into their grounds, by making some
little dam, or bar to draw them into to their grounds: for the matter which
this water brings with it, is commonly so rich and fat, as it yields a
maruailous refection to all the grounds, high or low, into which it may be
brought: which kind of husbandry is much used in Somerset, Deuon and Cornwall,
to their admirable advantage, and in some other place here, and there, but not
so generally, as in providence men might.


Bay. This is a good course, no doubt, in places where it may be put in
execution: but as you say, all men are not so provident, and painful, which
indeed is a great fault, and wherein I my self, I confess, have been
culpable: but I will be more careful as well in that, as in other things,
whereof you have put me in mind. And truly I think, there is much profit*
wilfully lost in many places by negligence, want of skill, and sparing of some
small charge. You have hitherunto spoken only of vpland meddowe grounds: but
you divided meddowes into two sorts: what say you to the second, namely low
meddowes? for I have seen and observed as great defects in them, by reason of
their too often moving without rest, as may require some consideration how to
repair them: for some of these grounds are as much annoyd by too much
moisture, as the vpland with the want of it.


Sur. For the too much moisture, if it be but in the winter season, How water
does good to meddowes.
and continue but until the middle or end of April, it does not only no
harm, but good: for if you mark and observe it well, you seldom or never see
bogges, where the water ouerflowes, and stands in the winter time. But if it be
more permanent, and of longer stay, there must be means used for the
euacuation: for in many places you may perceive certain low places in meddowe
grounds, where if the water once take a standing, it will cause the ground to
sink more and more, and therefore that kind of water must be vented betimes:
for otherwise it kills the grass, Water, ^ow it may be hurtful to grounds.
and makes the place bare in a dry summer, when the water is gone, or else it
will cause such a coldness to the earth, as it will bring forth more rushes
then grass. And therefore it must be a principal care, to have all rivers,
sewers, and water draines, well cleansed and scoured, that upon occasion, when
time requires, when you will convey the water from the meddowes, it may have a
due current.


Bay. But estoples of water courses, do in some places grow by such means, as
one private man or two cannot by force or discretion make remedy. As when
sewers be common, sometime between Lordship ^ Lordship, parish and p^rish, or
between a multitude* among whom it is always seen, some will be perverse, and
wilful* and hinder the best public action that is, though the doing of it be
never so profitable to themselves, and the omitting, hindrance. Besides this*
you see upon diverse streame^ Water-mils, Mils of too high a pitch, pen the
water.
which by reason of their high pitch, bat back the water that should have
clear pass: so that sundry men's grounds are drowned, even until, and at the
time of haying. And for the most part, these mils do appertain to great
persons, who rather then they will lose a penny o^ their profit, will hazard
the loss of a pound to poor men. What remedy is these for any of these
mischiefs?


Sur. For every of them the law has provided remedy. And the greatest
hindrance is either neglect or fear of complain 2* and upon complaint in
places, and to persons appointed to reform neglect of justice to be executed,
(...) or law-dayes, general Sessions, Commissioners of Sewers, and actions at
the common Law, are provided to right these wrongs: therefore speak no more of
this, as matter of impeachment of the grounds, which of themselves are
naturally good or evil. But rather seek the means to better and help the
ground, which, as you object, is weakened by often cutting. How to amend weakened
meddow
When a man observes such decay in his meddowe, let it lie some few years to
pasture, and be eaten very low, it will procure some heat again. If not,
take the fattest earth that may be gotten, and let it lie a year if you can,
to dissolve, and when it is dry and will crumble small, mingle it with good
and well fatted dung, and lay them a while in a heap, until they be
sufficiently incorporated, which will be in one winter, then carry it into
your meddowe about the beginning of March, or before, and then cast it abroad
upon the meddowes, not too thick, nor the clods too great, it will revive the
weakened mould, and make the grass spring again very freshly.


Bai. I think this be good also for barraine pasture.


Sur. It is very excellent for pasture, for he that will bestow the cost,
shall find his recompense in short time.


Bailey. I see in some meddowes gaully places, Gauly places in meddows.
where little or no grass at al grows, by reason (as I take it,) of the too
long standing of the water, for such places are commonly low where the water
stands not having bent to pass away, and therefore means must be first made
for the euacuation of the water for the continual standing of the water
consumes the grass, and makes the place bare, and sinketh it.


Sur. In such a place therefore, Clauer gras.
sow in the Spring time some hay seed, especially the seed of the clauer
grass, or the grass hony-suckle, and other seeds that fall out of the finest
and purest hay: And in the sowing of it, mingle with it some good earth: But
sow not the hony-suckle grass in too moist a ground, for it likes it not.


Bailey. Is it not good sometimes to ^ill and sow^ the meddow grounds?


Sur. To till meddow grounds
Yes, upon good occasion, as you find by the slender croppe of hay it bears in
a seasonable summer, that the ground begins to faint, as it were under the
burden of continual bearing, fallow it, and let it lie a whole summer, and in
the fall of the leaf plow it again, and at the season sow it with pease or
fetches, next with wheat, and lastly with fetches and hay dust, laying it as
plain and level as you can. Then seed it the next summer, and after that,
hayn it and mow it, and within a year or two, the grass will be fat, sweet
and good.


Bailey. I have seen meddowes, as well as other arable lands, Meddow ground
burned.
namely, the crust of the earth cut in turffes and burned, and so sown as
aforesaid.


Sur. This kind of husbandry is neither usual nor expedient in all places,
especially in meddowe grounds, unless the meddowes be too much ouergrowne
with moss, through too much moisture and cold: yet in deed I have seen it in
some part of Shropshire. But I have thought it rather done for the corn sake,
then for reformation of the meddowe.


Bay. But I like not this husbandry in any sort, in good meddow grounds.


Sur. You need not fear it, for experience has found, that it hurts no kind
of ground. But I leave every man to his own fancy.


Bailey. Surely, I think there needs no help to good meddowe grounds, Meddow
most beneficial.
for it requires small travail, and less charge, and of all grounds (as was
said in the beginning of our speech, it is most beneficial.


Sur. Every thing has his time and course, a growing, a perfection, and decay.
And the best ground may be ouercharged, the plowe, and the sith will weaken,
if there be no helps by Art, or Nature* for though nature wake and work when
we sleep, and are idle, yet it often fails, when wit and industry must work
and supply what Nature leaves. And therefore he that has best meddow grounds,
if he be a good husband, will observe how they stand in force, or weakness, and
accordingly endeavor to help the defects: he must neither sleep for the too
much heat in Summer, nor keep house in Winter for the too much cold: but both
Winter and Summer give such attendance and aid unto his land, as in discretion
he shall find most behoouefull: for land is like the body: if it be not fed
with nurriture, Land like the body.
and comforted and adorned with the most expedient commodities, it will pine
away, and become forlorn, as the mind that has no rest or recreation, waxes
lumpish and heavy. So that ground that wants due disposing and right
manurance, waxes out of kind; even the best meddowes will become ragged and
full of unprofitable weeds, if it be not cut and eaten; some will become too
moist, and so grow to boggs; some too dry, and so to a hungry moss. And
therefore according to the natural or urged inclynation, men are to endeavor
to prepare preseruations, or reformations, namely, to keep the good in good
case, and to bring the evil to a better state. If it be too moist, you must
seek to dry it: if too dry, you must use means to moysten it.


Bailey. What if there be such places in a meddowe, as neither Art nor charge
can conveniently make dry, or fit for grass, as I know many* and (no doubt)
so do you, which will be unprofitable, whatsoever course be taken, unless more
charge be laid upon it, then it can requite?


Sur. In such places the best course is to plant willowes red or white, To
plant Willowes.
namely, in every void plot of low ground that is too moist, and of little use
to plant them, as also near unto, and in hedgerowes: for those kinds of
willowes are very profitable, and little hurtful, and delight most in watrie
places, where profitable and sweet grass likes not: They grow speedily, and
bear much, and serve for many uses in husbandry.


Bay In this indeed I can approve your Judgment by mine own Art and
experience: for about seven or eight years since, I set a certain number of
these kinds of Willow poles, Setting of Willowes.
shaped and cut for the purpose, and in deed I cut them and set them in a dry
time, for I can tell you, although they love the water well in their growing,
wet is an enemy unto them, being cut from the tree: and in the time of their
replanting, some I set in the end of January, some in the beginning of
February, when the extremity of the cold is near gone. I set some in a meddow
by a ryuers side, some in a bottom, where the water falls most in the time of
rain, and I set every one of them six foot asunder, and for three years
space I kept them pruned very carefully: and at this present time they have
heads and branches of very great burden, every three trees near a load of
wood. And I do not think, but every five or six years will afford as much
and more: for as the body of the tree does increase, the branches will augment
in greatness: and this without loss of much ground, or hindrance to the
grass. Nay, I find that under these trees, the grass is most rank and
fruitful, not only by reason of the dropping of the boughs, but by the fall
of the leaf in Autumn, as also by the cattle sheltring and shadowing under
them. And moreover, I have planted an Ozier hope, Ozier hope.
( for so they call it in Essex, and in some places an Ozier bed) in a
surrounded ground, fit before for no use, for the too much moisture and
ouerflowing of it. And to tell you truly, I think, it yields me now a
greater benefit yearly, acre for acre, then an acre of best wheat: and that
without any great travel or charge, and the ordinary increase seldom sailing.
Only I find, that this kind of tree brooketh not the shadow of any other tree,
but delights in the open air, Ozier brooketh no shadow.
and in the Sun beams: so imperial or sullen is this little plant. And
truly I conceive, that men that have such grounds, as befit this kind of
commodity, come short of good husbands, if they plant them not.


Sur. You say in this very truly: and it is a great shame for many capable
wits, and able bodies, that they having livings and leisure, employ neither of
them to their uttermost profitable ends: for lands is given to man, to the end
he should till it, manure it, and dress it: namely, he should set, sow, and
plant upon it, and in due discretion to convert every place to his fittest
fruit. For I am of opinion, that there is no kind of soil, be it never so
wild, boggy, clay, or sandy, but will yield one kind of beneficial fruit or
other. All grounds good for some use.

Peaze upon the beach grow naturally.





Bail. Nay, by your leave, I think, the pib^les or beach stones upon the sea
coast, about Orford Nesse in Suff. the Camber in Sussex, and such like, are
good for no use, especially for any profitable fruit: for I think, there is
no firm^ soil within a spears length of some part of the highes^ of them.


Sur. It is true, and yet have I eaten of good and nourishing fruit growing
even there, as pease, pleasant, wholesome, and good, growing of their own
accord, never ste^^ ^o^^e: but they differ in the manner of branching, only the
blossoms differ not much, but the co^^les hang in clusters, eight, ten, or
twelve in a bunch, and taste as other pease.


Bailey. That is strange that they should grow where no firm earth is our, and
without set^ing or sowing: me thinks, if they be of any abundance, poor
people might make use of the^, if they be wholesome and not forbidden.


Sur. So do they in the times of dearth.


Bailey. (...) have seen upon these grounds, store of Pewets, Olives, and
Cobbes breed, ^owles of great request at most honorable table^. Pewets and
Olives, etc.



Sur. So have I: but to allure them, it is good to strew rushes and grass upon
the beach, whereon to lay their eggs, unless there be store of sea-weedes to
serve for that purpose. But for your other sorts of ground, as boggie, and hot,
and sandy grounds, commonly bar^en, I see not how they may be employed to any
great profit. For the first, namely, your love and sp^ngie grounds ^renched,
Hoppes.
is good for hopps, as Suffolk, Essex, and Surrie, and other places do find
to their profit. The hot and sandy, (omitting grain) is good for carret
roots, a beneficial fruit, as Orford, Ipswich, and many sea towns in
Suffolk: Carret roots.
as also Inland towns, Berrie, Framingham, and others in some measure, in the
same shire, Norwich, and many places in Norfolk, Colchester in Essex, Fulham,
and other places near London. And it begins to increase in all places of
this Realm, where discretion and industry sway the minds of the inhabitants:
and I do not a little marvel, that husbandmen and Farmers do not imitate
this, for their own families, and to (...) their poor neighbors, as in some
places they beg^n, to their great profit. I have also observed in many places,
where I have had occasion to travail, that many croftes, toftes, pightes,
pingles, and other small ^uillits of land, about farm houses, and Tenements,
are suffered to lie together idle: some ouergrowne with nettles, mallows,
thistles, wild tezells, and diverse other unprofitable weeds, which are fat
and firtile: Many waste grounds might yield profit. Hemp. Mustard Seed.
where if the farmer would use the means, would grow sundry commodities, as
hemp, and mustard seed, both which are so strong enemies to all other
superfluous, and unprofitable weeds, as they will not suffer any of them to
grow, where they are sown. The hemp is of great use in a farmers house, as
is found in Suffolk, Norfolk, Sussex, Dorset, and in many places in Somerset,
especially about Burport, and Lime, where the people do find by it great
advantage, not only for cordage for shipping, but also for linen, and other
necessaries about a house. So is also the flax, Flax.
which is also sown in many places, where good huswiues endeavor their wits*
(...), and hands to that commodious and profitable course, and the flax will
like well enough in a more light and gentle, and leaner soil, then the hemp.
And indeed there is not a place so rude, and unlikely, but diligence and
discretion may convert it to some profitable end: and among many other
commodities, I marvel, men are no more forward in planting of Apple trees,
Apple trees.
Pear trees, Crab-stockes, and such like in their hedges, between their
fields, as well as in Orchards: a matter praise worthy, and profitable to the
planter, and to the common wealth, very beneficial.


Bail. Indeed, I have thought upon this kind of husbandry, but I have been
prevented of mine own desires, by a preiudicate conceit, that these fruits
would redound little to my benefit, for that I think they will be stolen, the
hedges trodden down, and the trees broken for the fruits sake.


Sur. Negligence may easily find excuse: but this objection is frivolous: for I
know in Kent, Worcestershire, Shropshire, Glocestershire, Somerset, and Deuon,
and many parts in Wales, full of this commodity, even in their remote
hedge-rowes. And although some few be lost, since the rest come so easily, so
fully, and so freely, a good mind will not grudge at a wayfaring passenger,
taking for his refection, and to qualify the heat of his travel, an apple or
a pear: for the remnant will content the well conditioned owner. For I have
known, that (all the stolen allowed) the fruit thus dispersedly planted, have
made in some little Farms, or (as they call them in those parts) Burgaines, a
tun, two, three, four, of Syder, and Perry, which kind of drink resembling
white wine, Syder. Perry.
has without any further supply of ale, or beer, sufficed a good householder
and his family, the whole yer^ following, and sometimes has made of the
overplus twenty nobles, or ten pounds, more or less.


Baylie. This surely cannot be but confessed, to be very beneficial, both for
private and public w^^le. And I myself have noted, yt Mid. in former times,
has had regard to this kind of commodity: for many Apple Trees, Pear trees,
Service trees, and such like, have been planted in the fields and hedge-rowes,
especially in the North and East part of the shire, as also in the South part
of Hartfordshire, which are at this day very beneficial to the inhabitants,
both for their own use and relief, as also to v^nt diverse ways at London.
But the trees are now for the most part very ancient, and I do not see such a
continual inclination in the time present, to continue or increase this
benefit for the use of posterity: neither did I ever know much Syder or Perry
made in these parts, neither do I think they have sufficient skill or means.


Sur. I think indeed, little Sider is made there, some Perrie there is here
and there: but more in the West country and in Kent, Kent.
a place very fructiferous of that kind of fruit.


Bai. Yet is there not so much Syder made, for all the great abundance of
fruit, as there might be but in the Inland.


Sur. The reason is, because that near London, and the Thames side, the fruit
is vented in kind, not only to the Fruterers in gross, but by the country
wives, in the nearest part of Kent, Middlesex, Essex, and Surrey, who utter
them in the markets, as they do all other vendible things else.


Bailey. But above all others, I think, the Kentishmen be most apt and
industrious, in planting Orchards with Pippins and Cherries, especially near
the Thames, about Feuersham, and Sittingburne. And the order of their planting
is such, as the form delights the eye, the fruit the taste, and the walks
infinite, re^rea^e the body. Besides, the grass and h^rbage, no^withstanding
the trees, yeldeth as much benefit^* in manner, as if there were no trees
planted at all, ^specially for hay.


Sur. I^ is true: and in mine opinion, many men having tenements, and time in
them, make not half the profit, which by due and discreet industry they
might.


Bailey. Men untaught, know little.
Truly I now so conceive it: for you have in many things, made me see mine own
indiscretion and negligence* but in many of them fear has more prevailed with
me, then wilful refusal. And so I think it does in other men, who also with
my self, ar^ ignorant of many points of providence, and good husbandry: because
they are not generally trauelers to see other places, neither has their
breeding been judicious, but plain, according to a slubberd pattern of
ancient ignorance, by which they only shape all their courses, Many follow old
husbandry.
as their Fathers did, never putting in practice any new device, by the rule of
more reason. And therefore indeed, we that are yet in a plodding kind of
course, may conform us ^o new and probable precedents, as time and ^riall will
yield experience. But ^urely, I hold your opinion good for the planting of
fruit trees, not only in Orchards, but in the hedge rows and fields: for I
think, we have of no tree more necessary use.


Sur. It is true in respect of fruit. But in other respects, Oak, Ash, and
Elm.
the Oak, Elm, and Ash, are more precious.


Bailey. These indeed are building trees, and of the three, the Oak is of most
request a timber most firm and most durable. I have b^^ne no great traveler,
and therefore I can speak little of the increase or decrease of them, other
then in the places where I am most resident, and where my ordinary affairs do
lie. And for those parts, I can say, that they increase not, though they seem
not to be wanted: for you see this country inclinable to wood and timber much:
yet within these twenty years they have been diminished two parts of three:
and if it go on by like proportion, our children will surely want. How it is in
other countries I know not.


Sur. I have seen many places of note for this kind of commodity, (for so ^t
is, howsoever it has been little preserved) and I find, that it has
universally received a mortal blow within the time of my memory: Oak much
decays. 35. Hen. 8.
notwithstanding there is a Statute for the preservation and maintenance of the
same, and the same continued to this day, but not with wished effect, as we
have thereof spoken before.


Bail. I will tell you, Sir, careless Gentlemen, that have Manors and Parkes
well woodded, left them by their careful ancestors, that would not strip a
tree for gold, are of the mind (as it seems) that the shadow of the high
trees do dazzle their eyes, they cannot see to play the good husbands, nor look
about them to sell the land, ti^l the trees be taken out of their sight.


Sur. Can you break a jest so boldly upon men of worth?


Bail. You see as well as I, some do it in earnest: and I think indeed, it is
partly your fault that are Surueyors: Gentlemen sell their woods too fast.
for when Gentlemen have sunk themselves by rowing in Vanities boat, you blow
them the bladders of lauishing helps, to make them swim again awhile,
counselling first to clear the land of the wood, (in the sale whereof is great
abuse) persuading them, they shall sell the land little the cheaper. And indeed
I hold i^ providence, where necessity commands, to choose of two, the lesser
evil: namely, to sell part of a superfluous quantity of wood, where the
remanent will ser^^ the party in use, A Surueyor must counsel frugalitie.
rather then the land. But withal, it is the part of a good Surueyor, to
counsel frugalitie, and a sparing spending, according to the proportion of the
means of him he trauel^ ^or. And ^f that great Emperor Necessity will needs
have hau^cke, sell the wood, or p^ize it so, as he that buys the land have not
the wood for naught: as is often seen, when the wood and timber sometimes is
worth the price of wood and land.


Sur. It seems, when you come to be a Surueyor, as you labor to be, Affection.
I hope you will be very careful in your counsel: but it may be, when you
seem to have best skill, and earnest desire to draw the line straight: for a
man inclinable to his own will, he will rather give it into the hands of some
one that feeds his conceits with flattery, Simple men do manage men's business
through flattery*
and he shall manage the building, when you have laid the foundation. And what
he does, be it right or crooked, is level with the mark. And therefore
leaving every man to him he likes, I say only this, that since timber and
timber trees, and wood by due observation, are found to decay so fast, me
thinks, in common discretion, it should behooue every good husband (for all
would be so accounted) both upon his own ^and, as also upon such as he holds of
other men's, not only to maintain, All men ought to preserve timber
and to the uttermost to preserve the timber trees, and saplins likely to
become timber trees, Oak, Elm, and Ash: but voluntarily to plant young: and
because there is not only an universal inclination to hurl down, it were
expedient that since will will not, authority should constrain some mean of
restoration, namely, to enjoin men, as well Lords, as tenants, to plant for
every sum of acre, a number of trees, or to sow or set a quantity of ground
with Acorns.


Baylie. I remember there is a Statute made, 35 Hen. the 8. and the ^. Eliz.
for the preservation of timber trees, Oak, Ash, Elm* Aspe, 35. Hen. 8.1. Eliz.
and Beech: and that 12. storers and standils should be left standing at every
fall, upon an acre: but me thinks, this Statute is deluded, and the meaning
abused: for I have seen in many places at the fa^s, where in deed they leave
the number of standils and more; but in stead they cut dow^e them that were
preserved before, and at the next fall, The Statute abused.
them that were left to answer the Statute, and young le^t again in their
steads: so that there can be no increase of timber trees, notwithstanding, the
words of the Statute, by this kind of reservation, unless such as were thus
left, were continued to become timber trees indeed: And therefore it were not
amiss, that some provision were made, to maintain the meaning of the Statute
in more force: but I leave that, to such as see more then I see, and have power
to reform it.


Sur. It is a thing in deed to be regarded, for indeed there is abuse in it.


Bailey. Surely it is, especially in places where little timber grows: for
there is no Country, how varraine of timber soever but has use of timber: and
therefore, if neither men's own wills, Want of Wood* and Timber feared.
seeing the imi^ent want, nor force of Justice will move and work a
reformation, we may say as the Proverb is, Let them that live longest, fetch
their wood farthest.


Sur. But some Countries are yet well stored, and for the abundance of timber
and wood, were excepted in the Statute, as the Welds of Kent, Sussex, and
Surry, which were all anciently comprehended under the name of Holmes dale.
There are diverse places also in Darinshire, Holmes dale.
Cheshire and Shr^pshire, well woodded. And yet he that well observes it, and
has known the Weles of Sussex, Surry, and Kent, the grand nursery of those
kind of trees, especially Oak, and Beech, shall find such an alteration within
less then 30. years, as may well strike a fear, Thirty years have consumed
much wood and timber. Glass houses Great woods wasted.
lest few years more, as pestilent as the former, will leave few good trees
standing in those Welds. Such a heat issues out of the many forges, and
furnaces, for the making of Iron, and out of the glass kilnes, as has
devoured many famous woods within the Welds: as about Burningfold, Lopwood
Green, the Minns, Kirdford, Petworth parkes, Ebernowe Wassal^, Rusper,
Balcombe, Dalington the Dyker: and some forests, and other places infinite.
Tantum ^^ui longinqua valet mutare vetustas. The force of time, and men's
inclination, make great changes in mighty things. But the croppe of this
commodious fruit of the earth, which nature it self does sow, being thus
reaped and cut down by the sickle of time, has been in some plentiful
places, in regard of the superfluous abundance, rather held a hurtful weed,
then a profitable fruit, and therefore the wasting of it held providence, to
the end that corn, Woods destroyed for corns sake.
a more profitable increase, might be brought in, in stead of it, which has
made Inhabitants so fast to hasten the confusion of the one, to have the other.
But it is to be feared, that posterities will find want, where now they think
is too much. Virtutem inc^lum^m od^mus, sublatam sero saepe quaerimus inuidi.
Things that we have too common, are not regarded: but being deprived of them,
they are often times sought for in vain.


Bay. 140. Iron works in Sussex.
It is no marvel, if Sussex and other places you speak off, be deprived of
this benefit: for I have heard, there are, or lately were in Sussex, near 140.
hammers and furnaces for Iron, and in it, and Surry adjoining, 3. or 4. glass
houses: the hammers and furnaces spend, each of them in every 24. hours, 2.3.
or four loades of charr coal, which in a year amounts to an infinite
quantity, as you can better account by your Arithmatique, then I.


Sur. That which you say, is true, but they work not all, all the year: for
many of them lack water in the Summer to blow their bellows. Wasting of woods
in Sussex, good for the common wealth.
And to say truth, the consuming of much of these in the Weld, is no such great
prejudice to the weal public, as is the overthrow of wood and timber, in
places where there is no great quantity: for I have observed, that the
clensing of many of these welde grounds, has redounded rather to the benefit,
then to the hurt of the Country: for where woods did grow in superfluous
abundance, there was lack of pasture for kine, and of arable land for corn,
without the which, a Country or country farm cannot stand, or be relieved, but
by neighbor helps, as the Downs have their wood from the Weld. Beside,
people bred amongst woods, are naturally more stubborn, and uncivil, then in
the Champion Countries.


Bai. What, are men's manners commonly guided by the disposition and quality of
the places where they are bred?


Sur. There is no necessity in it, I take, but by observation it has bin
collected, That Montani sunt asp^ri atque incu^ti; Men's manners of their place
of breed.
Molliores corpore atque moribus pratenses: Campestres mansue^^ and Ciuiles:
Rudes and refractari^ S^^^^colae: Paludicolae inconstantes and ^ebeti ingenio:
Littorales duri, b^rrendi, immanes, latrociniis dediti, ^mniumque deniqu^
pessimi. etc. So that if this observation hold, men vary in wit, manners and
disposition of body and mind, much after the nature of the place where they are
brought up. Divine grace shapes new minds.
But let us not think that follows always, but that education and divine
grace does shape new minds, manners and dispositions in men, as they are trained
up in the knowledge and fear of God. But woods are commonly most desert, so
are Sea coasts subject to violent winds, and vapors, and therefore these above
other places are most condemned, and the inhabitants the more need to seek the
means of reformation.


Bay. Truly, I think all the places you name, the Mountains, Meddowes, Woods,
Marshes, and the Seacoast, breed by nature all rudes, refractarios and
immanes, without the grace of God directing them. And therefore we will leave to
censure conditions of men, in one co^tinent, and as it were, under one clymat
by the places of their breed. That in my conceit, were to give sentence against
Gods secret Counsel, and providence: Complexion never a true argument of good
or evil men.
As also to say, such a complexion were always an argument of ill condition,
and such of good, which never holds generally true. Let us* I p^ay, ret^^ne
to our former communication, for time passes, and I know, you would not be
(...) long.


Sur. Then I say, where, in former times, a (...) stood in those parts, wholly
upon these unprofitable bushy and woody grounds, having only some small and
ragged pastures for some kind of cattle, now I see as I travail, and where I
have had business, that these unprofitable grounds are converted to beneficial
tillage: The benefit that Sussex finds by decay of woods.
In so much as the people lack not, but can to their great benefit, yearly
afford to others, both Butter, Cheese, and Corn, even where was little or none
at all: yet I held a ^oderation necessary, lest that the too much overthrowing
of timber trees, and stocking up of Woods bring such a scarcity of that most
necessary commodity, as men build not for lack of timber, but use Peats,
Turffe, (...), Furse, Broom, and such like fuel for firing, Fuel of
constrain^.
where they may be gotten, yea, and Ne^ts dung, as in some places of Wiltshire,
and else where: which cannot but ensue, if there be neither prevention for the
subuertion of the present, no provision to plant or spare for the time to come:
who sees not that the general extirpation, and stocking up of coppise grounds
in Middlesex, Middlesex stocking.
will not breed want to them that shall succeed?


Bail. But that may be the more tolerated, because it brings a greater profit
in tillage and pasture, the ground being good, brings forth wheat and oats,
and other commodious grain, instead of s^ubs and shrubs.


Sur. Stubs and shrubs are also necessary: but as we desire food, we must
preserve the means to prepare it for food: for as corn avails not without
Mills to grind: so other necessaries without firing, are of little use. If all
were arable, where were meddowe and pasture* if all pasture and meddowe, The
use of firing necessary.
where corn? if all for corn and grass, it were like Midas his wish.
Therefore it is good to foresee, and to avoid a mischief to come, by desiring
or using present commodities moderately and prouidently. For when there is a
true concurrence between the use, and preservation, and increase of necessary
commodities, without wilful consuming, there seldom follows too much want:
but if, for the ouergreedy use of things present, there be no regard of future
occasion, it cannot be, but if the earth, the mother of man and other
creatures, could verbally complain, she might well say, A commodity present
should not deprive future times of a better.
she were even robbed of her fruits by her own children: and namely when for
one commodities sake, another is abandoned by some private men, more expedient
for the public weal.


Bai. I think your meaning is, when farms, or townships are by private men
dispeopled, and the houses pulled down, and the land converted to some more
private use: as only to sheep pastures, or grasing for cattle only, you
mean, corn, the more commodious, is abandoned for these less profitable.


Sur. Depopulatio^, dangerous.
Both these are necessary in their places, no man can deny it. But when the Ox
and sheep shall feed where good houses stood, where honest men and good
subjects dwelled, where hospitality was kept, the poor relieved, the king
better served, and the common wealth more steeded: who will not say it is the
ban^ of a common wealth, an apparent badge of Atheism^, and an argument of
apish ambition, or wooluish emulation? but because there is a statute carefully
providing reformation, I will be sparing to accuse, though a man might point at
the places and persons: Is not this next, Fern hill, a close of the Lords
demeisnes?


Bailey. You remember well, it is so.


Survey. If my memory fail not, there is a deep bottom in this field, and a
little rill of water rising out of the hill, runs through it.


Bailey. If you look but over this hill, you shall see it.


Sur. I ^ee it, and I marvel that there has been no respect had of this
place: for it is a desert bottom, full of bushes and shrubs, yielding now
little or no benefit.


Bay. What can you advise to be done with it, to make it more profitable?


Sur. I could wish some cost to be bestowed herein, Fish ponds.
making a fish pond, nay it would make at the least, two or three, one below
the other.


Bai. Alas, that were to little purpose, as I take it, considering the charge
of making the ponds, the clearing of the water course, the clensing of the
bodies, the making of the dammes or heads of the ponds will be more chargeable,
then the fish will be profitable.


Sur. As you conceive it, for where reason or experience teach not, there the
will follows to be untoward in all actions: and seldom men practice doubtful
things, howsoever probable, for experience sake. But in this there is no doubt
at all, the benefit is certain by approved experience, and it paieth the
charge to the founder in short time, and afterward the benefit comes without
much labor or cost. He that has travailed, and is acquainted with Sussex,
Fish ponds many in Sussex, and Surrie.
and Surrie, and has observed this commodity, may find that gentlemen, and
others able in those parts, will not suffer such a convenient place as this for
the purpose, to lie unprepared for this use: and the sweetness of the gain
they yearly make of it, has bred such an increase of ponds for fish, as I
think, these two shires have more of them, then any twenty other shires in
England.


Baylie. That were very much, but I take it, the making of them is very
chargeable, for the clensing and digging, the ridding of the stuff, and making
the head, I think will consume a greater charge, then many years will pay, or
redeem again, as I said before.


Sur. That which commonly comes out of these kind of places, is good soil
for other lands, and will of it self quite the cost of clensing and carrying.
As for the head wherein the greatest charge consists, may be done, for a
mark or a pound a pole at the most, but where there is good fast earth, as is
here, I think less will do it. This pond may be 20. pole at the head, few
so much: and after 2. or 3. years being well stored, it will yield requital,
not only for domestical use, but to be vented very beneficially: for the
Fishmongers of London do use to buy the fish by the score or hundred,
Fishmongers buy pond fish far off.
of a competent scantling, when the ponds in the country be sewed, and bring
the^ to London in caske, 20, 30, 40, 50 miles, and vent them by retaile: and if
the ponds be so remote from the maine Mart London, as the fish cannot be
conveniently transferred, other confining Cities, towns, and inahbitants,
besides the owners private families, will find good use of them: and many times
also, these k^nds of ponds may have sufficient fall of water for corn Mills,
Ponds necessary for Mills.
fulling, or wake Mills, sith Mills, and Mills of other kinds, as the country
where such convenient places are, may require: and it is found, by such as duly
observe the courses of countries, and inclinations of men, that want of
providence and fear of charge, withholdeth men's minds from many benefits,
private and public, and that many times, where they are voluntarily moved to
consume far more in matter of mere vanity, and things which right reason
holds very frivolous.


Bay. Ambitious building ridiculous.
Truly I have observed this that you say, to be true in many, especially in
such, as ambition moves without necessity to build more fair and stately
piles, then their estate or abilities will well hear, and covet nothing more,
then to raise their fame by their folly, not respecting commodities, so much
as pleasures, as if the name of a fair house, were meat, drink and credit
unto them: where if they were forced by necessity to raise an habitacle, it
might be so marshalled in discretion, A house with necessaries commendable.
that it should not exceed the quality of the person, neither stand without
such supply of all convenient appendances, as might both argue the party
provident, and add means unto all necessaries for alike families relief.


Sur. Men will have their humors: but he is wise, that can learn by others
harms to avoid, and by others good example to follow the like.


Bay. Sir, you see this piece of ground, it has not the name for naught, it is
called fernie close, and as you see, it is full, and so ouergrowne with these
brakes, that all the art we can devise, and labor we can use, cannot rid them.


Sur. Neglectis vrenda filix, innascitur agris, says Horace. But in many
places they serve to good use: Horace. Fern.
and therefore, where they grow, it must be considered, whether it be better,
to destroy them, or to foster the^, for they seldom or never grow in a fat
soil, nor cold, but in a sandy and hot ground: And as Theophrastus says in
his eight book, Theophrastus. lib. 8.
it comes not up in manured places, but withers away.


Bai. How, means he by manured places, plowed grounds?


Sur. Plowed grounds, may be said to be manured, but it is not so meant by
Theophrastus: Manuring what is meant by it.
for he means grounds well soyled, with good fat marle and dung: for plowing
without this kind of manurance, will hardly kill it: for the ground being
naturally barraine, it will not quite cost to plowe it, till they grow no
more. And if there be no other soil to manure it, take the brakes themselves,
to kill the brakes.


Bailey. I think, that were the way to raise more: for it is like the adding
more fuel to put out the fire.


Sur. But you see, that though the oil feed the Lamp, oil will extinguish
it. Fern destroyed by fern.



Bailey. That is, if you drown the match with oil.


Sur. So if you cut the brakes often, while they are young, and a little before
Midsommer when they are grown, and cast them upon the same land, and set the
fold upon it, and use it thus, 2. or three years, feeding it often with cattle
or sheep, you shall find a great decay of them. In the weldes of Sussex and
Surry, places inclinable to brakes, you may learn, The use of fern, in diverse
places.
how the inhabitants by their endeavors* do make good use of this kind of
husbandry, both for corn, and to increase their pasture, by cutting them in
August, and after when they are withered, and laying them upon their grounds,
with the fold, as I told you, which causes the grass to spring very fast, and
freshly: and they are so far from coveting to kill them, that they fetch them
for this use far off: but the continuance of this course will impair them
much. Moreover, they bring the brakes into their yards, where their cattle
lodge in the winter, and there they rot, and when they be well dissolved among
their other soil, they carry it about September, and October, into their
arable fields, to their good advantage. And in some places they lay it in the
common high ways (as in Hartfordshire and other places) and about March carry
it into their grounds. It is so lively, slymy and vegitable a nature, as it
seldom becomes utterly consumed, but by fat marl^, and soil, and continual
plowing, as I told you before. But I see, here is a ground next unto this, of
another nature, full of bushes and briers, he is no good husband that owes it.


Bai. Bushy ground
Neither he that owes it, nor a better husband can prevent this inconvenience:
for besides the bushes, the moss is so full and rank, as the ground is good
for nothing, but for that small pasture, that is in it here and there.


Sur. The ground of it self, I see is good enough, and not so prone to moss
as you take it, The cause of moss.
but the cause of the moss is the bushes: for after every shower of rain, the
bushes hang full of drops, which often falling on the ground, makes the upper
part of the earth so cold, that i^ increases this kind of moss: but without
the aid and industry of a skillful husband, fairest grounds will be come
ougly, and best land evil, and will bring ^oorth unprofitable weeds, bushes,
brakes, briars, thorns, and all kind of hurtful things* according to the
curse inflicted upon it for man's fault, at the beginning.


Bail. Admit, no man did manure the earth, The earth not manurde what becomes.
yet surely there be many grounds, in my conceit, would never become worse then
they be.


Sur. You are in a great error: for the freest grounds that you see, the
fairest pastures, and greenest meddowes, would become in short time, ouergrowne
with bushes, woods, weeds, and things unprofitable, as they were before they
were rid, and cleansed of the same by the industry of man, who was enjoined that
care and travail to manure the earth, which for his disobedience should bring
forth these things.


Bailey. How then was the state of this Island of great Britain, at the
beginning, when it was first peoplet?


Sur. A very desert and wilderness, full of woods, Great Britain sometimes a
desert.
f^lls, moors, bogs, heathes, and all kind of forlorn places: and howsoever
we find the state of this Island now, records do witness unto us, that it was
for the most part an universal Wilderness, until people finding it a place
desolate, and forlorn, began to set footing here, and by degrees grew into
multitudes; though for the time, brutish and rude, Time taught them, and Nature
drew them to find the means how to stock up trees, bushes, briars, and
thorns, and in stead thereof, to plowe the land, to sow, set, and plant, to
build Cities for defense, as well against the force of Wild beasts, then
plentiful in these grounds which now we manure, as against enemies, as the
ruins of Cilchester in Hamshire, Cilchester* Verolamium.
among the woods, and of Verolamium in Hartfordshire, and other Roman
Monuments of antiquity, do lay before our eyes at this day. After Cities, (as
the land became more and more peopled) they built lesser Towns, Villages, and
Dorpes, and after more security, Country Farms, and Gruinges: and as these
increased, Wild beasts in Britain.
wild beasts, as Bears, Bores, Woolues, and such like decreased: for when
their shelters, great woods, were cut down, and the Country made more and more
champion, then the people more and more increased, and more and more decreasing
the inconveniences that offended them.


Bai. I observe in this your discourse some doubts, as whether all this Island,
now great Britain, were a Wilderness and Desert, and whether there were ever
such wild beast in it, as you speak off.


Sur. If you will be satisfied by records, you may find, that most of the
Shires in England were Forestae. and as for the wild beasts, Authors very
antentique, report of the Calidonian Bear, Bore, Bull, Colidonian bear and
bore.
and Kine, which were in this Island, with infinite many Woolues: as by reason
of the great woods and fastness, there are yet in Ireland.


Bay. This our discourse is some what from our matter, yet not altogether
impertinent: for if this lie hidden* and men be ignorant of the state of former
times, Former ages had more art and industry then ours.
our present swelling and ambitious co^ceits may seem to assume more
commendation, for present art and industry, in reforming the earth, the^ Ages
of old: wherein I perceive, and by your discourse collect, that our fathers did
more in ten years, then we in forty.


Sur. It is true, because we saw not the earths former deformities, we dream
it was then, as now it is, from the beginning, The earth not in the beginning
as (...).
whereas indeed our forefathers, by their diligence and travail, left unto
our forefathers, and they by increasing experience, and endeavor, left unto us
that fair and fruitful, free from briars, bushes, and thorns, whereof they
found it full. And this field wherein now we are, may be an instance: for you
see by the ancient ridges or lands, though now ouergrowne with bushes, Lands
formerly arable, now wood.
it has been arable land, and now become fit for no use, unless it be
reformed. And the bushes that are in this field, you see, are such shrubs and
dwarffie bushes, and fruitless b^iars, as are never like to prove good
underwood, nor good haying or hedging stuff. If it were fit for either, and
the country scant of such provision, it might be preserved. But since they have
been so cropped and bruised with cattle, and since this country is full and most
inclinable by nature to this kind of stuff, more then sufficient for fencing
and fuel, and corn ground and good pasture nothing plentiful, if the tenant
were a good husband, he would stock it up and plow it.


Baylie. I think it is so full of Moss, it will bear little corn.


Sur. The Moss being turned in by the plowe, will rot, and these hillockes,
Mole-hils, Moss.
and Ant-hils, will enrich the ground, and cherish the seed sown.


Bailey. What grain is best to be sown first after the stocking?


Sur. It seems to be a good stiff clay ground, and therefore Otes are best
to prepare the earth, to make it fit for wheat the next season: and after it,
Oats in clay.
as the ground may be by the skillful husbandman thought fit for wheat again
or pease. But if the soil were lean and light, barley would agree better in
it, and a light red rush wheat, where, in the more stronger ground, the white
Wheat, and gray Ball, Barley in sand.

A mutual agreement between grains and grounds.


(as they call it in the West parts) is best. And in some more hot and sandy
grounds, Rye, as men shall by experience find the land to like the grain, and
the grain it. For there is a natural affinity or enmity between grains
and grounds, as between stomachs and meats. And therefore the husbandmans
experience will best guide him. But I do not a little wonder of men in this
age, whom, whether I may rather accuse of idleness, or ignorance, I cannot
tell: for where I ha^^ traveled in sundry parts of England, I have in many of
them found many old dry pits, anciently dug in fields, Commons, Moors, and
other grounds, many of them bearing still the names of Mar^e-pits, Marle pits.
and by search have bin found to yield very excellent Marle, first found and
dug by the providence and industry of our forefathers, and left by the
negligence of later times.


Bailey. But by your favor, fat Marle, me thinks, is not good for this kind of
ground, because it is a strong ^lay, it is better, I take it, for a hot and
sandy soil, and a hot chalk better for this.


Sur. It is very true, that observation should not have bin forgotten: but it
is well remembered of you.


Bai. We have, indeed, a kind of plodding and common course of husbandry
hereabouts, and a kind of peeu^sh imitation of the most, who (as wise men note)
are the worst husbands, who only try what the earth will do of it self, and
seek not to help it with such means, as nature has provided; whereas if men
were careful and industrious, they should find, that the earth would yield in
recompense for a good husbands travel and charge, Centum pro cento without
corrupt usury. Grounds well manured, greatest intrest.



Sur. I am glad you can now approve it so in reason: for I think, experience
does not yet so fully teach you. I have known where land has been very base
and barren, and so continued many generations, as ground in manner forsaken and
forlorn, abandoned of the plow, which after has come into the hands of a
discreet and industrious husband, that knew how, Ill ground made good.
and would take the pains, and bestow the cost to manure it in kind, has much
enriched himself by it, and where before it would not bear a crop of
requitefull increase, by marling and good usage, has borne crop after crop,
12.16. or 20. years without intermission. The benefit of marling, Lancashire,
Chesshire, Shropshire, Somerset, Middlesex, Sussex, Surrey, among many other
places, can witness, though not all by one kind of soyling and marling. For
neither is all kind of Marle in one place, neither any one kind in all places.
But few places are so defective, but it yields of it self, or is near unto
some place of help. And men that will have profit, must use the means, they
must not sit and give aim, and wish and repine at others increase. There must
be observation* to mark how others thrive, inclination and imitation to do the
like endeavor and charge. And if one experiment fail, try a second, a third,
and many: look into places and persons, note the qualities of the land of
other men, and confer it with thine own: and where there is a resemblance,
mark what the best husband does upon his land like unto thine: if it prosper,
practice it, and follow the example of him, that is commonly reported a
thriftie husband. And by this means, will experience grow, and of one
principle of reason, many conclusions will proceed. If a man look into
Cornwall, there shall he find, that in diverse places, especially upon the
North coast, about Pa^^s^ow, that the inhabitant Farmers do soil their lands
with sea sand: Sea sand, a good soil in Cornwall*
which because the country affoordeth not in all places, pass for cart-cariage,
men fetch this kind of sand 3.4.6. miles in sackes on horseback. And poor men
live (...) ^etching and selling it to the more wealthy. In (...) and Somerset,
and in some places of Cornwall, Sussex, and in the South part of Surrey,
besides their other commendable courses of husbandry, they burn their land,
and call it in the West parts, Burning of beat, and in the South-East parts,
Deuonshiring, and by that means in barren earth have excellent Rye,
Deuo^shiring.
and in abundance. In Shropshire, De^highshir^, Flintshire, and now lately in
some part of Sussex, the industrious people are at a more extraordinary charge
and toil. For the poor husbandme^ and Farmers do buy, Limestones.
dig, and fetch limestones, 2.3.4. miles off, and in their fields build Lime
kilnes, burn it, and cast it on their fields, to their great advantage: which
kind of lime is of the nature of hot chalk, great helps to cold and moist
grounds.


Bai. But this kind of stone is not to be had in all places.


Sur. That kind or some other, is to be found in or nere most places, and there
is no kind of stone, but being burned, will work the like effect. So will also
and especially the beach or pibble stones burned, that frequent the sea shore
in many places, Pibble and beach, good to make lime.
as upon the Camber shore near Rye, and at East-bourne in Sussex, near P^msey
about Folkestone, and upon the coast of Kent, upon Orford nesse, and about
Alb^row, Hoseley, and that coast in Suffolk, and sundry other places upon the
sea shore: In some places in so great abundance, as if there were wood in
competent measure, would make good and great store of lime for building.


Bay. It is far to fetch it: for I do not think, but every land fetched 5.
miles, is worth 5 shillings the carriage, and four pence at the pit: this is
very chargeable.


Sur. Yet it quiteth the cost well enough, he that is able, Difficulties
pretended, where is no will.
does find at profitable. But you are in the mind of some that I have heard,
when they have bin moved to entertain a help for their land, either it is
too deal, or too far to fetch, or too deep in the earth, or some
difficulty they pretend in it, that few undertake the right way to good
husbandry, like unto them that Solomon speaks of, that in winter will hold
his lazy hands in his lowzie amnerie, and for sloth will not look about his
land in the cold, and sleep out the time in Summer. Many difficulties and
impediments prevent them that will never be good husbands nor thrifty. But such
as mean to live like men, will shake off the cold with travel, and put by
sleep by their labor, and think no cost too great, no labor too painful, no
way too far to preserve or better their estates. Such they be that search the
earth for her fatnes, and fetch it for fruits sake. Moore earth Murgion.
Many fetch Moore-earth or Murgion from the river between Colebrooke and
Vxbridge, and carry it to their barren grounds in Buckinghamshire,
Hartfordshire, and Middlesex, eight or ten miles off. And the grounds whereupon
this kind of soil is employed, will endure tilth above a dozen years after,
without further supply, if it be thoroughly bestowed. In part of Hamshire they
have another kind of earth, for their dry and sandy grounds, especially
between Fordingbridge and Ringwood, and that is, the slub of the river of
Auon, which they call Mawme, which they dig in the shallow parts of the
river: Mawme.
and the pits where they dig it, will in few years fill again: and this
Mawme is very beneficial for their hot and sandy grounds, arable and pasture.
And about Christchurch twineam, and up the river of Stowre, they cut and dig
their low and best meddowes, Meddowes cut and carried into dry grounds.
to help their vpland hot and heathie grounds. And now of late, the Farmers
near London, have found a benefit, by bringing the Scauingers street soil,
which being mixed as it is with the stone cole dust, is very helpefull to their
clay ground: for the cole dust being hot and dry by nature, qualifieth the
stiffenesse and cold of the soil thereabouts. London soil.
The soil of the stables of London, especially near the Tha^es side, is
carried Westward by water, to Chelsey, Futham, Battersay, Putney, and those
parts for their sandy grounds.


Bai. Whether do you account the better, the stall or stable dung*


Sur. Difference of stable and stall dung.
The stable dung is best for cold ground, and the stall dung for hot grounds, if
they be both rightly applied. And of all other things, the Ashes that proceed
of the great roots of stocked ground, is fittest and most helpefull to a cold
clay. So is the sinders that come from the Iron, where hammers or forges are,
being made small, and laid thin upon the cold moist land.


Bay. I was once in Somersetshire, about a place near Tanton, called Tandeane,
I did like their land and their husbandry well.


Sur. Tandeane, the Paradise of England.
You speak of the Paradise of England: and indeed the husbandry is good, if it
be not decayed, since my being in those parts: as indeed (to be lamented) men
in all places give themselves to too much ease and pleasure, to vain expense,
and idle exercises, and leave the true delight, which indeed should be in the
true and due prosecution of their callings: as the artificer to his trade, the
husbandman to the plow, the gentleman, not to what he list, but to what befits
a gentleman, that is, if he be called to place in the commonweal^, to respect
the execution of Justice* ^he be an inferior, he may be his own Bailey, and see
the managing and manuring of his own revenues, and not to leave it to the
discretion and diligence of lither swains, A provident master.
that covet only to get and ea^e. The eye of the idle master may be worth two
working servants. But where the master stands upon terms of his quality
and condition, and will refuse to put (though not his hand) his eye toward the
plow, he may (if he be not the greater: for I speak of the meaner) gentlelize
it awhile: but he shall find i^ far better, and more sweet in the end, to
give his fellow workmen (...) in the morning, and affably to call them, and
kindly to incite them to their business, though he foil not his fingers in
the labor. Thus have I seen men of good quality behave them toward their
people, and in surueying of their hirelings. But indeed it is become now
contemptible and reproachful, for a mean master to look to his laborers, and
that is the reason, that many well left, leave it again before the time,
through prodigality and improuidence, and mean men industrious step in; and
where the former disdained to look to his charge, this does both look and
labor, and he it is that becomes able to buy that, which the idle and wanton
are forced to sell. Now I say, if this sweet country of Tandeane, and the
Western part of Somersetshire be not degenerated, surely, as their land is
fruitful by nature, Good husbandry in the West.
so do they their best by art and industry. And that makes poor men to live
as well by a matter of twenty pounds per annum, as he that has an hundred
pounds.


Bailey I pray you, Sir, what do they more, then other men, upon their grounds?


Sur. They take extraordinary pains, in soyling, plowing, and dressing their
lands. The manner of husba^dry in the West.
After the plow, there goes some three or four with mattocks to break the
clods, and to draw up the earth out of the furrows, that the lands may lie
round, that the water annoy not the seed: and to that end they most carefully
cut gutters and trenches in all places, where the water is likeliest to annoy.
And for the better it riching of their plowing grounds, they cut up, cast, and
carry in the vnplowed headlands, and places of no use. Their hearts, hands,
eyes, and all their powers concur in one, to force the earth to yield her
utmost fruit.


Bai. And what have these men in quantity upon an acre, more then the
ordinary rate of wheat, which is the principal grain?


Sur. They have sometimes, and in some places four, Great yielding of wheat.
five, six, eight, yea ten quarters in an ordinary acre.


Baily. I would think it impossible.


Sur. The earth, I say, is good, and their cost and pains great, and there
follows a blessing, though these great proportions always hold not. And the
land about Ilchester, Long Sutton, Somerton, Andrey, Middles^y, Weston, and
those parts, are also rich, and there are good husbands.


Bai. Do they not help their land much by the fold?


Sur. Not much in those parts: but in Dorset, Wilt-shire, Ham-shire,
Barke-shire, and other places champion, the Farmers do much enrich their land
indeed with the sheepfold. The Sheepefold.
A most easy, and a most profitable course: and who so neglects it, having
means, may be condemned for an ill husband: nay, I know it is good husbandry,
to drive a flock of sheep over a field of wheat, rye, or barley, newly sown,
especially if the ground be light and dry: for the trampling of the sheep, and
their treading, does settle the earth about the corn, keeping it the more
moist and warm, and causes it to stand the faster, that the wind shake it not
so easily, Sheep treading good for corn.
as it will do when the root lies too hollow.


Bai. I cannot reprove you. But I know grounds of a strange nature in mine
opinion: for if they be once plowed, they will hardly graze again in 6. or 7.
years: yet have I seen as rich wheat and barley on it, as may well approve
the ground to be very fruitful. Grounds long in grazing.
And if a stranger that knows not the ground, look upon it after a crop, he
will say it is very barraine.


Sur. Such ground I know in many places, as in the Northwest part of Essex, in
some places in Cambridgeshire, Hartfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Wiltshire. But
commonly, where you find this kind of earth, it is a red or brown soil, mixed
with a kind of white, and is a mould between hot and cold, The cause why
grounds will not graze in long time.
so brittle in the upper part, and so fickle, as it has no firm settling for
the grass to take rooting so soon, and in such sort as in other firmer
grounds: and for this kind of ground, good and well rotted stable dung is
fittest. Let us I pray thee, walk into the next field, the Lords demeisnes,
called as I take it, Highfield.


Bay. It is indeed, a large ground you see it is* and good pasture, but so
ouergone with Thistles, as we can by no means destroy them.


Sur. This kind of Thistle approoueth the goodness of the ground, they seldom
or never grow in a barraine soil.


Bay. Yes, I have seen thistles in mean ground.


Sur. It may be so, a kind of small hungry dwarffy thistle, but this kind which
you see large, high and fatty, you shall never see in abundance, in a weak
soil.


Bail. But I wish they were fewer in number: though they may be a note of good
ground, I find the^ nothing profitable, unless it be to shroud the under grass
in the parching Summer, from the heat of the scorching Sun, for they are
good for no other use that I can find.


Sur. That is some benefit: but the best way to kill them, Thistles, how to
kill them.
is to take them up often by the roots, ever as they begin to spring, and
either presently to rake them up, and carry them out of the fields, or else to
beat them in small pieces: for their nature is to revive again like an Adder,
that is not thoroughly battered in the head, and cut in pieces. Such is the
nature of this kind of Thistle, Thistle, the nature.
that though it be plucked up by the root, if it lie still upon the ground, as
soon as it receives the euaporation of the earth, his sli^^ie nature gathers
a kind of new life, and begins to fasten and cleave it self to the earth
again, and to shoot forth small strings, which entering into the earth
again, will bring forth many for one.


Bai. That is, if they be cut when they are seeded, the seeds fall and
increase.


Sur. Nay, if you cut them in their infancy: for if they be not cut often, and
that, as soon as they show themselves a foot high or less, the root will
recover, The roots of vegitable things, like the liver in the body.
and bud again: the root is as the liver in the body, from whence proceeds
all the blood that feeds the veins, that quickneth the body, which by
obstr^ction and stopping of the passages, putrifieth. So the roots of these
vegitables, when the branches are again and again cut off as they spring, the
root is left so ouercharged with moisture, that it will in the end yield, and
give over bearing, and die: as will also Rushes, Flagges, and such like, which
though they be strong by nature, Rushes. Flagges. Heath.
yet by this means they will be destroyed soonest.


Baily. But what say you to this heathy ground? I think of all other grounds,
this is the most unprofitable.


Sur. Indeed, naturally all heathy grounds are barraine, and that comes by the
saltnes of the soil.


Bai. Does all barrainnesse proceed of saltnes?


Sur. As leannes in a man's body, is principally procured by saltnes of the
humor: Saltnes, hot and dry.
So is barrainesse in grounds; for salt is hot, and heat dries, and too much
drowth breeds barrainesse and leanness. And according to the measure and
proportion of the decree of hot and cold, moisture and dryness, are all
grounds fruitful and barraine, as the body by these causes is fat or lean.
Therefore, though heathy grounds be commonly in the highest degree of
barrainesse, yet are some more in the mean then some. Some are more tractable
and more easily reduced to some use then others, and therefore has sundry
names. Heath is the general or common name, whereof there is one kind, called
Hather, the other, Hather. Ling.
Ling. And of these particulars, there are also sundry kinds distinguished by
their several growth, leaves, stalks, and flowers: as not far from Graves
end, there is a kind of Hather that bears a white flower, and is not so
common as the rest, Heath diverse kinds.
and the ground is not so exceeding barraine as some other, but by manurance
would be brought to profitable tillage. Some, and the most, does bear a purple
or reddish flower, as in the Forest of Windsore, and in Suffolk, and sundry
other places; and this kind is most common, and grows commonly in the worst
ground. In the North parts, upon the Mountains and Fells, there is a kind of
Ling, that bears a berry: every of these has his peculiar earth wherein it
delights. Some in sandy, and hot grounds, as between Wilford bridge, and
Snape bridge in Suffolk. And that is bettered especially, and the heath killed
best and soonest, by good fat marle. Some in grauelly and cold earth, and that
is hard to be cured, but with good stable dung. Heathy ground unprofitable.
But there is a kind of heathie ground, that seems altogether unprofitable
for tillage, because that the gravel and clay together retains a kind of
black water, which so drencheth the earth, and causes so much cold, as no
husbandry can relieve it, yet if there be chalk-hils nere this kind of earth,
there may be some good done upon it: for that only or lime will comfort the
earth, dry up the superfluous water, and kill the heath. But the sandy heathie
ground is contrarily amended, as I told you, with fat marle and that is
commonly found near these heathie grounds, if men were provident and forward
to seek for it. Every of these heathie grounds are best known of what nature
they be of, How to find the natures of the heathie grounds
whether hot or cold, by the growing of it: as if it grow low and stubbed, it
argues the ground to be grauelly, cold, and most barren; where it grows rank
and high, and the stalk great, the ground is more warm, and more apt for
tilth, yet it requires some kind of composte, else will it not bear past a
crop or two, contenting the owner: but if men will not endeavor to search for
the hidden blessings of God, which he has laid up in store in the bowels of
the earth, The earth commanded to deny vt fruit without labor.
for their use that will be painful, they may make a kind of idle and vain
show of good husbandry, when indeed they only plow, and sow, and charge the
earth, to bring forth fruit of it own accord, when we know it was cursed for
our sakes, and commanded to deny us increase, without labor, sweat, and
charge, which also are little available, if we serve not him in fear and
reverence, who is the author of true labors, and of the blessings promised
thereunto.


Bai. I think there is no disease in the body of man, but nature has given
virtue to some other creatures, as to herbs, plants, and other things, All
kinds of grounds have their help.
to be medicines for the same: so is there no kind of ground so mean, barren,
and defective, but God has provided some means to better it, if man, to whom
he has given all, will search for it, and use the same to that end it was
provided for. And yet this piece of ground adjoining, has had much labor and
great cost bestowed on it, and the ground little or nothing the more reformed:
Furse.
This fursy close.


Sur. In deed it is a strong weed, called in the North Country, Whynns. It
seldom gives place where it once footeth, Whynns.
I will go see the form of the furses. These furses are not worth the
fostering, they be dwarffe furses, and will never grow great, nor ^igh, Dwarf
furses.
and of little use.


Bai. I speak not to learn how to preserve them, but how to destroy them.


Sur. But there is a kind of Furse worth the preservation, if it grow in a
Country, barren of wood. And of that kind there grows much in the West part
of Devonshire, and in some parts of Cornwall, where they call them French
Furses, French F^ures.
they grow very high, and the stalk great, whereof the people make faggots,
and vent them in neighbor Towns, especially in Exeter, and make great profit
of them. And this kind of Furze grows also upon the sea coast of Suffolk: But
that the people make not that use of them, as in Devonshire and Cornwall, for
they suffer their sheep and cattle to bruize them when they be young, and so
they grow to scrubbed and low tufts, Quick set hedges of Furse.
seldom to that perfection that they might; yet in that part of Suffolk they
make another use of them, they plant them in hedges, and the quickset of them
make a strong fence.


Bai. Uery silly quickset hedges, I would think, can be made of simple furzes.


Sur. Such as after two or three years, being cut close to the earth, they
will then branch and become so thick, as no hedge, if the ditch be well made,
and quick well set, can be more defensible, being set in two or three ranckes.


Bay. I marvel they learn it not in Cornwall, where for want of quick-set, and
haying or hedging stuff, Fences of Turffes and Stones.
especially in the West parts, they are forced to make their fences with
turffes and stones.


Sur. They do so indeed, upon the Moors there: but sheep will easily scale
their walls. But the Furse hedges which I have seen in that part of Suff. no
cattle can pierce them.


Bai. Then are these furzes good for nothing.


Sur. To brew withal and to bake, and to stop a little gappe in a hedge.


Bailey. Then may we hereabouts afford the standing of them: for we have no
great plenty of these necessaries in these parts.


Sur. I see no store of hay boot, unless it be in the Lords wood, where I
think it be not lawful for men at their pleasure to take.


Bay. What mean you by hay boot? I have read it often in Leases, and I
promise you, I did ever take it to be that which men commonly use in hay time,
as to make their forkes and tools, and lay in some kind of losts or hay
taliets, as they call the^ in the West, that are not boorded: and is not that
the meaning?


Sur. I take it not: it is for hedging stuff, namely, Hay boot, what it is.
Hedge boot and hay boot the difference.
to make a dead hedge or rail, to keep cattle from corn or grass to be
mowne.


Bai. What difference then is there between hay boot and hedge-boote.


Sur. Some there is: for a hedge implies quick-set and trees: but a hay a dead
fence, that may be made one year, and pulled down another, as it is common
upon the downs in many countries where men sow their corn, in vndefenced
grounds, there they make a dead hay next some common way to keep the cattle
from the corn.


Baylie. If that be the difference, we have some use of it also in this
country, but we want it much, as you see, by the lying of our hedges.


Sur. I see the hedges lie very vnhusbandly: a true note of few good husbands:
for he that will suffer his hedges to lie open, and his houses uncovered, never
put a good husbands hand to his head. Quicke-set hedges are most commendable:
for they increase and yield profit and supply, to repair decayed places: but
dead hedges or hayes devour and spend, Dead hedges devour.
and yet are seldom secure.


Bailey. I pray, what is the best stuffs to make quick-set of?


Sur. The plants of white thorn, mixed here and there with oak and ash.


Bailey. But the plants are not easily gotten in all places.


Sur. Then the berries of the white or hawthorn, How to make a quick-set hedge.
acornes, ash keys mixed together, and these wrought or wound up in a rope of
straw, will serve, but that they will be somewhat longer in growing.


Bailey. How must the rope thus stuffed with the former berries be laid?


Sur. Make a trench at the top or in the edge of the ditch, and lay into it
some fat soil, and then lay the rope all along the ditch, and cover it with
good soil also, then cover it with the earth, and ever as any weeds or grass
begins to grow, pull it off and keep it as clean as may be from all
hindrances: and when the seeds begin to come, keep cattle from bruising them,
and after some two or three years, cut the young spring by the earth, and so
will they branch and grow thick, and if occasion serve, cut them so again
always, preserving the Oak and Ash to become trees.


Bailey. Time of quick setting.
What is the best time to lay the berries in this manner?


Sur. In September or October, if the berries be fully ripe.


Bay. What if a man were desirous to make a little grouet, where now no kind of
such plants do grow?


Sur. How to make a grouet.
Till the place with the plow, in manner of fallowing* and cross plow it, and
bent the clods small as may be: Then sow or set Acornes, Ashkeyes, Hawes,
Hedgberries, Nuts, and what else you desire* and then ^arrow it, and for some
two or three years it were good to keep it as free from grass or weeds as
could be, until the seeds were above the grass, and when they be somewhat
stronger, the superfluous weeds will be the more easily culd out. I know a
wood sown of Acornes about two and twenty years since, the Oaks whereof are
now as high as an ordinary steeple. The ground in this case must be considered:
for some grounds are more naturally inclyned to foster such things, and some
are not. Some kind of wood also loves one kind of soil more then another, as
the Juniper delights in a chalkie soil, Several trees and the grounds the
like.
as appears in Kent and Surrey. So does also the Yew tree, which brooketh a
light and barren soil. The Walnut tree likewise in mean ground being hott,
and the Elm a sandy earth, the Aspe, the Popple, the Alder, the Able trees
moist ground, the Oak most kinds of ground.


Bay. I have a piece of land, overcome with a kind of weed that is full of
prickles, and grows a foot or two foot^high, whereof no cattle will feed,
and I know no way to destroy it.


Sur. By your description it should be Gorse or prickle broom, Gorse.
a weed that grows commonly upon grounds ouertilled, and worn out of heart,
and it commonly grows not but in cold clay ground, and is hardly killed, but
with lyme or chalk, and so plowed, and then sow it two or three crops
together. And if you then let it lie, it will bear you the next year a cropp
of course Hay, and will then yearly increase in goodness for pasture or Hay, and
so much the sweeter and thicker, if you keep it low eaten.


Bay. I think you mistake the weed, you mean, I take it, Furse or Whyns,
which some call also Gorse.


Sur. I think I mistake it not, but such as call Furse, Gorse, are as much
mistaken, as they that call Brakes, Broom.


Bay. Because you speak of Broom, Broom.
I know a Lordship of my Landlords, which no doubt you shall survey too, it is
much pestered with Broom, and there has been much charge and pains, and Art
too bestowed in destroying of them, but al in vain. They have been cut,
stocked up by the roots, as was thought, burnt and plowed, and yet they grow
again.


Sur. It is the nature of Furse, Broom, Furse, Broom, Brakes, their nature.
and Brakes, to keep their standing, and hardly will yield the possession once
gotten in a field: for commonly they like the soil well, and the soil them,
and where there is a mutual congruitie, there is seldom a voluntary
separation. And therefore, as long as there is not a disturbance of their
possession with a contrary earth, they will keep where they are: for as the
Fish loves and lives in the water, the Camelion by the Air, the Salamander
in the fire, and either of them being taken from his element, will die. So these
kinds of weeds (for so they may be called) as long as they possess the soil
they affect, do what you can, they will live. And therefore as the soil is
commonly barrain hott, How to kill Furse, Broom, and Brakes.
and dry wherein they live, make this ground fatt and fruitful, and they will
die. And therefore the greatest enemy that may be set to encounter them, is
good and rich Marle, and thereupon, the Plowe some few years together: And you
shall see, they will shrink away, and hide their heads.


Bail. But commonly this kind of fatt Marle is not to be gotten in all places;
nay seldom where these barren grounds are.


Sur. It is true, they commonly come not, and say to the lazy husbandman, Here
I am. It is the nature of all things to covet rest, and where dumb and dead
things ^urke, is not easily found without diligent search, All hidden benefits
must be sought for
Gold, Silver, Brass, Tynn, Lead, Cole: Slate, and great Milstones, show not
themselves voluntarily, but are found by scrutation and discretion. And I
think, many treasureable blessings lie hid from slothful men, for want of
search, and worthily. So does this notable commodity of Marle, from the eyes
of the husbandman, until he diue into the bowels of the earth, to seek, and
admit he miss it here, he may find it there, if he fail to day, he may get
it to morrow. But Thryft has no greater enemies then Ignorance and Idleness.
Ignorance and Idleness enemies to thrift.
The one persuades it cannot be, the other, it will not be. And between these
Weeds, Briars, Thorns, Thistles, Furse, Broom, Gorse and a thousand marks of
the first curse annoyous, which by the blessing of God, Industry, and charge
might easily and shortly remove more out of our sights: And yet if the view of
them daily could make us or move us to call our first disobedience obedience
to consideration, and repentance, I would wish thorns to grow where corn
stands. But since no spectacle of former threats, no use of present blessings,
will move the hard hearted, either to seek by labor or charge to reform these
evils, easy to be reformed, Let us leave to discourse, None should be idle.
and he that has understanding, and will, let him use them here in this
toylesome life, and not be idle: for if we do what we can, these cankers will
follow us, these inconveniences will annoy us, and will procure every day, new
labor, and new cost, and new diligence, and new Art, to make us know, that
Omnia proposuit labori Deus. Man of necessity must labor. And when he has
swett and toyled, and bestowed all his skill and utmost charge, if God add not a
blessing, all is lost. Paul may plant, Apollo may water, but if God give not
the increase, the labor is vain. God makes a fruitful land barraine, Ps.
107.34.
for the wickedness of the people that dwell therein there is a curse. Again, A
handful of corn sown upon the tops of high mountains, Psalm. 72.26
shall so prosper, as the fruits and ear, thereof shall shake like the high
Cedars in Libanon. Here is a blessing. It is a gracious thing therefore to
fear and reverence him, whose blessing and cursing so much prevail, and to
pray to him for success in our endeavors, and to glorify him for his blessings.


Bai. You have divinely concluded: And I wish not only the words of mouth,
but the substance of your meaning were fully engraven, and truly seated in the
hearts of all that labor. So, no doubt, but the Lord would be always ready
to bless their endeavors: Although indeed Job says, The earth is given into
the hands of the wicked, Job. 9.24.8.21.7.
and they wax old and wealthy. And David in diverse and sundry places
declares that the wicked prosper most ^n the world. And I tell you, it is a
daunting unto weak men, that think they serve God truly, and many times it
goes worse with them, then with such as seem seldom or never to call upon
his name.


Sur. But when David considered the end of these men, Psalm. 37.22
he could say, that the Lord had set them in slippery places. And that they
that are blessed of God, shall inherit the earth: And whatsoever they do, it
shall prosper. Therefore I say, that he that commends his labor unto the
Lord, and the success of all his endeavors unto his divine providence, who does
and can always bring all things to pass for our best good, whether it be the
full fruits of the earth for our relief and comfort, or scarcity and want,
for our trial, Psalm. 1.3.
he is sure to stand fast, and shall be as a tree planted by the rivers side,
whose leaf shall never wither: And in the same time of dearth, he shall have
enough to sustain his necessity.


Bay. It is a good and holy resolution, on which all men ought to rest
themselves, with a faithful and patient expectation. And therefore he that
has far^ and fruitful ground, let him be laborious and thankful: and he
that has lean and barraine, let him be painful and patient.


Sur. You say well, and so I leave you. And for other matters, and better
satisfactions in these things thus superficially discoursed, I refer you to
the advice of the better able to resolve you. I will return to my former task.


Bailey. I thank you for your patience and pains, and I commend you to your
labors. And as your occasions shall challenge my further poor service, I
shall be ready.


FINIS.

