A TRVE REPORT OF THE Private Colloquy between M. Smith, alias Norrice, and M.
Walker.

Held in the presence of two Worthy Knights, and of a few other Gentlemen,
some Catholics, some Protestants.

With a brief Confutation of the false, and adulterated sum, which M.
Walker, Pastor of S. John Evangelist in Watling-streete, has diuulged of the
same.

Permissu Superiorum. M. DC. XXIIII.

TO THE READER.
IT IS no Nouelty lately practiced by the Protestants of our age; it has
always been the usual trade, and inueterate guile of Heretics in former
times, to corrupt, falsify, and deprave, not only the Books, and Writings,
but the words, sayings, and other Conferences they have held with the
professors of the Catholic Church. Origin Ruffin in Apol. pro Orig.
complayneth how his books were thus abused by the enemies of God, and Sowers
of Cockle, even in his own days. S. Augustine Aug. in breui. Collat.
writes, that the Donatists being convicted of falsehood in a Collation he had
with them, did after maliciously calumniate, and traduce the sentence given
against them, as falsely pronounced. The Arians, Pelagians, and other ancient
Sectaries were attainted of the like crime. And now our Puritans, and
Protestants are proved guilty of the same, or far more treacherous dealing, by
which they labor to underprop the rotten beams of their ruinous,
unconstant, and declining doctrine.

2. Of this fraud and deceit Hunnius, Hail-bronner, and their companions were
Tanner. in relat. comp^nd. de collat. Ratisb. Idem apparet ex protocollo.
guilty, who being vanquished in the meeting at Ratisbone, diuulged
notwithstanding many false reports of their triumph and victory. Of this was
M. Jewel guilty, as D. Harding in many of his writings, and M. Walsingham in
his Search, have evidently discovered. Guilty was M. Reynolds in publishing his
Conference with M. Heart, wherein he forged diverse things to the credit of his
own, and disadvantage of his Opponents cause, of which he never so much as
dreamed. Therefore S. Gregory truly auerreth of these, and such like
heretics, that, by their labors and disquisitions, they endeavor not so much
to attain the truth, as to seem victorious: they more eagerly thirst after
the applause of men, then the glory of God: they seek such things as apertayne
to themselves, not such as belong to Jesus Christ.

3. In which kind, most notable now of late, and most fresh in memory, is the
pride and arrogancy of D. Featly, who impudentlie boasted of his supposed
Conquest in a meeting which he, and D. White had with M. Fisher, and M.
Sweet: from which nevertheless he cowardly fled; wholly discomfited, and
blotted with the ignomonie of a desperate Retraite. No less shameful (though
in a conflict less famous) is the vanity of M. Walker, in bragging of the
Conference between him and M. Smith, which himself has set forth stuffed with
such a heapeof false and guilefull relations, as he may seem (according to the
Prophet) to have made lying to be protected. Nothing trembling at that Isa.
(...). v. 15.
dreadful sentence which is prophesied of him; Thou (O Lord) hate all that
work iniquity. Psalm. 5. v. 7.
thou will destroy them all that tell a lie. Howbeit not one, but so many lies
has he diuulged, as I may say with Jeremy, he has bent his tongue, or
prepared his quill, Hier. ^. v. ^.
as a bow of lying, and not of truth etc. His tongue is a wandering arrow; it
has spoken guile. For in relating the arguments and answers which passed on
both sides, some he changes, some he corrupts: here he leaves out, there
he foisteth in: one while he disioynteth the words, otherwhile he dismembreth,
and peruerteth the sense: in fine he makes such a misshapen and confused Chaos
of malicious slanders, of foolish and impertinent additions, as may well
become one of his own deformed and bastardly brood; which the judicious Reader
may playnlie perceive by the true narration I shall here deliver, without
inserting any more then shallbe necessary for the just reproof of the
adversaries forgeries, or redargution of other speeches purposelie omitted, and
suppressed by him.

4. Yet marvel not I have so long delayed The first Copy which miscarried,
was carried in all likelihood to M^. Walker, that he may be furnished before
hand with his Reply.
this obligation I had, to clear my self, and satisfy the interest Iowe to
truth. For the first Copy of my answer fully perfected, and addressed to the
press (though in a forrayne Country, because the time permits not any such
commodity at home) was, as it often happens, intercepted by the way, and the
interception concealed from my knowledge for the space of six whole weeks. So
powerful is the adverse faction in bearing us down, and openly disgracing us
with their calumnious libels; and so vigilant and watchful in stopping all
possible means we should take, to manifest our innocence. But such violent
oppression cannot still continue; the Widows tears, the Orphans cries will at
length be heard; and Christ's afflicted flock, our silenced pens, may find a
time to lay open our sincerity, and the wrong which is done us, by their false
criminations.

A TRVE REPORT OF THE Private Colloquy, between M. Smith, alias Norrice, and
M. Walker.
M. SMITH, alias NORRICE. So M. Walker styles me. FIRST then it is false, that
I challenged any Minister to dispute: I only yielded for the satisfaction of Sir
William Harington, to give a meeting to any whom he should bring. Secondly, it
is false, that I was assisted by any more Priests then only one, by any more
Catholics then four; I for solemnly conditioned at the beginning, that
there should be no more then five or six persons at the most on a side: to the
end the Conference might be very secret, and private, without concourse of
people, or noise abroad, for fear of affoarding disgust unto the State, in
that our quiet time of peace and conniuencie. Which conditions I punctuallie
observed, though the Adversary was so bold as to violate and infring them,
both by bringing more then the appointed number, as by publishing also the
whole discourse, to the open view and sight of the Realm; yet so
fraudulently, so corruptly, as forces me to this right and vnfaygned reply.
Then, although it be true, that I entreated the disputation might be performed
sweetly, and with all mildnes, without bitter words, or reproachful taunts;
yet M. Walker made no such answer as he has forged in his Pamphlet. True also
it is, that I excepted against the vnmannerlie terms of calling our Church
Whore of Babylon, the Pope Antichrist, and desired no such odious Epithetes
might be used, now especially when it pleased the Kings Majesty to send to his
Holiness for a dispensation for the marriage of our Noble Prince; Yet I said not,
that his Majesty sued to his Holiness, or gave the Pope that honor: The awe of
reverence I bore to so mighty a Monarch did temper my tongue from using any
such words, as seemed to carry the least show of distaste. At length that we
might proceed more solidelie, and not floate up and down upon vncertaynties, I
desired we might both agree in some general positio^s, or irreuocable Tenants,
as grounds of our ensuing dispute. Whereupon being to prove, That the
Protestants Church is not the true Church of Jesus Christ, nor, That it has
his true faith, I demanded of M. Walker, whether the true Church be always
visible, or no?


M. WALKER. The true Catholic Church is not visible, because it Yet M. Rogers
among his articles to which this minister did, or ought to have sworn has:
The visible Church is a Catholic Church. art. 1^.
comprehends the whole company of the elect of which the greatest part being
Saints in heaven, are without the ^each of man's eye, and cannot be seen.


M. SMITH. My question is not of the Church Triumphant in heaven, but of the
true Catholic Church Militant upon earth.


M. WALKER. But thus your words and question cohere not together: for it is
as absurd to say, that the Catholic Church is militant on earth, as it is
absurd to affirm, that all mankind, even the universal race of Adam, are now
living.


M. SMITH. Was S. Cyprian then absurd, who called the Cyp. l. 4. ep. 9.
militant Church, united and conjoined in the union and link of Priests,
adhering together, The one Catholic Church? To communicate with Cornelius,
the head Idem ep. 52.
only of the militant, was to communicate with the Catholic Church? Was S.
Augustine absurd, who terms the militant Church, whose communication we Aug.
de ver a relig. cap. 7. Idem ep. 170. contra Crescon. l. 1. ca. 29. de baptis
contra Donatist. l. 3. ca. 16. Tract. 6. in Johan* de fi^e ad Petrum cap. 19.
must hold, The Catholic Church? The milita^t Church, dispersed over the face
of the earth, The Catholic Church? The militant Church, in which alone one
baptism may be wholesomelie obtained, The one incorrupt Catholic Church? The
militant Church, in which by imposition of hands, the holy Ghost is given* The
only Catholic Church? The Church, in which good and evil be, as chafe and
corn, The Catholic Church? The Church in which the sacrifice of bread and
wine in faith and charity cease not to be offered throughout the universal
world, The holy Catholic Church? But to press you no further with the
testimonies of men; was the Son of God absurd, when he said, Other sheep^
Joan. 10. v. 16.
I have, that are not of this fold, the^ also I must bring; and they shall
hear my voice, and there shall be made one fold, and one Pastor? Who were these
other sheep, but either Predestinate, or many of them at least? To what Fold
were they brought? Without doubt to Christ's visible, to Christ's milita^t, to
Christ's Cath. Church: for to no other would he bring them, no other is his
fold, no other his one, and that singular one, of which he is chief and
supreme Pastor. Therefore not your invisible, but the visible, and militant is
the true Catholic Church of JESUS Christ Neither are the Predestinate, as you
pretend, before they be called, members of his Church, because this is the
oracle of Truth, They are not of my fold. So much by the way for this. Now that
you may cease your wrangling, and stick no longer in ambiguity of terms; I
tell you once again, that I speak not of your Catholic, and Invisible, but
of that militant Church, which we are bound to obey, and hear, that, of whose
Communion we ought to be; that, of which Christ said, di^ Ecclesiae, Tell the
Math. 18. v. 17.
Church. What hold you of this? I^ this Church visible, or no?


M. WALKER. I distinguish. That Church may be two ways considered; either in
regard of her outward men, outward duties of Christianity, outward preaching
of the Word, and administration of the sacraments, and so it is visible: Or in
respect of the inward election, inward faith, and spiritual graces, and so it
is invisible.

A Catholic Gentleman. Reserve your distinctions, until you need them, and
now answer directly to the Question.


M. SMITH. Ask me any question, and try whether I will use any such
tergiuersation. What, is your Conscience so horride, or cause so bad, as you
dare never give a direct answer?


M. WALKER. I answer, as I believe.


M. SMITH. And do you not believe, what your own men teach concerning this
point? Do they not teach, that the Church which we ought to hear, is visible?
Or may we hear an invisible? Does not D. Whitaker define it by these marks,
to wit, by the Whitaker ^cntro 2. q. 5. ca. 17. and 18.
true preaching o^ the word; and the true administration of the Sacraments? And
although he adds that the whole Essence of the Church consists in them; yet
he says, that these marks signify, and denote a visible Church. Now, do not
you believe as he does? Or are you afraid to confess that Church to be visible
which he confesses? Man consists of an invisible essence, yet is a visible
man: so the Church may have some invisible dowries, yet be a visible Church.


M. WALKER. You wrong D. Whitaker: He never taught that the whole Essence of
the Church consisted in the true peaching of the word, and administration of
Sacraments.


M. SMITH. I wrong him not: He teaches, writes, and diuulgeth it in print;
though you wrong both your self and us, in making these digressions, and
picking every occasion to run from the matter.


M. WALKER. Dare you stand to this, that M. Whitaker writes it? I have b^th
read him, and studied him, I am sure he has no such matter.


M. SMITH. His books are extant: you studied the^ slightly, or understood
them not. I am sure he has it.


M. WALKER. Because I will not spend time in contesting with See how cunningly
he diuerteth from his own exception, and from D. Whitakers express words,
who says: Quaestio non est de notis inuisibilis Ecclesiae etc. The Question
is not of the marks of ^^e invisible Church.
you, let this be the issue before these Gentlemen: let us send for D.
Whitakers works, and if I do not show that he does prove against Bellarmine,
that the Catholic Church i^ invisible, and that this is a main poin^ large
lie disputed by him, and a main controversy between him and Bellarmine, let
me branded with the mark of a wilful liar.


M. SMITH. Will you still fly to the ambush of your hidden Church? Shall I
never bring you into the open field? Have I not sufficiently inculcated unto
you, that my question is of the Church now militant on earth; of that Church
which we ought to hear, and obey; of that which M. Whitaker describes by the
marks before mentioned; of that which your self distinguished to be partly
visible, partly invisible? And run you now back again to your counterfeit
Catholic, and wholly invisible Church? Are you so suddenly distracted of your
wi^s, as not only to forget what I had said, but what your self had written
immediately before? Yet perhaps I may mistake: It proceeded not so much from the
giddines of your brain, as from the guiltines of your conscience; which
mistrusting the vain and unadvised challenge you made, would now like a cunning
Cheater, by foysting in these words guilefullie, divert it to a quite contrary
purpose. For I never denied that M. Whitaker forgeth an invisible Catholic
Church; but I so often canuased you from straying Contro. 2. q ^ ca. 18. fol
494. and cap. ^1. Nos non inuisibilis Ecclesiae, sed veras certasque n^tas
visibilis Ecclesiae quaerimus.
thither, as common sense might have taught you to keep on your way, and stand
to your tackling in mantaining the quarrel, or saucie exception you took
against me, for saying that M. Whitaker placed the whole essence of the Church
in the true preaching of the Word, and true administration of the Sacraments.
This was that which then I said. Against which you contested as before: your
words, to deliver the contestation truly as it was, I must in part repeat
again, leaving out that counterfeit passage which you of mere fraud so
treacherously insert.


M. WALKER. Well I am content to make this the very issue of our meeting: And
if M Whitaker affirm any such thing, let me be branded with the mark of a
wilful liar, impostor, and false Prophet. But if I show the contrary out of
his own writings, then shall you confess your self a forger, a falsifier, an
impostor, and a Priest of Baal. The gentlemen all confessed this was fair
play, and desired it might be soc. Whereupon M. Smith ( as M. Walker writes*
began to drawbacke and showed himself unwilling, and much afraid to hazard
his credit so quickly, and would gladly have left this point, and fallen into
another.


M. SMITH. How little I was afraid to hazard my credit in that matter, the
standers by at that time can witness; and the evidences I am now to bring out
of M. Whitaker shall manifestly declare: for he supposing, that wheresoever the
Word is truly preached, there it is heard, there it is believed, and
conserved, and there it fructifieth in the hearts of some; Whitaker in respon.
ad 3. rat. Camp.
expressly auerreth of the marks before mentioned. 1. We ascribe these
properties to the Church, which comprise the true nature of the Church, whose
presence make the Church, and their absence mar, or destroy the Church. But
if they comprehend the true nature of the Church, without which it cannot
stand; they contain not the accidental, but the essential nature. If the
essential Nature, the essence: if the essence, the whole essence, because it
is indivisible; they must comprehe^d it whole, or not at all; it cannot be
comprehended in part, because it has no parts. 2. He teaches that the pure
preaching of the Whitaker. ^ontro. 2. q. 5. cap. 17. 13. Vt causae effection
prof^^ etc. ita veritas Ecclesi^^ constitute ^^^sque caus^ est.
Word, is the cause of the Church etc. Then, as the cause produces her effect,
so truth does constitute the Church, and is cause thereof* Besides he often
affirms that, though this cause be more hidden to us, yet it is more known
in nature, more known in it self then the Church: where he undoubtedly
speaks not of the efficient, but of the formal cause. And who is so mean a
student, as not to know, that the formal cause of a thing, is the chief,
principal, and formal essence of that, whose cause it is. 3. D. Whitaker
holds that to be the essence of the Church which he does comprehend in the
definition of the Church (as you very impertinently urge against me;) and yet
the description he makes by these marks I now handle, he plainly terms a
definition VVitak. in resp. ad 3. rat. Ca^p. Hanc tu definitionem in natiuis
ipfius rei quam definimus etc. Controu. 2. q. 5. ca. 17. Quae definiunt, ea
denotant Ecclesiam etc. Sic quid sit Equus, Leo, Aquila ex definitione e^icitur.
of the Church, in his answer to M. Campian saying: This definition engendered
in the native, and inward principles of the thing it self, which we define,
thou shall never be able to overthrow. Again in another place speaking of the
same marks he says; Those things which define, those denote, and signify
the Church etc. So what a Horse what a Lion, what an Eagle is, by their
definition it is known: Therefore as the definition of an Horse, of a Lion, of
an Eagle contain their whole essence; so the aforsayd marks which define the
Church, contain the whole essence and nature of the Church. By these three
Arguments so strong, as M. Walker is not able to answer them, so clear, as
he cannot delude them; the truth of my assertion is irreproueably confirmed,
and he by his own challeng and engagement, is openly convinced to be a wilful
liar, a forger, an impostor, a false prophet, and a Priest of Baal: for such he
must be chronicled, for such entitled; and whatsoever hereafter he shall say or
write, with that note of infamy, must be all discarded. Even such is that
which here he writes immediately after.


M. WALKER. Gentlemen it is true, that D. Whitaker maintains, that the Word
truly preached, and the Sacraments rightly administered are the certain and
infallible notes, and marks, by which every true particular Church may be
discerned to be Christ's true Church; and you know, that the marks of a thing
differ from the essence and substance of it; as the sign hanging at the door
of a Tavern, disters from the Tavern it self: and the habit and cowle of a
Monk, or Friar, which is the mark of his Order, differs from the Monk
himself etc.


M. SMITH. Where were your wits, where was your judgment, where the reading of
you Cantabrigian Professors, when you wrote this at random of their doctrine?
For the sign of a Tavern, the habit of a monk, are ou ward and extrinsecall
signs; those of M. Whitakers ^^c^et and internal: yours only known to the
eye of sense, his to the understanding and eye of faith: Contro. ^* q. ^. c. 18.
yours separable his altogether inseparable: yours may be changed or taken
away without hurt or annoiance of the subjects they design, his cannot be
removed without destruction of the Church: yours In resp. ad 3. rat. Ca^p.
^stas nos Ecclesiae verissimas atque (...) proprietates esse defendimus.
are not so much as accidental qualities, originallie springing from the
essence of the things, but voluntary signs instituted (as the Logitians say)
to signify, at the will only and pleasure of man; M. Whitakers are most true,
and (as he calls them) (...), proprietates, essential properties, essential
marks, grafted in the inward principles of the Church it self; so little
conversant are you in the monuments of your Master* Besides, you do not only
write thus opposite unto him, but most childishly also contradict your self,
tearming these notes of M. Whitaker, certain and infallible, and yet comparing
them with mutable and uncertain signs, which only signify at man's
appointment. For an Iuye bush is not always an infallible sign of a Tavern,
nor the habit of a Friar an infallible mark of him; as the Tragical murders,
which no Friars, but bloody Homicides have committed in Friars weeds, and many
other Comedies can tell you. But because you are so ignorant, as not to know
your self, what to say, or what your own men teach concerning this point; let
me examine you about another, touching the Infallibility of the Church. What
hold you? May the whole militant Church on earth err, or not?


M. WALKER. This is a captious and ambiguous question, and cannot directly in
one word, negative or affirmative, be answered unto.


M. SMITH. No? D. Reynolds answers affirmatively, that It is the second of
his ^ Conclusions printed at the end of his Confedance.
it may err; This is one of his Theses publicly defended in the University
of Oxford; but you think all things captious, because you are set to cavil,
and willing to decline the disputation we have in hand*


M. WALKER. Nay I s^y it is captious and ambiguous, because in some respect it
may e^re, in others it cannot. If we consider it according to her Militancie,
Weakness, and Imperfections of men who are liars; so we tr^^e say it may err.
If we consider it according to the direction of Gods holy Spirit, the
assistance of Christ, his Prophets and Apostles as it is guyded by their
doctrine, cleaves close to the Scripture, and swarueth not from them; so long
we teach that it is infallible, and cannot err.


M. SMITH. But thus every Heretical Assembly is also infallible. Protestants
can challenge no more certaynty, then all other heretics have done.
Thus the Jews, Turks, Infidels, and Devils themselves are infallible; for
as long as any of these closely adhere to the word of God, are guided by his
doctrine* and follow his direction; so long they cannot err. And what? has
your Church no more privilege, or freedom from error, then Jews, then
Turks, then Devils?


M. WALKER. Yes, because Jews, and Turks adhere not to the word of God, they
follow not the truth, we do.


M. SMITH. Do you, because you say you do? Will not they say the same, and
have as good warrant as you? But how shall we know you follow the truth? what
proofs allege you? To chaleng it thus without proofs, seeing it is the matter
controuerted between us, is Petere principium; that is, miserably to beg the
argument we handle, or to give that for a reason which is only in question:
both most ridiculous, and hissed out of all schools. Therefore M. Walker was so
wary, as to conceal in his Su^me this inference of mine, and the foolish
reply, or desperate Nonplus of his. Moreover, to say your Church cannot err,
as it cleaves close to Gods Word, speaks and teaches according to it, or as
long as it swarueth not from thence, is nothing else the^ to avouch Their
ridiculous answer that they cannot err, as long as they speak true etc.
(though in other words) that it cannot err* as it cleaves to truth,
speaks and teaches according to truth; or that it cannot err, as long as it
erreth not: which is as idle as the former was foolish; because to adhere to
Gods word, is to adhere to the truth; to swerve from thence, is to run into
error. So that this answer is nothing to the purpose, no way able to satisfy
my demand: for by asking of you, Whether your Church may err or no, I demand,
whether it be so assisted by God, and guided by his holy spirit, as it must
needs cleave to his word, it cannot depart from it in delivering any point of
faith? What answer you to this, is your Church thus inerrable, or no?


M. WALKER. I have told you already, how it may err, and how it may not.


M. SMITH. And I have refuted what you said. If you have nothing else to
answer to my Interrogatories; answer me a little to a Syllogism, or two I
shall propose; by which I mean to prove, even by this which you have granted,
that the Protestants Church of England, is not the true Church of JESUS Christ.
And thus I frame my argument.

That Church which has not the word of God truly preached, and infallibly
delivered, is not the true Church of JESUS Christ.

But the Protestant Church of England, has not the word of God truly
preached, and infallibly delivered.

Therefore, it is not the true Church of JESUS Christ.


M. WALKER. I deny the Minor.


M. SMITH. I prove the Minor.

The word of God preached in the Church of England is corrupted with errors,
and the men that deliver it, are subject to errors.

Therefore the Church of England has not the word of God truly preached, and
infallibly delivered.


M. WALKER. I deny the Antecedent.


M. SMITH. The Antecedent has two parts, the first of them I declare by
induction. Malachy 2. v. 7. where The first Corruption of the Protestants Bible
argued and euinced.
all true copies have; The lips of the Priest shall keep knowledge, and the
law they shall require of his mouth; you corruptly read; The lips of the
Priest should keep knowledge, and they should require the law of his mouth,
contrary to the Hebrew text, which instead of shall keep, has Iism^ru,
instead of shall seek, Iebakkesu; contrary to the Greek (...) and (...),
contrary the Latin which is custodient, and requirent, all being of the Future
tense, and Indicative mood; which you have changed into the
Preterimperfectense of the Optatiue, or Subiunctiue mood; altering therein both
mood and tense of set purpose, to gainsay the infallibility of Christ's visible
pastors, who lawfully succeed in the Apostles room; and to patronage an
error, or rather Heresy of your own, That the Priests and Prelates of Gods
Church may err in doctrine; and so the people not bound to require the law at
their mouths.


M. WALKER. We have not corrupted the Hebrew text, for the true meaning of the
Holy Ghost is perfectly delivered by our Translation.


M. SMITH. But answer me directly. Are not the Hebrew, In which they have
altered both the mood and tense written by God.
Greek, and Latin words all in the future Tense? Do they not all import,
shall keep, and shall require? And have not you altered both the tense, and
mood? Is it not so? what say you?


M. WALKER. Though the words be in the future tense, yet we have kept the
true sense, because the future tense in Hebrew by reason of vau conuersiuum,
may sometime stand for the preterimperfect tense of the Optatiue, Potentiall,
o^ Subiunctiue mood, as our translation has; therefore it is no^ different,
nor irregular from the Hebrew, which is the Original.


M. SMITH. But this is a mere collusion, for here is no Vau conuersiuum in
that place, nor can there be, as all that are cunninge in the Hebrew can tell;
so that this shift will not serve your turn; nor that other of keeping the
sense. For I accuse you of corrupting the text: But to alter the tense, to
alter the mood, to alter the word of the Holy Ghost, is to corrupt the text,
to change the divine characters written by the finger of God: Therefore your
Translation is guilty of this change, and corruption. Otherwise if adulterers
of Scripture, may judge of the sense, where shall you find any adulteration?
what Heretic can be convinced of corruption? For ask the Arians, ask the
Valentinians, ask Marcion, who for paring, or gnawing away many places of Gods
word, was called Mus-Ponticus, the mouse of Pontus, ask any of these
Corrupters; they will all answer, they keep the sense, and bring as sound
arguments, as you do, for the maintenance thereof: for such is your proof.


M. WALKER. It was ^euer the purpose of Gods spirit in that place, or by these
words to teach, that the law should awayes be taught truly, and infallibly by
the Priests, and Pastors, who succe^d Moses, or the Apostles locally, in the
church by a continued succession.


M. SMITH. Here again you fall to Petere principium; for we prove, it was his
purpose, because his words enforce it. And have you no other means to
disprove it then by denying it was his purpose, because he did never purpose
it? And why did he never purpose it? Because is not agreeable to the purpose of
your Heretical frenzy: Though it be consona^t and agreeable to Gods sacred
doctrine, uttered, and unfolded in diverse other places, as when he says, that
his spirit, his words shall not depart out of the mouth Isa. 5^. v. (...). Luc.
10. v. 16.
of his Prophets, and their seed, and seeds seed for ever. That, he who
hears the Pastors of the Church, hears him: That, if any controversy arise
amongst inferiors, they shall come to the Priests of the Leuiticall stock,
Deuteronomy. 17. v. 8. and 9. These and diverse other passages, which I here omit, I
have more largely discussed in the 3. part. of my Antid. chap. 1. 2. and ^.
and do whatsoever they shall teach according to the law. It is consonant to
these texts, and sundry the like; to which your translation being dissonant, it
must needs be, not only a corruption of the text, but a deprauation also of
the sense of the Holy Ghost.


M. WALKER. That cannot be the sense, because the Priests, unto whom the
Prophet speaks there in the 2. of Malachy, were Levites, and succeeded Aaron
in the Priesthood, and yet they were departed out of the way; they caused many
to fall in the law by their corrupt gloss; and their abuse of the covenant of
Leui etc. Yea some of them had sacrificed to Idols, as Josephus shows in his
history.


M. SMITH. As though it were necessary for all Priests that have lawful calling
to be free from error? or such as are fensed from erring in faith, should
never be able to stumble in their lives? It is enough for the infalibility of
Christ's Spouse, that the high Priest, and his Consistory, that the head of the
Church, and her general Councels be inerrable. It is enough that God does
preserve his truth in the mouths of vicious, and wicked men; as in the mouths
of Scribes, and Pharisees, when they sat on Moses his Chair; as the gift of
prophecy in Ciaphas, of whom S. John records, that he prophesied, because he
was high Priest of that year. See thou (says S. Chrysostom) how great the
power of Po^t^sic Joan. 11. v. 51. Chrysostom. hom. 4. in ^oan. Aug* ^. de Pasto.
cap. 10. Velint, nolint pastoresverba Dei dicturi sunt.
^ll authority is? Grace (...) touched the mouth* but not the ^ewd, and
villainous ^art. And S. (...) of naughty pastors avouches; Will they, nill
they etc. they shall speak the words of God; by reason of the promise, which
here, and else where he has made them.


M. WALKER. God did not make he^re a promise, but gave a commandment* teaching
what the Priests and people should do, and ought to do; like that, Thou shall
have no other Gods but me. Exodus 20.



M. SMITH. In respect of the people, I grant it is a Commandment of God, that
they ought to learn, and require the law from the mouths of the Priests. And
I wonder how you presume to infring this commandment, by sending them from
their public voices, to your secret spirits, or hidden persuasions. Then by
your own confession (because it is the commandment, and Precept of God,
which the people, as you write, ought to obey) it must needs follow, that his
Priests have his infallible promise and assurance of truth; otherwise the
people could not with security repair unto them, otherwise they might err,
and be deluded by them in matters of faith, they might be frustrated of their
hope, and forfeite their salvation, even by following the express will, and
commandment of God, which without open blasphe^y cannot be auerred. The same
is manifestly declared by the reason the Holy Ghost assigns, why the lips
of the Priest shall keep knowledge, because he is the Angel of the Malae. ^.
v. 7. Cyril. in hun^ lo^u^. Chrysostom. in ^. ad T^moth.
Lord of Hosts H^ is called (says S. Cyrill) the Angel of the Lord of
Hosts, because he delivers unto me^ the Oracles of^iod, ^dding nothing,
withdrawing nothing, but even the same ^e rec^iued of God. S. Chrysostom: The
Priest is the Angel of our Lord, he speaks nothing of him self: if thou
despise, thou despisest not him, but God. Moreover, if this were only a
commandment given to Priests by way of direction what they should do; why did
not your Translation express it according to the Hebrew in the future te^se,
as they did other Commandments; Thou shall have no other Exodus 20.
Gods but me: Thou shall not ste^le: Thou shall not commit adultery etc? Surely
their conscience gave them, that something more was here co^prized, or else
they would never have altered the mood, and tense; they would never have bin
more affrayde of translating this commandment truly, agreeable to the
Original, then they were of others. This change* this alteration, pleads
them guilty; for let the sense be what it will; (though I have evidently
demonstrated it to be as we teach;)

Either the Holy Ghost knew better then Protestants, what tense he should use,
to express that sense, or they better then he. Did they know better? O how
detestable is their blasphemy, in ascribing more knowledge to men the^ to God!
Did he know better? O how diucl^^sh was their arrogance, in A dilemma
unanswerable.
presuming to alter the Tense oracled by the Holy Ghost, which he knew to be
best, knew to be most fit, for the explication of his meaning! This is such a
horned argument, or unavoidable dilemma, as neither M. Walker, nor any other
Minister is able to answer.

Another corruption though more cunningly conveyed, is discovered in the 4. of
Daniel v. 24. or The second corruption examined, and proved to be such.
27. where the English Bible has, Break off thy sins by righteousness etc.
instead of Redeem thou thy sins with Alms; For in the Latin it is Redime,
in Greek (...), in Hebrew, in rather in the Chaldeak it is Peruc, of Perac the
root, which also signifies to Redeem.


M. WALKER. That translation is senseles, and against all reason: for God never
appointed that men's sinn^s should be redeemed.


M. SMITH. Your proof indeed is without sense, or reason: it is that idle
Petitio principij, of which you have bin often accused, yet for mere want of
wit can never avoid. Have you no better stuff to allege then this?


M. WALKER. Yes, if you understand, that Nabuchod^nozor ^ wicked Heathen King
should by his own righteousness redeem himself from his sins, you make
Daniel a teacher of Heresy, and blasphemy.


M. SMITH. You are spitefully bent still to wrangle, or else you must needs know
I understand it not of his own righteousness. For Daniell exhorts him to
frequent almesdeedes, which first by way of congruity might procure Gods
favor, and after deservedly redeem, or satisfy for the punishment of his
sins. Which is a heavenly point of faith, inculcated again by the Holy Ghost
in the Proverbs, By mercy, and truth iniquity is redeemed, or purged, as
Proverb. c. 16. v. 6*
your own Bible reads: though that which follows in your Pamphlet be a
most horrible, and M. Walker in his printed sum page 25* Ibidem.
monstrous slander, that Papists go on in known sin, in hope of absolution
by confession, and penance; when we constantly teach, that neither of them can
avail, without detestation of sin, and full purpose of amendment. To this
slander is joined another of his notable leasinges, reporting me to have said,
that Peruc signifies only to redeem; whereas I confessed at the beginning, that
it signified to destroy, redeem, break in pieces, break asunder, but never
to cease to do, or break off a work, as their translation runs.

Sir Edward Harwood. Well, if the word does import, to break in pieces, and we
have, to break off, then me thinks the difference seems but small. This was
that he spoke: but he said not, as M. Walker outfacingly belyeth him, that M.
Smith had failed much in his pr^ofe: he was of a more mild, and generous
disposition, the^ ever to let fall any such speech.


M. SMITH. The less the difference may seem, the more pernicious if it jar,
as this does, from the harmony of Faith: for the word in his native sense
betokneth such a breaking, as hates, destroys, and quite extinguisheth the
thing it crusheth, or breaks a sunder: So it signifies in those very places
which M Walker alleges, Break off the golden ear^ngs etc. Exodus 3^. v. 2.
to wit, with abolishing, with destroying them to that, and changing them to
another use. And much more in Genesis, where it is not, as he most fraudulently
corrupts it, Thou shall break off his yoke etc. Genes. 27. v. 40.
but as the Protestant Translation reads, Thou shall break his yoke from off
thy neck. So that Peru^, break, is referred to the Yoke, as before to the
Earings; ( off) is added by phrase of speech* Likewise the very term of yoke
declares how he was to break it off as a combersome, and hateful burden,
with dislike and detestation, to be eased of the same. No such manner of speech
is usual in the place we handle, and the case it self is far otherwise. For a
ma may break off, or interrupt a business for a time, which he likes,
approoueth, and means after, when opportunity serves, to prosecute, and
accomplish. Therefore though your English Copy bears the sound of a small
corruption, yet the treachery is great, and deprauation most viperous; because
it takes away all reference to the demolition, redemption, and expiation of
sins, by satisfactory works of Penance, and Almes-deedes; which the true
meaning of the word enforces, and the Holy Ghost thereby intended. To conclude,
if the Hebrew word had bin doubtful, as it is not; then the Originalls of
Greek, and Latin, might have directed you, without seeking a new sense, and
faygned signification of your own.

Sir Edward Harwood, and M. Walker. Not so, for we have nothing to do with the
Greek, and Latin text, they are both corrupted.


M. SMITH. And is not the Hebrew also corrupted, especially of late, since the
addition of the pricks? This was the true occasion of excepting against the
Hebrew text; no other was the exception, no other my Walk. in his printed
Sum. page 27.
base estimation or reiection of it: Though M. Walker has so bad a conscience,
as to misreport them all, and so virulent a pen, as upon his own lying report,
to accuse me, of vanity, inconstancy, malice, and wickedness, joined with
wi^full ignorance. But these are mild, and modest words in respect of other
most opprobrious speeches, and spiteful terms, which elsewhere flow from the
bitterness of his heart: to which I now answer once for all The disciple is not
above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord: If Matthew. ^0. v. 24. 25.
they have called the Good man of the house Beelzebub, how much more them of
his household? It is no dishonor for me to be reviled with the servants of his
house, if it be no ignominy for M. Walker to be one of their Reuilers.
Howbeit, as soon as he had disgorged those uncivil terms, he peremptorily
writes.


M. WALKER. It is the judgment of all the best learned, both Jewish Rabbis and
Christians, that the pricks, vowells, and Helias Leuita in Praefat. Massorethi
Rabbi David Kimki in Psalm. 60. Galat. l. 1. c. 8. and vltimo. Genebrar. in suo
Chronol. ad an 476 Lindan. de opt. genesis l. 1. cap. 6. Senensis l. 8. haer. 13.
Arias Montanus in Praefa. ad Biblia.
accents were from the beginning.


M. SMITH. What? Of all the best learned? Little is your reading, or great is
your forgetfulness: for the best learned without exception say the contrary; as
not only Helias Leuita, but Rabbi David Kimki, whom Calvin, and Beza much
commend; and diverse other Rabbis are of the same opinion, cited by Galatinus,
who evidently proves this point out of their own writings: with whom
Genebrard, Lindan, Sixtus Senensis, Arias Montanus, and innumerable others
accord: The words of Arias Montanus be these: The Grammarians strive about the
antiquity, and first inuenters of these vowels, and pricks and the strife as
yet remains in debate: Some referring this thing to the time, and industry of
Esdras; others to the School at Tiberiades famous ^o^ the resort and meeting
of learned Viv^ hoe habeat, illud omnibus in constanti, certeque est, vocalium,
notarum inuentionem consonantibus Haebraicis minime esse coequam.
men: Howsoever thi^^e, that is constant and certain amongst all, the
invention o^ the vowells, pricks, not to be of equal standing, and antiquity
with the Hebrew Consonants. Lo then this is constant, and certain amongst all.


M. WALKER. But look Deuteronomy c. 17. v. 18. and there it is plainly
testifi^d, that there was a book of the law called Mishne, which signified
double, because it was the law written in the double form, both with letters,
and pricks.

Another Priest, M. Smiths Companion, You show your self very ignorant, for
Mishne This was his saying, though M. Walker sets a false gloss upon it.
Athanas*in synop. Aug. q. 49. Theod. in Deutrono. q. 1. Cornesius de Lapid^
sup. Deuteronomy. in pro^m.
does not signify in that place the Original Scriptures, nor holy Scriptures
at all: but the deposition or repetition of the Original, and prime law
contained in Exodus, Leuiticus, and N^meri, which are only part of the
Scripture called Deuteronomium, as S. Athanasius, S. Augustine, and Theodoretus
witness. Now to say, that the whole Scripture is called by the name of Mishne,
is as absurd, as to mantayne that the whole Scripture is called Deuteronomy.
And out of that bare word Mishne to infer, the Scriptures to have been
primarily written with pricks, is most ridiculous, because even in the place
you cite, it is as much distinguished from the first and primary Scripture, as
a copy from the original, a pattern from the Prototypon, and is expounded
joined with Thorah, a doubled, or second Law.


M. WALKER. You contradict you^ self, in affirming that Mishne signifies the
doubled law, which is the Scripture, and yet not the original Scripture.

M. Smiths Companion. No good Sir, It is no more a contradiction to deny Mishne
Thorah, or Deuteronomy to import the Scripture indeterminately, and yet to
grant it to be a part of the Scripture; then to deny you to be a true Minister
of Christ, and yet to grant you to be a Minister: for Mickra indeed is the
common word, by which the Jews express the Scripture.


M. WALKER. I answer, that the Scripture has diverse names, it is called
Thorah, Chethab, Mickra, and Mishne.

M. Smiths Companion. Are not you ashamed, after the labor of so many months
study to write so impertinently; for Thorah signifies only part of the
Scripture, or Pentateuch, Chethab any writing; as Esther. 8. v. 8. the kings
letter is called Chethab: and as for Mishne, you allege no text, or testimony
to prove that it betokens the Scripture. But see Pagnine, and you shall find
that the word never expresses any Scripture at all, but with the word Thorah,
as Mishne Thorah, it betokens a repetition, or second law, as Deutero. 17.
18. Iosue 8. 20. But where Thorah is left out, it signifies only the second.
Look Esther 10. 3. 4. Reg. 22. v. 14. ibid. c. 23. v. 4. and so M. Walker
bewrays his little skill in Rabbis, who though he flourishes in his writing
with the muster of some of their names, and Commentaries; yet he could not
remember at the meeting, to cite any one of their authorities.


M. SMITH. Thus you see M. Walker, how you will be always flinching from the
matter, though you be still beaten back to your own shame and confusion. To
return therefore from whence we are digressed. If the Greek, and Latin be
adulterated in the former place of Daniel, the Hebrew is alike corrupted;
because Peruc properly signifies to redeem, as (...) in Greek, Redime does
in Latin (hence Peric signifies a Redeemer, Purkan Redemption) and so
Theodotio, so Vatablus, so S. Jerome, and so all others express the word:
wherefore either all texts are falsified, or all are true. If all be false, the
Hebrew is tainted with corruption, as well as the Greek and Latin; if all true,
your translation is inexcusable, in discording from the truth of all
originalls, from the version of all the Ancients.

Sir Edward Harwood, with others. These Disputations about the Hebrew text, are
above our capacity, an^ filter for the Schools. I pray you descend to some
more profitable matter, and easier for our understanding.


M. SMITH. Upon this motion only, I ceased to rip up Some other corruptions
briefly urged. 1. Cor. 2. I pray you brethren keep my Ordinances. The like ^.
Thessa. 2. Math. 15. Why do you transgress the Commau^dements of God, by your
Traditions? (...). Luc. 20. and (...). but 2. Thessal. 1. they translate it
truly. Psalm. 118. v. 112. ad Romans 5. v. 17. 18. 21.
the residue of Protestant corruptions, but not because neither I, nor my
Companion had any more to say, as M. Walker according to his fashion peruersly
relates, for infinite other deprauations of theirs are obuious, and apparent;
as the fraudulency they use in translating one, and the same Greek word (...),
Traditio: For in such textes as mention good and wholesome Traditions, they in
lieu of Traditions, read Ordinances: where the Scripture speaks of such as be
naughty, or frivolous, they in hatred of our Apostolical Traditions, carefully
set down the right word Traditions. The same deceit they practice in
expressing the Hebrew word Sheol, Hell; For where it may import a third place
besides Heaven, and Hell, they warily turn it into Grave, Genesis 37. v. 35. Osee
13. v. 14. but where it cannot be meant of any other then of the dungeon of the
damned, there they rightly translate it; as in the 15. of the Proverbs v. 24.
Hell beneath. I might have urged how they iuggle with the word worthy, or make
worthy, against the merit of works; how they change Iustifications into
Statutes, Justice into Righteousness, against inherent Justice; how they
sometime forsake the Hebrew and retire to the Greek, as in the 9 of Proverbs
v. 2. Wisdom has mingled her wine: because the Hebrew word Masecha wholly
favors the ancient mingling of water and wine in the Chalice, which the
Fathers urge as necessary, and Protestants utterly neglect, they fly to the
ambiguity of the Greek word (...), which may signify to power out, as well as
to mingle: and so did they always read before his Majesty's Correction.
Otherwhiles they leave the Greek, and have recourse to the Latin, as Act. 13.
though the Greek be (...), they sacrificing Act. 13. v. 2.
to our Lord, as Erasmus translateth it, yet your translation still runs
according to the Latin they ministering unto our Lord, because you cannot abide
that word, although written by God, which does any way relish of the Sacrifice
of the Mass. These and a thousand such of your guilefull sleights I might have
alleged; howbeit to condescend to the reasonable motion of Sir Edward Harwood
and the rest, I willingly omitted them, and returned to prove the second part
of my first Antecedent which you denied.

The Antecedent was this. The Word of God preached in the Church of England is
corrupted with errors, and the men that deliver, it are subject to errors.

The former part is already proved by the manifest adulterations of your Bible
before mentioned.

The second Part. That your men also are subject to error, I convince by the
confession of M. Reynoldes, M. Whitaker, Reynolds in his 2. Conclus. Whitaker.
contro, ^.
and the most learned Protestants of our time; who expressly write, that the
true Church, which they suppose theirs to be, may err, and all her Pastors in
some points of faith, even necessary to salvation.

Therefore your men, your Preachers, and Pastors are subject to error.


M. WALKER. I grant, that the true Church may err for a time insome one
fundamental point necessary to salvation; and this I affirm of the Protestant
Church, of our Church of England: Ground what you can upon this.


M. SMITH. Though some of the Catholics heerevpon cried out, We have enough,
enough, let us leave of our dispute, yet to give more full satisfaction to the
Protestant Gentlemen, who perceived not so soon the absurdity of this
Paradoxe, or folly of M. Walker, in granting that very part of my Antecedent
which before he denied, I proceeded a little further, and argued thus against
him.

If your Church may err in one point necessary to salvation, it may as well
err in another, and so ca^ propose nothing undoubtedly to be believed, as an
article of faith. Which inference though M. Walker denied, and with many
cauillations labored to divert, yet it evidently follows, as I thus declare.

That Church which has not sufficient authority to persuade all the mysteries
of faith she proposes, to be infallibly true, can propose nothing undoubtedly
to be believed as an article of faith.

But your Church which may err now in one point, now in another, at least for
a time, has not sufficient authority to persuade all the mysteries of faith
she proposes to be infallibly true.

Therefore, your Church can propose nothing undoubtedly to be believed, as an
article of faith.

For seeing the Articles in which your Church may err, are not specified by
God, nor known to your followers; they may justly fear, and suspect least
those she now proposes, be some of them, in which she may err: But with fear
and suspicion no faith can stand, nothing can she propose which ought
undoubtedly to be believed, as S. Augustine in the like case most excellently
discourses, saying: How can he be believed who thinks he may Aug. lib. de
mendacio cap. 8.
sometime tell a lie; for perchance he then lies, when he c^mmau^deth us to
believe him. So you that hold, your Church may sometime err, have cause to
doubt, least then perchance she erreth, when she commands you to follow her
doctrine. If cause to doubt, no cause to obey, no cause to credit her. Nay it
implies co^tradictio^ we should with divine faith give credit unto her: For by
faith we are assured, Faith and doubtfulnes cannot comply together of one and
the same thing.
that the thing she teaches cannot possibly be otherwise, then we believe: By
doubtfulnes, or suspicion we mistrust they may be otherwise: Else why do we
doubt? Why do we suspect? Therefore it is a manifest implicancy, and
irreconciliable co^tradiction, that faith and doubtfulnes should consist
together; that we should be undoubtedly persuaded of the truth proposed, yet
stagger and misdoubt of the truth thereof; as you have just cause to do, as long
as you maintain, that your Church may deceive you.

Besides, to prove out of the former Paradoxe, that your Church is not the
true Church, I framed these Syllogismes.

That Church which may err for a time, in a fu^damentall point, necessary to
salvation, has no certainty for that time.

Yours is such.

Ergo, it is no true Church. Again.

That Church which may err for a time, in a fu^damentall point, necessary to
salvation, has not sufficient means of salvation, for that time.

Yours is such.

Ergo, it is no true Church.


M. WALKER. These arguments are sophistical, and faulty, because they have
four terms. With the same Censure he discarded other Syllogismes as crazy and
imperfect, he denied to answer any Enthymeme: and such was his fear of
hazarding both cause and credit, as he rejected also a true, and perfect
Syllogism in mood, in figure, as the Roman Catholic, whom he mentioned,
maintained against him. Though he did not renounce his salvation if it were not
true, which M. Walker after his wonted fashion most injuriously reports of
him.


M. SMITH. Your cause lies a bleeding, when you thus begin to wrangle about
Syllogismes; yet these two which I have here repeated, with the third which
immediately follows in your Sum, are such as no Scholar would reprehend.
For the conclusion which seems to make the Syllogism, and consists of four
terms, supposes another Syllogism vertually inuolued, which to avoid
tediousnes I did not express: After which manner all Enthymenes are justified,
and allowed, notwithstanding one of the premises be suppressed, and the
conclusion be immediately inferred. A thing very usual among the learned in all
Universities, especially when the Disputant is either straightened with shortness
of time, or the Auditory ouer-wearied, as now it was, with the combersome delay
of 4. long hours, by reason of your manifold digressio^s, idle repetitio^s,
impertinent discourses, ouer-tedious writings etc. But you who never appeared
in any such schools, never peeped out of Aristotle's Parua's, no marvel
(...)* ^. parua.
though you could not apprehend that kind of arguing. I pardon your ignorance,
I bear with your dulnes, and pass to those Syllogismes in mood and figure,
which you could not gainsay.

That Church which has not the whole, entire, and infallible faith, has not
means sufficient to salvation.

But that Church which may err for a time, in a fundame^tall point, has not
the whole, entire, and infallible faith.

Therefore, it has not means sufficient to salvation.


M. WALKER. I deny your Minor, and do put you to prove, that the Church which
may err, has not the whole and infallible faith.


M. SMITH. If it do err, it has not whole and entire faith; if it may err it
has not infallible faith: as thus I prove.

That Church which is subject to error, in a fu^damentall point, has not the
whole and infallible faith. But that Church, which may err in such a point, is
subject to error.

Therefore, it has not whole, and infallible faith.


M. WALKER. I must tell you* that your Minor proposition is false. For a Church
may be so far subject to error, that it may have a possibility to err, yet
not be void of the whole and infallible faith. It is one thing to be subject to
error, and another to err actually: We hold, that our Church may err, but
do not think that it does err in any fundamental point.


M. SMITH. If it may err, if it has a possibility to err, it is as bad as if
it did err, in respect of the certainty which faith requires: for thus I
argue.

That Church which is fallible in a fundamental M. Walker was affrayd this last
argument of mine, should come to light, therefore he purposely suppresseth it
in his Su^me
point of faith, is not also infallible in the whole and entire faith.

But your Church which is subject to error, which has a possibility to err,
in a fundamental point of faith, is fallible.

Therefore, it is not also infallible in the whole and entire faith: Unless it
may be in one and the same thing both fallible, and infallible, subject to
error, and not subject, which is impossible.

M^^revpon I concluded, that since the Protestant Church is fallible in faith,
it has not any true, and supernatural faith: if it has no true faith, it
cannot be a true Church, which were the two things I was engaged to prove: and
so I have fully discharged my task, to the satisfaction I hope of all that be
present. For M. Walker being caught in this net of contradiction, had no means
to escape, unless, as S. Augustine writes of Maximin^s the Arrian Bishop, By
talking much, and nothing to the Aug. co^t. Maxim. lib. 2.
purpose, he might seem at lest to answer, who was not able to hold his
peace. Therefore some of his companions entreated he might argue a while, to see
whether he could have better fortune in impugning our Church, the^ he had in
defending theirs. But before I relate the disputation he began, I think it
expedient for the instruction of such as are better conversant in Divinity, to
unfold certain Theological Principles, or Articles of faith, whereby the
force of my former argument, the truth of our doctrine, the folly of
protestancy, and the enormity of M. Walkers answer, may more apparently be
discovered.

The first Principle is, that Fidei non potest subess^ falsum, faith cannot be
subject to any falsity: Faith Three remarkable principles ^.
is infallible, since it has for its former object the prime Verity, or
authority of God; it relieth upon his infinite Knowledge, which cannot be
deceived in understanding any thing, and upon his infinite Veracity which will
not beguile us in testifying an untruth: It is impossible for God to lie, we
have a most Ad Heb. ^. v. 18.
strong comfort. But as it is impossible for God to lie, impossible for him to
witness that which may be false: So it is impossible for the habit of Faith to
incline, or for the act of Faith to assent to that which is liable to any
falsehood: As S. Thomas singularly 8. Thom* 1. 2. q. 1. art. 3. and Scholast. 3.
did* 24. 25.
well proves by these 3. Reasons. First, because nothing can belong to the
habit or act of faith, except that which appertains to their formal object,
and in such sort as it is instilled, conveyed, and drawn from thence: Even as
no color can be seen, unless it be garnished with the beams of light. But
to prime Verity no falsity can belong, not only any actual falsehood, but not
so much as any thing that has a possibility to be falls; no more then any
pronesse to evil can appertain to sovereign goodness, or the least shadow of
darkness to light inaccessable. Therefore Faith, which has prime Verity for her
object, must not only be free from actual error, but from all lyablenes
thereunto, or possibility of erring. Secondly, every act, every habit, is
necessarily lincked with equal proportion of certainty, or assurance, with the
certainty of the object, of which it borrows its dignity, nature, and form:
Wherefore as the prime Verity, and testimony of God; so the habit, and act of
Faith, are both infallible. Thirdly, Faith is an intellectual Virtue which
does perfect, and enoble the faculty of our Understanding, which cannot receive
the dye of perfection from any other thing then that which is true, because
that only, as all Philosophers teach, is her proper, and peculiar object. Hence
it is, that S. Paul describes Faith Ad Heb. 11. v. 1. Dionys* de diui. nom.
cap. 7. Aug. lib. 13. de Tri^i^. cap. 1. (...).
not only to be the substance, that is, the settled ground, the constant, and
stabl^ foundation (according to S. Dionysius) of our hope, but also, an
argument of things not appearing; that is, a firm assent, a demonstration or
Conviction, as S. Augustine says, of our understanding, which cannot be
obnoxious to any danger of falsity.

The second Principle presupposes, that Faith The 2* Principle.
must not only be infallible, but whole also, and entire: Witness S. Athanasius
in the beginning of his Creed, Whosoever does not believe the Catholic faith
wholly and i^uiolably, he shall undoubtedly perish: And S. Leo: A great
safeguard is faith entire, true faith, in Leo. ser. 4. in solemn. Natiu. Ephesians.
4. Mar. 16. v. 16.
which nothing can be added by any, nothing de^racted; because unless faith be
one, it is no faith, the Apostle auerring, One Lord, One faith. To which
purpose our Savior himself avouches: He that beleiueth not, shall be
condemned: that is; he that beleiueth not every Article, expressly or
implicitly, he that beleiueth not the whole sum of Christian doctrine, shall
incur the forfaiture of his salvation. For as all things are to be observed
whatsoever Christ commanded; Math. 28. v. 20.
so all things to be believed whatsoever he taught: and in such manner, that
albeit the mysteries in themselves are some of less, some of greater moment,
some necessary, some contingent; yet as they are testified, and revealed by
God, they ought all with equal certainty, with the same surety to be
credited and embraced; because God in all things little or great, necessary or
contingent, is equally great, and of infallible credit: Whereby every Article is
so fast riuetted, and conjoined one with the other, in such uniform and due
proportion, as they make, says S. Gregory Nazianzen, A Chain truly Greg. ora.
37. Amb. ad ^. 9. Lucae l. 6:
golden, and sovereign. From which, if your withdraw but one, you withdraw
your salvation, as S. Ambrose writes.

The third principle is, that the ordinary means The 3. principle.
of atteyning the whole and infallible faith, is from the mouth of the Church,
from the lips of her Romans 5. v. 17.
Priests, because faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of Christ: to
wit, by the word expounded and preached unto us, by his lawful Pastors: for
it Ibid. v. 14.
goes immediately before, How shall they hear without a Preacher, and how
shall they preach unless they be sent? Whereupon it necessarily ensues, that
if they be sent from God to teach his heavenly doctrine, if we be bound to
believe upon their testification and preaching, their preaching must be
certain, their testification undeceivable, that we may securely 1. These. 2. v.
2^
receive the word they deliver; not as the word of men, but as it is indeed the
word of God, who by their mouths speaks, by their testimony seals, and
witnesses it unto us; especially seeing he commands us to hear them as
himself, to obey them as Luc. 10.
his Vicegerents, to believe them under penalty of damnation; seeing he gives
them the Holy Ghost, Ioh. 16 and 17. Ephesians. 4.
to teach them all truth, to sanctify them in verity, that we be not carried
about with any wind of doctrine. Therefore as God cannot immediately by
himself, or mediatly by any other, deliver that which may be doubtful or
uncertain; so much less by the mouth of those his witnesses, his judges, his
interpreters, In the 3. Part of my An* tid. chap. ^. and 6.
by whom he utters the Oracles of truth: as I might more fully demonstrate,
if I had not already elsewhere vncontrollably euicted and proved the same Yea
the very nature and condition of faith, perforce requires it; for that being
an assent of our understanding to things not appearing, that is, not appearing
true through the evidence of truth in themselves, or through the light of
humane reason, but only by this Authority of God, who testifies them not
immediately, but by the means of his Church, by the true Pastors, and
expounders of his word; if they might vary, or fluctuate in the rules they
follow of expounding Scripture, their expositions were wavering, their
preaching vnco^stant, they could neither assuredly teach, nor we undoubtedly
give credit to that which they propose, Whit. cont. 2. q. 4. page 221.
as to constant, stable, and immovable truth. For it is a warrantable position
of M. Whitakers; Such as the means be, such of necessity must be the
interpretation it self: But the means of interpreting obscur^ places are
uncertain* doubtful, and ambiguous: Then it cannot possibly be, but that the
interpretation it self is uncertain; if uncertain, then may it be false. But
if it may be false, as M. Walker acknowledges the interpretation of the
Protestants Church may be, it overthrows the ground of faith, the foundation
of Religion. For what else can be, or any of his fellows assig^e, on which they
stay o^ an^ker the certainty of divine belief? Their particular pastor? Their
private spirit? But if their Pastors in general may trip and slumble; how
much more, their particular? If the public spirit of their Church be errable,
how deceiuable is their private? Again, the private spirit is hidden, it
cannot be discovered and opened to others, and yet it is open it self to a
thousand illusions. Therefore it must be tried by some more known, and certain
spirit: What then, do you build upon the voice of God that speaks in the
Scripture? but that voice is no other then the bare word or out ward letter of
Holy writ; of that arises our strife and debate. That also speaks most
errably to you, as your own contentions and infinite hersies sprung from
thence, bear evident witness. If your reply, that it speaks inerrably to such
a read, and hear it with faith, and humility as they ought; you send me still
a rouing in the wilderness of uncertainty; for how shall I know who they be,
that observe those conditions as they ought? And what is this, as they ought,
after your Puritanicall, or Caluinian manner?

Lastly let it be (for this will be) your last, and poorest refuge, that the true
Church of JESUS Christ has always such well known to him; what is this to
you, if you know them not? What if we disprove, as we plainly do, your Church
to be his? Where are your humble Readers? your faithful interpreters? Or to
yield you the uttermost your can ask, though most impudently begged at our
hands; let there be such Readers, such Interpreters among you; either they
always infallibly observe the conditions specified, interpreting still a
right, and then your Church by their direction, contrary to your Tenent, can
never err: Or they fallibly observe them, and so your Church may run astray,
it cannot be the pillar of faith, the storehouse of truth, the voice, or
trumpet of supernatural belief; as my last two Syllogismes printed by M.
Walker undeniably conclude: which as long as they shall remain registered in
his Pamphlet, so long shall it bear the record of his own disgrace; so long
shall it proclayme the victory of our Catholic cause; so long shall the
Protestant Church lie panting in the dust, without life, without strength,
without vital breath? Now let us behold what new life M. Walker can breath
into it, to revive This argument crosses it self in terms, for if the Church
erred in a fundamental point, it was not true; if true, it erred not.
it again? Marry, that a true Christian Church may err for a time, in some
one fundamental point, necessary to salvation, he disputes thus.


M. WALKER. That which the ancient Apostolical Church might do, other
succeeding Churches may do, with the same success.

But the Apostolical Church might err, and did err in a maine point, and yet
have a true faith, and was a true Church.

Ergo, Other Churches also.


M. SMITH. I deny the Minor. The Apostolical Church did not err in a maine
point of Faith.


M. WALKER. The act of Christ's Resurrection from the dead taught in Scripture,
is a fundamental point of Faith. The Apostolical church did err in it. Ergo
etc.


M. SMITH. I distinguish the Minor. The Apostles erred, or rather were ignorant
of the act of Christ's Resurrection, as a matter of fact, I grant the Minor;
as an Article of faith, I deny it: for it was indeed a divine verity, a true
matter of fact at that time, yet no article of faith.


M. WALKER. Behold Gentlemen he denies the Resurrection to be an Article of
faith.


M. Smiths Companion. You wilfully abuse him; he denies it not absolutely, but
only for that time, because it was not then sufficiently promulgated.


M. WALKER. Reach me the Bible, I will show the contrary in Io. 20. v. 9.
express words of Scripture. So opening the book he read, how some of the
Apostles knew not the Scriptures, that he must rise from the dead: how our
Savior Mar. 16. v. 14.
appeared to the eleauen Apostles, and vpbrayded their incredulity and hardness
of heart* because they believed not them who had seen him after he was risen.

At this Sir William Harington houlding up his hands, said: Oh, I protest I
never heard any point so plainly proved!


M. SMITH. Proved? he has proved nothing. For I grant the Apostles were slow
in believing, dull in understanding the resurrection of Christ; but I say, it
was not then an article of faith, which they were obliged expressly to
believe, because it was not so clearly promulgated, and proved unto them, as
to bynd them under the pain of Heresy, or note of Infidelity, at that time to
embrace.

A Protestant Gentleman. Say you so? Was it not expressly revealed in
Scripture? sufficiently promulgated by Christ himself?


M. SMITH. I acknowledge the revelation of scripture, the promulgation of
Christ sufficient in themselves; yet not in respect of the Apostles capacity;
for they were yet rude and weak of understanding, they had not as yet that
inward illustration and light of the holy Ghost, those outward motives, and
arguments of credibility, which did bind them to give infallible assent to so
deep a mystery. They assented and believed, that all was true which Christ
said, all true which the Scriptures revealed concerning his Resurrection; yet
they knew not whether the sense and meaning of those passages were to be taken
truly or enigmatically, properly or figuratively. Of this only were they
ignorant; and this ignorance proceeded from their imbecility and weakness,
and not from the insufficiency of holy Scripture.

The Gentleman satisfied with this, and M. Walker M. Walker silenced with the
first distinction made against him.
grauelled with the former answer, his reasoning was at an end: howbeit his
brawling would have no end, for the foresaid distinction held him at such a
bay, as notwithstanding he bragged much of his dexterity in disputing, yet with
all his cunning Sophistry he could not so much as frame one argument, one
Syllogism, or Enthimeme against it. But being in a monstrous rage, because his
pride could not brook such a foul overthrow, I thought good to give way to
his chafing fit, and so departed with these very words: Well, well; I
perceive my distinction has choked your argument, you are not able to proceed.
Now, after that I arose and walked hard by, the other Priest that assisted me
explicating the answer that I had given, said.

M. Smiths Companion. It is not much to be meruailed, that the Apostles at the
first conceived not aright the Resurrection of Christ: for the Apostolical
Church was then in her infancy; it was newly raised, not wholly finished; begun,
but not perfected; The Evangelical law was delivered, yet not fully
established.

And can this undergo the censure of any other doctrine, then sound and
orthodoxall? Or could M. Walker justly vaunt of any allegation he brought
against M. Smith? Then read and detest the arrogant style of an heretical
Impostor, who blusheth not to print, after his confusion, these flourishing
words.


M. WALKER. M. Smith being put to silence with those proofs, Lo the vanity
of a vanquished minister.
the other Priest to make us this breach, fled to another shift, and denied the
Apostles to have been a Church at that time, because the Holy Ghost was not yet
come down, nor the Evangelical law revealed.


M. SMITH. If you were not already returned in open Court for a wilful liar,
forger, false Prophet, and Priest of Baal, your words might bear some show of
credit: but in so much as you are notoriously defamed for such an one, I only
entreat the Reader to judge, whether I were silenced, or you; whether my
Companion fled to another shift, or defended the answer which I gave: Whether
you have not writhed his words to a faulty strain, of purpose to reprove
them. For he denied not the Apostles to have been at that time a Church, nor
that the Evangelical law was revealed; but that it was not promulgated; that
the Church was not yet perfect, or law co^plete. For how could it be then fully
co^plete, when it wanted diverse guiftes and endowments, necessary to the entyre
complement and perfection thereof? When it wanted the spiritual comfort, and
inward Unction of the Holy Ghost? When it wanted her outward promulgation
essentially 8. Thom. ^. ^. q. 90. art. 4. Luc. cap. 14. v. 48.
required to the establishme^t of a law? When it wanted the gift of tongues,
most requisite for the conversion of all Nations? When it wa^ted that vigor, or
strength of verity, of which our Savior said: Tarry in the City till you be
endued with power from high? How then M. Walker, how could your conscience
serve you to carpe, or reprehend that saying of his, strengthened and supported
by such warrantable proofs? To pervert and disorder the whole frame and
method of your own disputation? How could it serve you, 1. To charge me Are
not these Ministera wicked children? a lying seed*
with tearming the Apostles ignorance or hardness of heart, an error of
forgetfulness? 2. To faygne me to say, that the Scriptures had not expressly
revealed, how Christ should rise from the dead? 3. To faygne, that I entreated
you to show it me out of the Gospel? 4. That I persisted still, how the
Scriptures had not sufficiently revealed it? All most injurious and hideous
lies.

Notwithstanding these leasinges of his, or selfedeuised fancyes, he mustreth a
band of three several probations, and graceth the last with the admiration or
solemn acclamation of one of his Assistantes, howbeit it was used upon another
occasion. Such is every where the iugling of that vainglorious Sycophant: yet
he discharges me from the labor of refuting his arguments, since they are
nothing else but engines raised to batter the forts of his own conceits: which
nevertheless he suffers not to fall to the ground without the sound of his
fellows applause, praising himself for ouercomming himself, in such a
skirmish, in which he is both the assayler, and the assailed, he the Master,
and he the maystered, idely conquering, and basely conquered both at once.

Moreover he reprooueth me for making a strange distinction between a thing, as
he terms it, and it self: because I said, that the act of Christ's
Resurrection was a true matter of fact, a divine Verity, yet no article of
faith, which the Apostles then were bound expressly to believe. But is this so
strange? I will give you an instance of the like strange distinction. The
validity of baptism ministered by Heretics was always a divine Verity, always
a truth sufficiently revealed in holy Scriptures, in the first of S. John, and
the third Joan. 1. v. 33. Luc. 3. v. 10.
of S. Luke, where it is written: It is he that baptizeth: Christ is the
principal agent, whose action cannot be frustrated by the faults of his
instrument; yet this was not always an article of faith, until it was
publicly defined by the Consistory of Gods Church; which caused Vincentius
Lirynensis to free them from heresy who defended the contrary before; to
condemn such as persisted in upholding it after the definition; his words are
these: O wonderful change and alteration of things! The Vincent contra
Propha. cap. 11.
Fathers of one and self same opinions are adjudged Catholics, the followers
Heretics; the masters are acquitted, the disciples condemned; the writers of
books shall be Sons of the kingdom, the maintainers of the same shall be
cast into hell*

Finally M. Walker for his vpshot, relates the commendation a Catholic gave
him of his noble conquest after he was thus discomfited. I reprint his words,
which he for very shame disguiseth under the cloak of a third person.


M. WALKER. When the Priests were very willing to make an end, and the
Protestant Gentlemen seemed well satisfied, and made them ready to depart; One
of the Roman Catholics calling M. Walker aside, began to collogue and flatter
with him, telling him, that he was a good Oh the pride! Oh the folly of this
man!
Logician, a good Linguist, and well read, and that God had given him a sharp
wit and ready tongue, and therefore no marvel though he prevailed, and made a
good cause seem bad when he opposed it, and a bad cause seem good, when he
defended it.


M. SMITH. Fie, fie, M. Walker! Are you so greedy of a little vayn-glory as
thus to blazon with your own pen (for you penned the whole sum though you
mask it under another vizard) the false luster of your supposed talents? Of
such as never were acknowledged by any of your Pew-fellowes in Ca^bridge, much
less extolled by the mouth of a Catholic? For I enquired of the Ge^tlema^ who
co^ferred with you, and he solemnly protests before God and man, and is
ready, if need require, to confirm it with his Oath, yea and iuridically to
diuulge it to all the word: First, that he never gave you those high titles of
commendation, which you set down; Secondly, that the Courtly complements he
cast upon you were merely in jest by the figure of Ironia, as the Wisdom of
God iested at Adam after his fall, saying: Lo Adam is become as it were one of
us, knowing good Genesis 3. v. 22.
and evil: yet such was your quick and subtle wit so worthy of admiration, as
it conceived that to be spoken in good earnest, which was uttered in derision,
to laugh you to scorn.

By which, and by all the former passages, every indifferent man may easily
perceive, 1. How poor a Religion Protestancy is, and how weak a Patron here
she had, who could bring no better propps to sustain it, then knavery,
fraudulency, lies, and falsifications. 2. How Thraso-lyke M. Walker boasts of
the Victory, and ends the scene of his fabulous discourse with that
triumpha^tsentence, Magna est veritas and praeualet; Great is* Esdr. 3. c. 4.
v. 41.
truth and it does prevail. For unless salshood may be inthroned in the
chair of Truth, and Vanity possess the seat of Verity; far, too-too far
is he from preuayling, who has been convicted, and notably disgraced with so
many tergiuersations, digressions, forgeryes, and gross absurdityes; who has
been driven to such shameful begging of the principal question; to grant that
after, which before he had denied; to deny that now, which he formerly granted;
yea to a flat ^ntrariety and plain contradiction* the greatest ^yles a
Scholar can take: He I say, who has been ^ot only vanquished and defeated, but
chased out ^f the field at every encounter. In which neuertheesse if he had
stood, and vpheld his quarrel (as God forbid he should;) sees he not what
horrible crimes he had laid to the Apostles charge? What ^famies on their
flock? Sees he not what a breach ^e had made in Syon? What ruins in his own
Jerusalem? For by attaching the Apostolical Church of erring in a fundamental
point, manifestly revealed in holy Scripture, and often intimated by the Son
of God, he attacheth it of Infidelity, he enditeth it of Heresy, and wholly
depriueth it of the happy means of salvation. For the entire profession of
saving truth (as Calvin, Field, and other Calvin. ^. 4. Instit. c. 2.. 1. Field
in 2. book of the Church c. 3. and 4.
prime Protestants confess with us) is necessary to the state of salvation,
which the Apostolical Church wanted, when it erred, according to him, in that
essential article of Christ's Resurrection; it wanted then the sovereign
means of attayning eternal bliss; and so could not be the spouse of Christ,
the gate of life, the temple of God, or Church of his beloved son; without
all-sauing truth, it is impossible to be his saving Church. The same is more
strongly confirmed by the dotage it self. M. Walker very dotingly labored to
prove (or else proved nothing for his purpose,) That the Apostolic Church
erred in a fundamental point necessary to salvation; For if it was necessary,
the Church could not be saved without it; if it might be saved without it, it
was not an article at that time necessary to be believed.

Neither does he only bereave that pure and primitive flock of the riches of
bliss, of the integrity of faith in that one he specified, but by the same
argument, in all other points of belief. For as by one mortal sin the Virtue
of charity is wholly expelled, according to S. James, He that offends in Ia^.
2. v. 10. 1. Tim. 1. v. 20.
one, is made guilty of all: so by one only Heresy, or act of Infidelity the
habit of faith is utterly lost, which S. Paul teaches, affirming, that
Hymenaus and Alexander made ship wrack of their faith, albeit they only denied
one sole article, to wit, the future Resurrection of our flesh. Which the
Fathers Aug. l. de har. ^eron. ^du. Lucif. c. ^. Whitaker. cont. 2. q. ^. c. 1^.
witness, when they avouch, that such as fall into Heresy, are degraded of the
dignity and right of Christianity. Which D. Whitaker also approves, saying: If
any one fundamental point of doctrine be removed, the Church presently
falls. Whereupon it follows, that the Apostolical Church was presently
buried in her own ruins; that the Apostles made ship wrack of their faith;
that they were no Chistians when they believed not the Resurrection of Christ,
if then they were bound to receive it as a fundamental article of their
belief. Nay it follows hereon, that the whole fould of Christ (for it was
wholly no doubt inwrapped in the Apostles error) became (o monstrous impiety
and most hellish consequence!) became I say, a heard Note the blasphemles,
which ensue of M. Walkers argument: and the misery of Protesta^s who cannot
make their false Church true, unless they make the true Church false.
of Miscreants, a band of Infidells, a den of Apostataes. The chaste and
undefiled spouse of Christ (I dread to think it) fell to be an Adulteress; his
pure Virhin, the harlot of Satan. And because that which befell the
Apostolic Church may by M. Walkers own Logic, befall in like manner unto
all other Churches; the Protestants Church, not only by mere possibility, but
actually also may be stained with Heresies, tainted with Apostasy, blinded
with Infidelity, wholly revolt and fall from Christ. And if once it may do so,
we ca^ at no time (as I have already declared) be infallibly certain, that the^
it does not so; we may always doubt, or fear at least, that now it does so.

On the other side, because our Savior testifies of his Church, that it
cannot possibly be divorced from him, that it is an everlasting Kingdom, Osee
2. Dan. 2. v. 44. Luc. 1. Matthew. 16. 2. Corinthians. 11. Cypr. tom. ^. epist. 73.
not possible to be overcome, not by the gates of hell, that it is guarded by
the Holy Ghost, never able to be misguided; that it is a pure Virgin, not able
to be spotted with any disloyalty: The spouse of Christ cannot play the
adulteress, says S. Cyprian: Therefore the Protestants Church, which may
really be naught, may actually fall, and prostitute her self to some filthy or
distoyall error, can by no means be the true Spouse, the true Church, the true
Kingdom, or Camp of Christ; nor enjoy the dowryes, possess the treasures of
his inerrable Truth.


FINIS.
Laus Deo, Deique genitrici Mariae.


