NORDENS Preparatiue to his Speculum Britanniae.

INTENDED A reconciliation of sundry propositions by diverse persons tendered,
concerning the same.

Psalm. 113.16. Coelum coeli Domino, terram autem dedit filiis hominum.

Genesis 10.5. A filijs Noe Diuisae sunt insulae gentium in regionibus suis,
vnusquisque secundum linguam suam, and familias suas.

LONDON Printed 1596.

To the Right Honorable, Sir William Cecill Knight, Baron of Burghleigh, Lord
high Treasurer of England, of her Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel,
and of the most Noble order of the Garter Knight.
ALthough (Right Honorable) I have been forced, to struggle with want, the
unpleasant companion of Industrious desires, and have long sustained foil,
enforced neglect of my purposed business, and sorrow of my working spirit. It
may yet now at the length please the high guide of Noble affections to move
your Honor to effect what you have begun: And as your hand has happily led
the way, your good word may as easilye accomplish the work of my new
rejoicing. And the rather for that mine Endeavors in this general business
sprang from your Honorable good liking. In regard whereof I am not in despair,
but that my wythering hope shall be refreshed again, with the dew of your
powerful helping hand, I have under your patience and protection, upon some
reasonable ground, exhibited this simple preparatiue unto the worlds view. And
as I shall find the same to answer your good opinion especially: So perforce
will my heart and hand falter and fail me, or fulfill what is hid in unseen
desires.

Miseria mentem macerat.
At your Honors direction. John Norden.

Auctoris in Patriae and antiquitatis imperitiam sententia.
NVlla omnino ignoratio tam videtur grauis, quam antiquitatis and patriae
imperitia, quarum luminis splendore* depriuati homines, non de Deo omnium
conditore, de mundo eius excellenti opificio, de seipsis, de patria, neque de
sedibus (quas incolunt) recte senserint. Omnia autem illis, in tenebris quasi
latent: Ita vt vel eos qui in caeteris liberalibus artibus consenuerunt, pueros
and sensus, vitaeque communis ignaros videri cogit, and in patria ipsos
peregrinos, and reip. gubernaculis, consiliorumque consociatione ablegandos.

TO ALL COURTEOUS GENTLEMEN, Inspectators and practitioners in Geographie, in
Christo salutem.
I The most unworthy, being employed (after the most painful and praisworthie
labors of M. Christopher Saxton) in the rediscription of England. And having
thereof exhibited some simple beginnings unto your general view, have like
Apelles (though far short of his perfection) yielded attention to the sundry
censures of men, touching the same. To the end that hearing the opinions of
many, both touching the matter and the imperfections thereof, and the method,
and their conceits thereof, I might the better shape the residue of the work,
(so near as I may) as reason, Art and time will direct and permit me. And,
(besides that which may yet rest in the minds of some men undiscovered.) I
cannot but take knowledge of sundry particularities, propounded by sundry
persons, as fit to be considered and observed in the work, among many, (Multae
enim inter multos sententiae) these that follow seem most material:

1 It seems fit to some that in the deliniation of every Shire, I should
observe the variation of the Compass, some other therein are of a contrary
opinion.

2 Others will have the degrees of Longitude, and Latitude, in every
particular description: Some think it frivolous.

3 Some hold that every Shire, be it great or little, should be reduced into
one and the self same scale, others the contrary.

4 Many would have the Scale of miles, to answer a mile of some certain
content.

5 Some think it a necessary thing to distinguish as well the limits of
every parish, as of every hundred.

6 Some, (besides the more special things) will have all houses of name of any
account, as also such as are decayed, being of antiquity to be observed:
others will have only special howses. The like difference of opinions I find
in the observation, and omission of sundry other things.

7 Some very curiously pry into the work, augmenting (in conceit) their own
credits by carping at every fault, holding the smallest error (yea the
misterming of a place) very criminous. And I confess it were a fault to
justify a fault: and I should increase the great fault of negligence, by a
greater fault of rash boldness.

I am moved notwithstanding (Gentlemen) under your favors to endeavor what I
can, to discharge me of all suspicion of voluntary pretense of committing the
least fault, or omitting the least thing likeliest to please all, although that
cannot be aut art, aut ingenio: therefore I desire to shape that course, which
reason, Art and time seems best to allow. And for that mine own soil is
of it self so barraine, as it cannot (I know) yield so fruitful arguments as
may satisfy all men. I would gladly subscribe unto the learned, that will
vouchsafe reason to reform what I have begun, hoping to offend none in
yielding my conceit touching the former objections.

1 And first as touching the variation of the Compass, It cannot be denied in
deed, but the needle touched with the loadstone, seems to be here with us,
and in many other places, sensibly attracted (by an unknown virtue) certain
degrees east of the north Pole, and west of the Suns steed at noone tide:
which imports much the mariner to consider and to frame his courses
answerable to the nedles variation (if his cards have the same) which how
diverse it is in diverse places, the experience of observing trauaylers has
found. And as it may seem to me in reason (being no nauigator) the nedle has
least variation, as long as it possesses the equinoctial line, especially (as
the skillful have observed) about that meridian, that passes near S. Michels
Islande in the Asores, and so long as the nedle is under or near that line,
the extentions of the nedles points, are almost parrallell with the Axeltree
of the Poles, as appears in the figure following, at A. A. and as the nedle
bends in the mariners courses Northerly, or Southerly, from the Equator it
then declineth more or less under one of the Poles, as appears by B. B. B.
which declination may cause to seem a variation ex deceptione visus,
espetially passing easterly or westerly, which duly upon any parralell can
not be. And therefore the variation seems always more and more, as the nedle
comes near to either of the Poles which is from the earth by the observation
of the learned, near 69498316. sixty nine millions four hundred ninety
eight thousand, three hundred and sixteen of our common miles: which
immensurable distance may make a variation, yea though the nedle be merely
opposite unto the Pole: and it seems somewhat probable, because the variation
is in some places Northeast, and in some Northwest, which argues that sometime
then it has a mean, and so is of little or no variation, and the variation to
be of his declination, and the imperfection of the eye, wherein yet I rest
under reformation. The nedle near London seems to decline his north point,
about 71. degrees under the north Pole, and consequently eleuateth his other
point above the south Pole. And this grows by reason of the rotunditie of the
earthes globe, about which as the nedle is moved, it keeps his points, as it
were parrallell with the horrizon, in that it is equally balanced in his box,
and so the weight countermaundeth the virtue of the stone, and forces the
nedle to cut every line that comes to his Center, from the center of the
earth C. by right angles, as EEEE. in the figure do show: But if it could be
placed in the earthes center C. they think it would have no variation at all,
when it comes upon the line of the Poles D D. it cutteth the same also by
equiangles, and then are the nedles points forced to stand meerelie contrary
to the Poles. And there seems a mortificatio^ of the nedles virtue, which
staggereth uncertainly, being by his weight prevented of eleuatinng his point,
to the desired object, which under correction I take to be the Pole; though M.
Norma^, most skilful, will have a respective rather then an attractiue point,
but it seems rather an attractiue, then a mere respective, by reason of the
nedles attraction of Iron or steel, massy bodies.

The figure.


Now whether it be fittest to observe this variation in the description of a
particular country, I will encounter no man's probable reasons: yet in my
simple judgment the nedles direction is to be followed merely without
allowance of any variation, for that it gives the magneticall meridians
without scruple, by which the work is protracted, though they seem to vary
from the Polar meridians. And that direction of the nedles respection, I take
more certain then the variation, in as much as the nedles true variation in
every small distance is not so easily certainly found, though through the most
industrious travails, and studies of the learned, M. D. Hoode, M. Burrowes,
and others, there are extant to the ease of practitioners most necessary
inventions for the same, to whose learned censures I subject my conceit. Many
Surueyours and plotters of land seem to have a special curiosity in observing
this variation of the compass, by some of whom I have been persuaded to
follow the same also: But for two causes I covet to be farther resolved of the
necessity thereof, before I can be thereunto induced: The first and principal
is, for that who so has his variation allowed, at, and according to the
declination and meridian of London, going far west or far North, to put the
same in practice by that variation shall err. And to observe it in every
place, he can hardly at all times. And therefore it seems more troublesome
and doubtful, then of importance. A second cause is, for that a special
consideration is to be had in a survey of the buttes and bounds of land, and
to shape them as near as may be, according to the ancient limitations, for
that they may else make a difference between the antique and their modern
observations (which were laid out without variation of the Compass) nay
without Compass at all for the most part, only by the suns noone steed,
which directed the south, and thence the three other principal points were
derived, East, West and North, as appears by the figure following.

A B C D show the 4. antique points whereby our fathers bounded their land. A
their Suns noone steed, or South. B the North. C the East. and D West. E F G H
Show the 4. principal points of the variation or new bounding. E South. F
East. G. North. and H West.

By this figure it may appear, that a bound which our fathers placed
according to the ancient manner easterly may by this new rule of variation
(which is 11. degrees. 15. minutes at London from the former received points)
become southerly, or appear doubtful, and so of the rest of the points,
whereby may grow to posterity in intricate things, cause of justifiable
controversy, yet whosoever finds in his discretion no reason, but to follow
the variation, Fiat cuiusque voluntas. For my part, as I think it needles to
follow any other, then the nedles mere direction, I will add thereunto no
man's imagination, until by reason I be satisfied of a necessity therein; and
then I will not be obstinate. I have not represented my meaning by the former
figure, as imagining any professor ignorant of the matter, but that the
demonstration duly considered, may work more in some conceits, then a bare
speculation.

2 For the observation of longitude and latitude in every particular Shire, is
not material as I take it: for that few Shires will admit one degree, some not
30. few 40. minutes. And therefore to refer that observation to the general
Map of the whole land.

3 As touching the reducing of every Shire into one equal Scale, howsoever it
may seem to please some, it will not agree with the opinions of the most: for
that some Shires of the greatest magninitude, will require two sheets of paper
Royal, when some other will not contain of a sheet. And therefore I take it
better to admit equal proportion in magnitude, then equality of Scale.

4 Such as would have the true observation of the miles to answer some
certain content, have reason to propounde it (I confess.) But such as have
but speculation in the Art, much more, such as are practisers, howsoever easy
it be deemed by geometrical theoremes to be performed (as in deed it is)
yet by practice they do or may find such a difficulty in the accomplishing
thereof exactly, as does strain even the mechanical conclusions, beyond that
which is required in plotting of land, which by application of the line or rod,
may be performed by the instrument, without intersecting of lines, which this
work requires. And the better able, and more skillful then my self, would with
me acknowledge upon proof that the absolute performance of such an expected
geographicall description, after such proportion of miles as may be
propounded, does require dimensuration between every station, aunswerable to
the measure propounded, that by the intersecting lines the distances may be
gathered according to the same proportion. And so many stations of necessity
ought to be, as the obscurity of the places (whose view is often intercepted,
by woods, mountains etc) may in art require, which are so infinite, and
intricate, unless in open level as to observe them singularly and precisely,
will require the whole time of a man's ripe years, to effect the description of
England, Hoc patet expertis. But if there were an instrument, that would give
any far distance at one station, without dimensuration: it were to be
performed with more facility. Such an instrument I know in some measure may
be effected, that would yield some little distance, found true by
Arithmeticall and geometrical probation, and nothing seems defective
therein, as touching these artificial conclusions, only the sightes
impediment bewrays imperfection of the instrument. Such an instrument I have
heard M. Blagraue has effected, and such a one has been promised by others,
how performed I yet know not. But such an instrumente I have framed, which will
give a distance at one station nere of a mile, and farther as the opposite may
clearly offer it self to the eye, which instrument will also lay out any
thing upon his true point, for the apt protracting of many things observed
at one station. An instrument fit for some purposes, but comes short to answer
the necessity of this business. In regard therefore of the former difficulty,
the miles may be observed without offense (as by all men in like travails of
so general a work they have ever been) according to the accustomed account
of every country (although they be diverse in diverse quarters of this land)
and according to such miles to proportion the places within view at every
station: and thence to extract the miles of whatsoever computation given. For
the ordinary miles of England (especially such as are remote any way 30 miles
from London) contain near 1 1/2 mile of the greatest account. There be sundry
computations of a miles longitude. And the true content of an English mile, is
not any where extant that I know, but received by tradition, whereof one is of
8. furlonges, every furlong 17.1/2 perch, every perch 8. yardes, of 3. foot the
yard: a second of 8 furlongs. 28. perches the furlong, 5. yards the perch. a
third of 1000 paces geometrical 5. pedu^. And lastly of 8 furlongs, every
furlong 40. perches, every perch 16 1/2 foot the perch. The first contains
140 perches, 672 paces geometrical, 1120 yardes, 3360 foot. The 2. although
unlike the first in composition of yardes and perches, yet it is one with it,
in the number of yards, paces and feet. The 3 contains 151 17/33 perches,
1000. paces, 1666 2/3 yardes, 5000 foot. The 4. and: last contains 320,
perches, 1056. paces. 1760. yardes, 5280. foot, So it exceeds the first and
second, by 1920. foot, which is 384 paces, 43 2/33 perches after 16 1/2 foot
the perch; which amounts near to 3/16 of a mile. This last I take to be
chiefly received, and is fittest for all the Realm, for that it best agrees
with the statute measure of an acre of land: for 2. acres in longitude is 320.
perches, and so is this mile: After which if England were measured, it would be
found near 450. miles in length, and as much in breadth, which mile may be
extracted out of the common miles.

5 As touching the conceit of some that would have the distinction of the
limits of every parish, I hold it not so needful as impossible, and I
think the most of judgment will affirm the same.

6 Where it is objected by some that I observe too many perticularities. Some
again think I cannot observe more the^ necessary. And where it seems also
to offend some that I observe houses and other things of small moment, and that
I omit some of greater worth to be remembered. So it may be, and my self to be
excused, who pass as a stranger guided by the direction of such, as by
discretion of men in Authority are thought fit to yield me direct
information, who yet thorogh their simplicity or partiality, may miscarrie
the most provident obseruer, holding that to be in their conceits of moment,
and of the contrary, as their affections lead them, for has not the poorest
man his partial humor? And what I observe is from them, if the thing be hidden
(as some time it is) from mine own view, for it were not possible to have
access to all. And therefore if I do observe things of no great importance
among the rest, and omit the greater, it is my fault perforce. But I take it
the offense can not be great to observe the most things, for the meanest may
sometime have use in the Map. And can the shadow of it administer greater
offense in having place in the plot, the^ the thing it self in the field? The
more things (as I take it) are observed, the more like is the description to
the thing discribed. And my fault were great to omit any, were it possible to
observe all: But it may be that some deeming best of their own and their
friends, covet only what they affect and reject the rest. And how to moderate
the work herein, and yield every man his desire, is a work of greater skill
then I pretend, I would gladly please the wise. And then I hit what I aim at.

7 To the ouer-curious inspectators that seem to bring with them a preiudicate
censure of the work, I presume not to say much: Because every public work,
is always publicly considered, and it is lawful (I confess) for all men,
to utter their opinions thereof freely as they find it, and to call a fault a
fault. And because I cannot justify all the Liniaments of so rude a body, I
will say with him that finds the fault (though in Art he can not mend the
same.) Sir it is a fault and I will mend it if I can: But I have not yet seen
the work of the most absolute artist so perfect. But some will hold it as the
Shoemaker did Apelles picture, who did yet like a workman, in that he reproved
the imperfection of the thing belonging to his own skill, but could not take
the Pensill and reform it, if a Paynter had found the fault, and could mend
the same, there were his praise. And he does well (I acknowledge) that
finds a fault, and not ill in condemning the workman, if he can take in
hand the work and perform it, so as none shall reprove it. But admit
(Gentlemen) that you in the several places of your abode, be able justly to
control mine observations, either in regard of the uncertain distances,
untrue denominations of places, curuing of Ryuers and such like, which (I
confess) are faults worthy to be called faults. Yet hold me thus far
excused, that as I cannot have access to every particular, nor see record for
every name: But resting perforce upon the information of other, in many
things, by whom I may (as your selves might,) be miscarried. So in courtesy
in your own known quarters, reform the errors, or inform me of them, for
howsoever I may little regard the unprofitable reproves of common reprouers,
I yield with all my heart thanks for the kind controulment of such as
thereby seek a reformation, and wish a perfection in the work, of love, and
not the disgrace of the workman in malice. There are many men of rare
perfection in Geographie, and of the Mathematikes in this land, and by the
industry of many they increase daily, whose kind reproves I accept as
necessary documents unto me. But I bewail the overmuch emulation, so
universally grown amongst many, even by a vain conceit of self
singularity, whereby they struggling to gain the start one of another in fame,
discover more imperfections of the mind, which should manage all their
affections, then they gain credit among the discreet by their greatest
vauntes. Art noscitur artifex. Some having but speculation, will sit at home
and send forth their rash reproving censures, more resolutely against a work
and the workman then the practicioner, that by experience has approved the
Mechanical conclusions, wherein howsoever they pretend the augmentation of
their own fames, they shall find their own labors wounded with the like
weapons. It may be objected and (indeed) it cannot be, but that I must err
sometimes in the denominations of places, as any man may do in so general a
Catalogue. But under patience I will yield a reason why without most special
regard, the most skillful may err therein. The affinity of sundry
determinations of the names of places, and the ignorance of their
significations may (besides the vulgar unskillful instruction,) miscarrie men
from the truth in this case. As Berye may be taken for Bury, Burye for Burrow,
Burrow for Berge, Ton for Don, Den for Don, Lee for Ley or Leigh, and infinite
others may be, and are often mistaken of such as pretend great knowledge
therein. And therefore it is not unfit for such as will truly pronounce them,
to consider their significations, which although it be not always the way to
find the truth, yet a light which will guide in many things. Berye signifies
a seat or place to dwell in, as Newberie; Burye a Sepulcher or burying place,
as Malmesburye, Caunterburye, etc. Burrow, is a City or town, as
Attleburrow, Starburrow, Peterburrow, and that is it that the Germans call
Burg, as Strasburg, which is sometime mistaken in pronouncing it for Berg which
is a hill, as Wittenberge, Dewsberge, and as our Salisberg or Ceysarsberge of
the hill where old Sarum stood, although we pronounce Salesburie. The
situation of the place is sometime a more certain evidence then tradition: for
the inhabitants call Appledore in Sussex, Appledrum, Appledurham, Appledrayn
which indeed is Appledowre, of the situation upon the water. Jews is Lewatch
the watery place. Newbidding in Sussex is truly New Bigging. Noua structura new
building, for the old English word for building was Bigging. Barkshire called
of antiquaries Bareokeshire of an old Oak in Windsore forest: but I am not
persuaded that a County should take name of a rotten tree, but Bergscire a
hilly Shire, which agrees well with the quality thereof, infinite such like
there are, many places determining in Don, Ton and Den, are often robde of
their right, one of another, by reason of their affinities and neglect of their
significations, Don signifies a down or a hill, Ton a town and Den a Deane,
as Wellingdon, Taunton, Pangden, Ouenden of the depression between two hills.
And it is to be noted that there are three sorts of places of much like
quality, yet differ in name, as a Valley, a Deane and a Comb, and it is not
from the purpose to consider it, for a Vale or valley is a place depressed
between two hills with a river or brook. A Dean is a depression between two or
more hills, which gives passage to rain water only, and becomes dry again,
a Comb is that low place between hills, which has no fall for the out-gate
of any water course, and this no doubt is not strange to the sensible Reader.
Moreover there is mistaking of Lee for Ley, or leigh, and they import diverse
things; for Lee signifies a cold air, as Bletchinglee, Hellinglee,
Chittinglee, and Ley or Leigh a soil, as Dowrley a watrie soil, Fairleigh a
beautiful ground, Hurstley a woody soil, Bentley rushie, Okeley, Quercetum,
Stoneley, and many other. Many words take name of the quallitie of the place,
and mispronounced by custom, as Tarring for Terring, arrival or landing,
Fering, transporting. Sometime we find names in England given of the French,
and mispronounced, as Blackboys for Blanckboys, white wood, Beaulye for
Beaulieu, a fair seat. Sometime of a thing done at a place, as Warnecampe
near Arondell, as of the Sentinel or Scoutwach, Tirrelsforde of a passage of
a man of that name. There are also names compounded, and the abbreuiation of
the sound alters the name, as Milton for Middleton, Chensforde for
Chelmersforde, Awston in Sussex for Alesiston, and Awston in Dorset for
Aldestown, Amersham for Agmondesham, those words that end in Ham, and Ton, have
almost like signification, for they both import a dwelling place, but in diverse
manners, for Ton idem est quod Pagus, and Ham may be taken for one home or
dwelling place, as a ferme in the Country, Victum suppeditandi gratia. But
Pagus (as Glareanus says) 20000 Hominu^ continebat, but taken now for a less
multitude. Ham sometime is compounded with a word importing the nature of the
place, as Bromeham, Dowrham, Woodham, Frytham, sometime the quantity as
Michelham, Littleham, Midleham, sometime of the situation, as Eastham, Westham,
Sowtham, Northam. Norton is a common name, yet mistaken often, for there is
both Noreton a Town on a hill, and Northtowne, as Noreham a dwelling on the
hill, and Northam. Ham is taken sometime for Am a river, as Twineham for Twineam
situate between two ryuers, as Twineam in Sussex, and Christ-church Twineam in
Hamshire, Inter binos amnes. There is also I forde or Eaforde one passage, or
Forde, Twyforde of the two Fordes, Treforde of the three Fordes. Worth is a
usual termination, and imports (for the most part) the inclination of the
soil, as whereunto it is aptest, as Beech-worth, Bentworth, Sedgeworth,
Elmesworth, Haselworth. The like is Sted, or Stow, which signify one thing, as
Okested, Holmested, places of Oak and Holme, Hemsted locus cannabaceus of
Hemp. Greenested de Viriditate: But Greenwich in Kent, seems not to take
name de viriditate, but rather it is Groynewich, a town near, or upon the
Groyne: for a Groyne is it that is made for a defense against the force of
water, as an Elbow eiected out beyond the rest to preserve the land at any
place, where the force of the water works it away, as it appears the water,
by his curuing, both at ebbes and floodes, did at that place; for the situation
argues no less. In Sussex as also in other places, there is a vulgar
determination in Vold or Fold, as Couold, Chiddingfold, Dunsfold, Burningfold,
which is mistaken for Waldt or Weldt, which signifies a wood, and ought to be
pronounced Couewaldt, Chiddingwaldt, Dunswaldt, Burningwaldt, etc. So is
Waldtham in Essex, and Waldtden. And of this word, Waldt or Weldt, comes our
vulgar word wild, as a wild Horse, a wild Bore, or a wild man, used for
Weldt, as of the wood, wherein they live sauagely. Infinite denominations
there are, which through ignorance of their significations are indirectly
pronounced and written. Moreover sundry hundreds in England take names of
places, now unknown, and thence spring indirect determinations, both in
speech and in record, as Goldspore hundred in Sussex, so called corruptlye
through the ignorance of the place whence it is named, which is a peer or
Rock near Guldford, called Guldespere, as the Forde or passage is called
Guldesforde. The like is Thurstaple hundred in Essex corruptly so termed for
Staplehurst, which signifies Staple-wood, which Staplehurst is a place, at
this day so called in Tiptre heath West of the Pryorie, and by corruption of
speech called. Thurstaple, for Staplehurst. These things being considered are
in themselves manifest, and very probable, although wilful ignorance will
hardly admit any reason, but simple tradicion takes place with the most, who
hearing the true denominaton of a place, will find fault because they know it
not. And by these means may the most careful obseruer, be led in the Mist by
vulgar instruction, which may rob also a hundred of his antique title, by
the ignorance of the place, whence it is derived, and attribute unto it some
other more notorious place within the same hundred, as the hundred of Godley in
Surrey, is of the common multitude for the most part termed Chertsey hundred,
because Chertsey is the more famous place, and parcel thereof in the same
hundred. Many other words might be examined to good purpose, as Wike, thorpe,
and Vile, usual termniations of many places in this land, and else where. Wike
idem est quod vicus, and vicus (as Varro defines it) Multis domibus constat
nullo muro clausis, after Vadianus. Vicus in oppido via est domorum seriem
complexa: whereby it appears, that a wike contains certain houses orderly
builded together, as in Rome there ^s, Vicus Affricus, vicus Ciprius, vicus
Celera^us: But there are many that may determine in wick, and so may be of one
house: which in Essex are dayries, and they called wickes, which differs from
wike, though of a mutual resemblance in pronouncing. Thorpes there are
infinite, especially northward, which is that which the Germans call a Dorpe,
the Saxons thorpe, and that we call villam, of the like quality with vicus,
wherein Vadianus takes us to be deceived, who affirms villam to be domu^
ruri seorsum extructam, and suo fundo attributam, as a ferme, fermeholde, or as
it is in the west, a bargain: whereof yet there may be many together, and so
may become vicum, or a Dorpe, or thorpe; for dorpe and thorpe is all one, only
th which is th, is taken for the simple d^ These and many other things, being
to be considered in this my poor pretended buysines, I thought good to touch
these few particulars briefly, under the correction of learned antiquaries,
not intending thereby to prevent any man's better judgment, protesting that I
acknowledge many more worthy then my self, to undertake the work, and I the
weakest to support the burden of so weighty a business. But since it is
allotted unto me, my desire and endeavor is, and shall be to perform it
though not as I would, yet as I may. And forasmuch as the work is so
general, and the accomplishing thereof, must perforce depend much upon
information, bear with small faults, and give me light in what you can, to
reform the greater. And withal for that it requires a twofold industry, I
crave the aid of all friendly affected to the work, by whose collections,
observations and aduertisementes, I may be the better enabled to perform both
the topographicall and historical purposes, to the more general good liking
of all, wherein as I have the steps of former laborers in the like, in great
measure to walk in, so had they their former, and all merit good opinion. And
as I shall receive your kind assistaunce in whatsoever manner of measure, I
will gladly render every welwiller his deserved recompense, which is
acknowledgement of his pains, and the fruits of theirs and mine, to the good
of all men in general. And because the true and ancient denominations of
sundry places are uncouth to many, I have, and do purpose to observe in the
mappes, only the vulgar names, and in the books as well the antique, as the
modern, wherein the helps of records, and information of the skillful well
affected, may much further the travail, whose number and goodwill I wish to
increase, for the good of our country, for which we were borne.

At my poor house near Fulham. 4. November. 1596. Under your friendly
reformations, John Norden.

FINIS.

