To the Queen's Majesty's poor deceived Subjects of the North Country, drawn
into rebellion by the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland.

Written by Thomas Norton.

Seen and allowed according to the Queen's Injunctions.

ALbeit I know not by what name well to call you, since you have lost the
just name of Englishmen by disturbing the common peace of England, with
cruel invasion and spoil like enemies: and the Queens Subjects ye can not
well be named, having thrown away your due submission and obedience: and yet
her Subjects still must you be, and cannot enjoy the name of laufull enemies,
being under her highness authority of correction, not to be raunsomed, nor by
the courtesy of Marshall law to be dealte with as just enemies: but to be
executed as Traitors and Rebels: Christians I can not term you that have
defaced the Communion of Christians, and in destroying the book of Christ's
most holy Testament, renou^ced your parts by his Testament bequethed unto you:
Yet I remember what you have been, by contrie Englishmen, by nature our kinsmen
and allies, by allegeaunce Subjects, by profession Christian men: I pity what
you now are, by cruelty and spoil of the land worse than enemies, by
unnatural doings farther from duties of love than extremest strangers, by
rebellion Traitors, by blaspheming Christ our Savior, and destroying the
monumentes of his Religion, worsse than Jews and Infidels: Lastly I do not
wholly despeire, though you be far gone, what by good advise and repentance
hereafter you may be, if you shall cease from outrages, assay the daily mercy
of our God, and the often approved clemency of our most gracious Queen, whereby
you may become again preserved Englishmen in England, reconciled kinsmen and
friends, pardoned subjects, and reformed Christians, who otherwise stand in
state to undo your selves, your wives, children, and posterity for ever, to
feel the sharp revenge of her Majesty's necessary justice and due execution
to be most rigorously laid upon you by her invincible power, and by the hands
of her true loyal subjects, to lose all that you possess, to die with shame,
and (that is most terrible and grievous) to die in state of damnation. The
considering of these your perils, with much compassion of you, and with some
(though but small) remnant of hope, that being admonished by hearing your
friends, and somewhat already touched by feeling your selves, you will be called
back to a more gracious and happy way, has moved me to write unto you, Though
it be hard to think, that other men's words and writing can withdraw them,
whom their own duty and most evident danger could not with hold, yet because
(not excusing your wicked following them) I impute one great part of your most
heinous fault to other men's wicked persuasions, so I do not wholly despeire of
your amendment by better aduises. I shall therefore beseech you, for the honor
of God, for the quiet of the realm for the safety of your selves, your lives,
possessions, wives and children, for preservation of your poor souls from
everlasting death, to bear my pore counsel, as of one that is careful for you
and heartily prays GOD to give you his grace to have true repentance, to
obtain his and the Queens majesty's merciful pardon, and that your dangerous
beginnings may be example to restreine both your selves and all good Subjects
from like myschiefe hereafter. I know Biles launced before their ripeness, are
not thereby well cured: yet hope I that the rancour and sore of your dysorders
has by this time grown so far and gathered as much ill humor as it can, and
the same so rottened with your own pains and calamity, that you are not
altogether unripe and unready to receive the means of your healing, rather than
to continue til you must of necessity be cut off, as incurable and despeired
members. Call I pray you to remembrance your matter, cause and quarrel, and there
with the end whereto it tends: the shows and colors wherewith it is cloked,
and therein the likelihode of those successes that you are promised, with the
hope of your aids, accomplices, favorers and succors: the states and qualities
of those that have mysguided you: how far you be any way bound unto them, and
to whom you rather be bound, and for what causes: the manner of your own
doings in following them: the power and force of her Majesty, her true Subjects
and other bent against you: your own manifest myschiefe and danger, both
bodily and ghostly: almighty Gods infinite mercy, and the Queen's majesty's
excessive clemency.

Your very matter, cause, and quarrel in deed, is not any enterprise for your
commodity, Their cause and intent.
nor meante for your benefit, no more than if you were set on work to hang
your selves, such good will they bear you that do thus deceive you. The very
matter in deed is this, to alter the state and government of the realm: to
overthrow her majesty's our most gracious sovereign Ladies croune and dignity:
to satisfy the need and poverty of such your leaders, as are fallen into
lack by their leude unthriftiness and wastful spending in most vile things
and doings: to set up the ambition of most unworthy persons: to serve the turn
of our foreign enemies, by whom entending our general destruction, your
misleaders are both with present means and great hope most traitorously
corrupted: to advance a feigned and false title, that Magnae spes altera Rome.
has neither fundation of right and law, nor can stand with the safetye of
the Queens Majesty, and can not but most manifestly threaten to the Realm
spoil, tyranie, alienation of honor, of soueraintie and of necessary defense,
with most grievous bondage to sstrangers unjust power. To which cause who so
ever shall by means of alliance, league, confederacy, or other bond of
favor Confederats.
whatsoever, knit or join himself, can not in right consideration be severed
from the society and stayne of your treason and rebellion, nor can be any
other but a daily dangerous underminer of the Queens most excellent Majesty's
Crown and life, whom GOD long preserve, even to your benefit howsoever poor
souls you be abused. This is your naked cause, howsoever your seducers have
clothed it. Let each of you wey with him self, (for so it stands you upon)
what he has heard and understood among you, what form of conditions he
knows would content your Captains, what change would please them, what
success he looks for if your treasons might prosper, what attempts have been
given, for which of the Nobilities destruction they pretend themselves to be
careful, what course that Nobility has taken, what manner leages, alliances
or co^ioinings they have entered, what metings they have had, what faythes and
promyses, and whereto they have been given, if their own proclamation say
true, and do not rather staunder Nobility to deceive you: and so shall you
easily decifer and plainly see the matter to be as I have dysclosed it. Which
course to follow, what were it else than to resist the ordinance of almighty
GOD, to reject his most inestimable benefit, a most gracious Queen our most
dear mother, nurse and protectrice, to draw upon us the yoke of a cursed and
abominable rule, of most vile and cruel example odious to God and man, to
shake away a most peasible government, to pull upon our own heads by Gods
just plage most miserable calamity and flauerie, and to be parteners of his
just revenge for the notorious evils of those whose yoke we should so seek to
enter? And yet a change An ill change.
must be made by our wise leaders great discretions, a noble change forsothe.

Some of you parhaps, see nothing but the outward show and color, because you
look to nothing else, which yet God wot is full il favored. Their colors.
Your great Captains (a likely matter) pitying the foul dysorder of the realm
of England, so empouerished and decayed from Ironi^
the marvelous welthy state wherein Queen Marie left it, so far indetted beyond
the expenses of infinite treasure that King Philip brought and left in this
land, so subjected to strangers that had so small lykelyhode to have ought to
do here in Queen Mary's reign, so troubled with foreign wars and invasions
as we have been in the. xj. years and more of the Queens noble government, so
defrauded of due excution of justice, that no subject can have his right by
law (where in deed none wants his right but they and you that yet want your
due execution, but may have it time enough) and that most lamentable is, those
good devout men, as your holy Earl of Westmerlande and other, in whom no
kind of lewdness lacked, but rebellion, which they have now added to make up
their full heap of iniquity yt they might be perfitly stark naught, being
grieved forsooth to see God ill served in the common order of prayers,
preaching, and administration of sacraments, and specially in this, that the
book of God lies open to the people, and that god is served after gods own
teaching: to remedy al those mischiefs, these notably well chosen men, like
themselves have called a noble Parliament and Convocation, that is, a route of
unlearned rude Rebels, forgetting all duty to God, Prince, Country,
Neighbors, and all that ever honest is: and in this deep, wise and godly
assembly, by the inspiration of the Devils spirit, whom under false name of
the holy Ghost, they have Mass of the holy Ghost.
in abominable sacrifice called upon, it is at length decreed, enacted and
proclaimed, that your two Earls with the rest of their faction, are the Queen's
true and faithful subjects: Their proclamation.
that they have a good meaning, that nobility have given their faith to
further it: that disordered and evil disposed persons about the Queen, seking
their own aduancements, have overthrown true religion, disordred the realm,
and seek destruction of the nobility: that these your good Governors will with
the help of God and good people, redress things amiss, and restore ancient
customs and liberties to the Church and Realm. Finally, they inform of a
great purpose of strangers to correct and chasten us to the hazard of the
Realm, which they will avoid by hazarding it themselves. And after the end
they say, God save the Queen, when in their doings and discourses before, out
of all course of duty, they have plainly showed it is not our queen, Queen
Elizabeth that They mean not our Queen.
they mean.

Blind men may judge no colors. A man in a dark place without light, or he
whose eyes be blindefild or covered with any thing that he can not see through,
or he that obstinately winketh, is as unapt to discern colors as he that is
stark blind. Wherefore if you will rightly judge of these colors, and see
what they be in deed, you must come out of that blind corner of rebellion and
error where no truth shyneth, you must shake of the veyle or covering of
wrongful affection and misunderstanding, and you must leave winking at your
own faults and follies. And principally you must pray to Almighty God to open
your eyes to give you his grace to see truth and find mercy at his hands.
And thus prepared, I beseech you descend to confer these gaye colors in the
broad light.

Your Earls (say they) are the Queens true subjects. Suppose it for the time
and for They are not true subjects.
the questions sake, as they would have you, but for the time and for their
purposes sake to take it, that they understand or mean thereby Queen Elizabeth
our most gracious sovereign Lady, and not any other that would bring upon us
Mariana tempora, the miserablest days that ever Rome or England Marius and
Sylla.
felt. Far does the proportion of duty of Subjects to the Prince exceed
the duty of Servants to Masters, or Children to Parents, yea or Wives to
their Husbands, the very nearest conioyning in human fellowship, even so
far as a Realm exceeds a private Family. But if one of your own
servants, children or wives, should do that without your will, yea against your
will and express commandment, that your Captains and you have attempted
without and against the Queen's highness pleasure, would you account them good
servant, good children or good wives? If the servant shall depart from his
masters service without leave, the child from his fathers obedience, the wife
from the society of her husband without his contentement or pleasure known,
the case being supposed your own, you can not like it. If they shall put on
armoure and weapon, and become terrible, or threaten force to the Master,
Father, Husband, or the rest of the family: if the case (I say) were your
own, you would more myslike it. If they shall threaten to pull away, to
banish, to destroy those friends or good servants, or the rest of the children
whom the master, father or husband dearly estemeth, by whose good travail,
cherishing and dutiful ministry and attendance, the master, father, or
husband is served and preserved, and mainteyneth the commodities of his
contena^ce: this being your own case, you would yet more disalowe it. If they
shall misentreate, rob, spoil, mayheme, and murder some of the rest of those
other servants, friends and children that the master, father or husband so
dearly loves, and for his benefit co^fortably uses: were it in your own
case, you would now abhor it. If by no warning, prohibition, request, promise of
reco^ciliation, threatening or otherwise, they will cesse off prosecuting their
enterprise: the case being your own, you would hiely stomach it. If
notwithstanding all these doings, procedings, continuings, neglecting of
threatenings, rejecting of fair speech and promises, these risers,
withstanders, inuaders, robbers, murderers, co^temners without license, against
the authority, against the open declaration of his own will and means of
pacification sought by the master, father, or husband, will still say and
maintayn that they be true and faithful servants, humble and obedient
children, good and loving wives: if the cases were you own, you would not
believe it.

The Queen's majesty Queen Elizabeth is by all right the sovereign Lady and
Maistresse of us al, and of you too, and that must ye otherwise acknowledge or
otherwise feel, or both, to your terror I speak it. Her grace is the most
loving mother and Nourse of all her good subjects, to your shame and reproach
of unkindness I say it. Her highness is the Husband of the common weal,
married to the Realm, and the same by ceremony of ring as solemnly signified
as any common marriage is, to our great comfort and confidence I rehearse it.
Shall your captains forsake her service, and tell you they are good servants?
Shall they or you resyst her authority, and refuse her blessing, and say they
or you be her good children? Shall they sever the knot of love and agreement
between her and them, and yield their bodies to a notorious adulter, and yet
say they break no bond of this sacred wedlock? Call their doings to mind,
peruse them, wey them. They have long ago nourished this treason in their
hearts: they have been long prouidyng for it: It was brought to her majesty
and her counsel by aduertisements: they have been tenderly dealt with, privately
admonished of the rumors, the matter so signified unto them, as if her
highness where loath to believe it: them selves have for sworn it, with great
oaths and detestatio^, protesting themselves to be free from it. Wherein note I
pray you the great indulgence toward them even with the most that any subject
in highest place may use in cases touching his Sovereigns safety, where of he
ought no to be prodigal. And yet could none of these too great kindnesses move
them. Note withal how lykely they are to profess a true Religion, that hold
this principle to keep to faith, use no loyalty, regard no oaths and promises
Papists teach to keep no faith.
made with attestation of God, and auowing themselves to renouncing of heaven
and to eternal damnation. Note also how lykely they are to say true to you, in
the things they bear you in hand, or in keeping promise with you for your
succor, defense or standing by you in extremity, if themselves might have any
hope to escape and leave you to gods mercy, or rather to your own misery and
most hard adventure. For surely they do in the while but use you for a
buckler, to hold up between them and the strokes for a time, and at length
when they be ouerlayde, they will throw away their buckler that they may run
away the lighter, if they and their buckler both be not aforehande beaten
down to the ground* But these good men well respecting Religion, that respect
no faith, nor will keep any with you more than they have kept with the Queen
and her Officers, being called at length by order to purge them selnes, refuse
to appear, being more earnestly called upon to come and declare their
innocence, they enter into actual rebellion, raise up you and other to keep
themselves from the face of justice, and yet they have put on a visour of great
virtue: and where in deed not being able to clear themselves, and answer their
traitorous leagues and devises, they use you for the time to stay their
apprehension, til they may otherwise provide their escape, they bear you in
hand that with all reverence they remain her true and faithful subjects. Is
not this a plain conterfait color? There is no white without witness, no good
without goodness, none true without truth, none faithefull without
faithefulnesse, no subject without subjection and obedience: What do they
herein else, but as all other traytoures and rebels have ever and ordinarily
do, pretend themselves to be true subjects, knowing otherwise that simple
subjects would not follow them at all?

These good religious Earls and Captains that so much inuey against faith
which they use not, and brag of the value and merits of good works whereof
they have few, now let them if they will prove their color true, that they be
as they pretend, show me their faith by their works, their white by their
whiteness, prove themselves true by true dealing with god in their periuries,
with prince in their rebellion, with subject and neighbors in their spoils
and robberies, and well paying their dettes, yea with your selves in so fowly
abusing you. Let them prove themselves faithful subjects in their refusing to
come to answer, in their rising without warrant, their resistance with out
yelding. All these enormities they still continue, no gentle usage, no good
mean restrains them. Alas the case is to plain.

They say they have good meaning. If it were so, it would proceed by good
doing, and Their meaning not good.
tend to good ending. But what good meaning are such good men like to have: Or
whatsoever is good meaning, be these likely to light first upon it, or fitly
chosen to further it? Somewhat must be said, or nothing can be done, Some show
must be made, or no man will follow. How easy is it for the naughtiest person to
say he means well? but how plain is it on the other side for every
reasonable man to see, that he that does ungraciously means il? and he that
puts in execution horrible and ungodly factes, continues and rejoices in
them, riscth without his princes warrant, armeth her subjects without
authority, employeth their force to her ferror, bends al his doings to
tumult and uproar, destroys the book of God the most comfortable jewel in
the world published with the princes power and commendation, wherein each man
is truly taught how to do well in deed, this man I say that does thus ill,
means not well how good soever he say his meaning is. Discern the tree by the
fruits, the faith by the works, the saying by proof, the pretended meaning by
apparent deeds. These men mean shrewdly or speak* very falsely, when they
say they mean well, and yet do so ill. If they mean well to the Queen, when
they thus resist her, it is possible they will undo you too, and yet bear you
in hand they mean you well. They mean to you daungerously evil, and they
mean to themselu^s foolishly well, in thrusting your bodies between them and
their due danger, while such shift will last, and till they may spy a better.
But you shall do well to discern their ill meaning: let them answer their
faults, and repent you your faults. Of such a good meaning on your part may
rise a good doing, and hap a better speeding than is yet to be looked for.

But see in what form and particularities this good meaning is expressed.
Nobility Nobility slandered.
(say they) and other have given their faith to further this lewd meaning. If
any such confederacy be, as it is not so great as you be borne in hand, it
shall be good to the parties to purge them of that jealousy in true service
against your captayns and you. Neither can any be free from the spot thereof,
that shall be found to advance, favor, mainteyne or join him self to any
estate or title that importes her majesty's danger, or has impugned her
highness safety, right or dignity. No, no, this is but a color to saunder
Nobility, and deceive you with vain hope of desperate succors. You see you
find it not, you are destitute and disappoynted of it. If such leagues had
been, never look that they will keep faith with you that break it with their
Prince, or will join with you, being no stronger than you be to bear them
harmless. Look sooner that Nobility will the rather employe them selves for
her Majesty against you, to cleanse and revenge this great infamy and
dishonor, with your just destruction. But be it, that they had so, and were
joined together to advance this good meaning, whereof God wot you are fowly
begyled. What is it I pray you or what ground has it? What has her Majesty
or her counsel offended? Wherein is the Realm so daungered and oppressed, that
it must have violent remedy, it may abide no delay of Counselling, no ordinary
mean of reformation: Northumberland, Westmerland and Swinborn, like Catiline,
Lentulus, and Manlius must erecte a new The rule of three gouerners.
Triumuirate to repair or new melte and fashion the decayed common weal of
England? Great wast in the melting.
Forsooth disordered and ill disposed persons about the Queen have marred all.
Disordered says my Lord of Westmerlande? Ill disposed, says my Lord of
Northumberlande? about the Queen, say goods fellows, wight riders and robbers
in the borders of two Realms? O virtuous men. O holy thieves. O well meaning
traitors. O likely surmise. Is there any greater disorder than rebellion? Is
there any worse disposition than Treason? Is there any greater falshode than
thus to defame the Queens most Noble gouernemente? Are you so blind not to
see the Queen touched, though, to beguyle you, her name be spared? Come they,
whom you call disordered, to the Queen uncalled? Are they not of her
Majesty's Counsel by The Queen's name forborne, to sclander her Counsel.
her wise and good choice? Deal they not in the causes of the realm to such
end and with such means as her majesty appoints? Do they any thing without
her authority and good liking, as there is good cause? Make they any laws,
require they any Subsidies, do they the greatest things, without assent of the
whole Realm, your own assent by your deputies and burgeses, yea your own
forsworn captains, in open parliament, whereunto her Majesty's assent is had?
or in cases out of parliament, is ought put in execution without her highness
will and pleasure? Do they their things here, trow you, as you do your things
there? O impudent beasts to bears you so in hand. O deceived fools you to
believe it. But O mad doltes so rashly to hazard your possessions, lives, good
names, wives, children, hauiour, yea souls, and all upon credit of so false
reports. It is her Majesty that does these good things her self, and
honorably auoweth and inuincibly will uphold the doing of those things which
your captains call misdoings, and will defend the persons of those good and
noble counselors that serve her in so good governance of her estate, with the
assistance of almighty God in her right, and the dutiful service of all her
true Nobility and her faithful subjects against al Rebels, traitors and
enemies, what soever they be, either within this Realm or without. Thus know
ye, that her Majesty takes upon her the justification of her government, and
her Counsels ministry therein. Therefore when your Earls accuse these about
the Queen, they accuse the Queen her self. It is but color to abuse you.
They would say the Queen, if they thought ye would well take it. And it G O D
were so far angry with us as to give them miraculous victory against all
likelihode, yea and in man's eye against all possibility, no dout her Majesty
should feel it with the fowlest indignity that ever was seen in earth. And
if it lay in them to spoil her majesty and the realm of her good counselors,
their slender courtesy to her person would sone appear. Cease then to be so
beguiled, take that shadow away, and take it as truth is, that your Earls
proclamation in deed says, though not in the self same sillables, that the
Queens Majesty with her Nobility, Parliament, and Counsel, have done these
mischieus that my lord of Westmerland and his fellows must redress in have.
And these Nobility and counselors your wise good Rulers call disordered and
evil disposed persons. If you know them not, will you believe that so wise,
learned, virtuous and The Counsel not disordered not ill disposed.
noble a Queen calls to her counsel disordered and evil disposed persons.
Yea more, if you know them not, will you believe that so great weakness and
poverty, wherein her majesty found the realm, is (thanks be to God)
repaired: so great quietness and peace procured and kept: so good and equal
distributing of justice maintained: such amity with neighbors, such love,
credit, yea awe of her highness among foreign princes and Potestates, conciled
and vpholden, so firmly, and so many years: will you believe so great things
so well done, so long continued, by disordered and ill disposed persons? If you
know them, then need I say no more. You know your proclamation is The rebels
disorders and ill dispositions.
false, you know they be slaundered, you know your selves be deceived. God
give you grace to know how to recover your selves again. But on the other
side, when you remember that which you daily see, the vanities, the
doltishnesse, the borrowings without caring to pay, the prostitute abus^
without regard of chastity, the leude unthriftiness without respect of well
getting or well spending, the rashness without discretion, the ungodly life
without al virtue, the glorious lustiness without fear of God and without all
foundation of honesty, the adulteries, fornications, theftes, robberies,
spoils, murders, and other mischiefs, in some of your captains professedly
open and daily exercised, even with the gay name of a ioly stout Gentleman and
lusty courage, and in some of greatest rauenie, yet like Rainard the Fox
cloked with some more hypocrisy: these when you mark and wey truly, as you
see them daily apply the words of disordred and ill disposed persons as you
see them deserved. Let every work have his true name. And now see these
colors. Rebels are called true subjects, the Queen's majesty is named with
honor, and touched with dishonor: her doings, that they may be more freely
standered, are imputed to other who^ they dare more boldly defame: you are led
against the Queen, and born in hand against other: Nobility is falsely charged:
foul treason is called good meaning: perjury chale^geth to be believed: common
robbers and thieves, adulterers, murderers and rebels are well disposed persons:
the Queens majesty's counsel and true nobility are called disordered and ill
disposed. Alas these colors are so black, that they will take none other hue.
Mark well. If you believe these, you may not say you are deceived otherwise
than wilfully, the matter is so plain.

But what have these disordred and evil disposed counselors about the Queen
done say you? overcome true and Catholic religion, disordered the realm, seek
the destruction of Nobility. O shameless falshods, O fading false and vain
colors. Come out of darkness, open your eyes, carry them into the light, hold
them against the sun, try them and judge of them. They have overcome
Religion.
true religion, say your seducers and false teachers. Is there any alteration
of Religion made so rashly as your rebellion? or teaches it so ungodly doings
as you do execute? or is it received from any other than from the word of God
himself? If you will have any religion, I trust you will have Christ's
Tearing the Bible.
religion. If you will have the Religion of Christ, I hope you will best believe
himself to tell you what it is. If you will hear him self speak, you may not
destroy his word. Even they that would deceive ye most, can not deny that the
holy Bible is the word of GOD, what soever is taught therein is truth, what
soever is against it is heresy and falshode. How think you then, do they
mean you well that take Gods word from you, that destroy the bible, tear and
tread under feet the Scripture of the word of God, forbid you to hear or
know that whereby only you should hear and know truth, and learn to see
their falshode? can they wish you to see that would take away your light? can
they wish you to fare well that would deprive you of your food? The blasphemy
is heinous, the offense dangerous, this path is not the way to true religion,
but to error, which they would not have you see, that persuade you to blindfill
your selfs against the truth of gods gospel.

Besides your destroying of Gods book, can ye think that they mean to draw you
Breaking the Communion table.
to true and catholic religion, that persuade you to destroy the monuments of
Christian Communion? Read or hear the whole form of that service, judge of
every word and sentence, and then shall you see what comfort your false
deceyuers have taken from you. Compare what good you find in that, and what
edifying in the contrary: what sweetness it is to join with Gods
congregation in partaking of Christ's body and blood by mean of his
Sacraments, and what vanity or rather sorrow it is to gaze upon a thief that
robs you of that treasure, pretends to take it al himself, and holds up
that which he calls a Sacrament as it were in insultation and triumph over
your silly simplicity. Do but hear, read and know the things that ye yet
despise, I dout not Gods grace shall crepe into you for your comfort.

Where thirdly you have raged against the marriage of Gods Ministers, behold
Cruelty to married priests.
your own madness. I hope you be not all popish Priests Bastardes, thus
rebelliously to rise for the honor of your false Fathers. Do you think al your
popish priests to have lived chaste? Know you not their old incontinence
commonly misnamed lustiness and good fellowship? Remember the examples your
selves. Is marriage worsse than horedom? was it not by themselves taught to be a
sacrament? Is it not the holy ordinance of god? Is the marriage of your selves
and your forefathers become uncleanness, or displeasing to God? Think not so
ill of your selves. No, no, there is another matter. You are begyled poor
souls, look home to your own beds, preserve the cleanenesse and honesty of
your houses. This is a quarrel wholly like the old rebels complaint of
enclosing of commons. Many of your disordered and evil disposed wives are
much agreeued that Priests which were wont to be common be now made
several, Hinc illae lacrimae, there is the grief in deed. And truth it is
and so shall you find it: few women storm against the marriage of Priests,
calling it unlawful, and incensing men against it, but such as have been
Priests harlots or feign would be. Content your wives your selves, and let
Priests have their own. And for whole religion, receive it as GOD has taught
it, read his word: and for the delivery and explication of it, it behooves
you, being no better clerks than you are, to credit the whole Parliament, the
learned Clergy of the Realm, and those that teach you by the book of God,
and learn it in such sort and places as it is to be taught. Your Camp is no
good schole of Divinity. Your churches as they were reformed, the word of God
red in such tongue as you understood it, the Sacraments ministered to your
comfort, in such sort as you might feel the sense of them and be edicted by
them, the good examples of your Ministers living in holy matrimony with their
own wives and abstayning from yours, their teaching you obedience, justice,
and charity, be the means to learn truth.

And yet if errors had been taught, this is not the way to come to amendment.
Know of those that complain of the overthrowing of that religion that likes
them, if ever they sought good means to defend it and were denied, if ever
they offered conference where it was meet and were refused, if ever they
maynteined it in place convenient by the word of God and were not fully, truly
and charitably answered: Think you her majesty and the wisest of the realm
have no care of their own souls, that have charge both of their own and
youres? Think you they would have entered into the troubles of changing
religion, unless very truth, conscience and zele for all our souls had
enforced them? God wot you are deceived, you are out of the way for true
understanding religion, you are out of the way for true seking it, and ye are
very far out of the way in thinking that your captains have any care of it.

They abuse you in this as in the rest. They regard no religion, that go so
irreligiously to work. All is but shows and hypocrisy. They have frequented
the service established by common authority, they have received Gods
Communion with his Church, they have commended it, which if they had had the
contrary religion to heart, they would not nor might have done, unless they
would confess them selves such as you ought not to believe. But the truth is,
they know that for want of sufficient preaching, and especially for want of
grace to receive the truth of God preached, and partly also for that long
settled errors even in men otherwise good and honest, must have their time of
instruction and parsuasion: by these means I say, there be many yet within the
realm not well taught: the multitude of which simple men, they hoped by this
color to draw to the fellowship of their rebellion, and that way to have more
help to shield them selves from the power of Justice, and so to give an
adventure by more aid to escape the due punishment for these their treasons
that otherwise in peasable place of justice they could not defend or avoid.

So still this is but color, even as is the same yt follows, that her
Majesty's Counsel have disordered the Realm. Well they Disordring the realm:
know it is not so, and well they know that they nor their auncesters never
knew it so well ordered. But if any would believe such sclander, they hoped
thereby to win the more accomplices, and so to hide their own danger in the
multitude. Consider the truth of this color. Wey the times, confer and
examine them truly. Let not false persuasions deceive you. Be not so wild and
wanton with wealth, to forget whence your wealth comes, or not to see that the
Realm has it. Had England ever in our memory so long so blissed peace
both at home and abroad? Had ever true Nobility more tender indulgence and
honorable cherishing? Had ever subjects more true and free administration of
law and right? Was England ever better ordered in all degrees, from hye to
low, till your shameful rebellion has interrupted the great blessing of God?
Or has all Christendom the like at this day, your lewd tumult only
excepted? Has not her Majesty with the advice and aid of her most honorable
Counsel, so ordered us, that we have as it were standing on shore beholden the
shipwrackes of other nations? Live we not daily so our comfort with the fruits
of this good government? It is such, that as the case stands, he is like to
be unhappy that shall ouerliue it. Is this the thanks due to her Majesty and
her Counsel for their care and travail for your preservation? Suppose you
that such kindness is the way to keep GOD loving and beneficial unto us?
Repent your error, acknowledge with thanks the good order of the realm that
you have felt with profit, forsake the disorderers of the common wealth, and
yield to such good order as they that have well, wisely, justly and mercifully
ordered it can best dispose of you. You see these be still but false colors to
deceive more subjects, to draw more adherentes, to help to shroud your seducers
in community of peril.

And of like sort, falshode and impudency is that they say of seeking to
destroy Nobility. Destruction of nobility.
Though some of them that so proclaim have been noble, you must remember how
Nobility may rise and fall. There is no traitor noble, how notable soever he
be, or how noble soever his auncesters were. The advancement for virtue to the
most honorable order is no more due to good, valiant and true Gentlemen, than
the defacing of the former ensigns of Nobility, and solemn spurning them
into a ditch, is a due prejudice to desloyal and untrue subjects, the very
stayne of whose company, presence or felloship in the tokens of honor true
Nobility can not bear. Pity it is that they have so far forgotten the common
wealth and their owh, so to deserve. But so deserving, good example and
necessary justice it is, that they bear their extremest infamy. Neither yet
has the Queen's majesty nor her Counsel sought their destruction, but they
themselves have now procured their own, and drawn you in with them. Let
themselves say of the benefits they have received of her majesty, her good
countenance and supportation, all her Counselles friendly and loving means to
do them good: then judge ye what cause they have so to say. As for the rest of
the Nobility, as they be most deeply bound to her majesty for her good and
gracious tender love and favor to them, which they cease not to acknowledge,
and will do, even with the adventure of their lives, honors and possessions,
in her Majesty's defense, against all rebels and traytoures, and namely against
your Captains and you: so are they full slenderly beholden to your two good
Earls for defaming them with the partnership of so foul and abominable
treasons. And for that the slander is general, without particular naming of
any, ye must look for the more general revenge of all nobility against you, no
one shrinking or withdrawing, but every one most forwardely pressing to purge
himself by his good service from so great dishonor, and to show his
thankfulness (the natural property of honor) to her majesty for her great
kindness and tender love to that whole degree. Some of them to their great
praise, you see, already have showed their truth, in repressing your attempts,
refusing your societies, and in readiness to overthrow you. Each man is so
likeliest to desire a new estate, as he has most cause to be weary of the
old. In what Princes days did ever Nobility live, or can they hope to live
in such security, in such (as it were) nerenesse and convenient familiarity
with their prince, so free from unjust backbitings, from vain ielosies and
suspicions, from dangers by enemies reports or false accusations, from tumulte,
war and malice one against another, yea from all vnsuerties and vnquietnesses,
as they have done in her majesty's days? It is marvelous and unnaturally
miraculous, that there are found such two (I mean your two Earls) to show
such unkindness. Think not then that any more of nobility be so ill minded.
But be not deceived, take the thing as truth is, this is but a color, howbeit
in deed a lewd malicious subtle and dangerous color, partly to the intent to
raise mistrust between her Majesty and her nobles, if either were not so well
known to other as they be, and partly or rather chiefly to deceive and deteine
you with hope of that which is not in deed. But as in the one they labor in
vain, so in the other learn you to be wiser, and to trust them the worse
hereafter. You find it falls not out so. Her majesty has ever cherished
Nobility, no one of that estate has by her perished in all her time, they
know it and acknowledge it, and you must feel it. You see that they come not
to you, for all the promises and faithes supposed in your proclamation. It
falls not out as you are borne in hand: they are al in readiness with their
power against you, to clear themselves, and to wreke the dishonor upon you. If
this color deceive you, you wink hard, or be maruelously blinded. If any of
nobility for any contempts or other causes have been stayed (whereupon the
likelyhode is that you are the more led to think this surmise true) themselves
acknowledge yet with what clemency they are used, the world knows how sorry
her majesty is to have any such occasion: but howsoever it be, they have small
cause to thank you for agreeuing their case with greater suspicions: and
according to that you have so ill deserved of them, you must account that
themselves, so far as their liberties and her Majesty's trust in them will
permit, and all their friends for their benefit, will with most sharp
revenge upon you, do what they can to persuade their innocence. Neither I trust
will her majesty her self, so yet give over the care of her own
preservation, as to contemn all aduertisements of attempts, and not by good
care and head of her counsel, yea and extirpation of the contrary, stand upon
her guard against all aduauncements ^of such titles as you would prefer being
dangerous to her safety, and which have already to their uttermost, attempted
her hiest peril, or yet to leave in danger to their malice her good Subjects
that be ielous of her preserving. And God give unto her grace the heart in
perils touching her person and estate, not to have too great clemency,
remembering that though it be magnificall and noble to contemn treasons to
pardon traitors, to reco^cile dangerous underminers of her estate: yet the
whole realm having interest in her life, by which we all live, and can not
live well without her, it is far more honorable to be good Lady to true men
than to false, to the whole common wealth of god men that depend upon her, than
to any knot of evil men that may practyse her danger, by which the whole realm
must needs come to such confusion, as your wise guides would fayn bring it. But
in the mean time you see, they have brought you in a gay case, upon trust of
their words, their vain colors in their proclamations, their false promises
of great succors. You are in the way of undoing for ever to help them to a
little leisure to shift, or (if they abide by it) to give the adventure of
their most heinous treasons.

And hereto they persuade you with promis Help of God and good people.
of the help of god and good people, directly against the commandment of God,
and to the disturbance of good people. But, I pray you, what people, or what
Goodness, look they for to aid them? The late tumults in king Edwards time
have taught all the wise people of the Realm, to beware of such follies. The
good and honest subjects of the West, The west.
that were then seduced, now have learned, and do like good subjects continue
in loyal duty, and be ready to employ their force against you, to teach you
by smart that which you will not lern by example. The noble and Exeter.
well governed city of Exceter has taught al Cities and towns the honor of
faithfulness. All the south, the east, each part, the land, the sea, and heaven
it self are joined against you. Each man sees the horror of the fact, but your
selves alone. Read (I beseech you) the excellent treatis of sir John Cheke
Knight, of the Sir Ihon Chekes excellent book.
Hurt of sedition, there see as in a glass, the deformity of your fault,
learn to wype away those spots that have so fowly arrayed you, that you look
not like Christian people but like monsters in nature and policy, howeuer your
captains call you good people, being so rebellious against so good a Sovereign,
and banded in hostility against all good subjects. So each thing that they
pretend with mere contrariety of truth, bewrays their open falshod, unless
they will, to defend themselves to have said in one only thing true, that they
rise to redress things amiss, say that they mean not things amiss to be
redressed, but things to be amiss redressed.

In like manner is all the rest. They will (they say) restore ancient customs
and liberties Custom.
to the church and realm. Are all customs without respect of good or bad, to
be restored? are not rather the badde to be reformed? and so is it true
liberty to be delivered Liberites.
from them, and not remain thrall and bound unto them. For he that binds
least and sets freest, offers most liber tie. If they mean by liberty
lewd licentiousness, and dissolute disordre of life, to have no fear of God
Prince, law, or shame, to have no respect or awe of honesty, such liberty I
grant they propounde unto you, and give you daily examples of. But if the true
liberty of Christ's church and flock be, to hear his voice, and no
strangers, to be subject or in bondage to no strange power or usurped tyranny
that shall sit in the consciences of christian men, captiuing them to an
implicit and general faith of what so ever they shall teach without the
warrant of Christ the true head of the church, then your great Libertines bring
but bondage and slavery. Beware therefore lest under name of liberty, you take
the heavy yoke of thraldom. When most noble and victorious kings and princes,
most grave, valiant and wise counselors and nobility, most learned, discrete
and virtuous prelates and other of the clergy, have with their great trauail,
study and adventure, made a conquest of Antichriste that kept us in bondage,
delivered this Realm to very freedom in deed, set it at liberty from foreine
tyrants yoke: is this to restore the liberty of the Church, to make it bond
again? Can you be so mad to think it? Great are the illusions upon those whom
Gods grace has forsaken. Pray to God to bring your hearts to liberty of
consideration, and you shall plainly see the liberty of the church assailed
by your own factious, the liberty of your consciences captiued and the true
liberty of your lives in lawful things restrained. Sweet in deed is the
name of liberty, etc. the treasure of the thing it self beyond al value
inestimable: so much the more it behooves you to take heed that with the
sweetness of the name you lose not the value of the thing. You may not think
her majesty her self, and her nobility, clergy, and other good subjects,
so far thrown down in courage, as they would lose the fuel of liberty.
Much less must ye believe your licentious bosters of liberty, that will bring
you in deed nothing but bondage. You see the difference of their credit, and
the evidence of your peril: judge therefore the falshod of this color as well
as the rest, and with the fond devise that follows, to pretend a care for
their country, into whose bowels they have thrust their weapon, least they
should be behind strangers in wounding her.

They say they fear a reformation by Strangers.
Strangers, to the hazard of the realm: and therefore forsooth these noble
hazarders of their own wealth, estate and honor, and of your sureties, must
hazard the realm them selves, lest strangers should: and yet further withal,
lest themselves should not suffice to hazard it enough, they directely
signify, and it is well known that themselves have sought and used conspiracy
of strangers to further the hazard to their uttermost. But note the fraud I
pray you, for the meaning is to deceive you, and therefore it behooves you to
note it. They will not say directly, we have practiced with strangers to take
our parts, for that were too broad and too plain: but it must be penned in
such words that you must be given to understand that strangers are of that
faction, yea and so far forward, that they are also ready to do that which you
have enterprised, though forsooth your captains and they be not of one
conspiracy. He is blind that sees it not. All this is but to encourage you
and to put you in hope of aid, either by traitors in England, or enemies
abroad: whence it come it makes no matter. But they deceive you, it will not
be: wey it well, feed not your self with vain hopes.

First, if strangers were dysposed to come, it is a mad saying, let us rise and
refourme least strangers come and refourme, as though strangers having purpose
to come, and intending to gain by spoil, would come so much the later for
having so much aid as so many rebels to help them to spoil. Therefore when
they come not in deed, you must needs say that you were falsely so borne in
hand with a gay hope, to make you the bolder to run to your own destruction.

An unnatural hope it is, and beastly, to join with any strangers to the
spoil of Treasons of popish religion
their own country. But such is the nature of that false religion, to regard
no country, faith, nature, or common honesty. Remember I pray you, what
yielded the realm tributarie and the King Uassal, I mean king John, but the
treason of Popish Religion? What gave the Crown, to Ludouike the King John.
Dolphin of France, that invaded and possessed much of the realm a long time,
by the aid of disloyal Barons in England, but the treason of popish religion?
What sent Legates and Messangers (yea English traitors) Card. Poole.
about Christendom, to foreign Emperors and Kings, to offer them this Realm to
pray, spoil, and conquest, to exhort them to turn their prepared powers from
inuading the Turk, to make war upon the king of England our Sovereign Ladies
most noble father, whom they termed worse than any Turk, but treason of popish
Religion? What hazarded this Realm with subjection to strangers in our late
memory: but treason of popish Religion? What then derived, and yet daily does,
solemn pedigrees to Trolop. A. B. and C.
Spaniards and other foreins, yea and wresteth law for dangerous strangers, to
make them acceptable to the deceived multitude, as though they were our
natural princes, but only treason of popish religion?

But God has hitherto preserved this land from being subdued by these horrible
treasons, and I trust he will still, and in your poor case is most likely to
leave your vain trust disapointed. For consider the likelyhod. The example so
touches the common President.
state of al Kings and Princes, as you being rebels may look for no foren
aid, though it were but for presidents sake. Such forens as might come to you
by land, are truer Scotland.
friends to the Queen than you be subjects: where, by the way, look for no
retire nor safe refuge, but her majesty's mercy. Other strangers, that in deed
have uttered more Alua.
malice to her Majesty and her realm, and have interrupted the good love and
peace, and ancient love, amity and intelligence between her Majesty and those
Princes of whom she has most constantely well deserved: K. Philip.
alas, they be neither much terrible to her majesty, nor can be much
comfortable to you. Will they, in such season as may serve you^ turns, having
so few to spare where they be, bring a mean power by Sea, so far, so
dangerous a viage, along the Queen's highness coast, in such time of year,
being neither able to resist her navy by the way, less able when their men be
landed, and least able to come again to fetch them when the enterprise is
ended? Be they so mad, trow you, to leave their Nobility, Captains and
Soldiers in their enemies land, enclosed between enemies of both Realms,
without more succor than unlikely Fortune and the trust of a few Rebels.
No, no, they be not yet so mad, though you be madder. There must be greater
heads and power than you be or have at liberty, that they will join wythall.
They can be content to give you vain hope perhaps. For if England may be in
tumult by their practice, and you come to your deserved end, it contenteth and
suffiseth them to have ventured the state at your peril, and to have grieved
her Majesty with alienation and destruction of so many poor deceived
Subjects. Look unto your selves well, the great bragges are not performed,
the promises are not kept, you are betrayed by your own leaders. Call to God
for mercy bytimes, satisfy her Majesty with returning to duty, and that
with all speed, least though ye escape slaughter by the true subjects hand, you
may not with honor be too gently dealt with. Deliver them that betrayed you,
that they which in proclamations have published unto you vain and false hopes
of treasons, may upon scaffolds preach unto you the right fruits of rebellion
and duty of obedience, that their death may do more good in example, than ever
their lives did in practice.

This counsel I hope you will follow, when the light of true consideration
shall The Rebels leaders described.
shine into your hearts, and chase away all darkness of these erroneous shows
and false colors that yet have blinded you: and so much the more when you shall
further note all the necessary circumstances that may reduce you to truth.
What be your leaders? Your two Earls, you know well, are even of the meanest of
all Nobility, in hauior, credit and power, to conducte you through so great
and dangerous an enterprise. The one you see hardly bears the countenance of
his estate with his small portion of that which his ancesters sometime had and
lost: his daily sales and shifts for necessity, even then when he had less
charge than to maintain an army, both in Sussex and else where are well
known: such power as he has had and used in those parts about you, is to
be ascribed to her Majesty's authority, under whom he served, which now is
bent against him: otherwise, neither his policy great to rule or redress a
Realm, nor yet to epsy the true faults, much less the remedy, an unfit
judge of Religion, and a very evil chosen chastiser of disordered life. The
other, of no credit, no wisdom nor governance, no ability, no virtue. Who
knows not the enormities of his life, the indiscretion of ruling his own,
the great lackes and dettes wherein he is by his own fault endangered, the
estimation of him as of a contemned man, none otherwise regarded than for the
name sake of honor and some possibility that he might parhaps leave a better
son to amend the state of his house? Though his Father were touched with many
great faults, much noted in ye world, some whereof this Gentleman has as by
inheritance received: yet never did he so hurtful a deed either to the common
weal, or to his own name and family, as when he begatte so ungracious a
son. Even he that never governed well him self nor any thing that he has,
whom no wiseman nor I think any of you (as mad as ye be) would privately trust
with ordering of a mean household, now must take in public charge the power of
a shire or two, yea of all the Realm, if the rest would adventure as madly as
you. For the case of Religion: does any man know that ever he pretended any
religion or conscience at all, till now he makes an Apish counterfayting of
feigned popish devotion? And now yet, by your good judgment, he that knows
neither religion, faith nor learning, must come to comptroll the judgment,
lerning and faith of the Queen's Majesty, her Counsel and all her Clergy.
What madabsurdities are you run into, to believe so apparent untruths,
dissimulations and bypocrisies? The residue of your doltish Captains, what be
they? think you they be men able to bear you out against the power of a
Prince, al her Nobilities Cities, Realm, subjects, friends and allies? One with
little wit far set, an other in his old age weary of his wealth, an other a
runneaway with a young wild brain tickled to see fashions. Alas, what be these
to carry you through the serious and earnest dangerous enterprise that you have
in hand* They are rather meeter to fraye you from it: meet men surely to
follow your ominous fatal or unlucky ensigns, wound and crosses, the apt
and due signs of just Omen placer.
slaughter, or infamous execution.

But yet perhaps some of you have this meaning that you owe them duty, and for
Pretense of duty.
duty you will not forsake any danger. If this consideration have place in any
duty, it has it chiefly in the highest duty which you have despised. A mad
excuse it is to say you entered into danger for duty, when the principal duty
did bid you sit in quiet without danger at all. Even such a fond doing of
duty it is, as if one would kill his Father to please his Master, or rather
murder Father, Master and him self to keep promise with a thief. What be
these duties that may move you? wey them and compare them. The name of Percies
and Neuilles have long been honorable and well beloved among you, some of you
and your for fathers have been auanced by them and their ancesters, some perhaps
be knit in kindred, some be tenantes, some be servants, some be with like causes
allied and bound to the meaner Captains. Great things be these to move love
and good neibourhed, and of great importance and efficacy to draw honest, true
and kind hearted men to stick by their Lords and friends in all wars against
the Princes enemies, and in all honest quarrels and perilles: but small matters
they be, yea no causes at all to draw any man to stand with any man in
rebellions and treasons. Is Percie and Neuill more ancient, more beloved and
dear unto you, than your natural Sovereign Lady, the Queen of England, yea
or England it self? Does one small tenancie move you more than the holding of
the whole realm? Is not in all your homages and fealties unto them, saved your
faith and allegea^ce to your souerain Lady? This is even as untoward a folly,
as if a mad fool in a tempest would travail to drown the whole ship to save
one of the mariners cabbens. This is not rightly considered of you.

The common weal is the ship we sail in, no one ca^ be safe if the whole do
perish. To god, and then to the realm, to the croun, to the law and
government, your leaders and you and we all do owe our selves and all that we
have, in highest degree of duty. Al other inferior duties are but means that
these may be the better performed. When now your Captains have forsaken faith
and duty to God, natural love and duty to the realm, allegiance and duty
to the Croune, obedience and duty to law and government: it is no following
of duty to follow them against these duties, no though they were your
fathers. And that they have done so you may not believe their pretenses, you
must believe the book of GOD which you have trodden under foot, ye must believe
the laws of the Realm which you have contemptuously broken, you must believe
the Queens Majesty her self speaking in her Proclamations, and by the
mouths of her officers, whose gracious voice you have rebelliously contemned.

Now as I have compared your small duties pretended, with your great duties
forsaken, Their doings.
compare again your most due duties with your undue doings. You have without
warrant fro the Q. Majesty, or any by her authorized, assembled yourselues in
forcible manner, adhered to those whom her majesty has declared traitors and
rebels, you have levied war within ye realm against the realm, within the
Queen's dominions against the Queen, you have broken the common peace whereby
your selves, your families and possessions have hitherto been preserved, you
have in your rebellious outrage committed many heinous and horrible factes, you
have destroyed the monumentes of Gods most holy Communion, you have torn and
defaced the sacred Bible of Gods most holy word, the very pledge of your
salvation, you have presumed to alter the form of Christ's Religion, you have
in dishonor of Christ's most blissed and only sufficient sacrifice, set up
the most abominable and blasphemous sacrifice of wicked Mass, you have
committed unnatural and vile cruelty upon Gods Ministers and dispensers of
Gods mysteries and of the health of your Souls, you have defaced Gods holy
ordinance, whereby all mankind is preserved in chastity and continued by
lawefull increase, you have robbed your neighbors, spoiled and destroyed the
Queens true subjects, you have wasted the provision for your wives and
children, you have undone your selves. Trow you, this be your duty, either as
Christian men, Englishmen, subjects, tenauntes, husbands, fathers,
neighbors, yea or natural men?

And when you have thus done, think you to bear it thus away? A piece of the
Bishoprike of Durhamme and Richmond shire conteyneth not all England. Your
courage may be good, I would it were employed to better causes: your power is
but small. You know you are but few, weak, unarmed, unfurnished to hold out,
unlawfully called, unskillfully guyded, sclenderly provided for, falsely abused,
fondly blinded, your captains not trusty to you, nor bound by any authority
so to be, your company not holden together by any just power but that they
may slip away as their lust, their werynesse, their need, their business,
hope of pardon or better aduisement may come upon them, your succoures fail
you within and without, your vittayles in a barren place not like long to
endure, the season hard, your lodgings incommodious, your housholdes in peril
of famine or destruction in your absence, no stoare of armoure, Weapon nor
Munition, your number of Horse though not now many, yet daily like to be
fewer, those necessaries that you have either for defense, invasion or
sustenance being once spente, no way to recover more, one overthrow destroys
you wholly, you have no mean to repair yours force, you are enclosed round
about, no refuge by Land, no escape by Sea. Are not you in a gay taking? And
this you know to be true.

On the other side, behold the dreadefull majesty of God the Lord of hosts
is displeased with you* the Queen's highness, sometime your loving Sovereign
Lady. now by your lewdness is enforced to be The Queen's power.
the heuie minister of Gods wrath against you. The whole nobility for their
duty, and the rather for revenge of the dishonorable spots and suspicions
sprinkled upon them by your traiterous proclamations, is earnestly bent to
overthrow you, the whole number of her highness true subjects ready to die
upon you* the number is great against you, infinitely exceeding your petit
multitude: they be furnished of all things necessary with a princes store and
so great store as never had any of her auncesters, weapon, armure, shot,
powder, and all sorts of munition, vitail abundance* choice of commodious
being, strong holds, one knot of just authority from which the power assembled
can not start or sever, skillful Captains, wise Governors, orderly proceeding,
daily fresh succoures at pleasure, power to save and kill by law, a wide and
large realm gathered together, the country round about within her obeysaunce,
a strong Navy, good and sure friends even in the next foreign part unto you, the
very grounds, colors and fundations of your enterprise be in her Majesty's
power, and in all necessities or misfortunes, army upon army to be new
repaired, so as a few victories can not fuffise you: finally all advantages
against you infinitely incomparable. Trow you this match be well made: a corner
against a Realm, a handful against hundreds of thousands, want Their match
compared.
against plenty, folly against policy, nakedness against armed force, the
succourlesse against abundance of aid., falfehode against truth, one or two
doltish mad heads against whole Nobility, a few rebels against all
subjects, the wild field against strong forts, an ungodly, weak, foolish,
destitute, misguided, silly, small multitude against the wrath of God and power
of a Prince? Is it not time for you to be better advised? See you not your
peril? or is it Their danger.
not rather so deep that you can not see the bottom? Surely it is as deep as
Hell: which though you can not thoroughly measure it, you may justly fear it.
Dreadful he is that can send both body and soul into hell fire. Beside all
these bodily pains, the state wherein you stand is the state of damnation, if
you die in it there is no recovery.

Remember your selves therefore betymes. For Gods sake, and for your own
weal everlastingly, bethink you of the infinite mercy of almighty God,
whereof there is no measure. Repent you of your Gods mercy.
offending him, embrace his true Religion, hear his word, learn his will,
and follow it. Again, call to mind how gracious and merciful a Queen he has
placed The Queen's clemency.
over us: think upon the great examples of clemency that she has used, the
tender love that she has ever showed to the Realm, the care she has for us
all, the grief she bears to lose so many of you that might be better
preserved: flee to that refuge, where is the only hope that Wholesome counsel.
is left you: make such amends as you may, yield your captains to justice,
your selves to her mercy, that if for necessary importance of honor, of
president, and of the safety of her Majesty's person and realm, you must be
some examples of justice, you may recover yet the possession of Example.
eternal life: and if her Majesty shall extend the excess of her clemency
to your pardon, you may acknowledge it in your truer service hereafter, and
whether way soever it shall please GOD and her highness to dispose, you may in
life and death teach true obedience, and be examples to restrain your selves
and all other hereafter from so foul spot and danger of rebellion. And to this
end, God send you his grace.

God save our Queen Elizabeth, and confound her enemies.
Imprinted at London, by Henry Bynneman, for Lucas Harrison.

ANNO DOMINI. 1569.


