OF THE ART OF GREAT ARTILLERY, Viz. THE EXPLANATION of the most excellent and
necessary Definitions, and Questions, pronounced and propounded, by that rare
Soldier and Mathematician, Thomas Digges Esquire; and by him published, in his
Stratiaticos, and Pantometria, concerning great Ordinance, and his Theorems
thereupon.

Together, With certain Expositions, and answers thereunto adjoined: Written
by Robert Norton Gunner.

And by him Dedicated, to the Worshipful John Reinolds Esquire, Master Gunner
of England.

LONDON, Printed by Edw: Allde, for John Tap, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the corner of Saint Magnus Church. 1624.

To the Worshipful John Reinolds Esquire, Master Gunner of England: Robert
Norton Gunner, wishes all health and happiness.
GOod Sir, (as your sometimes Scholar, and your now substitute) give me leave,
to show some part of my dutiful thankfulness, for your many loving favors
received; your kind instructions, your free helping hand to the beginning of
my encouragement, by your loving Certificate (to the right Honorable the Lord
Carew Mr. of his Majesty's Ordinance) of my sufficiency to perform the place
and Office of a Gunner, for his Majesty's service: I therefore have presumed to
demonstrate a part of my duty herein, the rather for the loving respect you
have ever showed unto me, and to all others under your Command, that endeavor
to become serviceable for our King, and Country, by the diligent practice in
the excellent Art of great Artillery: It being my chance of late Sir, to turn
over Mr. Digges his Books, entitled Stratiaticos, and Pantometria, to light
upon certain dificill Definition, obscure Theorems, and some subtle
questions, concerning the use of great Ordinance, which as Mr. Diggs there
says, though he long since publicly propounded them, that none has yet
undertaken to answer any one of them: wherefore in his last edition with short
Marginall notes, yes and no, himself has darkly resolved some of them, as
hereafter in the Margent appears, whereof I have undertaken to make a more
plain Exposition of them and the rest, as well for mine own, as for others
furtherance. And whereas he has there coated certain published Errors in this
Science, I have thought fit to join them together, with some other Errors that
I have also espied in other Authors writing of this Art: All which I have
presumed to publish under your iuditious Patronage, hoping that my willing
pains shall neither incur disgrace, nor displease, but rather that these my
first Fruits will be accepted with such love as I truly offer them, whereby I
shall be encouraged (with your good leave) hereafter to proceed further with my
Treatise of the Art of Artillery, wherein I persuade my self, that the most
necessary particulars belonging to the Gunners Art, are more acutely showed,
then in any other Treatise in any Language yet extant: And so I shall endeavor
to deserve the continuance of your love and favor, and will rest at his
Lordships, and your Worships command, both whom, I pray God ever to bless.

Robert Norton.

The Preface.
TO commend the Art and Practice of Artillery, it were utterly needless, for
that it is apparent, that all other Sciences are therein used, as in their
convenient and proper Medium, and grounded on supreme virtue, seeing that
without it no Kingdom or Commonweal, can either be or continue in Peace, or
defend it self, nor offend their Enemies; it being the powerful Regent in our
Modern Millitia: for that it destroys Enemies, depresseth Tyrants, chasteneth
Rebels, increases Dominions, and is the common make-peace, and Conseruor of
tranquillity in Kingdoms and Commonweals. It consists of many ingenious
Theoricall and Practical parts, wherein Knowledge must be the Pylot of Action,
or else the action will prove but sillily simple. The Theorick in this (as in
all other Sciences) being the fundamental groundwork of the practicke part
thereof; Therefore Knowing from Doing, must be no more separated then Letters
from Arms: this made the Hebrew, Egiptian, and Persian Soldiers, to be as well
Priests as Gentlemen; and the Grecians to be both Philosophers and Captains,
and the Romans to be both Soldiers and Scholars; whereby each of them got
for their Nation a world of honor. M. Diggs said very well, that it fares in
this Art, as in Soldiary, and in Navigations; for as many a private Soldier,
whose brains will only reach how to stand Sentinel, and to March to his
Guard, yet takes himself to be a perfect Soldier, but if once his wit be
capable to become Corporal of the field, or Sargeant Mayor, then he comes to
see his former ignorance and wants. Even so the Common Saylor, if he can but
say his Compass, furle a Sail, and take turn at Helm and Lead, does less
know his ignorance, then such a Master or Pilot at has sailed a ship by his
Chart, Compass and Art, round the world; And so likewise in this Art, many
silly Gunners that never sounded the deep Channel of this Art, will not
stick to say, they know enough, and scorn to learn more, when they God
knows understand not the first principles of good Art or practice; but if by
chance, or mischance, they made a good shot once, though without understanding
of the true cause of it, it must uphold their reputation for ever, and be
sufficient to make Fools proud. This may chance to be returned me home, yet I
care not, for I hope to escape the name of a Coward (though my purse be
cudgelled) for that I have taken up those weapons, that with a challenge were
laid down so long ago; But let them that are envious commendor come mend it,
and so I end.

Theirs that love Art and Practice, Robert Norton.

Certain Definitions taken out of Mr. Digges his Pyrotechnie, and published in
his Pantometria concerning Great Ordinance. Explaned by R. N. Gunner.
Mr. Digges. FOR as much as by the hollow Cylinder or Trunk of the Piece, the
violence of all shot of Great Artillery is not only directed, but also
increased, I call that hollow Cylinder of the Piece, her Soul.


Mr. Norton. This Soul is usually termed by the most experienced Gunners, the
Concaue Cylinder, or Bore of the Piece: And when she is loaded, so much thereof
as contains her Charge, is called her Chamber, or Charged Cylinder, whether
she be Equally Bored, or Camber Bored; and the rest that is vnfilled, is called
the vacant Cylinder of her Bore.


M. D. The Mettaline substance of the Piece, of what shape, kind, or
proportion soever, I call The Body of the Piece.


M. N. The several parts of the Mettallyne substance of each Piece, are
distinctly known to Gunners, by diverse and several Names: As the thickest of
her Metal at the most eminent ring of her Breech is called her Base-ring or
Carnooze, the whole length of her shaft, is called her Chase; and those parts
of Metal that M. Digges elsewhere calls her Ears, are by Gunners, called
her Trunnions; and before her Trunnions that part of her chase toward her Neck
(which is near the Mouth) is called her Coronice: Her foremost extreme of her
Chase, is called her Mouth or Muzle ring, etc.


M. D. The Soul in all principal Pieces of Battery is ever a perfect uniform
Cylinder comprehended in a Circular Colume, and two equal Circles, whereof the
one I call the Head the other the Base.


M. N. The Soul or Concaue ought indeed to be a perfect uniform Cylinder,
except in Chambered Cambered Taper and Belbored Pieces, but by reason of ill
and careless Foundings, few Pieces come to that perfection; neither do scant
any of their Souls lie exactly in the midst of their Metals, which (unless
for them the Dispart and Dispartline be arteficially, and accordingly varied)
causes them to shoot awry, or over or under, or trauerse.


M. D. The direct line, which by Mathematical imagination, does conioyne the
Centers of the two Circles, is the perfect and true direction of all Shot made
out of great Ordinance, I term the Axis of that pieces Soul.


M. N. Which may very properly be so called, but it is usually termed the Axis
of her Bore, or the middle line of her Concaue Cylinder, those two Circles at
the extremes of that line does with their planes make right and Orthogonall
Angles therewith.


M.D. A mark is said to lie within Point blanke, when the Piece being directed
with her convenient Bullet and Charge, is able to strike and reach that mark.


M. N. True it is, it has improperly been called point-blanke, as far as
any Piece conueyeth her Shot in a right line, nevertheless the Piece be
mounted to the third or fourth point; But then if you ask how much that Piece
shoots at poynt-blanke, unless you also assign the Mount, it cannot be
certainly answered, And so consequently there is no certainty of that
point-blanke for any Piece, because then every Piece may have a thousand such
several Point-blanks. Wherefore I suppose it were more proper to call that
only distance Poynt-blanke, which the Piece conueyeth her Shot in a right or
insenceable crooked line; the Axis of her Bore lying level with the Horizon,
that is, she being neither mounted nor embased to any point, or minute of a
point, above or under the Level, that being the only Blanke point, that is
without numeration, as being the beginning, both of elevation and depression.


M. Diggs. A mark is said to lie within the Metal of the Piece, being
dyrected not by the Axis of the Soul, but by the Coronice and uppermost ring
of her Head, and Coil, is able to reach the Mark.


M.N. This is by Gunners termed shooting by the Metal of the Piece, (or Mira
Comune) whereby it is meant, that the Large line (which is that line which
passes upon the uppermost of the Pieces Metal, from the Breech to the Mouth,
vertically over the Axis of the Soul of the Piece) be directed to the mark,
and is able to reach the same.


M. D. The difference of these two Ranges, I call the Difference of the level
Range of the Soul and Body of the Piece.


M. N. Which by Gunners is called the difference between the shooting a Piece
by her due dispart, and by the uppermost of her Metal (or most eminent, the
Base and Muzle-rings, at her Breech and mouth) and which (upon the level) is
near about twice so much ground, as with a dispart for her Range it is: But
this holds not so above the level, in or near double, for it only eleuates
the piece about five or six degrees (in some pieces more, in some less) to
shoot by the Metal more then by the dispart increasing under the mount of the
best randon, but less being mounted above the same, so much as 4. or 5. or 6.
degrees. would increase or decrease the Range for the Eleuations assigned.


M. D. The Axis of the Body of any Piece I term that strait line, which
passes between the Centers of the two outermost Circles at the Coil and Head
of the Piece, which in all Pieces, truly founded, is also the very same with
the Axis of the Soul.


M. N. Gunners and Gun-founders call the greatest ring at the Breech (the
Cornooze or Base-ring of the Piece (which Mr. Diggs terms the outermost Circle
at the Coil, the other which he calls the outermost Circle at the Head,
they term the greatest ring at the Mouth or the Muzle-ring: But that Axis
cannot be the very same with the Axis of the Concaue Cylinder, in pieces that
are not truly Founded.


M. D. If the two Axis differ, the Piece is false founded, and then they are
either paralells, or make an Angle: if they be paralells, I term it the
Distance of the Axes of the Body and Soul.


M. N. The definition thereof is very significant and proper, for if in the
Casting or Founding of the Piece, the Axis of the Nowell that makes the hollow
Cylinder swerve paralelly aside, it will make the Piece thicker of Metal all
along upon one side, then it is upon the opposite side thereof.


M.D. If they be not parallel, their Angles of variation are considered two
ways; That is to say, in Altitude and Latitude; and those Angles accordingly
named the Anomalie: Angles of Altitude or Latitude of those Pieces.


M. N. Those Angles of variation may be three ways considered, that is, in
Altitude only, in Latitude only, and in Both jointly, each of which will make
the Piece shoot amiss, either over and aside, under and aside, or directly
over or under the mark; and so for remedy thereof, the Piece must be
differently disparted, and accordingly alter her large line upon the top of
the Metal, otherwise then it should have been, if her Concaue Cylinder, had
lain directrectly in the middle of her Metal.


M. D. The first part of the violent course (of a shot thrown out of any
piece of Ordinance) of Gunners termed Point blanke reach, I call the direct
line of the Bullets circuit.


M.N. Most understanding Gunners, leave that improper phrase or Name of
Poynt-blanke, although it be very ancient (because as I said of the uncertainty
therein, for there may be for one Piece 1000. several poynt-blanks, if that
distance which the Piece conueyeth her shot in a strait line, should be
Point Blank, it carrying so at every several degree or point of mounting, a
several distance; namely four or five times so far upon the best Randon, as
upon the Level: Besides the level right Range, might most properly be called
the poynt-blanke only, because it is the Blanke point, and the beginning of
Elevation and depression: each other point in either, has its proper
denomination and Numeration, as the first, second, third, etc. to the twelfth
point, which lastly is perpendicular, either above or under the Horizon: And in
place of Point-blanke therefore, they call that distance the strait Line or
right Range, proper for the mounting or imbasing assigned.


M. D. The second part being a Curve Circuit, beginning at the foresaid
declination from the Axis, ascending to the highest Altitude above the Horizon,
and ending at a like Altitude to his beginning, I term for distinction sake
his Middle Helicall or Conicall Arck.


M. N. Gunners call it the Circuit of the Crooked range or Circular motion of
the Shot, or the Mixed or Compound motion thereof; It perticipating of the
violent, and the Natural motions mixed together, beginning at the farther end
of the strait Line or Right Range, and ending at the first graze of the Shot,
and being peculiarly differing in every mount or Randon from all the rest; And
therefore in two or more several Pieces, each like Randon in the one, is
proportional to the others like Randon: That is, having both the Randons of
one Piece, and one like Randon of another Piece given. The rule of proportion
will produce the Range for the other like Randon for the mounting sought.


M. D. The altitudes of any Bullets Circuit, I call that Line perpendicular,
which by imagination Mathematical, falls from the Bullet, at his very
highest of his Mount, perpendicularly down to the plain Horizontall: Which
line of Altitude, coupled together with the right lines from the Top and Foot,
Concurring at the Center of the Pieces Circular Base, does make a right angled
Triangle.


M.N. This and the two next Definitions, although they need no expositions, yet
they have good uses in the Theorems following.


M.D. The Horizontall line of that Triangle I call the Base.


Master Diggs. The other slope Line is the Hypothenusall.


M. D. The Pieces direct line of that Circuit which is always above the
Hypothenusall, (for destinction sake) I call the Line Diagonall, For that there
are several of these Diagonall lines to all Angles of Randon, and together
with the Horizantall line do comprehend the Angle of the Mount.


M. N. In my book called the Art of Artillery, I term that Hypothenusall
Line, the Secant Range of the Piece, because the same properly represents as
in the Doctrine of right lined Triangles the Secant of the Mount: As the
aforesaid perpendicular does the Tangent, and the Horizontall the Radius
thereof; which I so do, the rather for the more easy and certain
Calculations therein requisite.


M. D. The Pieces Horizontall level Range, I term the distance between the
Piece and the first graze of the Bullet, when the Piece upon her discharge,
lies level upon her Carriage, not mounted upon any lofty plat-forme, but such
as lies, even with the true Horizontall plane, whereon the Bullet must play.


M. N. This is amongst Gunners most usually termed the Level Range, which I
call the Leuel-dead range, and so look how far the shot goes directly,
(without any sensible declyning) is usually called the Level right range.


M. D. All other Ranges made on any Horizontall plane, by the Bullet, when the
Piece is mounted, at any several Randons, I term the Horizontall Range.


M. N. They are by Gunners called Randons or Ranges, and by me in the said
Book, termed Dead-ranges.


M. D. And because every Piece has some certain grade, of the Quadrant
whereunto mounted, she makes her uttermost Horizontall Range, in such sort,
that if ye mount the Piece higher, the Bullet shall fly a shorter distance;
and the Horizontall Range return less and less again: That point of the
uttermost Randon Horizontall, I term the Tropicke point or grade.


M.N Which Range is called by Gunners the best of the Randon, and by me the
greatest dead Range being the furthest distance that the same Piece can
possibly convey her shot: and that has been many years supposed to be at
the mount of 45. degrees (as the mean or middle between the Level, and 90.
degrees) But now it is found to be rather at the mean or middle degree between
the Level and the degree of mounting, that in decreasing, conueyeth the shot
just the distance of the Level Range, which is about 82. degrees, so that
above 40. degrees above the Horizon is the best of the Randon if accidents be
excepted.


M. D. And that which serves for the discovery of the different violence of all
Pieces right Lines or Right Ranges howsoever Mounted, (By me called the lines
Direct of the Bullets Circuit, and Lines Diagonall, I call for destinction sake
The Theoricke of Lines Dyagonall.


M. N. For the Theorick, all Dyagonals (or more properly termed Right Ranges)
for each several degree of mount of the Quadrant from 1. degree to 10. and so
for each 10. degrees to 90. I have thought good to adioyne an abreuiation of
one of my Tables A Table of Right Ranges.
Gr. paces Gr. paces. Level 0 192 20 524 1 209 30 695 2 227 40 855 3 244 45
930 4 261 50 1005 5 278 60 1140 6 285 70 1220 7 302 80 1300 8 320 90 1350 9 337
10 354 out of my Book called the Art of Artillery, (which hereafter I purpose
to publish the use of the said Table of Right Ranges, is thus,

First, if you know the right range of the Piece upon the Level, or upon any
degree mounted, you may thereby (with this Table) know upon every other degree
of mounting the same Piece, how far she will convey her shot in a strait
Line, being like loaded, and having like accidents. As suppose for example,
your Piece upon the Level shoots 250. paces upon the strait Line; and you
desire to know how far she will shoot in a strait Line being mounted unto
40. degrees above the Horizontall plane; say by the Rule of three: if 192. (the
number of the Table for the Level) give 250. your Pieces level right Range,
what shall 855. (the number of this Table for 40. degrees) give? and you shall
find 1113. (fere) the fourth proportional, which is the Number of paces she
will convey her shot, being so mounted to 40. degrees elevation in the strait
Line or right Range sought.


M. D. The other that discovers the variety of Ranges of all Pieces, at all
degrees of Randon, I call the Theoricke or Scale of Randons.


M. N. For the Theorick of Randons I have also here epitomized another Table,
out of my said Book of the Art of Artillery, whereby, for the six first
points of the Gunners Quadrant, you having the dead or Horizontall Range of one
shot made out of any Piece, whether it be of the nature of a Culuering (which
is between 30. and 40. Dyamitres of her Bore in length by the Range of numbers
set against the Letter S.) or whether it be of the quality of a Cannon (that is
between 18. and 24 Diametres of her Bore in length, by the Rank of Nombers
set against the Letter C.) you may having one shot by the same, and the rule
of Proportion, or rule of 3. know her dead or Horizantall Range for any other
point of mounting sought. As for example: suppose for a Culuering that shoots
level 260. paces: I would know how far she will convey her shot upon a
Horizontall plane, she being mounted to the third point (that is to 22. gr. 4.)
Say as 192. (the number against S.) for the level range, in the Table gives
2032. the number under the third point, what will 260. give? work by the Rule
of three, and you shall find 2752. for the number of paces that she will
convey her shot upon a Horizontall plane being so mounted.

A Table of Dead or Horizontall ranges.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 points. S. 192 985 1623 2032 2185 2281 2300 paces. C. 201 958
1600 1983 2135 2232 2250 paces.


M.D. The other Composed of All, and by Conference of all their parts together,
framing a Theoricke of perfection, differing in all planes Horizontall, or
varying for all kind of Pieces, and Bullets whatsoever; Their Ranges and
Randons: The Altitude of their Circuits, together with their Lines Diagonall
and Hypothenusall shall be named, The Theorick of Artillery general.


M. N. I have not here run through all those curious varieties, because they
require many experiments, much Art, and large discourse and grounded upon
Mathematical and practical demonstration: But, to know how much of the
Horizontall Line, lies under the right Range or strait Line of the shot
(being found as before) for the Elevation given, it is thus to be gotten: As
the Radius is to the right syne of the Complement of the Elevation given, So is
the right Range to the Level distance under it. And for the Level under the
crooked Range, that is found by substracting the distance under the right
Range, out of the whole distance of the Horizontall or dead Range sound as
aforesaid, and the remainder shall be the level Distance sought. Lastly, for
the Circuits of the crooked Ranges, Mr. Nicholas Tartaglia in the fourth,
fifth, and sixth Propositions of his second Book of his Sciencia Nova (which I
purpose one day to Translate, if God give life, and no other man prevent me)
does demonstrate, that the crooked Range of a shot made above the Level,
makes more then a Quadrant, and upon the Level a just Quadrant, and under the
Level, less then a Quadrant. But for all his subtle Demonstrations, it is
not exactly so found by experience. For it is neither perfectly Circular
elipsicall parabolicall, Hyperbolicall, nor Conicall, but merely Helicall, or
Helisphericall, according to the proper Leuelling, mounting, or imbasing of the
Piece assigned, which let now suffice.


Mr. Digges his Theoremes, concerning the new Science of great Ordinance,
resolving the most part of his Artillery Questions in Stratiaticos proponed.
The first Theoreme.
THere are three chief most material and efficient causes of the greater
violence of any shot made out of great Ordinance, viz. the Powder, the Piece,
and the weight of the Bullet.

The 2. Theoreme.
Powder is compounded of threee Principles or Elements, Saltpetre, Sulpher, and
Cole, whereof Saltpeter is it that gives the chiefest violence.

The 3. Theoreme.
Albeit Saltpetre be indeed the only or most material cause of the violence,
And that Powder commonly found most forcible, that is richest of Petre, yet is
there a certain proportion of Perfection of these three Components. And that
in such sort, as if you add more or less Petre, the violence shall abate.

The 4. Theoreme.
Although Powder be also the most efficient cause of the force and violence of
any shot, yet is there such a proportional charge of Powder to be found for
every several Piece, in regard of the proportion of her charged and vacant
Cylinders, as giving more or less, then the same proportional charges, it
shall diminish, and not increase the violence of the shot.

The 5. Theoreme.
If any two Bullets of equal quantity, but unequal weight, be let fall from
any lofty place to the Horizon, the more weighty shall ever fall the more
swiftly: albeit not proportionally to their weight; which Axiom is indeed
erroneous, albeit a great Philosopher has auerred the same.

The 6. Theoreme.
If two equal Bullets of different weight, be shot out of one and the same
Piece directly to the Zenith, both Bullets being of massy metal, and charged
with one quantity and kind of Powder, the lighter shall always outflie the
heavier. But such kind of Bullets they may be charged with all, as the Heavier
shall outflie the Lighter, although they be both discharged with the same
Piece, and quantity of the same Powder.

The 7. Theoreme.
There is such a convenient weight to be found of the Bullet, in respect of the
Powder and Piece, as the Bullets metal being either heavier or lighter then
that weight, shall rather hinder then further the violence or far range of
the shot.

The 8. Theoreme.
There is such a convenient Proportion to be found of the length of every Piece
to his Bore or Bullets Diamiter in respect of the Powder, and weight of the
Ball, as either increasing or diminishing that proportion it shall abate also,
and hinder the violence of the shot.

The 9. Theoreme.
This proportion exactly found in any one Piece, does not hold in all other,
and yet the difference and alteration such, as may be reduced to Rules
certain.

The 10. Theoreme.
Besides these three most material causes of violence, the Randons also and
different Mounts of Pieces, cause a great alteration, not only of the far
shooting of all Pieces, but also of their violent Battery. And albeit the
different alterations are very intricate and strange, yet have they a Theoricke
certain.

The 11. Theoreme.
There are also many other Accidental alterations happening by reason of the
wind, the thickness or thinness of the Air, the heating or cooling of the
Piece, the different manner of charging by Ramming fast or loose the Powder, by
close or loose rouling or lying of the Bullet, by the unequal recule of the
Piece, either by reason of the vnequality of the Platform or Wheels, or by
the uneven lying of the Piece in his Carriage or deformity of the Axtree, with
diverse other such like, whereof no rules certain can be prescribed, to reduce
these uncertain differences to any certain proportions: but all these are by
Practice, Discretion, and Judgment to be considered, and uniformly guided
and performed in their best perfection.

The 12. Theoreme.
Any Piece mounted 90. grades above the Horizon, throws his Bullet most
violently immediately after the discharge, and then the motion grows slower,
till the Bullet be come to his utmost Altitude, and then by Perpendicular
falling, increases by little and little, his swiftness again, even till it
come to the Horizon. But at all other Randons, it falls not so out.

The 13. Theoreme.
Albeit in the subtlety of Geometrical Demonstration, no part of the Bullets
violent motion, can be truly auerred a right or direct line, save only the
Perpendicular: yet in these experiments Mechanical, That first part of the
violent motion (I mean so far as the Piece is said to carry Point-Blanke)
being so near the direct, is, and may well be termed the direct line. As all
water leuels are accounted in all Mechanical operations, the Perfectest leuels
and directest lines. Albeit the subtlety of Geometrical Demonstration, does
find them not right or direct, but Curve or Circular.

The 14. Theoreme.
When any Piece is mounted directly to the Zenith. Then does his Motion violent
(being in that situation directly opposite to the natural) carry the Bullet
in a perfect right line, directly upward, till the force of the violence be
spent, and the Natural motion have gotten the victory. And then does the
Natural return the Bullet downward again, by the very same Perpendicular
line. And so is the whole motion of the Bullet in this case a very direct
Perpendicular to the Horizon.

The 15. Theoreme.
But if any Piece be discharged upon any Angle of Randon, albeit the violent
motion contend to carry the Bullet directly by the line Diagonall; Yet the
Perpendicular motion being not directly opposite, does though vnsensibly, even
from the beginning by little and little draw it from that direct and Diagonall
course. And as the violent does decay, so does the natural increase: and of
these two right lined motions, is made that mixed Curve Helicall Circuit of the
Bullet.

The 16. Theoreme.
Any Piece therefore discharged at any Mount or Randon, first throws forth
her Bullet directly a certain distance, called of Gunners their Point-Blanke
Range, and then it makes a Curve declining Arc, and after finisheth either in
a direct line, or nigh enclining toward it.

The 17. Theoreme.
The further that any Piece shoots in her direct line, commonly called
Point-Blanke, the deeper also she pierces in her Battery, if the Bullet be
not of substance brickle or frangeable.

The 18. Theoreme.
The more ponderous a Bullet is, the more it shakes in Battery, albeit it
pierce not always so deep as the lighter or letter shot conveniently
charged.

The 19. Theoreme.
Any two Pieces of Battery Ordinance, charged with one kind of Bullet, and
shot into one Rampire of massy uniform kind of Substance, shall ever make
their Profundities of pearcing Proportional to their level Ranges
Horizontall, if they be discharged either leuel or at one grade of Randon, and
at like distance.

The 20. Theoreme.
Any two Pieces of Battery discharged into any Rampire of uniform massy
substance, shall ever make their Pearcing depths proportional to their lines
Diagonall, albeit these Pieces be discharged from different Randons, so as
they batter at like distance.

The 21. Theoreme.
As Archimides line Helicall or Spirall, is made by the direct motion of a
point carried in a right line, while that right line is Circularly turned as
Semidiameter upon his Circles Center; So is this Artillery Helicall line of the
Bullets Circuit created only by two right lined motions becoming more or
less Curve according to the difference of their Angles, occasioned by the
several Angles of Randon. Whereupon by demonstration Geometrical, a Theoricke
may be framed, that shall deliver a true and perfect description of those
Helicall lines at all Angles made between the Horizon and the Pieces lines
Diagonall.

The 22. Theoreme.
These direct or Diagonall lines, are always longest when the Pieces Axis is
directed to the Zenith. And always as the Pieces Axis declineth more and more
to the Horizon. So do the Diagonall lines grow shorter, and at the level
Horizontall, shortest of all.

The 23. Theoreme.
These direct lines Diagonall, albeit they increase in length at every grade of
Randon from the Horizon to the Zenith, yet is not their increase uniform or
proportional, either to their degrees of Randon or Horizontall Ranges, nor yet
to their Circuits or Altitudes, and yet such as may be reduced to a Theorike
certain.

The 24. Theoreme.
The middle Curve Arkes of the Bullets Circuits, compound of the violent and
natural motions of the Bullet, albeit they be indeed mere Helicall, yet have
they a very great resemblance of the Arks Conicall. And in Randons above 45.
they do much resemble the Hyperbole, and in all under the Ellepsis: But exactly
they never accord, being indeed Spirall mixed and Helicall.

The 25. Theoreme.
Any Piece discharged at any one Randon with like Bullets, and several charges
of Powder, shall make both their lines Diagonall and Curve Circuits of
different longitude, but the Curve Arkes shall always be as Paralels, and
their Longitudes Proportional to their lines Diagonall.

The 26. Theoreme.
The last declining line of the Bullets Circuit, albeit it seems to approach
somewhat to the nature of a direct line again, yet is it indeed still Helicall
and mixed, so long as there remains any part of the motion violent. But after
that is clean spent, the rest of his course to the Horizon is direct and
Perpendicular, and a perfect right line indeed, which is best discerned in
those Grades of Randon, which are between the Zenith and the Mount or Randon
Aequorizontall.

The 27. Theoreme.
This declining line does always make a greater and greater Angle with the
Horizon, as you raise the Piece to a greater Mount, till you come to the Mount
Equorizantall, about which Point the same declining line becomes
Perpendicular before the Bullet fall to the Horizon.

The 28. Theoreme.
The Horizontall Ranges in all Pieces mounted from the Horizon toward the
Zenith, does not still increase, but at every grade of Randon are longer, till
you come to the Point or mount Tropicall, commonly called the utmost Randon,
which has bin generally thought to be the grade 45. but is not so. And from
that Tropicall grade upward, the Ranges decrease again till you come to the
grade Aequorizontall, so called because the Bullet then falls a like distance
to the level Ranges.

The 29. Theoreme.
This Aequorizontall Grade is as far distant from the Zenith, as that Grade is
from the Horizon, which shall cause the Piece to shoot in the Horizontall
plain a distance equal to his highest Altitude or longest line Diagonall.

The 30. Theoreme.
The Mounting of any Piece above his Aequorizontall grade does still decrease
her Horizontall Ranges even till it come to the Zenith. But in a Proportion
different from any of the former, her Bullet ending every of those Circuits in
a direct line Perpendicular.

The 31. Theoreme.
The Gradual increase and decrease of these Ranges Horizontall, albeit they are
equal in the Quadrant, yet are they neither equal nor proportional in the
Horizon, neither the Ranges nor their Interualls. Neither compared between
themselves, nor yet conferred with the Chords or Sines of their Arks. And yet
is there such a kind of Proportional increase and decrease of the proportion
of their Interualls, as may be reduced to a Theorike certain.

The 32. Theoreme.
The Tropicall grade commonly called the utmost Randon, is not as has been
generally supposed the Medium or Middle between the Horizon and the Zenith,
Viz. 45. but rather between the Horizon and the grade Aequorizontall, which
will fall out much nigher 50. from the Zenith, and 40. from the Horizon.

The 33. Theoreme.
The highest Altitude of any Bullets Circuit is farthest distant from the
Piece, when she is discharged at her utmost Randon or point Tropicall, and at
all other Randons either above or beneath that Tropicall Point: That highest
Altitude is ever least distant, and the bases of these Triangles do ever
increase to the Randon Tropicall, and decrease after, even as the Horizontall
Ranges; but in Proportion more different every one from other.

The 34. Theoreme.
The Altitudes of the Circuits of Randons do not increase and decrease as
their Ranges Reciprocally, but from the Horizon in every grade to the Zenith,
do still increase, but yet neither equally nor Proportionally, neither
conferred between themselves, neither yet with sines or Chordes of their Arkes
of Randon. And yet the increase and decrease of their Interualls Proportions,
such as may be reduced to a Theorike certain.

The 35. Theoreme.
The Hypothenusall lines of all these different Circuits carry a mixed
proportion of the composition of the Proportions of these Altitudes and bases
by addition of their Squares, But are not proportional to the lines Diagonall
of their corresponding Angles of Randon.

The 36. Theoreme.
Any two Pieces of Ordinance being mounted to any one Grade of Randon shall
make their Horizontall Ranges of their Bullets Proportional to the Altitudes
of their Circuits.

The 37. Theoreme.
The Ranges Horizontall of any two Pieces discharged at one Randon, will be
always proportional to their lines Diagonall of the same Pieces Circuits.

The 38. Theoreme.
The Horizontall level Ranges of any two Pieces of Artillery are ever
proportional to the utmost Ranges Horizontall of the same Pieces.

The 39. Theoreme.
Any two Pieces whatsoever discharged at one Randon, do ever make their lines
Diagonall, and lines of Altitude Proportianall howsoever the Proportions of
their charges vary.

The 40. Theoreme.
Any two Pieces whatsoever discharged at one grade of Randon upon any enclining
or declining Plain shall nevertheless make their Ranges proportional to
their lines Diagonall and Altitudes of those their different Ranges. Albeit the
Pieces be charged with a different kind of proportion of Powder and Bullet,
so as the shot be made in a fair Calm day, as is in these cases always
presupposed, because for such uncertain Accidents there cannot certain Rules
Artificial be prescribed.

The 41. Theoreme.
One Piece discharged at several Randons under the utmost Randon, being a like
charged and discharged, and the Piece also of one temper, at both times, shall
ever make several Ranges. But if she be discharged at several Randons, the
one above the Tropicke point, the other under, Then may their Ranges be equal
notwithstanding their Randons, Lines Diagonall, Altitudes, Bases, and Lines
Hypothenusall, be all different.

The 42. Theoreme.
When any Piece (being twice discharged at several Randons, the one above, the
other beneath the Tropike point) shall make the same or equal Ranges in a
Horizontall plain. The middle grade between those several Mounts is very
nigh the grade of utmost Randon: and the Piece Mounted to that middle grade,
shall then make very nigh his utmost Horizontall Range.

The 43. Theoreme.
The grade of utmost Randon or point Tropicall of any Piece in a Plain
Horizontall, shall not be the Tropicall grade of that Piece, in a plain
declining or inclining, but an other Peculiar to that Angle of Inclination or
Declination.

The 44. Theoreme.
Any Piece discharged at his grade of utmost advantage Horizontall upon a
Plain inclining, shall not make so great a Range as on his plain Horizontall:
But contrariwise on a Plain discending shall make a farther Range.

The 45. Theoreme.
A Piece discharged first at his due level, and again at his Aequorizontall
grade, albeit in the plain Horizontall they make equal Ranges, yet in Plains
declining shall they not so do, but always the Level Ranges shall ever
out-shoot in all declining Plains the Range of that grade Aequorizontall.

The 46. Theoreme.
A Piece discharged at any grade from the Zenith to the grade Aequorizontall,
shall always make a greater Range in any Plain enclining or declining, then
on the Plain Horizontall.

The 47. Theoreme.
In all plains enclining at all Randons between the Horizontall Level and
point Tropicall, all Pieces shoot farther in their Plains Horizontall, then
on any Plains enclining, and contrariwise in Plains Declyning: But above the
Tropike grade not always so, but sometimes, and not always contrary.

The 48. Theoreme.
In any Plain whether it be enclining or declining, if any Piece of Ordinance
be discharged being Parallel or Equidistant to that plain, and the first graze
or bound noted. If the same Piece be with like charge uniformly charged and
discharged at such an high grade of Randon as may cause the Bullet Range the
former Distance: That middle grade of the Quadrant, which lies between these
two Mounts, shall be very nigh the grade of utmost advantage, for that
enclining or declining plain. The which in all plains enclining, will be
above the utmost Range Horizontall, and in all declining under.

The 49. Theoreme.
In all enclining or declining playnes, as the grade Tropike of greatest
advantage does vary; So does also the proportions of their Ranges, at every
grade of Randon differ, whether they be accounted from the Zenith, Horizon or
Playnes, enclining or declining. But yet in such an assured and certain manner
as may be reduced to a Theoricke perfect.

The 50. Theoreme.
In all Grades of Randons, and in all manner of Pieces, whether the playnes be
Horizontall or vary by Inclination or Declination, the Diagonall Lines are
still proportional to those of the plains Horizontall respectively taken by
Graduation from the Zenith, in all Pieces whatsoever. But the Lines of
Altitudes, their Bases and Lines Hipothenusall are ever different in every
several Angle, both of Inclination and declination, and vary by such a
different Proportion from the Horizontall, as they are to be discovered by a
several Method of Calculation.

The 51. Theoreme.
Such Theorikes, Scales, and Instruments, may be framed for the Invention of
these strange Proportions of Altitudes, Lines Diagonall, and Ranges
Horizontall, as thereby with the aid of Calculations Arithmeticall, and some
Rules Geometrical, a man may exactly and readily discover the true Circuits
and Ranges of the Bullets of all Pieces of Ordinance whatsoever, mounted
howsoever; and upon all grounds or plains enclining or declining, that can be
Imagined, as shortly to the world by Gods grace shall be made apparent.

Mr. Digges his Questions, in the Art of Artillery with Mr. Nortons Answers to
them as follows.
Of Powder.
1.
Mr. Dig:. WHether there be not for any Piece proponed such a certain
quantity of Powder to be found, as duly to the charge of the same Piece
agrees, And that in such sort, that charging the Piece with more or less then
that quantity, it shall hinder the far ranging of the Bullet.


Mr. N. By the fourth Theoreme aforesaid, There is such a certain
proportional charge of powder to be found for every Piece, in regard of her
Charged and vacant Cylinder: But there must further be a consideration had
concerning weight of the Shot, the Fortification of the Piece, and the
different force of the sorts of powder, each to be proportional to other, and
so three Dyametres of the Bore, or. of the weight of her Shot in Corn powder
for Cannons. Or. of the Diametres, or. of the weight of the Iron Shot of Corned
(Artillery) powder, for the Culuerings. And four Dyametres, or the whole
weight of the Shot of such powder for Sakers, Falcons, and lesser Ordinance,
is usually accounted as their due proportional Charges, which charge (if it
could be readily found) would be just so much powder, as being all fired
within the Cylinder, will at that instant have carried the shot just to the
mouth of the Piece.


2.
M. D. Whether one and the selfsame Piece twice charged with one and the
selfsame quantity of Powder and Bullet, discharged also at the same Randon,
shall make the same Ranges?


M. N. No, for at the Second time it will shoot further then at the first: As
well because the Air that before was still quiet and unbroken, will be then
moved that way the shot goes, and by the course of the shot become broken.
And also for that the charged Cylinder will then be dryer and warmer then at
the first, and cause the Powder to fire quicker, and better together, which
will add more force thereunto.


3.
M. D. If a Piece be discharged with the weight of his Bullet in Serpentine
powder, and afterward discharged with half the weight of his Bullet in such
Corn powder as shall cause the Piece to cast the same ground; No.
I demand if the same Piece be again Charged with half the quantity of either
sort, whether these Ranges shall also be equal? The form of Charging being
uniform, and temper of the Piece alike.


M. N. No, for the last halfes will one of them be then more farther off from
due proportional Charge of the said Piece, then the other was from his Mate at
the first; And therefore it is certain, that the last half of the Corn
Powder, will shoot much further then the half of the Sorpentine Powder can
do, because there is more Petre in the quantity of the last half, then in so
much of the first half of the Corn Powder, and less in the other.


4.
M. D. If two Pieces of the same Length and Bullet be charged with one kind of
Powder, but several waights; I demand whether the Ranges shall be
proportional to the said waights, No.
Or to the Square, Cube, or Squared square roots of the said waights: Or
whether the Proportion of the Ranges, be not to be found, without any further
respect, either to the length of the Piece, or Ponderositie of the Bullet?
Considering (by Hypothesis) all those are equal.


M.N. Their Ranges will not be proportional to those Roots, (besides, whether
they should be alike or differently mounted, being not here expressed. Neither
the different waights of the Powder) therefore without them, those nor any
other proportion certain can hold; yet they may he found in a Compounded
proportion, having respect unto the proportions between the force of the
Powder, weight of the Shot, and length of the Piece.


5.
M. D. Whether the Proportion found in one kind of Powder, No.
hold not in all other kinds, of what mixture soever it be, the Pieces and
Bullets (being as is before supposed) equal?


M.N. No, for the proportions of all different kinds of Powder, equal in
weight or Measure, do differ in Force accordingly more or less, as there is
more or less Petre, and working therein; Nevertheless the equality of the
rest, for that a lesser weight or measure of stronger Powder will equal the
proportional Force of a greater weight or measure of weaker Powder, and these
are for Action in Geometrical proportion augmented, but for Resistance they
are augmented in Arithmeticall proportion, as an excellent Philosopher
elsewhere does largely Demonstrate.


6.
M. D. Whether the proportion of such Ranges, He refers this to a Book
never yet extant.
be not a Mean proportional resulting of the Commixion of the equality of the
Pieces lengths and Bullets; and the inequality of the Powders Quantity? The
Quallity being supposed alike.


M.N. I say it comes so near to such a mean proportionallity, as that in
practice it might be accepted for the same indeed; But it not being exactly so,
and also not being easily found, by reason it lurketh under so many compounded
varieties and contrarieties, we must content our selves with such a necessary
Neerenesse, as in my Exposition of M. Digges his Definitions are exemplified,
or to be showed elsewhere more largely.


Of the length of the Piece and Powder.
7.
Mr. Digges. Whether two Pieces being in all respects equal, saving only in
length, being charged with one Bullet, Yes.
and one quantity of Powder shall not make equal Grazes?


M.N. No, for both by Master Digges his answer and mine to the first Question,
there is a Charge certain; which is, that two Pieces of several lengths, and
otherwise equal, cannot with one Quantity of like Powder, have both of them
such a Charge, as can possibly be equally or proportionally nearest to their
Charge certain; And therefore their several Grazes must needs be also
different.


8.
M. D. Not always.
Whether the longer Cannon shall make the greater Range, whatsoever Quantity,
or kind of Powder they be discharged withal, the Quantity of Powder being
equal?


M. N. I imagine that Master Digges meant the Quality or Kind of Powder, which
may cause proportional difference, according to their several Forces:
Otherwise I may answer yes, unless the longer Pieces charge be as much over,
as the shorter is under, the Charges duly certain.


9.
M.D. Yes, but not without respect of the Powder.
Whether there be not a certain convenient Length of the Piece, in respect of
his Bore or Bullet, to make the utmost Range, in such sort, that making the
Cannon longer, shall rather hinder then further.


M. N. Surely Master Digges meant herein as in the last, the length of the
Cylinder or Chase, by name of making the Cannon longer, and then the question
is by him truly answered yes. If the proportional Force and Quantity of the
Powder be therein also considered and excepted; as I have under his former
Definitions exemplified.


10.
M.D. Whether this Length and proportion being found in one Piece, No.
hold in all other (the proportion I mean for the Length) must of necessity
alter?


M. N. One proportion cannot hold for Cannons and Minions of (not above 24.
Dyametres) and also for Culverings and Sakers (not less then 30. Dyametres of
their Bores in Length) and the greater weight of the greater Shot, resisting
the powders Force so much the more, by how much the more the Piece is mounted,
and does likewise in his Course more (by the greater gravity thereof) affect to
descend out of the strait Line of her Course, then the lighter does, though
both beginning with equal swiftness, each of these and all, or some of them
together do hinder general proportions, besides the less proportion of
fortefying of the Cannon, (which Metal) then of the Culvering, and yet the
proportion of the shot more increasing in the Cube, causes that the Cannon
can neither burn within her, nor endure. in Corn powder of the weight of her
shot, as the Culvering can do, much less as the Falcon, Saker, etc. which
can endure to burn within them, their shotts whole weight in such powder,
therefore they must needs convey the shot a greater proportional distance,
then the Cannon or Minion can possibly do, and consequently break the
proportion above in his question mentioned.


11.
M. D. The proportion being by Experience found with Serpentine Powder
according to the ordinary Charge; Unanswered.
Whether giving like quantity of Corn Powder the same Proportion of Perfection
shall hold, Unanswered.
or a new be sought, in respect of the alteration of the Powder?


M. N. No, that perfect proportion will be altered and anew to be sought, for
there will a different quantity of Petre be found in the like quantity of those
several powders; wherefore their Forces, and consequently the Ranges must
needs also differ. And further you may understand, that although Serpentyne
powder be grown out of use (because Corn powder is found better for
Ordinance) and that the Force thereof was commonly accepted in compared
proportion to Corn Powder, as ^. to 1. Yet for that there is also in several
sorts or Receipts of Corn powder greater differences of Force found between
them: Therefore also the said proportion cannot hold, for if in one pound of
Corn powder of the receipt of 6. 1. and 1. there be 12. ounces of Petre,
whereas in one pound of Powder of the receipt of 4. 1. and 1. there will be but
10. ounces and. of petre found; You may thereby also know what quantity of any
one sort or receipt of Powder will be of equal Force, with any assigned
quantity of any other sort of powder, whose receipt or mixture you already
know, or can find out, which you may easily do many ways; As in my Book of
the Art of Artillery at large is showed.


12.
M. D. If two Pieces being in all respects equal, save only in Length, be
discharged with one Bullet, and Quantity of one sort of Powder, make several
Ranges (at Point blanke discharged) I demand whether the same proportion of
Ranges shall still continue, with whatsoever Quantity or kind of Powder the
same Pieces be Charged? The Quantity being always equal, No.
and all other Circumstances in Charging and Discharging in either of them
alike?


M. N. The proportions cannot continue the same; For if in the former two
shotts the assigned Charge be as much over for the shortest Piece, as it is
under for the Longest, or in any other proportion, it cannot be in like
proportion in the Latter two shotts.


13.
M. D. If two Pieces in all respects alike, save only in length, be charged
with one Bullet, in Ordinary Serpentyne-Powder; I demand whether their Ranges
shall bear the proportion of the length of their Cannons, or of the
Vacant-hollow-Cannons, from the Charge to the Mouth? Or if it bear not the
same proportion, whether they carry not the proportion of the Square, Cube, No.
or Squared-square Roots? Considering all other Circumstances, all other
things being equal saving only the Cannons? it is apparent, that from their
Proportion, as the Original cause, the proportion of Ranges must in this case
be derived.


M. N. We must conceive that which Mr. Digges here and elsewhere terms the
Pieces Cannons, is the Vacant and Charged or Concaue Cylinder of the Piece, in
her whole length within, or the Chase without. And to the first part of this
double Question, I Answer, that the assigned Charge must needs be nearer to her
most due Charge certain for one of the Pieces then for the other. And for the
latter part I answer No, as unto the fourth Question: But to the Conclusion I
answer, as I did to the first Question, that from proportionallity of the
quantity and force of the Charge, with the length of the Piece, and height and
weight of the shot, the Proportion of Ranges for each several Mounting is
derived.


14.
M. D. If there be three Pieces in all respects equal, saving in length of
their Cannons or Cylinders, and yet those three longitudes proportional: No.
I demand whether the Ranges of their Bullets shall not be proportional? All
other Circumstances save only this of Lengths being one, equal, and alike.


M. N. The longest will outrange the two shorter, if that Piece be so well
fortefied, that she can endure her due charge of powder, and so by the same
reason the middlemost may outrange the shortest; And yet their lengths may
shorten in such sort, that their Ranges upon any like Mounting, or upon the
Level, may be proportionalls, but then the several lengths of their Chases
will not be proportional thereto: For that one, or those two which are
nearest the due charge of Powder, shall carry the shot with more advantage,
then the more or most remote from their due charge, in regard of that which
their lengths and weight of the shot can do.


15.
M. D. If three Pieces as before, having the Longitude of their hollow or vacant
Cylinders proportional, whether, Unanswered.
then (all the rest being equal and uniform,) the Ranges shall not be
proportionalls?


M.N. I say no: If their Bore be equal, their Charge equal, and yet their
Lengthes shortening or lengthening by Proportion, because the Charge will only
in one of them come nearest unto the due charge, which advantage will break
the proportion of it, with the other two; But if the middlemost for length were
the nearest unto the certain length due to the assigned charge of Powder, then
the longest must needs be too long, and the shortest too short, which
disaduantages would come nearer to proportionallity, but not be exactly so; for
diverse causes elsewhere herein showed.


16.
M. D. Or if in one of these Cases the proportion of the Ranges be not a Mean
Proportional, Unanswered.
resulting of the commixion of the Equallity of the Bullets waights, the
Equallity of the Powder, and the Inequality of the Longitudes of the Cylinders,
either whole or vacant?


M. N. Yes, it is doubtless a mean resulting proportionally of the Comixion
of the equalities, with the inequallity, but always with the former Cautions
mentioned in the two last precedent Answers.


Of the Powder and length of the Piece considered with the Bullet.
17.
M. D. If a Piece twice charg d with one quantity of the same Powder, but the
Bullets in weight different, Note there is a mean convenient.
I demand whether the lighter shall always outsly the heavier, or that some
convenient weight may be found?


M.N. Doubtless there is a mean convenient weight may be found, which must be
proportional to the Force that moves it; For a man's hand can throw a weight
of 4. pound of Lead further then a weight of 20. pound of Iron, or then 2.
pound of Feathers. And so shooting severally in a Saker three shotts, one of
Lead, another of Iron, and the third of Stone with 12. pound of powder (as the
Leaden shot would weigh) then will the Shot of Lead outrange the other two,
and that of Iron will outrange that of Stone; But severally shooting those
three with 8. pound of powder, as the Iron shot weighs: it will outrange
the Lead shot, and the Lead the Stone shot: But shooting them again
severally with 4. pound of powder, then will the Stone shot outrange the Iron,
and the Iron the Lead. Besides, the more a Piece is mounted, the more does the
heavier weight of the shot resist the Mouer, which if it be too much or too
little for the Force, it then impaireth the Motion; Therefore will the
convenient mean weight be proportional.


18.
M. D. Yes.
Whether this convenient weight of the Bullet alter not, according to the
Quantity or Validity of the Powder?


M. N. Yes, for the Leaden shot will require the whole weight of ordinary
powder, or. of the Corne-powder; And the Iron shot. of ordinary, or. of the
best; And the stone. of the ordinary, or. of the best powder, As has been
ordinarily observed to do generally his best execution; But this holds not
always for the force of powder and other proportions and accidents are
continually variable.


19.
M. D. Whether to find the said convenient Ponderositie of the Bullet, it be
sufficient to consider the Powder, Both.
or that the Longitude of the Piece also cause therein a diversity?


M. N. Yes, the longer Piece will require the more powder to be fired within
her, before the shot can ariue to the just mouth of the Piece to be then
discharged out, then the shorter will, For if all the powder be fired before
the shot ariue at the mouth, the after-running thereof within the rest of the
Cylinder will hinder the swiftness thereof, by the Cylinders being too long.
And likewise if the shot be discharged out of the Pieces mouth before all the
powder be fired, and that it have received all the force of the Powder for want
of sufficient length in the Cylinder of the Piece, it will be also hindered.
Therefore there is a convenient length for the convenient weight to accompany
with it continually proportional.


20.
M. D. If two Pieces be twice charged, first with an Iron, then with a Lead
shot; The Quantityes of Powder, Unanswered.
at both times equal: Whether the differences of the Ranges be not derived
only from the proportions of the Waights of these Bullets? (All other
circumstances by proportion differing not) And what relation to the Ponderosity
of the Bullets these Ranges have?


M. N. To this I have already sufficiently Answered, especially in the three
last precedent Answers, For as much as herein the proper weight of the Shot,
and due length of the Piece, proportional to the Force of the Powder and
Height of the Bore, do all domineere in altering their Shotts Ranges. And
besides we seldom use Lead shot, but often Stone shot in great Ordinance,
wherefore the Questions and Answers may be better applied to lion and stone,
then to Iron and Lead.


21.
M. D. Unanswered.
Two Pieces being in all respects equal, and charged with one kind of Powder,
but different Bullets, the one Iron, the other Lead; And either having the
weight of his Bullet: I demand whether the ranges be equal?


M. N. No, but proportional according as the length of the Piece is nearest
proportion as aforesaid.


22.
M. D. No.
If one Piece be charged three several times, first with a Stone Bullet, then
with Iron, and finally with Lead: And the Iron of such temper, that it be an
exact mean proportional in weight between the other two, being all
discharged with one quantity of Powder, I demand whether the Ranges shall be
in continual proportion?


M. N. No, for the length of the Piece; Height of the Bore, and force of the
Powder; will be nearer the convenient mean, for one of the said shotts, then
for any of the other two: Therefore the continued proportion will not hold
herein.


23.
M. D. No.
Whether a Piece being twice charged, first with Iron, then with Lead, having
one quantity of Powder, and the Range noted; I demand whether, being charged
with any other quantity of Powder, the Ranges of the same Bullets, shall not
always retain the same proportion?


M. N. I also deny that the Ranges shall retain the same Proportion, for that
the weight of one shot will nearer approach then the other toward the
convenient length of the Piece and force of the other quantity of Powder, And
therefore that advantage will alter the proportion therein.


24.
M. D. If in a Falcon, for example, Unanswered.
by experience I find two such quantities of Powder, as discharging the Falcon
with the first Quantity of Powder, with an Iron, shot; and again discharging
her with the second quantity and a Lead shot, they Range both duly one
ground: I demand whether in a Saker of the same Length with the Falcon,
Charging her first with an Iron Bullet, then with a Lead Bullet, using the same
quantities of Powder, whether their Ranges shall be proportionals? And whether
doubling either quantity of Powder, it shall alter the proportion of the Ranges?


M. N I say unto the first part of this double Question, that the Saker shall
not make proportional Ranges of ground. First, for that the Saker is of a
higher Bore; And secondly, for that the convenient proportions of Powder cannot
agree with those quantities (But I never heard of a Saker so short as a Falcon
by a foot at the least.) And to the second part I say, if at the first they had
been proportionalls, yet they would alter their Ranges by doubling convenient
proportions of either quantity of Powder.


25
M. D. If two Pieces of one Length be of such different Quantity of Bullet, No.
that the one being discharged with a Lead Bullet, the other with an Iron
Bullet, either having Powder the weight of their Bullet, and so make equal
Ranges: I demand whether either of them discharged with half the weight of
their Bullets in Powder shall Range alike also?


M. N. No certainly, for the halfes will be further of, (then the whole
waights were) from the Convenient mean: Therefore their Ranges will not be
alike; for then the Iron shot will outrange the Leaden.


26.
M. D. Not always.
If two Pieces be of one Length, but of several quantity of Bullet, and yet of
one kind of Metal or substance, and discharged with the weight of the
Bullet, in one kind of Powder: I demand whether they shall not Range one
ground, being equally Mounted?


M. N. Not at any time, if the Piece of the lower Bore have her due length: For
then she will ouer-Range the other of the greater Bore.


27.
M. D. Unanswered.
If there be once found by experience in some one Piece such a perfection of a
Cannon, as whether ye make him longer or shorter, he shall Shoot less
ground, having always the weight of his Bullet, of one kind of Powder to his
Charge: I demand whether if another Piece whose Cannon or Hollow Cylinder is
in proportion like to the same, although greater in Quantity, shall not be of
the same perfection?


M. N. No, unless there be a due convenient Fortification and length of her
Cylinder proportional unto the height of her Bore weight of her shot and
Force of the Powder of her convenient Charge. But with those conditions I say,
yes, it shall be of like perfection.


28.
M. D. If two Pieces having their Hollow Cylinders similes or proportional be
discharged with the weight of their Bullets in Powder at like Randon,
Unanswered.
I demand the proportion of their Ranges; the quantity of their Cylinders
known?


M. N. If the range of one shot be truly known of either piece, made (with
like loadings and accidents) either upon the level or any Mount assigned, then
by my Expositions before set down under M. Digges his three last Definitions
(preceding h s Theoremes) both the said Ranges may be found, as is well
demonstrated by Nicholas Tartaglia in his seventh Proposition of his second
Book entitled his Noua Scientia. Where he says, That every Range or violent
motion of a body equally heavy (as round shot is) be it great or small,
equally mounted above the Horizon, or equally oblique or parallel to the plane
of the Horizon, they will make their Ranges like, and consequently be
proportional in their distances.


29.
M. D. Of any two Pieces presented, to know which shall shoot furthest, being
both Charged with the weight of their Bullet in Powder, The force of the Powder
being first in some one approved?


M. N. If the Length of the Cylinders, be in like proportions convenient to
their Bores Height and Charge, then the longer the Piece the farther she
shoots. Otherwise the Cylinder (may by being too long) make the longest
shoot shortest.


30.
M. D. Unanswered.
Any two Pieces proponed, how to charge them with such quantity of Powder as
they may both at like Randons, Range like ground.


M. N. There in the Force of the said quantities of Powder, conpared with the
length of the Concaue Cylinder, and weight of the Shot, and all other
circumstances must be considered: and so applied that the Piece that would
shoot farthest must be proportionally abated of her allowance of Powder, as
that which would shoot shortest is the more weak.


31.
M. D. Unanswered.
Having proved any Piece at his utmost Randon with any one kind of Powder, to
know how to diminish the Proportion of Powder from time to time in such
proportion, as the Piece keeping that Randon, shall shoot any part you will
assign?


M. N. Having by my answer to Master Digges his 11. Question, or otherwise
found how much Petre is in that quantity of powder proved, and deminished it
according to the force you desire to lessen; and having by my Expositions upon
M. Digges three last Definitions (preceding his Theoremes) found the Ranges,
you may find Leading marks: But proportional proofs manually acted,
exceeds Art herein, by reason of unseen accidents.


32.
M. D. Not equal but proportional.
Whether the right Line of the utmost Randon be equal to the right Line of the
Level Range, Or whether in all Pieces they retain proportion?


M. N. The Level strait Line or course of a short explained in the 11.
Definition contained in the 5. page, is at the best Randon, as 1. to 5. as
Tartaglia and others have demonstrated agreeing nearly with experience;
Therefore they cannot be equals, but they are always proportionalls in all
Pieces.


33.
M. D. Whether the right Line of the utmost Range be less then the right Line
of 90. Grades of Randon? Yes.



M. N. No, for the right Range or strait Line of the Bullets course at the
mounting of any Piece to 90. degrees, is there longest, and is directly
perpendicular to the Horizon.


34.
M. D. Whether the right Line of the utmost Range be a Meane-proportionall
between the right line of the Level Range, and the right Line of the vertical
Range, Yes.
viz. mounted to 90. Grades?


M. N. No, by the next answer following, but every strait Line of any Piece,
for each Mount is proportional to the strait Line of any other Piece like
loaded and mounted, compared with any Ranges of equal Mounts for those Pieces
given.


35.
M. D. Whether the right Line of the utmost Randon, Yes.
be not rather a mean proportional, between the Level right Range, and that
grade of Randon that Rangeth the ground of the Level Range?


M. N. Yes, especially in a Calm, and that mean proportional will be found
to be somewhat above 40. degrees by the 19. Definition and the Exposition
thereof.


36.
M.D. Yes in a Calm.
Whether the Right lines made by any two Pieces discharged, be not
proportional to the Ranges of their Bullets at the same Randon?


M. N. Yes, by the 20. and 21. Definitions and Expositions hereof: And as it is
well demonstrated by Tartaglia in his Nova Scientia, and his Coloquies.


37.
M. D. Not answered.
Whether the right Lines made by any two Pieces at any Randon, be not
proportionals with their utmost Ranges?


M. N. Yes doubtless, nevertheless the 23. of M. Digges his said Theoremes
concerning great Ordinance herein incerted; And as it will appear by my two
Explanations and Tables following his 20. and 21. Definitions aforesaid.


38.
M. D. No.
Whether the Utmost Randon, (I mean to make the utmost Range) be always one,
whether the ground be level or ascending?


M. N. No, it cannot be so, for that the ascending ground does sooner meet with
the way of the shot, then the Level, and the Level sooner then the
descending plane.


39.
M. D. No.
Whether the Bullet end his Range with a Line, not sencibly different from a
strait Line; As it does begin his Circuit?


M. N. Yes, under 60. degrees of Mount, but about 70. 80. and unto 90. it
ends in a perpendicular right Line, which is a right and strait Line.


40.
M. D. Whether all Pieces at one Randon discharged, Not answered.
as they make one Angle at the beginning of their course, do make one Angle at
the end of their Race?


M. N. Yes, they do as in Tartagliaes Nova Scientia is demonstrated, upon all
like planes, and meeting with like Accidents.


41.
M. D. Whether the Angle at the end of the Circuit made with the Bullet be
equal with the Angle of Randon? No.



M. N. No, it does not; for it is always greater, except at the Mount of 90.
degrees.


42.
M. D. Whether the upper part of the Circuit made with the Bullet be a
proportion of a Circle as Tartaglia supposes? No.



M.N. No, for it is a Mixed, Curved or Helisphericall Line or Circuit, proper to
the degree of mounting.


43.
M. D. If a Falcon of three Inches Bullet weigh 700. pound, I demand how much
a Cannon of eight inches will weigh, that is able to receive his proportional
Charge to that Cannon?


M.N. This cannot be answered by the simple Rule of proportion, because weight
is not appertaining to Lines nor to Superficies, but unto Solid Bodies. And
also you may note that although M. Digges here compares the Falcon which is at
least 30. of the Dyametres of her Bore in Length, and Fortefied with Metal to
endure the weight of her shot in powder, with the Cannon that is but 18. or
24. Dyametres of her Bore in length, and no better fortefied then to endure. of
her shotts weight in Powder: But comparing the Falcon with a Demi-Culvering
that is of the same kind and Fortification, whose shot waigheth 10. pound,
the Question is Answered thus: for


Example.
The Cube of three (the inches of the height of the Falcons Bore) is 27. and
the Cube of 4. (the inches of the Demi-Culuerings Bore) is 91. (fere) Now say
by the Rule of three, Unanswered.
if 27. give 91. what shall 700. give? And so having accordingly Multiplied the
third number by the second, and divided the product by the first, you shall
have in the Quotient 2359. pound 7/27. for the weight of the said
Demi-Culvering sought.

44.
M. D. If a Falcon of 3. inches Bullet require 3. pound of Powder for his
charge, I demand how much Powder will charge a Cannon of 8. inches Bullet?


M. N. Because this Question is of several kinds of Ordinance, as is said in
the last precedent Answer, I have also applied this Answer, and the Example to
the said Demi-Culuering thus: for


Example.
Multiply 91. the Cube of 4 1/^. by 3. l. the charge of the Falcon, and the
product will be 273. which I divide by 27. the Cube of 3. (the Diametre of the
Falcon) And the Quotient I find to be 10. pound and ^/^. for the Powder of the
due charge for the said Demi Culuering sought.

45.
M. D. Not answered.
If the Falcon that carries Point Blank 150. paces, and at the utmost Randon
1300. paces: I demand how far a Culvering at his utmost Randon will reach,
that at Poynt-blanke, or Level rangeth 250. paces?


M. N. Say by the Rule of 3 if 150. give 1300. what shall 250. give? answer,
2166. paces, and. for the utmost range of the Culvering sought.


M. D. And thus by observations used in one Piece, by this Art of Proportion, a
man may discover the Force of all Pieces.


M. N. The Gunner may know by her level right Range how far his Piece will
convey her shot at any Elevation mounted: If he multiply the number of Paces
she carries in a strait line, (she lying level) by 11. and divide the
product by 50. the Quotient will be the greatest digression, which it makes at
the first degree more then at the Level. But all other degrees proceed always
deminishing unto the utmost Randon: and to know how they deminish, take the
number of degrees from one to 41. the best of the Randon, and that will be 40.
by which dividing the said number of the former Quotient; This Quotient will be
the number of Paces, which shall decrease from degree to degree, from the first
unto the utmost Random. As for Example: For the Culvering that shot 250. paces
level in a strait Line; I do multiply that, by 11. and it produces 2750.
which I divide by 50. and the Quotient will be 50. paces; which it shoots at
the first degree more then at the level; which 50. paces, divided again by
40. (the degrees between the first degree and the utmost Randon) and this
Quotient will be 1. pace and. which I take from 350. namely from the 250. and
the 50. increased at the first, and also the 50. to be increased for the second
digression, it leaves 348. paces for the Range of the second degree, unto
which add 48. paces. abating the one pace;. and there will be 195.. for the
paces of the Range of the third degree, and so proceed.


Certain Erroneous Positions and Grounds published by professors of this Art
of Great Artillery, noted by Mr. Digges.
1. THat in all Pieces of Ordinance mounted above the utmost Randon, the Bullet
is violently carried in a right Line to his utmost distance from the Earth, and
then falls perpendicularly down to the Horizon.

2. That all Pieces of one Bullet being charged with one quantity of the same
Powder, and discharged at one Randon, shall make their Ranges proportional to
the Length of their Pieces.

3. That if you Charge any one Piece, with several quantities of one kind of
Powder (the Piece being discharged two several times, at one Randon, and with
the same Bullet, shall make different Ranges proportional to the weight or
quantity of the powder.

4. The fourth and chief of all the rest, is the Grade of utmost Randon; For
most Writers that ever I read, agree in this, that the mount of 45. grades
above the Horizontall plane, should make there the utmost Range.

5. That every degree of Random does equally increase the Range in any one
Piece, from the Zenith to 45. their Tropike grade, and so in decreasing
likewise, and that proportionally in all pieces more or less according to
their Force.

6. That in all sorts of Pieces, the difference of their utmost Ranges should
be in proportion answerable to the weight of their Bullets and Charges of
Powder.

Other Erroneous Positions published concerning Ordinance; Noted by Robert
Norton.
1. THat when a Piece is to shoot at a mark above the Level, being within
distance of the right Range, then it by the virtue of the Fire that ascends
ouer-shooteth the Mark. And that therefore to remedy it, the Piece must be so
much imbased, Sior. Collado. fol. 61.
until a Plum line at the Cornice let fall, will not enter but touch the lower
side of the mouth of the Piece.

The same Author there affirms Folio 60. that if any Piece be to shoot from
above downwards to a mark under the Level, and the Pieces Metal directed to
the mark, that then the Piece must be so much Elevated more, as may equal the
Angle, that the Pieces flatt of her mouth makes with a Plum line applied
thereunto to equal the Natural defect caused by the ponderous descending of
the shot in her mixed motion or crooked Range.

Mr. Smith has published in his Art of Gunnery, page 35. that if a Saker will
convey her Bullet at Point blanke 200. paces, and at the best of the Randon
900. paces, that then that Cannon will shoot 1620. paces at the best Randon
that carries at Point-blanke 360. paces, which is very erroneous, for that at
the best of the Randon the shot rangeth rather 10. times as much as at the
Level Range.

And also page 39. he affirms, that if a Culvering be shot off with 2/^. of
the weight thereof, and then with the whole weight of her shot in Powder, that
then the second shot shall be near. further then the first.

And page 46. that a Cannon that shoots 1440. paces at 45. degrees, will for
every degree of less Mount, abate 32. paces in her Range.

And page 47. he says that a Cannon that shoots at her best Randon 1440.
paces, will shoot at 30. degrees, but 960. paces, whereas in that case she
will convey her shot being like laden and mounted about 1269. paces.

And page 49. he says, that if you abate the Leuel Range of a Piece from the
utmost Range thereof, and divide the remainder by 45. degrees, then the
Quotient will show you how far the shot is carried at every degree.

Or by dividing the same number by so many degrees, as you would eleuate your
Piece at, The Quotient he says does show how far the Bullet does range
beyood Poynt-blanke, and that thereby you may make a Table of Randons.

But he either forgetting, or I think rather not knowing that the best Randon
is but little above 40. degrees Elevation, or that the Piece shoots thereat
about 10. times as much as the Level Range, Or that the Ranges deminish from
1. to the best Range, and increase from the best to 90. degrees Elevation; It
has made him publish these and many other Erroneous positions.

FINIS.

