The Description of Swedland, Gotland, and Finland, the ancient estate of
their Kings, the most horrible and incredible tyranny of the second
Christiern, king of Denmark, against the Swecians, the poleticke attaynyng to
the Crown of Gostaue, with his prudent prouidyng for the same. Collected and
gathered out of sundry laten Aucthors, but chieflye out of Sebastian Mounster.
By George North.

Set forth according to the order in the Queen's Majesty's Iniunction.

Imprinted at London by John Awdely, dwelling in little Britain Street, by
great S. Bartelmewes. Anno.1561. The.28. of October.

To the right woorshypfull, and his synguler good Master, Master Thomas
Steuckley Esquire, his obedidient servant George North wysheth prosperous
health, with increase of much worship.
AL ancient Historiographers (my singular good Master) for their difficult
trauayl, merit most hye laud, whose famous works reueleth to our memory the
secret doings of time past: and also bewrays to time present, the unknown
acts of our Elders. For although by ye course of Nature, their bodies are
killed: yet lives their good or evil deeds, in the everlasting report of
letters. Among these none deserves more praise, nor worthy of more
veneracion, then the most noble writer Sebastian Mou^ster: whose large labor
greatly surmounteth the doings of any other. This Mounster both compendiously
and briefly (and yet eloquently and truly) entreats, not only of one, and
his own natural soil: but generally of al Nations, the situacion of their
Countries, the manners of their people, with the ryghtes and vsages of their
Princes. In whose volume it was my fortune to read the description of
Swedlande, Gothland, and Finland. And findyng these Countries to be so large
and fruitful, their Kings so noble and ancient, and their people so mighty
and valiant. Considering the virtue of Princes to be a myrrour to look on,
and their vices a terror to think on, and also for that swyft Fame has
published the report of these people unto us: I thought meet to reduce the
same hystorye into our vulgar tongue, though not so copiouslye and
eloquentlye as any learned might have done. The situacion and natural lying of
their great and large Countries, the rytches, fertillitye and fruitfulnes of
the same, with their noble and notable Cities, I have briefly ouerpassed. The
old estate and ancient raygne of their Kings, with their diverse and sundry
alteracions, sometime by the Danes, sometime by the Norwayes, and sometime by
division among them selves. I have in few words collected. But the horrible and
cruel tyranny of the second Christiern king of Denmark, against the Swecians,
and his just reward for the same, the poleticke attaining of King Gostaue to
the crown, his triumphant Coronacion, his prudent gouernyng, with the virtuous
prouidyng for the education and learned instruction of the most noble Eric
now King of Swecia, I have most amply declared. Gathering the report hereof
out of sundry Autthors, as John Magnus, Archbishop of Vpsalen, Saxus
Grammaticus, and Sebastian Mounster, whose authority I have chieflye followed.
Proferynge the same (to your worship) as the fruits of my trauail in your
absence: acknowledging herewithal the remembrance of my serviceable deuty and
good will to your Mastership, whose large and ample benefits I have not seldom
times received, with your favorable goodness, not only to me, but also to
every one, whose need you knew to want your relief. More, what friend
remaynes vnrecompence^^? any friendshyp toward you? What stayed hand has
wythdrawen any gift of yours from him who desired it, and whom you thought
worthy to receive it? Besides these your liberalities, your own travel in
foreyne and straungenacions with the perfect understanding, and almost natural
speaking of their languages: imports you to be as trym a Courtier, as you are
known to be a worthy Soldiour. I would dilate your several virtues, but I
fear to incur your displeasure thereby, whose ears enuieth the hearing of
your own praise, and whose tongue thundreth out the good fame of others. Also
some sclaunderous Sicopha^ts would say my pen did flow rather with affection
and flattery, then with troth and veritye. But to such (as never learned to
speak well) I answer (that besides the part of a Servant) I have wayed more
your inward natural inclinacion, then your outward frank doings, although
they are sufficient witnesses with me of this my report. Most humblye desiryng
you to accept in good part this my unlearned labor, that I have under the
defense of your goodness putin publycke prynt, which if it be thankfully
taken, may encourage me hereafter to attempt larger works, whereby I trust as
well to profyt my Country, as to content my self. Wyshinge the prosperous
success of Fortune to call you to your hearts desire, with the fruitful
continuance of health between you and my Mystres, whose goodness both I and mine
have often times aboundauntly tasted, to whom I wysh like prosperitye. Whose
mind is frayted with a number of sober virtues.

Your bound Servant, as I have ever seemed George North.

The description of the most florishyng Country of Gothia, or Gotlande, with
the ancient raygne of their noble Princes.
This word Gotlande in the German tongue does interpretat a good ground of
good land. And amongst the Northeast Regions, this Country of the Goths is
most fertylit. It is also to be prere^^ed before the rest, for the aboundaunt
yeldyng or all manner of fruits and honye, and chiefelye for that it has
such goodly pastures, whereby their cattle are fed both great and fat, The
fruitefulnesse of Goth^^.
full of large Forestes, with apt and plesaunt Ryuers. They have great store of
all manner of Merchaundies, and in every place is found such plenty of usual
necessaries, that their superfluities suffiseth to enterchaunge with others,
aboundyng with precious turres and mettanes, but chiefly with Copper.

The Goths and the Swecians time out of mind, and even from the beginning or
their being: have vnsted and knyt themselves in leage and amitye, The ^^thes
(...) the Swe^^ns have time out of ^^nve, been under one King.
both under one law and one King. And also they have appointed the confines and
bounds of both Countries to be as one kingdom. Yet have they often times
occasion being offered (and as those chances are wount) sequestered and divided
them selves the one from the other, and each nation have had their several
king. Notwithstanding their division was never certain, neither did it long
remain between them: but that they were joined again with contented
subjection under the aucthority and government of one Prince. At home and near
hand against their neighbors the Swecians have ever prevailed: Nereh^^^^ and
against their neigh bours, the Swecians have ever stoorished, but abroad the
Goth^^.
but abroad in far and strange Countries, the glory of the Goths with their
mighty and bloody bartels by the report of Fame have greatly exceded. They
wrestled of long time with the Romans, and being ouercommed, they would for
a while be quiet: but attempting again the doubtful hasard of battle, they
have with great discomfiture and destruction of the Romans, suppressed and
overthrown their mighty and almost invincible armies. Also not seldom times
with equal victory, The gothe^ sacked Rome they possen Italy, they occupied
France, and made sure four da^^^ in Spain.
or little loss they have departed. And at length treading down and
ouerco^ming their whole Empire: they past through Italy, where with great wast
and destruction they sacked Rome. They possessed Italy no small time, they
occupied France, and they grounded them selves so in Spain, that their chief
Nobility does discende from them, as the Romayne histories does mention.

Gothland boundeth with his North limits to the South of Swecia, and lies
from the West to the mountains of Norway, The noble cities of (...) t^la^d,
wy^^ ^^s Du^^ ^omrs.
which are from the lymites of Swecia, to the mouth of the River Trolheta, from
the South and the East it joins on the sea. The towns and cities of this
Country, be many and great, Lodhusia a Port town, where great trafike is used,
Wald burgurbs has a strong and fair Castle, Halmstat, Elsinburg, Landskro^
Calmaria with a goodly Castle. Stegholm, Suderco pia, Norcopia, Lidercopia a
city that stands upon the river of Vener, Vasten and Huetland.2. trymme
towns. Vestrogothia a Dukedom, whose cities be Scaris and Varnem, where are
the Sepulchers and graves of their ancient kings. Ostrogothia a Dukedom, whose
cities be Schemingt^ and Lincopia, where their bishops sea is: Halladia,
Smalandia, Tnischia, Verindia, Blechingia, al Dukedomes. Visby a City of the
Goths, where was wont to be their ancient and famous Mart, (...) my a^ by the
(...) ^^^tes.
but now (by the often incursions and afflictions of the Denmark and M^scouite
Pirates) it is depopulated and left desarte. The ruined monuments do yet
apeare, bearing wytnes of the flori^hing estate of the place. Here was the
first certain abiding and building of the Goths, the which the Meotides did
occupy. There is at this present day a goodly Castle and a Monestary, wherein
is a brotherhod of the order of Saint Benedic, (...) ^^^ary (...) sun (...)
^^^hur^
having a Librarye of ^000. Anethors, and old ancient Histories. Out of this
Country, and other the Northeast Regions does come the rytch furs of noble
Beasts, and chiefelye the costlye Sabels, which are wonderfullye esteemed. They
never hunt them, but in the Winter, for then Nature makes their furre thickest
and surest. They have an Island environed with the Sea, (...) of (...)
reported to be in length. 28. Germayne miles, it is greatly adorned with
fruitfulnes, for his fertillitie and plentiful abounding of al things, it is
called the Mother or norisher of Swecia.

Of the ancient Kings of the Goths and Swecians, after the aucthority of
John Magnus, Archbishop of Vpsalen.
(...) ^ie^t (...) ^f for (...).
Agog nephew to Iaphet Noes son (as witnesses Joseph in his first book of
Antiquities, the. 11. chapter) was ye father and fou^der of the Scithians, and
was the first that raygned king among the Scithians in that part of Europ,
that now is called Finland. This Magog had. 5. sons, the eldest called
Swenus, Magogs. Sonn^s.
from whom the Swecians recefued first their proper name. He succeeded his
father in the kingdom. And after him his second brother named Gother and of
some Gog, reigned king. After Gother Vbbo the third son of Magog was elected
king whose raygne was after the flud.246. years. This Vbbo long before the time
of Abraham, did build the city of Vpsalen which now is their Metrapolitan seat,
Vbo bylded Vpsalen, be for the time of Abraham
he dyed and was buried in the same City. After whose death Siggo attained to
the kingdom, and ruled with much honor the term of.65. years, geuyng place
to nature the.402. year after ye flood was buried at Vpsalen. Whylst Siggo
raygned in Swecia, The vertu^^^ government of the first Eric.
Eric the first was chosen King in Gothia: he governed with so much Justice as
any prince the^ might do, he made laws and decrees, such as ye world then
best might bear. Virtue did so govern his kyngly aucthority, that many
histories report him to be, These names only remain, Vddo, Alo, Other,
Charles, B^orn^ Gother, Siggo.
not only the chief and worthiest, but also the first king of the Goths, and
the Swecians, he dyed after the flood 425. From him to Berico, only the names
of their kings remayn, as Vddo, Alo, Othen, Charles, Biorno Gother, and Siggo.

Berico by the common consent both of the Swecia^s and Goths did enter into
the Monarchy of both kingdoms, Berico the 14. king, and ye first that led
the^ out of their contrye.
after the flood.836. he was the.14. king and the first that led them out of
their Country. They departed out of Gothland and Swedland, from the creation of
the world.2831. and after the flood.875. and before the coming of Christ.1430.
at what time Othoniel judged Israel. This Berico left the crown to his son
Humulfus, giving him therwithal a fatherly charge for the well governing of his
Country. After him raygned Humelus, cousyn to Humulfus, under whom the Danes
rebelled, which the Saxons seeing, (...)
invaded Denmark, whereby they were compelled of necessity to yield and submit
them selves again to Humelus. After whose death his son Gothilas succeeded,
he raygned with no less valiant^es then did his father, he dyed and left the
crowue to Sichtruge.

Thus far by the aucthority of John Magnus, Archbishop of Vpsale^s with
others: hereafter follows Sebastian Mounster, whose aucthority I have chiefly
followed.

The antiquity / the doings, the increase, and the rytches, with the natural
situacion of the most florishyng and largest Country of all the Northeast
Regions, named Sweonia or Swecia, and as it is commonly called Swedia.
SWecia has lying upon his west parts the Goths, upon the North the
Wermilanes, with the Scricfins, on the East, Finland and Russia, and upon the
Southe, the sea Balthicke. This country does yield his greatest abundance of
al fruits toward the North, where the earth bestows her norishing gifts
of kind plentifully. And also there is gathered much store of honye, very
ritche of Silver, Bras, Lead, Iron, and Cattle. Rytche of Silver and other
metals.
They have likewise all kind of fyshe, which is not only received of the Sea,
but also generallye of their Rivers and Pooles. And for Beasts to hunt both
wild and tame, either for pleasure or profit, no country can have more.

Swedia does excel Norway.
Swecia, as it is well known in largenes, people, metal, and al other things,
does twice excel the kingdom of Norway: yet there be in many places, hills so
sharp and hye, and Marasis so deep and watery, that they are not passable,
neither with Norse nor Chariot.

Stockholm their (...) City.
Their Imperial City is named Stockholme, not so byg in quantity, as it is well
fenced and furnished, both by Nature and Art. It stands in a Marish
ground, much like the cituasio^ of Venis, from whence he takes his name. For
although it be builded in water: yet is the foundation very strong and sure.
The sea enters into it by two great and large arms, that any ship full
fraited, may sail with her burden into either of them.

After the incarnacion of Christ. 1307. this city was wonderfullye afflicted,
(...) ^^r^full (...) not of (...) ^^ard of
and almost utterly ruined, by a fire that fell from heaven. For when the
lyghtnyng had taken hold of the houses: it miserably burnt and broyled as well
the people, as their goods. There perished in this pitiful flame. xvi.
hundred men. But most part of the women, with an innumerable sort of maids,
conveyed them selves with their substance and children abourd such shyps as
lay in their havens, and with the^ not a few men. Notwythstandyng, A thousand
and syx^ hundred men (...).
before they could depart, the whole multitude (fleing from the peril of
present death) violently embarked them selves with the rest, and having no
regard to their common calamity, did over charge their shyps, in such sort that
the waters devoured them both. Such as with great hope and hasard, A wonderful
and a la^^^ntable ^haunce.
escaped the hateful death of burning: here ended their lives with the unlucky
chance of drowning. (An example to the world, no les worthy to be noted, then
it is of al men to be pitied.)

This country of Swecia is full of Marchandrise for strangers, and for their
own necessaries, they have enough to make exchange with others. They have also
great store of precious furs and metals. The hye Mountains of Norway and
Denmark, are plainly and perfecly seen of them. A great Kind of cur^^^y.
It is for a trothe reported, that the inhabitants of Swecia, have a wonderful
kind of curtyse entertainment with them: For they account him an evil and
naughtye man, that denies to the stranger lodgyng, so that contencion and
strife does often chance among them, who Wall first receive the traueler into
his house. Where as they pay neither for meat nor drink. And besides this, In
Swedland the traueler p^ieth not for ^^^vytails, but in corporate towns.
they will guide their Gest to his next bayght, lendyng him horse and other
necessaries, for the quicker dispatch of his journey. (What greater honor can
one do to his country, then in vsyng a stranger friendly?)

The people of Swecia are many, of strength and arms mighty, both on
horseback and a foot. In battle bold and valiant, either on the land or the
sea. The Dukedom of Angermani, contains the North parts, to the confines of
Laponie, whose country is full of great woods, and large Forestes, where their
chief wild beasts are hunted. The Dukedom of Midelpathus, occupies the
south of Angermani, after whom lies the Dukedomes of Helsingia, Ges^ritia,
Firingia, and Vpsalia their Metrapolitane city, the Dukedom of Coperdalia,
where there is a valley that grows full of Copper, A valley yt grows full of
Coppet.
also Dalecarlia a people strong and mighty in arms. The Dukedom of Vplandia,
which has all his Country with mines of Silver, Copper, and Steel. Vplandia
rytche of al metals.
They have a notable city called Nicopia, strongly fortified with hye walls,
and great Bulwarks. Kolinolnemus deuideth Swecia from Gothelande, by the Poole
that stretches out a long from Nicopia.

Of the Kings of Swecia.
TO seek the first spryng and original of the Swecia^s, my labor should be
no les therein, the^ an endless travel, and I think it as un possible for others
to find, as myself, both for others to find, as my self, both for the
antiquiti of their name, and also the ancient state and continuance of their
reign. Notwythstanding that which passed time has committed, to the report of
letters (which of al auctorities is accounted ol best) I have here briefly
collected.

(...) were (...) land (...) ^^ich (...).
Long time past and long before the nativity of Christ, Sichtrug (as says
Saxus Gramaticus) reigned king of Swecia, till such time as Gram king of
Denmark did overcome and kyl Sichtrug in battle, whereby the Swecians were
made for a while subjects to the Danes. Then Swiddager king of Norway expulsed
and drove fourth Grame both out of Denmark and Swecia, (...).
by which means he brought all three kingdoms under one crown. Such
alteracion and overthrows of Princes, as our Elders have seen them, so we in
our days have felt the proof of them. For when for tune is disposed to daly
with Princes, The ^^un^^^^us ^^a^^^^ (...) ^or (...).
she makes their seat so much the higher, that their fall in the end may be
the greater.

After Swiddager succeeded his son Hasmond, in the kingdoms of Swecia and
Norway. Vffo after Hasmond, and Hindin after Vffo, Hynding succeeded Hindin and
after his death he left the crown of Swecia to his son Hothrod. Who, whilst
he striued to amplefy and enlarge his kingdom: lost both it and his life.
Whereby a way was made for the Danes to the crown of Swecia. But Atisle and
Another, the sons of Hothrod, considering the straight tribute of the Danes,
recovered (and for a small time enjoyed) the crown after their Fathers death.
For Rolfe, king of Denmark invaded Swecia, and slew Atisse in battle. He took
the Regal name of a king from them, and would in no wise have them bear any
Princely dignitye, but to remain subjects only to the crown of Denmark.
Till such time as Hiartur (a noble man borne of Swecia) did so enter into the
favor and grace of Rolfe, Swecia is made a ^^^butary ^^^tenant s^y^.
that he granted them the title of a Lieftenant, appointing therwithal a
yearly tribute to be paid. And because he would be the more assured of his
fidelity, he gave him his sister in marriage.

The iestes and doings of Swecia remained in this state but a while: For
Hiartur did cut of the head of Rolfe, and he again of the Danes was polde by
the same Barber. Then Mother the brother of Atisse (who^ Rolfe did kill) seeing
the Regal seat void of a king, did win the Nobilities favor so much, that
they possessed him with the same: and also they made it easy for him to bring
in subjection the kingdom of Denmark, Denmark subject to ye crown of Swecia.
which he did. But as with small travel and little time he obtained it: so with
inconstancy, and lightness of mind in les while he lost it. For Baldar did
drive him out of Denmark. Not long after Mother was slain in battle, where
upon the Nobility being weary, and loathyng the yoke of the Danes, did make
Atisse (one of the blood Royal) king. Thus passed their state for a time, where
in no notable thing is found to be done among the Swecians, wether the Danes
to them, or they to Danes were subjects. But as by histories it is certaynlye
known, that about the time of Augustus Caesar, Alric was king of Swecia, who
was slain by Eric, a man of wit excellent, of tongue eloquent, and of hands
ready and valiant, who vanquished Alric, and raygned king after him. This was
the same time, that Christ descended from heaven, and took upon him our
mortal nature. At (...) time Christ descended out of heaven.
Haldan the son of Eric succeeded his father in the kyndome of Swecia, who
was slain, and his son Siward as heir to his father, possessed the crown.
Then Eric the son of Siwardes daughter and the son of Froto king of
Denmark did both step in for the kingdom, Between. 2. stools, the ^^^le
goes (...) ground
but they ended their raygne by mutual battle, and Haldane the second did get
into the Regal seat, a man only given to the wars, regarding neither the
marriage of wife, nor the gettyng of children, esteming more the field conquest,
then the bed victory, rather delighting in the bloody deeds of Mars, then in
the pleasant pastimes of Venus, not wythstandyng he appointed who should wear
the crown after him, which was Vngulnus. He dyed and left both Swecia and
Denmark, under the government of his son Siwald. After whom Reignold, and
after Reignold Aluer, one of the noblest men in Swecia successively raygned
kings. Then Ingus the eldest of Aluers three sons did lawfullye succeed his
father. The kingdom divided between thee bretbre^
But he deuidyng the Realm with his brethren Olaue and Ingellus, did only
reserve to him self the general decree of al laws. He was slain with his
brother Olaue in the Denmark wars, and Ingellus by the victors consent
enjoyed the whole kingdom. Ringus being yet but a child, did raygne after his
father Ingellus, and after him Gotare, who was slain in battle against the
Danes, whereby the crown of Swecia came to Iarmeric king of Denmark.

This was about the year of Christ. 380. at what time the Goths, that long
before were gone out of Swecia and Gothia, made great spoil, and wonderfully
troubled the Romans both in Italye, Spain, and France. The Goths which
continually remained in their country, did unit and knyt them selves to the
Swecians, both in laws and manners, and ever since have been subjects to the
Kings of Swecia.

Who were Kings of Swecia, after Charles the great.
SInce the yearly histories and acts of Swecia, from Iameric to Fro, is
unknown to me: I am compelled to let slyp and over leap that time. Fro was
king of Swecia when Lodowic the son of Charles the great, Fro kings of Swedia
was slayns by the women of Norway.
did sit in the Imperial seat of Rome. This fro was slain by the women of
Norway. And Herot chosen king in his place which left the succession to Sorle,
whom Regner king of Denmark overcame in battle, whereby the crown came to
Biorne the eldest son of Regner, who after the travel of a few years in
Swecia, gave place to Fortune. For Vnichsert the second son of Regner was
chosen king for his brother. And after him Eric the third son of Regner was
appointed to raygne in Swecia.

But Often a man nobly borne of the blood royal of Swecia, did oppres and
overthrow Eric, and took the government and rule of his native country into
his own hands. Now the brethren of Eric, both to revenge his death, and also
to get their old regiment, did so trouble and vex the kingdom of Osten, that
they brought the crown to Sturbiorne King Biorns son, with whom Fortune
dalyed but a while, for he was likewise ouerco^med and driven out of Swecia,
Olaue the first king yt professed Christ i^ Swedia, was christ^ned James, the
year of Christ, (...)
by Eric son to Olaue, and cousin to Regner. This man enjoyed ye crown
without any let, trouble, or danger, who left the kingdom to his son Olaue,
which quietly possessed the same and was the first among the Swecia^ kings that
openly professed Christ. He received the holy sacrament of Baptism, and was
named James.

There were many in Swecia that long before his time did secretly profess
the faith, and took upon them the holy order of Anscharius. This was the
year of Christ. 1000 at such time as holy Hary was Emperor of Rome.

After James his brother Emonde (borne of a harlot) and a Christian only in
name, did succeed to the crown, a man in marcial affairs nothing fortunate.
He left the kingdom to Stinkell, a very good Prince (better worthy of the
place, then his predecessor) for the Christian religion did greatly increase
in his time. He pulde down and banished the Idolatry, that the Vpsalieus did
use, whereby he much honored his country. and wan him self a fame
perpeiuallye. He also appointed the same place to be their Metrapolitane City.

About the year of Christ. 1100. he yielded to nature her due, What two ^riueth
for, the third eni^y^th.
after whose death, two Erics not without great slaughter and effucion of
noble blood, contended for the crown. But Halsten son of king Stinkell,
upon the unlucky end of both these Erics (who perished in battle) as lawful
heir possessed the kingdom, from whence he was by rebellion driven out again,
and Animander chosen king in his place. Who for his crueltye to religion, with in
a little while after was compeld to tread the steps of his predecessor, and
Aquine elected king in his room.

Then Magnus the son of Nicholas king of Denmark (by the help of the
Goths, which were wearye with their often change in Swecia) was made king.
The Goth^^ divided ^^om the ^wedians.
The Goths dividing them selves once more from the body of Swecia, and gaping
for an alteracion, did trust that the Imperial Crown should chance to him,
whom they would assign it to. The Swecians (being valiant of mind) would not
bear so great an iniurye, that their old and ancient custom of chosyng their
prince should be by any astred. Wherefore they determined that their king should
be elected and appointed at their pleasure. They aduaunsed to the crown one of
their own country, and not only not regarded, but also despired the king
which the Goths had made.

The Goths stubburnly and rebelliously resisting the decree and sentence of
the Swecians, did make ciuyll wars against their new king, whom they did
overcome. And because they would have Magnus to reign (which was of the Goths
election) they made the Imperial seat void of a Ruler. The Swecians anoyding
domestical discencion, and internal hatred, did condescend and agree with the
Goths (not by compulsion, The Swedians s^the of ciuyll wa^ris.
but by request) that Magnus should be king. After whose death, they
generallye exalted Swercone to the kingdom. Who left a son named Charles,
that quietlye and peaceably succeeded his father, all the time of Waldimar king
of Denmark, to whose daughter he was married.

After Charles reigned Eric, who quietlye passed his life with the Danes, and
was about the time of Christ 1249. Whose fate and fortune being at an end,
they made great variaunce and discord with the king Birgerius. He left the
kingdom to Waldimare, who taking his viage into the holy land, did leave the
protection of his realm to his brother Magnus, which with unnatural rebellion
did usurp the same, and would never surrender it again.

The uncertain s^aie of a prin^^.
Birgerius succeeded Magnus and tragecally enjoyed the crown. For when he
thought him self most assured and in the type of al his glory: he was deprived
by Eric his brother, and cast into the wretched bands of imprisonment. From
whence at length, being by good fortune delivered, he joined his son Magnus
quopartner with him in his reign. Birgerius now at liberty, and knitting
amalicious revenge with his authority, did call to remembrance the spiteful
wrongs he had suffered at the hands of his brethren. His unquenchable color
kynled so fast for repaying the like evil, that he would by no means be
pacified, til that with their blood he was satisfied.

A unnatural murder among brethren.
When his brethren least feared him, and when they thought the stinking mist of
al malice to be void, then did he with a tained color of frendshyp request
them to a banquet, where in the myddest of their mirth, they were cruelly
slain. This horrible and detestable fact did so creep into the ears of the
Commons, that it moved every man to the just reuengement of so murdrish a deed.

Then he with his Queen fled, and left his son Magnus behind him: whose
head reco^pensed the offense of his father. After who^ they advanced Magnus
the son of Eric (which was behedded at his brothers banquet) to the imperial
crown. His reign was so prosperous, that with the help of virtue, and the
favor of good fortune, The kingdom of Norway knyt to the crown^ of ^we^ia.
he joined the country of Norway to his kingdom of Swecia, and was crowned king
of both countries. He yielded Nature her due the year of Christ. 1326. and left
a son called Magnus, heir to both the kingdoms. Magnus did promis the
marriage of his son Aquine to the natural sister of the Earl of Holst, on
this condition, that if Aquine received her not a Maid, all the noble men and
rulers of Swecia, should be free of their oath and alegeaunce to the King.
This Maid saylinge into Swecia, was taken upon the sea of Waldimar, King of
Denmark, and Margaret, Waldimars daughter was married to Aquine: Which thing
the Governors of Swecia perceiuyng, denied their duty and homage to their
Prince (because he kept not promise with them) and forthwith they were sent of
the Earl of Holst to Albert Duke of Magnopolis, father in law to the said
Earl: who had married Eufemia the kings sister, whose son named Albert, they
would have to their king, and so deprived Magnus from al his royal dignity.

But he seeing him self deposed and forsaken, did join with Aquine to make
cruel war against Albert, whose force naught auailed, for Alberts power was
more able to resist them, then theirs was to overthrow him. Magnus of
^d^iuexyle.
Wherefore Magnus was compelled in the end, to be contented with his
banishment, wherein he dyed.

Albert being now established, and with princely auctority confirmed in his
kingdom: did apoint himself with all honorable furniture, sit for a King, and
leaving the charge of the regal government, in the hands of Dismarie, did
sail to his Country Magnopolus.

The valya^t and haught mind of a woman.
In the mean season whilst these things were a doing, Margaret the daughter of
Waldimar king of Denmark and Norway, after the death of her husband,
protected the two kingdoms with her little son Olaue. And having a desire to
the regiment of Swecia, she began to quarrel with Albert, king of the same. They
both levied two mighty armies, and committing the success of their good or
evil fortune, to the bloody lot of war, Albert (who had finished the course
of his prosperous raygne) was with his young son Eric, of Margaret taken
prisoners, with whom they were kept in miserable captiuitye, the lyngring time
of seven years. Margar^^ Queen of ye three kingdoms.
By which overthrow of Albert, the three kingdoms were once more subjects to
one crown, and have always remained so ever since. The Norwaise never
chau^ging nor disagreing: but the Swecians refusing to bear the troublesome
yoke of a stranger, have often times shaken of the society of the Danes.

Now Albert upon this condition was delivered out of myson, that he should
within three years following, pay three score thousand mark, or else deliver
the town and Castle of Stockholme, otherwise to be imprisoned again, Albert
would have surrendered the City, but the Swecians would not by any means agree
to it, he being therefore in despair, and void of all hope of recovering his
kingdom, did give up al, and contented him self with his old Magnopolus.

The mighty Margaret triumphantlye raygnynge Queen of the three kingdoms,
passed her youth with great pomp among the Swecians, till such time as
crooked age, with creping pace ouertoke her (whose stalking steps none can over
run) and then by the common counsel and consent of her rulers and governors,
she adopted Eric Captain of Pomeranie to her son. The Capytaine of Pomeranye
is made king. ^ome say ye this Phillipp^ was ye kings dang^ter of England.
After whose death he was made King of the three kingdoms, and quietly passed
his time a great while among the Swecians. For Philippa the Queen his wife,
and daughter to the king of Portugal, did most commonly lie in Swecia, where in
the end she dyed.

Now the king having continual wars, and wantyng money, did (contrary to his
oath) spoil the Swecians, and sought all the means he might to impouerishe the
country, because it seemed welthiar and much more rytcher then the rest. Which
made the Nobility to declare their impacience with open envy (for the
Swecians, as they are slow to conceive a wrong: so are they quick in the
revenge of injury) but when this was reported, and perfectly related to the
Earls of Eric, he which for his evil esteemed nothing, little regarded it. The
small regard of princes, is (...) times cause of their more ^^struction.
Till such time as Engelbert (a noble man both by birth and condition) did
raise rebellion against him. And where as he had tortified the Castles and
fortes of Swecia with captains and officers of the Danes: This Engelbert
removed the^, and did constitute and apoint Swecians in their places.

Then Eric at the first with great expedicion, sought to fear Engelbert with
cruel threatenings, which naught auailed, for his magnanimity was able to
counterpaise the others envy. Wherefore he raised a mighty army, thinkyng
thereby to pacefy the Swecians furye. He saylinge with his parnicious company
toward Swecia, was prevented of his purpose by a terrible tempest, wherein
most of them were drowned. And Eric him self compeld to land with a few, where
he saw by experience that favor and not force, would vanquish the Swecians.
Althinges chauncing contrary to his expectacion, he did with much speed and
little gain return into Denmark.

At length the Ports and towns adjoining to the sea, made this concord and
agreement between Eric and Engel bert: Eric should be king on this condition, A
king upon conditions.
that no Danes but Swecians should bear office in their holds, their Cities
should keep their old liberties, and their merchants their accustomed
fraunches. The king being resident in the country, should receive his whole
reuenewe, and being absent, but the one half.

These things agreed upon, he saild into Denmark, where the Danes taking
example of the Swecians, prescribed certain rules and orders, which they would
have compelled their king to follow, whereby much trouble happened in their
country. He therwithall wonderfully offended, (...) fors^oke his kingdom.
did gather together as much treasure as he might. And swearing never more to
meddle with the troublesome state of a king, did sail into Prussia.

After whom Christopher Prince of Palatine, and Duke of Bauar, consin to Eries
sister, was generallye chosen by the chief Rulers of the three kingdoms.
Whereby they thought to have provided a great tranquillity and quietness to
their Merchants. This man altered nothing in Swecia, till such time as (not
contented with his own prosperitye) he began to envy their country. And then
he heaped up all the treasure of the kingdom, as well that which was gathered of
many years before: as his own, and sent it away by the sea.

After whose death the Swecians would join their kingdom no more with the
Danes, The Swecians refuse to be knyt with the Danes.
but with a much better will did choose to their king Charles Canutus, one of
their own, a worthy Ientleman, and nobly borne, of the old and ancient blood
of the kings of Gothea and Swecia. He scant had finished.vii. years in his
reign, when he began to ware very grievous and covetous in all things, Peruers
counsel brede^^ contemple to the Prince.
altring his noble nature, from upright Justice, to severe and cruel
punishment, accounting his will in each decree to be a law, which caused his
faithful and loving subjects to revolt and turn from him. When he perceived
that they sweld so against him, such things as he had before his election, he
gathered together, and placing the treasure of the crown in a sure hold,
embarked him self and went to Gedamus. When the king was cross saild, and
wanting nothing for his departure, but only waying of Ancker: one of his noble
men demanded of him it he had not left something a shore undone, This is not
sound in Mounster, but ye shall re^de^^ in ye history of ye B^thes.
which he would have executed. To whom the King with a great sygh answered: Yes
verelye, I have neglected long time since, the executyng of thee and thy like,
which if I had then done, I had now quietlye remained in the common wealth.

Then Christiern (whom the Danes and Norwayse had elected for their King) was
called into the kingdom to be crowned, whereby the three kyngly titles did join
again in one. Not long after, the Swecians did move just rebellion against
king Christiern, because he kept not promise with them, nor did not wisely
observe those things he had taken in hand. The king therefore the.7. year of
his raygne, and the year of Christ.1469. did enter with cruel battle into the
country of Swecia, where as ye inhabitants being knit together, did easily
resist him. Notwithstanding this repulse, he had.2. Castles in the Country,
that wonderfully vexed and troubled the Swecians. Afterward the King entryng
again with an army into Swecia: could do no good for him self, nor damage to
his enemy, for the strayghte passage of the mountains. In the mean season
Charles Canutus that was King of Swecia, dyed: in whose place they chose Steno,
one of their worthy Captains, The Swecians choose Steno to be governor, to
who^ thef give the aucto^i^ye of a king, but not ye name.
to whom they gave the authority of a King, but not the name. He might call and
command all the Swecian Princes and Rulers to any affairs about the Realm:
such one whom the Germaynes name a Marshal, the Frenchmen a Constable, and the
Romans a Master of the Horse. In great reverence and estimacion was thy
Steno, among the Swecians. For they accounted him as well worthy of the crown,
as any of his predecessors, which they not seldom times offered him, with the
name of a King, but he continually refused it. John the son of Christiern,
^ohn king of De^mark (...) gape for the crown (...) ^^ecia.
being placed successor in both ye kingdoms of Demnarke and Norway, did also
gape for the crown of Swecia. Whose expectacion they likewise had satisfied,
if he would have been bound (as the rest of his predecessors were) to the
obseruances of al their old laws and customs, which he refused, unless he
might have it with the frank auctority of a Prince.

Many years passed whilst the affairs of Swecia, remained in this state, and
chief lie because their protector was of such Justice, that the people had no
desire to a King. Now John the son of Christiern, gatheryng together an
excedyng great and mighty army, ^ohn king of De^mark does vanquysh Swecia.
did lead them into Swecia: Where after many bloody battles, he conquered the
Country. Not long after, when the King was busyed about the determinacions and
apoyntmentes of his doings, there rose a rumir among the people, how easily
they might recover their liberty: The king being so busely occupied about the
establyshyng of his own estate. But he perceiuyng their murmuryng minds, did
leave his wife with a Garyson in the Castle of Stockholme, and privily departed
out of the Country. The Queen thus left, the Swecians did besiege the Castle,
^^^ng Tho^s (...) is al^^^st.^. year (...) N^nste.
wherein she was, and at length by the extremity of famyne and hungar she
yielded, and went to the Monastery of saint Brydget, from whence she was after
the space almost of two years delivered by Raymond Legate of Rome. In the mean
time king John did leny a huge army, to carry into Swecia, where he having many
friends which sent him word either to bring fifty thousand men, or else his
travel should be in vain. Notwithstanding he attempted this war, Fyfty
thousand Danes go into swecia, and prevail not.
wherein he little prevailed, having his son Christiern a soldiour with him.
After the travel of a small time in these doutful doings, he dyed, and left
Christiern his son in his place.

The tragical hystorye, and tiranicall doings of the second Christiern king
of Denmark.
CHristiern the second, king of De^marke, and son to John, did plainly
demo^strate in his youth where unto he would be chiefly addicted in his age.
For being a soldiour under his Father in the Swecian wars, he used him self
very fierce and cruel, and in peace at home double and deceitful.

Christiern king of De^marke does enterprise to invade Swedia.
This Christiern full fraighted with ambicion, and as it should seem naturally
inclined to mischief, began immediately after his fathers death with haught
mind to make civil wars, and first he enterprised to invade Swecia. But when
he perceived them to be of such great might, that as long as there was no
domestical discencion nor unnatural hatred between them, they could well
defend their country nerehand, and also subdue their enemy abroad: He
practiced to get that by polecy, which he could not get by force and therefore
he went about to kyndle contencion, and to sow sedicion among the Swedian
confederates.

First he procured to this treason, Gostaue the Metrapolitan Bishop of
Vpsalien. Who by the instigacion of Christiern, did not only condescend and
agree thereunto him self, but also alured a great number more to join with
him, Gostaue ye Bishop of Vpsalien, go^th about to betray^ his country
which were fully determined, and certainly appointed the year of Christ.1517.
to betray and deliver their country to king Christiern. But as soon as this
treason was related, and perfectly known to the second Steno, general
Governor of Swecia: he presentlye persuaded and exhorted the Bishop to leave
of his evil begun enterprise, friendly chargeing him to remember the end before
the beginning, and not to take that in hand, Friendlye admonicio^.
which should be the destruction of his native and natural country, and also
purchase to him self an everlasting infamy. But the bishop co^temning this
favorable admonicion, did with a steadfast mind continue in his traiterous
intent, and now seeing his devilish doings to be bewrayed, The bishop besieged
in the castle of Stech.
he fled for refuge to the Castle of Stech, where in he was by Stenoes
soldiers besieged.

Christiern king of Denmark hearing of the danger that Gostaue was in, like a
faithful confederat, did leuy an army for his delivery, trusting by his power
to set the bishop at liberty, and also by his might to vanquish the country.
Christiern ouerco^med and driven out of Swe^^^.
But he being driven back and overthrown by the Swecians, was compelled to
forsake the rescue of Gostaue, and to return with the loss of a great number
of his men into Denmark. The Bishop understanding of the unfortunate success
of his companion, being void of al hope, and utterly in dispay^e of al aid:
did feign a repentance, Gostaue fai^^th a repe^^aun^^, and ^oth yield.
and was contented symplye to yield him self, only the siege to be raised. It
was agred upon, and the Bishop thus delivered (because he would seem to be
perfect sorry for his offense) he left his ecclesiastical dignity, and privately
lived of his own patrimony.

Now Christiern seeing the head and chief instrument of his confederacye to be
unarmed, whereby the rest that were of no such auctority (as the Bishop) might
ye easslyer be disme^bred: he began to execute his malicious enterprise with open
force, Christiern the second time both invade swecia. Stockholm desieged.
and gathering together a huge and mighty army, did lead them into Swecia,
fullye bent with his monstrous power to over ru^ the country, and to subdue the
people with cruel servitude. He encamped round about Stockholme, making his
first attempt with their chief and principal City. But the Swecian soldiers
laced him and his army in so straight, that they could get neither victuel for
the^ selves, The extrem hunger of ye Danes.
nor forage for their horse, which caused his host to peryshe with extreme
hunger. In this miserable estate they remained almost two months, plaged with
al euyls and discommodities that might be, and return into Denmark they
could not, the wyndes were so aduers against them.

Christiern practices his delivery by craft.
Fleyng therefore to his old and privy mischiefs, he practiced the delivery of
him and his (by craft) from those extremities, wherein they were wrapped. For
being thus with the sharp and gredy plague of famine oueco^med: he desired
truse, and an end of the wars. Steno (Governor of Swecia) with glad mind
condiscended and agreed to the peace. A treaty o^ peace. The noble deed of
Steno.
He also considering the horrible penury of his adversaries, did (upon a
valiant and pityful mind) send in to the camp of the Danes a number of
Biefes, with other victuel, whereby the paynful hunger of his enemies was
relieved. Christiern faining a great favor to Steno, and fraudulently semyng
to be much beholding unto him, for this good turn of his, did send into the
City, requestyng him friendly to come into his tent, and speak with him. Steno
was void of disc^yght.
The which Steno (who meant all truth) had done, if the Senate of Stockholm had
not stayed him. For he was so noble of mind, that he thought no disceite
could lurk in a Princes breast. But the Auncientes of the City, considering
their wealth and decay to remain in his parson, would not suffer him, upon so
slender an entreaty to depart out of the town.

The Dane therefore perceiuyng this evil to be spyed, or at the least frustrate:
The Dane deniseth yet another mis^hiefe.
did yet denise a another mischief, declaring how he would come into the City
among the^, if he might have pledges for his safe return. Steno being thereto
throughlye persuaded, did appoint certain young noble Gentlemen, to be his
warrauntes. Among whom was the most valiant Gostaue Erichson, Father to the
noble Eric, Gostaue Erichson father to Eric now king of Swedia, to sent for a
pledge to Christiern, who carried him prysouer into De^marke.
now King of Swecia. He with the rest, committing them selves to the fidelity
of the Danes, entered into their Camp, from whence they were carried to their
shyps, and there (contrary to the expectacion of Steno) were bound in Irons.

The king thus falselying his faith, did not according to his princely promise
come into ye city: but waying his anckers, and hoysing up his sails, made
speed with his pray into Denmark. The Swecians (not without just cause) did
greatly envy the infidelity of the Danes, Christiern returns into De^mark
and also deplored and lamented for the loss of these noble me^. Who were by
the fraudulent dealings of Christern, clean against the law of arms,
forceablye made, not pledges (as appointment was) but prisoners, as the Dane
would: After this flight, Christiern the space of.iiii. year was quiet:
strengthening his power with men, and enrytching his cofers with money,
remaining still in this destable purpose, and devilish intent (at time
convenient) to scourge Swecia with some greater plage. Unto which furious
madness Nature had borne him, will had framed him, and Fortune had appointed him.
Leuying therefore a great army, did once more invade Swecia. Christiern does ye
third time invade Swecia.
Leuying therefore a great army, did once more invade Swecia. Steno remembering
the Irregal part of Christiern, with an ireful mind of revenge, did with great
expedicio^ make haste to meet him, and fully bent to try the might of his
enemy: did join battle with him. Where Steno playing the part of a noble
Captain, Steno playing the part both of a Captain and a Soldiour was slaynt.
and also of a valiant Soldiour, manfully fighting in the face of his
adversaries, receuing many and grievous wounds (not without great loss to his
country) with high laud was slain. After whose euerthrow the Swecians for a
while did fiercely maintain the fight, their bloudye bodies possessing those
places being dead, that they were appointed to keep by their captain being
alive. Notwithstanding the bold and haught courages of the Swecian soldiers
could not long prevail, the power of the enemy being so great, and not only
their field leader, but also their common wealth Governor being killed.
Therefore they were compelled to commit the safegarde of their own lives to
flight, and like men without a Captain left the field.

Gostaue the counterfeit bishop, utterly drowned in all mischief, and
naturallye inclined to disceight, Gostaue shakes of his discemnled simplicitye.
cloking his evil and naughty desire with poor repentance, covering his
crafty entencion with the cloud and darkness of fained holiness, who seemed to
live solitarely till this present. Whom no gladness could rejoice, nor no
pleasure could please: now seeing his natural country men thus ouercommed and
disperced, like an unnatural beast with a joyful mind, did shake of his
discemuled simplicity, and vnbrideling the rain of his hipocritical lust,
Gostaue to turns to hyn traiterous vo^^^
creping out of his lurking Iuy tree, returned to his traiterous vomet: much
more glorying in the victory of Christiern, then bewayling the lamentable
overthrow of his country men.

The wynning of one field was to the king no conquest, nor the loss of one
battle was to the Swecians no subjection. Wherefore he went about once again
to compass with craft his pretensed purpose, and gylefullye determined (under
the favorable name of peace) to execute great cruel and incredible evils: The
Senate of Stockeholme at so licited to peace.
which he could not so perfectly bring to pass by the force of his army:
therefore he solicited the Senate of Stockholme to an honest and perfect agreement.

The treatye was brought to this end, that they were contented with any
honest conditions of peace: so that the uncertain and miserable broile of war
might seace. They so much regarded the quiet estate of tranquilitye, that they
preferred this disceitfull amitye, before the assurance of their own safetye.
The Auncientes and chief Rulers of Stockholme did prescribe the Articles which
were these: The condition of peace.
Christiern should keep and mayntaine the laws and customs of their Country
unbroken, he should not infringe nor take away the liberties of their Cities,
he should forgive and forget all such as had woren armor against him.

The Dane (who never desired quietness, but to some mischeuous end) had
suttellye conceived all these things in his head before, The wrytynges of
peace at bra^^^ and co^s^r men with these seue^^^ feales.
knowing that this agreement was the path way to his inhumane purpose. He swore
a solemn oath, wrytynges were drawn, both of their peace and amitye.
Whereunto they did seuerallye set their hands and seals.

The Citizens thoroughly persuaded, or rather innocently blinded, by this
fraudulent disce^t: laid open their gates to their enemies, The Danes enter
into Stockholm
and received their new reconciled friends into the City, whereinto many of
the Country did enter with them. Not treatyng them straungelye as late
adversaries, but curteslye with much gentleness, as ancient friends, did use
them honorably.

Christiern did dwell in his mischeuous dissimulacion, till such time as he and
his Soldiers were of their trauelous toil well refreshed, and also had the
Castle of Stockholme stronglye fortefied with his Garrisons, wards, and
watches. Christiern does call the Danes ^o horrible counsel.
Then longyng and lustyng for his horrible entencion, and boiling in his
diuelishe desire, he called the Danes to a Council, belchyng out the rancour
and poisoned devise of his murdrish mind, for the destruction both of the City
and Citizens. He asks their judgment, how and by what means he anyght best
destroy them, either by force or polecye.

O thrice unhappy Citizens, and most unfortunate Swecians, what meant you to
lay open your gates for such a Geast, whose Fame, Fortune, and high
felicitye, did enlarge his liberty with spightfull affections? Could not his
often double dealinges have warned you? Could not the ensample of his first
breatche of promise teach you? Nor would not the suretye of your own persons
suffice you, but that you must open your bowels, and cut forth your entrails
to feed your enemies with your blood? Why did you not prevent this dampnable
counsel? Was there no Prophet among you? Was there no celestial sign showed
unto you? Could no Swecian ear be so happy to harken to this conspiracy? The
bl^^^k ^o^ of (...) ^iue^ be^^^wen.
That whylst you walk up and ded (...) the City, thynkyng your selves in
most securitye, the bloody lottes of your lives be drawn.

O cruel Christiern, could nothing remove nor induce thy vicies, to dread the
terrible punishment of murdrish minds? What great and grievous tempests of
hatred lurked in thy breast, that thou must needs thus thunder out thy horrible
and dampnable sentence, against those that reverenced thee, regarded thee, and
honored thee? They were become thy subjects, and thou should have been
their king. They took thee to defend them from foreign force: and not to spoil
them with cruel slaughter. They took thee to rule with Justice, and not to
reign with rigor. The Swedians took Christiern for a king, and not for a
killet.
They chosed thee a king, and not a kyller. They took thee a Man, and not a
Monster. How much did thou digress from human nature, when thou
apointedest thy self for an instrument of murder? When was become thy senses?
could no peril fear thee? could no reason rule thee? nor could no shame
withdraw thee from thy detestable intent? Did not thy conscience waren thee?
Did not the horror of mind trouble thee? nor did not the swift course of fame
bashe thee, Fame flies ^at and sw^^^ with Princes boi^ge^
which transporteth Princes doings to the extreme confines of the world? Was
there no good counselor in this assemble? Was there no Dane that durst
dissuade thee? Had thou no faithful and free friend in all thy company? not
one that loved thee? not one that frankely would refourme thee? The Danes
^e^drid more their kings favor, the^ his honor
not one among them all that tendered more thy honor, then thy favor? O pityful
case. Were they all as thy self minded, and thou as they determined? A mete
king for such cou^selers, and apt subjects for such a Prince.

Now for this traitorous conspiracy against the Swecians, whose counsel was
most woorst, that was best allowed, and whose tale tended to most tirannye, that
was best lyked. For among all their diuelishe devises this dampnable sentence
chiefelye pleased: That Christiern should appoint a general triumph and feast
for his Coronacion, The dellys^ of their dyuclywe attempt.
whereunto all the Nobility and Gentlemen of Swecia would repair, with a great
number of others. And having them once within the City, by the color of
friendly chere and familiar countenance, he might the sooner and with less
danger, overthrow and confound them. Then he might execute that which his
beastly immoderate, and importunat nature did drive him to, when as no wisdom,
no power, nor no polecy should redress their woeful cause, so suddein a
mischief coming unlooked for. The are should lie on their necks, before they
should think to dye. Their weapons warm in their blood, before they could
judge any harm, and heaps should be murdered, before they should find the
peril.

This was thought by the whole consent and societye of this facinorous
assemblye, to be the chief and perfect mean for the utter decay of the whole
country. The King also greatly aloweth this practice, Christiern burns for
the sequel of his tyranny.
and burning with an incredible desire, to accomplish and bring to effect this
horrible device: he commands the feast, he makes great preparacion, he
apointeth the order of the triu^phe, he gives honorable entertainment to all the Nobility, lodging most part of them in the Castle, he provoke a mirth, he
seems to rejoice, he uses al men with a smilyng countenance friendlye. The
Danes set out them selves in althinges merely, and the Swecians do the same,
not knowing that their blood should pay for their banquet. Three days
continued their good chere, wherein there wanted nothing that might force a
gladness. Three days continued they: good chere.


But now the doleful fate of the Swecia^s aproching, and their miserable and
murdrish torments at hand: no one among them al could spy the imminent peril
of their present destruction. No heart panted, no flesh trembled, nor no mind
was moved with any mocion of their present end. Christiern thirsts for the
attempt of his tirannye.
Christiern (whose cruel courage vehementlye thursted for the attempt of this
tyranny) did send his Guard into the Castle with straight commandment,
violently to bind and spoil the Swecian Geastes (who were in the midst of
their banqueting mirth, pleasantly passing the time, The Swecians in the
myddest of their ba^ket. The begy^ning of this diuely she mirth.
more rejoicing in long life, then preparing for present death) and to cast
them into Dungeons Now begins this fury to heap mischief upon mischief,
now does he repugne against human nature, and with an incredible audacitie
surmounteth his hellyshe purpose. The day following the gates of the town
werammed up, the Lieftenauntes were sent out to defend ciuyl force, and the
Trumpets were commanded earlye in the morning to sound their bloody and
dreadful noyses. All the mighty soldiers were appointed to be ready through the
City in their armor, with terrible and cruel countenaunces, like wild and
horrible Monsters. That what with the roaring noise of the enemy, and the
fearful clashing of harnis, every one should more doubt his own death, then
either the loss of the City, the resistyng of the adversary, or the safeguard
of his own familye. It was also appointed, It was appointed yt no place should
be void of slaughter,
that what with spillyng of blood and slaughter of Citizens, no place, no
street, nor any way should be void of most dampnable murder. And that from
the Castle to the Market place al should be overthrown, torn down, and
ruined with the warm blood of the unfortunate Swecians. Then was there brought
from the palace two Bishops, Scarencis, and Strengenencis, which were with
pulling, halyng, and terrible thrusting among a sort of tirannicall
villains, brought to the place of execution. Two Bishops behedded.
There stood an aultare before the counsel house: where they being cruellye
thrown against the ground, lost their heads. After them the Rulers, chief
Officers, and Auncientes, The auncientes, Senate, and chief Officers, at
tirannously murdered.
with such as were known to have done any thing boldly in the defense of
their Country, and also the Senate of Stockholme, men grave, wytty, and wealthy:
were al drawn from the Castle, and all together were most tirannouslye
murdered. Then made they a prescript table, A Table made, wherein is written the
names of the^ that should be killed.
wherein was written the names of those whom they would have slain. With this
the Guard ran through the City, executyng their detestable mischief upon all
those whom they had marked. From the which no man could fly, nor hyde him
self, for all places of refuge was shut up. The Danes augmented their
monstrous doings with a^lewd and ungracious acts, both of hands and body.
For the Soldiers and common people being mingled together, was cause: A
general slaughter.
that with vehement violence they did not only kyl such as were appointed, but
also others that were but lookers on of so cruel a spectacle. They spared none,
they pitied none, nor they regarded none: but entering into their houses, did
draw out their unarmed naked and yelding bodies to the slaughter. So much did
the devilish desire of hellysh madness conquer them, that they executed
infinite, cursed, and wicked vengeance, as well against God as man. Some
Citizens bydde them selves
When as in this tumult and bloody broyle, a great number of the Citizens had
hydden them selves in dark and secret places: and Christiern perceiving a many
that had not as yet tasted of his tyrany, A false proclamacion.
he caused to be proclaimed from the counsel house, that al such as lived, and
had escaped his terrible torments, should remain vnpunnished, and be free with
their lines. The good fame and report of this most horrible disceite and false
lie, so crept into the ears of the unhappy Citizens (whose hearts were wrapped
in infinite miseries) that where as they lucked with some safety in obscure and
unknown coruers, they came abrod and opened them selves to their enemies, at
whose hands they found neither favor, grace, nor mercy, but present death. For
the example of their former tirannies proceeded likewise upon these: The Garb
was commanded to commit every one to the sword, whose bloody minds void of
al pity did murder as many as they could find, and so continued till such time
as al were killed. The loud clamor of the Danes, the ver^e co^^tenace of
slaugh^^.
and the pitiful noise of the Matrons (playning with shriking cries, for the
death of their husbands) myngled with the hydeous gronynge of the murdered
Swecians, was horrible to hear. Al places was filled with armor, carkases,
blood, and lamentation.

Because Christiern would have his tyranny the more to excel: (...) most crual
and dete^^^^ Uranay.
he did with great villainy and spite take a certain noble man, whose name was
John, and cleave against al laws, both natural and human, he spoiled him of
his apparel, and (in contempt) naked, nailed him on a cross. Who long hangyng
there in great pain and penurye, did commit the revenge of his innocence, to
God: and with lamentable tears be wayled the miserable estate of the City. The
Wane (...) in (...).
The Dane ouercommed with furious wrath, and wrapped in odible mischief: did
cause the natural and secret members of the dead, to be cut of, and cast at
the face of him that was on the cross. Afterward they stroke him through the
side, (...) ^^^th his (...).
where they took out his heart, and slonge it in his face. So great, so large,
and so immoderate was his irefull mind, that he doubled his tyranny, with
violent force.

The family of Ribigu^ cruelly persecuted.
They chiefly persecuted the whole house and family of Ribingus, toward whom
they used such and so much cruelty, that when there was no more left of
sufficient age for slaughter: they took the young children, A pityfull murder
of Children.
and tying their tender hear in knots, hanged them on cages. Commanding his
flagitious Tormentours to cut of their heads, and let the dead carkases to
fall on the filthy ground. This done, be willed that al their bodies, with the
rest of those that were murdered, should be brought into the Market place,
where on with gasing and gapyng like a fury of hell, he fed his wrathful eyes,
satisfied his monstrous lust, A most hortyble sight to look vy^^.
and fulfilled the desire of his most horrible mind, with this his outtagious
and fierce mischief.

Three days did their dead bodies lie there in most loath some wise, wrapped
and defiled all over in their own clottred and congeled blood. Three days did
their dead bodies lie in ye mas ket place.
Those that yet plunged in the panges of painful death, aspiring with panting
and feable breath to their fatal end: did with trembling flesh (neither quick
nor dead) dequeth their woeful spirits to God. What eye so merciles could stay
from tears, to behold such torn bodies dismembered of their lymmes, and to see
such pale and wan visages (as dead carkases do represent) whose innocent ghosts
(no doubt) the hoauens possessed. No heart but Christierns would have executed
such dete^table tirannies. Chri^^^^^ hatte wa^ s^ony^.
No men but Monsters could have been apt instruments for such a murder. As he
was, such was his servants: For what he commanded, that they fulfilled in
most extreme wise.

After all this, Christiern (not yet fully satisfied, nor perfectly glutted in
these facinorous factes) gave straight commandment, that their carkases
should be cast into stinking sinckes, ^^^^k beab (...) are ^^^yed in ^^yules.
filthy pits and priuies, without the City. He drew the body of Steno out of
his sepulture, so much did the rage of tyranny govern him: Stebi is ^^^^en out
of his grave
that his desire of devouring, was like a gredy Hound. Who could be safe from
his fury? or how was it possible for any to be free from his malicious deeds:
when as the close and secret graves could not hide nor keep their dead from him.

When he had on this manner depopulated and wasted the City of men (leaving not
one that the biting edge of weapon might harm, nor sparing of any that the
twyned cord might strangle) he turned all to rapine and theft. The cruel
countenance of homici^^^^.
The Wives were spoiled of their Husbands, the Infantes and tender Sucklinges
of their Parents, the Widows of those things they best loved, namelye their
Children, their Friends, their Kindred, and of all their goods. Virgins were
destoured, Maidens were ravished, their ancient Monuments were rased, their
Temples ruined, no profane nor sacred thing was spared. Whylest the Tiraunt
was executing of these detestable mischiefs with in, he kept fast the gates of
the City, least the horrible fame, and cruel cry of their euyls, should have
fled into the ears of the Country, whereby just wars might partly have
revenged their most abominable doings. What studdes of tears shewrd down
from every man's eyes, The lamen Racid of the Country.
with dolerous sobs? What plunging sighs boiled out of every man's breast, with
mased minds? What thundering noise roared forth of every man's heart? What
desperate musis, what terror, and with what inward fear every one was laden and
clogged with all, through the whole Country (when the horror of this incredible
news was perfectlye reported unto them?) there is none, but may judge. Some
Fathers lamented the loss of their Sons. Some Children bewailed the cruel
end of their Fathers. Some Myues playned the woeful death of their Husbands,
and some friends sorowed for the terrible torments of their Familiars, but
generallye every one pitied the miserable slaughter of their country men, and
with great despite enuyed the hellysh doings of the Danes.

Christiern departs from Stock holme.
When Christiern had thus finished the end of all his murdrish factes: he
departed the City, and in his journey went to an Abbey, called the New valley.
Where of the Abbot and Monks, he was honorably received, friendly entertained,
and gently used: having al things ministered to him and his at their desire.
Christiern comes to an Abbey, called the New valley where he executes a
crucl tirany
The Tiraunt did feign a great love toward them, taking very thankfullye,
their diligent curtesy. And being there on Candelmas day, he went to their
Church, and heard service: never offering nor showing any sign of mischief,
till such time as their ceremonies were done. The unquenchable flaine of his
ripe euyls and pestilent doings, would not be by any means repressed nor
extincted: Tirani wa^ rooted in (...) heart of Christiern.
for the bloody seed of murder was so rooted in his tyranous heart, yt the
hurl wind of mischief, and renting breath of vices, had ship wrackt in him al
princely virtues. For after he had received such honorable chere, with an
adiniracion of the Abbots provision: A cruel account.
Immediately when their sacred service was ended, he belched out his poisoned
nature, calling the Monks to account for his good entertainment, rewarded them
with bynding, beatyng, and drowning. The Abbot by fortune escaped their hands,
and prouyng to save his lyse by swimming, the cruel and most parnicious
company of the Sailors, did so wound him, that loosyng his strength, he was
likewise drowned.

Thus this Christiern full gorged with the blood of the Swecians, (...) with
^^^dy sp^ll, ^^^urns in^^ De^ark
and laden with rytches, slaughter, and spoil, leaving a garyson of Danes in
the Castle of Stockholme: saylde with his horrible pray into Denmark. He
scourged Swecia with the plages of battle, theft, murder, and al other kind
of mischeuous euyls.

The diuelysh sury of ^ostaue the ^ounterfayt Bishop.
Gostaue the false and counterfaite Bishop, desyryng (contrary to his sacred
profession) to excel in the bloody fury of a soldiour, and delyghtynge in the
dangerous broils of battle, did thrust out irradical, and violently pull up
by the roots al such as against his mind possessed any spiritual possessions,
or enjoyed any ecclesiastical dignities.

How Prince Gostaue escaped out of captivity, and after delivered his Country.
THe most noble Prince Gostaue Erichson, son to Eric, nere of blood to
Charles Canutus, the last king of Swecia, and Nephew to Steno Sture the Elder:
(...) Gostaue prisoner in Denmark.
being yet a hostage (or rather a prisoner) in Denmark, and hearing of so many
euyls and calamities of his Country, going a hunting with other noble men of
the Danes, he began to excogitate in his princely mind, how and by what
means he might best escape and steal away. Occasion offered, He (...) his
apparel with (...) ^^^ourer.
and sequestring him self from the fellowship of the Hunters: he declined his
natural nobilitye, to the course countenance of a country man, and aparaled
with the robes of a common laborour, he joined him self to a Merchant, and
feigned to be a Muleter or a keeper of Cattle, till such time as he was escaped
out of the country Lubee, and from thence was transported into Swecia. Where he
did openly boldly and frankly declare, that he would revenge the injuries and
losses of his country, and restore them again to their ancient liberty, an
enterprite more then his youthful years could compass, but that the stoutnes
of his mind did answer to his boldness. Moreover, he was decked with such
temperaunce, The virtues of Gostaue.
honesty, and manly prudence, as was rare to be found in any of so grene and
tender age. Therefore the fourth year after the beginning of the bloudye wars
of Christiern, Prince Gostaue changed his apparel, and having on the rusty
garments of a ragged country man: went about Swecia, declaring unto them in
how many manifold, cursed, and wicked euyls they were wrapped in, plainly
paynting forth the wretched estate of them al, leaving nor omitting any thing
that might kyndle or encourage the Country and Citizens to battle. The
persw^cions of Gostaue.
He did not forgette to tell them, that they were not borne for them selves,
but for their Country, to whose aid and succor they were bound of duty to
forsake no peril, no danger, nor any travel, being then at point to perish
without present help. He remembered them of all the facinorous factes that
Christiern had committed, and also of the most great and grievous wickedness that
his flagitious company had executed, both against God and man without any
renenge, which he to accomplish with them, would hasard his life, no whyt
regardyng it, in respect of the earnest zeal he had to the common vtility of
his country men. The come^^e grace of Prince Gostaue.
Moreover the comelynes of his parson did represent such a Majesty: that it
declared his magnanimity to be adorned with a singular valiant and stout
courage.

The Dalekarlions ^e y^ (...) wa^^yks people ^^ll Swe^^^.
Wherefore he took upon him by their election, both to revenge their wrongs,
and also to set them at liberty. For the accomplishment whereof, he leuyed
soldiers of Dalckarly, ye most warlyke people of al Swecia. They dwell about
the mountains that deuideth Swecia from Norway, where there be mines of Silver
and of Brass. Which metal places does quickly move them, ^y^^s e^ Silver and
^rasse
and chiefly stir them above al things to be fierce in resisting their
enemies. Gostaue using the service of these men, went against the Danes, that
lay in Garrison in the City of Aorosie, The Danes lie in garyson at ye city of
Aoros^y. The sudayn (...) of Gostaue the by^^op.
where they did much harm with violating, vexing, and troubling of the whole
country. Now Gostaue (the Bishop only in name) and Traitor to his country,
driven into a great fear with this soudeine and new danger, sought al ye
ways he could how he might overthrow this begun enterprise of revenge. But the
noble, valiant, The gentle nature of Prince Gostaue.
and princely young Gostaue Erichson, perceiving his intent, did send a
Messenger to the Bishop, friendlye exhorting him to leave of and return from
his old errors and treasons. Considering that his country men (not long time
past) had tasted the fruits of sufficient, detestable, and abominable
mischiefs. The Bishop received this gentle admonicion with such arogancye, The
arogancy (...) ^^dain full pride of the bishop.
and pride: that reading his honorable and courteous letters did spitefully cast
them down, and irreverently trod them under his feet. The magnificent Gostaue
(having intelligence thereof) being of the blood royal, (...) of ye blood royal
and Nephewe to them who had woren the crowns of Swecia: now demanding his
rightful inheritance of those that spoiled it: was the more grieved with the
despite of the Bishop, which caused him to do that by ye force of his regal
auetority: that other wise he would have redressed by his clemency. He led a
band of trusty and chosen soldiers of the Dalekarlions against him and his
company, who with small power did overcome him. The Bishop our^throwe does fly
to Stockeholm
The Bishop being thus subdued, with spedy flight went to Stockeholm, where the
rest of the Danes lay in Garrison. But they considering the might of the
Swecians daily to increase: did determine with this Traitor, Gostaue the
Bishop sayleth into Denmark. The vnstidly discurtest of Christiern
to send for a new army into the Country. With which promise he sailed to
his tirannical companion into Denmark. Where he was (as well worthy) neither
friendly received, nor gently entertained, nor after yt was ever of any
auctority or estimacio^ with Christiern. By what reason could he leave, forsake,
or shake of, the fellowship and society of him, who had communicated their
tyrannies, and joined their mystheuous minds so often in one, being
confederates together in all their dampnable deeds. The king of Denmark was
nothing inseriour to him in all falsehed and untroth, not only to his enemies
abroad, but also to his subjects at home. A busy troubler of his country,
where in he was accordingly regarded: for within a while after his return, he
was deposed from his kingdom. The Bishop wandreth like an abject, a just
^^marke of trasen.


The crown thus taken from the king, and he being thrust out of the regal
seat, Gostaue the Bishop without any glory or reverence, like an abject wandered
through the country, Christiern (...) p^ye (...) lycke d^e (...) sa^^^.
and so continued in Denmark till his dying day. Christiern also poor and
nedy, for certain years had no place to abide in, but destitute of al kingly
furniture, was compelied to place his feet under other mean ^^bles, and glad
to banquet with other men's dainties, only necessity and want driving him there
unto.

Leauyng Christiern thus a Stragle* the most ^uissaunt Gostaue did leuy a mete
and convenient army of the Dalekariens, Pr^^^^ Go^^au^ g^the ^^^h an ho^^
the Swecians, and the Goths, and followed the rest of the Danes that were fled
into Scondia. He also besieged Stockholme, wherein there was no men left,
Prince Go^^^ue bes^^^^^h Sto^k^o^^.
but only the Garrison of Christiern. The wynnyng of this City was very
daungerons to be attempted by assault: the place, the situacion, and
artificial strength of the town resistyng them. Notwithstanding the virtue,
might and polecy of the Captayn was such, that they forceably wan it, and by
assault did enter into it. The City thus taken, the valiant Prince Gostaue did
prudently consider that al things was at a good point, the wars in every
place ended, and the whole Realm (void of their enemies) to be at quiet:
therefore he did very honorably and worthily reward his soldiers, The wars
ended, Gostaue magnificentlye rewards his Soldiers.
every one with ample and large gifts according to his good service. This
done, he opened the seas again and made safe and sure nauigacion for all
Sailors.

The most noble / magnificent, and virtuous Prince Gostaue, the only deliverer
of his Country from al cruel bondage, vile servitude and misery: is worthily
elected King.
FOr the great goodness that the most valiant, By Prince Gostaues virtue, he
li^ected his Country.
victorious, and triumphaunt Gostaue Erichson did, by incredible travail (with
great trouble of mind, and paynfull labor of body) bring to his country: and
because he valiantly had revenged the cruel wrongs and horrible injuries,
where in his Country men were most miserably wrapped: The Rulers of the
kingdom, that yet remained, whose happy lives had not tasted the terrible
torments and vehement furies of Christiern: Gostaue is crowned King of
Swedland, Gothlande, and Fynland. He is king by succession (...) election. By
right he is horn to the crown.
and all the whole countries of Swecia and Gothland, with one voice and one
consent, both by right and deserte, did crown him king. And generally with
glad minds and joyful hearts they gave him the Imperial sword: as one whose
noble acts had worthily merited (both by succession and election) the regal
place of his predecessors. By right he was lawful king: no less nobly borne
in birth, then valiant and magnificent in deed. Of no baser blood, then his
haught attemptes witnessed. Of no meaner parentage, then his honorable doings
declared, and of no lower race, then his princely virtues showed. By desert^ be
bought^ the crown.
By desert he dearelye bought the kingdom: For he delivered them from the most
bitter bondage, and vile thraldom of their cruel enemies, he assured their
lives from those that would have murdered them. He restored their ancient fame,
from those that had disfamed them. He liberted their Cities, The pleasures he
did to his country
from those that had disfrau^ched them. He guarded their goods from those that
would have spoiled them, and finallye he saved them from domestical peril and
also defended them from outward danger.

This prudent Prince by his wisdom, power and polecy, with an invincible
mind, for the revenge and restoring of his Country, Nature made him, his
virtues called him* and fortune pl^^ed him in ^^e r^gall estate.
passed through a thousand perils (sometimes on the rough and ragged rocks of
the Danes tyranny, and sometimes almost swaloed up with the devouring sands of
envy) before he could attain to the royal typ of his appointed estate. For the
which Nature at the first had made him, virtue had called him, and fortune had in
the end brought him. Now al those that wylled well to their Country, preferring
honorable concord, before civil discencion, regarding public vtilitye more
then common spoil, The description of hop^ losts and ouerthrowers of Common
wealths.
and, unless it were such that were enemies to rest and quietness, foes to the
good, and friends to the evil, greedy catchers of other men's lyuinges, and
prodigal wasters of their own, sowers of sedicion, and reapers of disce^cion,
styrrers and mouers to al strife and mischief (as no commonwealth is clear
without some of them) except these hop lostes, not one but greatly did
rejoice, and made their humble prayers to God: They pray for the continuance of
his raygne.
That his Majesty might long raygne among the^ at home with everlasting peace
and tranquislity, and abroad against his and their enemies with great conquest
and victory: and chiefly that his princely person might be sure in both.
Wyshing his life so to shine in prudent virtue, that he might be a myrrour and
lively example to al mighty Kings and rulers, whereby he should for ever be
worthily saluted (and with the swift thundering tru^pe of fame reported) for the
best and happiest

After this triumphant manner, the noble king Gostaue received the crown of
Swetheland, Gothland, and Finland. With what p^^^^^ce Gost^ue ^u^e^d his country
Which Regimentes he did govern by such politik wisdom, and princelye
providence, that joining with his regal auctority great and laudable virtues,
he ever mayntayned and norished above al things, peace, love and concord. ^^s
s^di^ion ^^^^^ly p^^^^^^.
Not withstanding the Sucalandes a few years past did a little trouble and vex
the country. Which sedicion was by his prudent wisdom so provided for, and by
his diligent industry so pecified, that they floryshed with happy peace and
desired tr^nquisity. The joins godly, wise (...) learned (...) to him
To the confirmyng and luculently estably King whereof, was chosen certain
men, both godly, wise and worthy, whose grave counsels the King did call to his
kingdom with great love and favor: Namely George Norman, George nor man,
Oliver Holmens.
and Oliver Holme^s, both singulerly well learned. The first for his noble
gifts of the mind, wherein he did excel, and also for his godly knowledge in
the scriptures: he was made Tutor and Scolemaister to the most princely and
valiant Eric now King of Swecia, George Nor man Tutor to prince Eric, ^owe king
of swedia, and to Duke John his brethee.
and to Duke John his Brother. And moreover, for his great experience and
excellency of wit was elected one of King Gostaues privy counsel. The other
named Oliver Holme^s, beside lys sincere and perfect understanding of the
sacred scriptures, and also his knowledge of other notable histories, was an
expert and rethoricall Preacher.

These two with others their like, did the King chose to be the principal
members of his kingdom. Gostaue did prosper with gloryo^s fame.
Whose reign could not by any means decay, but prosper with glorious fame,
having such grave Counselors to enstruct his doings, and preparyng such
instruments for the maintenance of his regal estate. What expectacion was to
be looked for in those tender and youthful years of the most noble Eric (that
yet were imperfect) not only his princely and virtuous redynes (which as then
by report began to bud out) but also the good education and learned enstruction
of his Tutor, Occasion why there was good and greet hope of the noble Prince
E^^^
he being endued and brought up in like condition and like inclinacion with
him, might bring this doubt in question: Whether the King or his Country had
most cause to rejoice. The Father for that he had gotten such a Child to rule
after him: or the Country for that they should have such a Prince, both learned
and wise to raygne over them, he declared being young, what fruits he would
yield in age. Notwythstanding, because Princes do often degenerate from perfect
Nobilitye, and altering their noble nature from the beginning, do incur into
a thousand euyls in the end (though his virtuous doings hitherto have yet set
forth no such lykelyhoode) I leave his present praises to the good or evil
deserts of his acts here after. Not douting or it be long, to see the
valiant and prosperous raygne of his Father in public print, who ruled the
Swedians, the Goths and the Vandoles the space of.38. years. Yelding nature
her due, the year of Christ.1560. and left the crown to his Son Eric, the
14. king of that name.

The descripcion of Finland, after the authority of Seba. Mounster.
FInlande is called a fair Country, because it is more plesaunter then
Swecia. Plini seems to name it Finnonia, of the bowing arm or bosom of the
sea Finnonicus. It is so large a Country, that it once was called a kingdom,
but now it has only the title of a Dukedom. The Sclauous in this passed age
did inhabit there, which nation used the Grecian language, so long as Moschus
was Lord over them. But now it is under the crown of Swecia, and does use the
rites and ceremonies of the Western Church. Much wine is transported thither,
out of Spain, by the sea Balthic, which the people of the Country much
desires, only to exhillerat their minds. The inhabitants professed Christ
after the Swecians, under Eric then king of Swecia. This Country does excel
Swedia, in corn and grain, both for plenty and goodness, because it is for the
most part plain, and not so fenny nor hylly as Swecia is. There be trym towns
in Finland, as Gusta, a town fortified for the wars, Abo their Bishops sea,
Rasbing, Viburg, Karelia a Dukedom. Abo is not far distant from Vplandia,
Viburg is situated at the extreme borders and farthest bounds of all Fynlande,
toward and against the Russes and Muschouites. It is the chief and principal
place where their Soldiers and Garisous do lie, that defendes and kepes those
people from inuadyng the Country. It is also a Mart town of great traffic,
whereunto the Ruthines do often frequent. They say that the North pole does
rise over this town, above the horisont.61. degrees and a half, and they
number the length to be.78. They account the degrees of Stockeholme to be in
breadth.61. and in length.64. The Finnons have continual wars with the
Muscouites in the arm or bosom of the sea Finnonicus: vsyng in Summer the
aid of Ships, and in Mynter they combat upon the Ise. How populous was this
Country and others lying about it, many great and wise men do wytnes, as
Methodius, Martyr, Iordanus, Gothus, and Paulus Diaconus, the which Aucthors do
write that this people did swarm out like Bees. And they call these North
Regions the Store house or Garnar of Nations, and chieflye of them are proceeded
these names following.

The Goths. The Ostrogothes The Vestrogoths The Gepides. The Samogets. The
Massagets. The Hunes. The Amasons. The Cimbrians.
The Parthians. The Swedians. The Lo^gobardia^s The Turcilingia^s. The
Auarians. The Herulians. The Winulians. The Sueuians. The Bulgarians.
The Suicers. The Taliphalia^s. The Danes. The Sclauons. The Rugians. The
Alanians. The Burgundia^s The Sembrians. The Liuonians.
The Scirians. The Nortmania^s. The Pictians. The Carpians. The Caibians. The
Cimerians. The Daciaus:
The Inhabitants of Fynland do speak two sundry languages. From Viburg to
Berga or Sibb^na, they do for the most part speak the Sclauon tongue, but nere
the Sea coasts they use at this present the Swecian language, and in the
myddest of the Country, their proper speech. And on the lymeth and borders,
they occupy both. Wherefore in many places their Preachers do preach and
interpretate the Scriptures in both tounges. The Swedian language, and the
same that the Goths, the Danes, and the Norwaies do use, is one, but that they
have sundry pronouncinges, and propes accentes in voice. They do also agree
much with the Germans, as for example such as can speak or understand the
Germain tongue, may here read the Lords prayer in the Swecian language, whereby
they may judge the difference of their speeches.

The Lords prayerin the Swecian Language.
FAder vuar some er i himulum, heiligat vuar de dit namen, tilkomen tit rike,
sckedin vuillige some i himulum so opo iordene, vuar taglig brodh gif os itag
verlath os vuaren schuld some vni verlatten vuare sckuldiger, och inledhos icke
i frestilse, vt an lo^ss i froonda. Amen.

Imprinted at London by John Awdely, dwelling in little Britain Street, by
great S. Bartelmewes. Anno.1561. The.28. of October.


