Spiritus est vicarius Christi in terra.

A TREATISE wherein Dicing, Dancing, Vain plays or Enterluds with other idle
pastimes etc. commonly used on the Sabbeth day, are reproved by the Authority
of the word of God and ancient writers.

Made Dialoguewise by John Northbrooke Minister and Preacher of the word of God.

Cicero de officijs lib. 1. We are not to this end borne, that we should seem
to be created for play and pastime: but we are rather borne to say onesse and
to certain grauer and greater studies.

AT LONDON

Imprinted by H. Bynneman, for George Bishop.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Sir John Young Knight, his singular good friend,
John Northbrooke wishes increase of faith and knowledge in Jesus Christ,
continual health, joyful prosperity, with as much increase of worship.
WHen I call to mind (right worshipful) the excellent saying of the divine
Philosopher, that says, Non nobis solu^ natisumus, Cicero. Lib. 1. de offic^s.
ortusque nostri parte^ patria vendicat, partem parents, parte^ amici etc., 1.
Cor. 10.24.
we be borne not for our selves alone: but some part of our birth, our
country, some part our pare^^s, some part our friends do claim, etc. (Plato
did know only, by the light of natural reason, that al excellent and good
gifts came of god, and were given to the intent that a man should therewith
help and profit others. James. 1.17.
Of like opinion were all the Philosophers: which had tasted of honest
discipline and learning made me to enterprise and take this treatise in hand,
that I might thereby help those that are diseased with any of these diseases,
either of diceplaying, dancing, or vain plays or enterludes, which reigns
too too much by so much amongst Christians, (especially in these days and
light of the Gospel of Christ etc.) who soever therefore does ^hinke him self to
be a member of the common wealth of Christ, (which is his mistical body,) he
must needs much more be enforced of Christian knowledge and charity, to employ
his labors in bestowing those gifts which God has given him, to the profit
of others, than those Philosophers, which knew not god aright in his word,
through Jesus Christ.

Saint Paul very aptly (by a similitude) compares the church of Christ to a
natural body. 1. Cor. 12.12.14.20. Col. 1.18. Romans 12.4.5.6.7
etc. As in the natural body every member helps the whole: for we see, that
there is in a natural body such an affection and desire of every member to
help and maintain the other, 2. Cor. 11.15.16.17.21.22.27.
that not only the senses be ready to do their part and office: as the eye to
see, the ear to hear, the nose to smell, the tongue to taste, etc. and so
likewise in the rest of the senses: but also all the other parts of the body do
so much care for the whole, 1. Cor. 12.26.
that they refuse no danger (though it be never so great) to help and succor
the same.

If any man then, which bears the name of a Christian, and of a Gospeller,
Gal. 6.12. Col. 3.16. Proverb. 27.23. Col. 1.18. Ephe. 5.23.
shall espy forth any thing, that may conduce and benefit the mystical body,
and does not his endeavor to the uttermost to bring the same there unto: verily
he is to be thought an unprofitable member not worthy (in my judgment) to be
accounted of that member of whom Christ Jesus is the head: And also that he had
not tasted of the spirit of god, which neither moved with example of the
heathen, nor with love toward the brethren, considering the great dangers
that might ensue here upon, would take some pains, and endeavor to procure
medicines, so farfoth as in him lies, to ease and help the same. Which
(according to my exiled and slender learning) have made this little treatise
against Diceplaying, Dancing, and Vain plays or Enterludes, giving herein
medicines and remedies against these diseases which most of al trouble the
whole mebers of the body: although at the first it seem not toothsome, yet I
dare au^uch, it is wholesome. We can be content (for the health of our bodies)
to drink sharp potions, receive and endure the operation of extreme purges, to
observe precise and hard diets, and to bridle our affections and desires etc.
much more should we so do for the health of our souls. And where should we seek
for this health of our souls, Esaias. 53.4. Luke. 9.17. Cap. 11.28. Numb 21.9.
Cap. 3.16. 1. Cor. 6.11.12.
but only at Christ Jesus, who is our only Phisitio^, who calls eueryone to
himself that is burdened and hevy lode and he will refresh the^: th^s is that
syrie serpent, that as many as took upon him should live. this is that I soap
which purges us: this is that red Cow without blemish not used to the yoke,
that makes us white. This is that sparrow which was stain etc. to set us at
liberty. This is the Lamb that takes away our sins, original and actual.
This is that Peli^a^ which gives out his own heart blood to remain as his young
ones that have been stoong to death by the poison of Satan. Ambrosli^ de Virgen
bus.
As S. Ambrose says. Omnia Christus est nobis Sivulnus curare desideras:
medicus est. S febribus estuas, sons est. Si grauaris inquitate: iusticia est.
Si auxilio indiges virtus est. Si morte times: vita est. Si coe^u^ desideras:
via est. Si tenebras fugis: lux est. Si cib^u quaeris: alimentu^ est. Gustate
igitur et videte quam suauis est dominus, beatus vir qui sperat in eo. That is:
If thou desire to be healed (of thy disease) Christ is thy Physician: if thou will have away the burning ague (of sin) he is thy cold fountain. If thou
be grieved with thine iniquities, he is thy righteousness: if thou be weak,
he is thy strength: if thou fear death, he is thy life: if thou desire
heaven, he is the way: if thou will avoid darkness, he is light: if thou be
hungry, he is thy nourishment. O taste therefore and see, how sweet the Lord
is: blessed is the man that trusts in him. After I had gathered together this
simple work (which lay far abroad) and so had finished this treatise, I mused
with my self, unto what Patron I might best direct the same. In fine, I found
none more fit than your worship, cosidering your virtuous and godly
disposition, which answers your zealous and true profession of the gospel (for
I am assured you utterly defy and detest al kind of Popery whatsoever) and
for that I perceive my self something addict and tied with the bonds of
singular and great friendship flowing from you to me, In recompense where of
(because I have none other treasures to exhibit unto you, but only this
little talent of my base and simple learning) I do here dedicate unto your
worship this hook (named a treatise against, Diceplaying, Dancing, and vain
plays or Enterluds) although rude and homely, yet (I doubt not) plain and
profitable for these times of ours wherein we live: wherein I have to crave
(that nothing more heartily I can obtest) then your friendly acceptance of the
same, for it is a token of my hearty good will, remembering the worthy deed of
the famous Persian Prince Artaxer^ xes, so much of every one commended. I
humbly obtest your friendly countenance: and by my strong bulwark against
the fuming freates and belching ires of saucie sicophants, Diceplayers,
Dauncers, and Players, which if you do, I have my whole desire, and
cro^inuallie I will pour out prayers unto the Lord of heaven and earth, to
send you in this earthly mansion continual increase of faith, knowledge and
zeal in the gospel of Christ Jesus: with prosperity, and access of many
blessed and happy years: with your good lady (Sarah.) And after this life,
never ceassing and endless joys in the heavenly seniorie.

At Bristow. Yours to use in the Lord, John Northbrooke Preacher.

To the Christian and faithful Reader.
IF such men, as will be taken for Christians, would flee and abhor so much
the deeds of the Epicures, and Saduces (gentle Reader) as they preted to
detest the name and profession of them, Romans 2.17.13.19 ^8.21.22 24. 1 Timo.
5.6, Gala. 2.14. John. 8.42. 2. Timo. 3.^. Romans 2.28.29.
verylye they would refrain, and temper themselves fro wickedness and
mischief, and would use and exercise virtuous and godly life, no less than
they now live obstinatly in vice, and behave themselves in all their doings both
wickedly and ungodly. And again, they would none otherwise observe, and keep
the commandments of almighty God, than they now neither fear him, nor dread
him at all.

Wisdom. 2.3.4. Gene. 2.7. 1 Rev. 10 ^. Psalm. 31.5 Ecclesi. 3.21 Psalm. 32.^
Mat. 10 28 Luke 23.46 Act 2.59 Revel. 6.9 Mat. 5.12 2. Timo. 1.8 Wisdom..10
Mat. 25.41 Romans 1.18 Phil. 3.18 19 1. Cor 6.9.10 Revel. 22.15. Psalm.
14.4.5.53.7 2. Pet. 3 3 Iud. 1.18 2. Es^ras. 1.58 2. Pet 33.10 Job. 14.1 Luke.
34. Psalm. 3^.4 2 These. 5.^ Wisd. ^.8 Mat. 3.2 VVsl. 12.1.2.3 4.5 6.7. Psalm.
9.^0 Wisd. ^. 9 10 1. Pet 1.24. 1 Pet. 4.^ 2. Pet. 2.9.20 Eccle. 5.7 2. Pet.
10.12.13 14. 1 Pet. 4.3 Esaias. 5.20. Mat. 11.18.10 2. Pet. 2.12
But undoubtedly there is not one almost, which does so much abhor the thing
it self in his heart (which thing may plainly appear by our daily
conversation, our manners, and all that ever we do) as we eschew and flee the
name. For how can those men be assured in their consciences, that souls are
immortal, which for the most part live, as brute beasts do. Or that there be
rewards reposed for the godly in heaven, or punishment ordained for wicked me^
in hell, which do inno manner thing fear to trasgresse and break the
commandments of God, and do fall headlong into al kind of vice and
enormities, as though they did imagine, that either god is but a jesting stock,
and a sayned thing, or the souls and bodies do dye both at once. (as Pope John
the two and twentieth held.)

Now I beseech thee (gentle Reader) what man is there, whom either the fear
of Gods justice does withdraw from vice and sin, or yet does induce and bring
in mind to reform and amend his life? wherein thou may justly lament, and
bewail the folly and state of men, and much wonder at their blindness, or
rather madness, which in such shortness and uncertainty of life do so behave
themselves, that they have no mind of any reformation, or ame^dment of our
life, when we be crooked for old age, and have then fearsely one day to live:
far off is it, that we go about, or inte^d that thing, when we be yonkers, and
in our flourishing age. When I remember with my self, that such is the folly
of men, or madness rather (as I may well call it) in deferring the reformation
of their life and manners, Eccle. 5.7 2. Pet. 10.12.13 14.
makes me sorrowful.

It is a world to see and to behold the wicked people, 1 Pet. 4.3 Esaias. 5.20.
Mat3 11.18.1^ 2. Pet.2.12
how they wrest and turn the names of good things, unto the names of vices. As
if a gentleman have in him any humble behavior, the the Roysters call such a
one, by the name of a Loute, a Clinchpoup, or one that knows no fashions: if
a man talk godly and wisely, the worldlings deride it, and say, the young Fox
preaches, beware your Geese, 1. Peter. 4.3.4
and of a young saint grows an old devil: if a man will not dice, and play,
then he is a nigard and a miser, and no good fellow: if he be no dauncer, he is
a fool and a blockhead, etc. If a man be a Royster, and knows how to fight
his fight, then he is called by the name of honesty: if he can kill a man, and
dare rob upon the high way, 1. Timo. 5.13 Ephesians. 4.28 Eccle 13.16 17.18 19.
Esaias. 5.11.12
he is called a tall man, and a valiat man of his hands: if he can Dice, play,
and dance, he is named a proper and a syne nimble man: if he will loyter and
live idly upon other men's labors, and sit al day and night at Cards and
Dice, he is named a good companion, and a shopfellow: if he can swear and
stare, they say he has a stout courage. If he be a whoremaister, they say he
is an amorous lover and Venus bird, it is the course of youth, he will leave it
when he is old etc. Upon these people will fall that woe and curse that Esaias the
prophet does pronounce, Esaias. 5.20
saying: woe unto them that speak good of evil, and evil of good, which put
drunkenness for light, and light for dronkenesse, that put bitter for sweet,
and sweto for sour. Salust also speaks of them saying, I am pridem equidem
ver a rerum vocabula amisimus Salust de coniures tione catilinania.
quia bona aliena largire liberalitas, malarum yerum audatia fortitudu vocatur,
that is to say, Now of late days we have lost the true names of things,
because the giving away of other men's goods is called liberality, and unshame
fastness in noughtie things, is called high or gentle coutage.

What is a man now a days if he know not fashions, and how to wear his
apparel after the best fashion? to keep company, and to become Mummer, 1. Pet.
44
and Diceplayers, and to play their twenty, forty or 100. li. at Cards, Dice,
etc. Post, Cente, Gleke, or such other games: if he cannot thus do, he is
called a myser, a wretch, a lobbe, a cloune, and one that knows no fellowship
nor fashions and less honesty. Prouer. 23.20.21 Cap. 28.10. Eccle. 1^.11.12.
And by such kind of plays, many of them are brought into great misery and
penurye. And there are five causes hereof (as Iiudge) specially among all the
rest.

John. 5.25.28.29. Mat. 25.41.46. 2. Pet. 3.110.11.12 1. These. ^.2. Cap. 4.1^.
Mat. 25.42. 1. Cor. 2.^. Ca. 15.^2.43.^4. 1. These 17.
First is unbelief: for if we supposed not, that those things were fables,
which are mentioned in the scriptures every where of the last day of judgment,
and of the voice of the Archangell, and of the trump of God, and of the throne
of Gods seat, whereat al me must stand, of the punishment of the wicked, of the
everlasting and blessed life, which the godly after this miserable life shall
enjoy, of the resurrection of the bodies and souls, either to be partakers
together of certain joy, or else of certain pain, and also shall give his
account of al things, which he has done, either intended, by thought, said,
or done, and how he has used gods gifts and creatures, toward his needy
members, etc. Without al doubt and question they would not live thus ydlely
and naughtily as they do.

The second cause is, the boldness (to sin) upon gods mercy: this boldness
is great in very deed, but yet it is such as they may well enough deceive
themselves withal. Eccles. 5.6. Ezech. 18.322 1. Pet. 3.9. Romans 2.4.
For of boldness they have no sure trial at al. So Solomon says, say not, the
mercy of God is great: he will forgive me my manifold sins: for mercy and
wrath came from him, and his indignation comes down upon sinners. etc. with
this boldness I say, the wicked enemy of mankind keeps man in sin
continually, but like as god grants forgiveness at the first to the
repentaunt: so does he also sharply punish those sinners which do continue
obstinately (without repentance) in vice and sin. For such men then, as repent
not unfeignedly, and purpose to lead new lives, conceive a false hope and
boldness of the mercy of God. And by this means that the Devil sets
forth to men this boldness, he brings this to pass, that they live on forth
quietly, and securely in vice and wickedness, and think little or nothing
with themselves at any time of any reformation or amendment. And herein they
despise the abundance and riches of the bountifulness and long suffering of
god, being ignorant, that the goodness of god does induce, and lead unto
repentance.

The third cause is, the custom of sin, which is in a manner, made natural
in long continuance. For like as it is hard for a man to alter nature: VVisdo.
14.19. Levit. 18.30. Iereme. 13.23. Ecclesi. 4.12.12.
so custom, if it be once rooted, cannot easily be plucked up and expelled.
And therefore it is that learned men do call custom an other nature. It is as
a certain wiseman says: such vices as we have accustomed our selves to, from
our tender age, cannot be without great difficulty weeded out afterward,
which thing though it be very certain and true, yet who sees not how fondly
fathers and mothers bring up their children in cockering, Ephe. 6.4. Eccle.
30.7.9.
and pampering them: from their infancy they be given to none other thing,
but to pride, delicious fare, and vain idle pleasures and pastimes.

What prodigious apparel, what vndece^t behavior, what boasting, bragging,
quarelling and ietting up and down, what quassing, feasting, ryoting, playing,
dancing and dicesing, with other like fellowship that is among them* it is a
wonder to see. Eccl. 30.11.12.13.
And the parents can hereat rejoice and laugh with them, and give liberty to
their children to do what they list, never endeavoring to tame and salve
their wild appetites. What marueyle is it, if they be found thus naughty
and vicious, when they come to their full years, and man's state, which have of
children been trained and entered with such vice* whereof they will always
taste, Horatius.
as Horace says, Quod nouatesta capit, inueterata sapit. The Vessel will
conserve the taste of lycour very long,
With which it was first seasoned, and thereof smelful strong:
Even so a child, if that he be in tender years brought up
In Virtues school, and nurtred well, will smell of Virtues cup.


If these men therefore at any time do fully purpose to repent the and reform
their living: as when their conscience moves them, or the burden of their
sin pricketh them: Eccle. 5.7.
yet custom has so prevailed in them, that they fall into worse and worse
enormities, and like mad men desire the reformation of their life.

Consider I pray thee (good Reader) what ioly yonkers and lusty brutes these
will be, when they shall come to be Citizens, and intermedlers in matters of the
commonwealth: Proverb ^3 24. Cap. 23 13. (...) 7.23. (...).30.1.
which by their fathers have been thus nicely and wantonly cockered up never
correcting nor chasting them for any faults and offenses whatsoever. What
other thing but this, is the cause that there be now so many adulterers,
unchaste and lewd persons and idle Rogues? That we have such plenty of Dicers,
Carders, Mummers and Dauncers* And that such-wickednesse and filthy livers are
spread about in every quarter, but only naughty education and bringing up: well
then, such as impute this thing to the new learning and preaching of the
gospel are shamefully deceived, having no judgment to judge of things No, no,
the new learning and preaching of the Gospel is not the cause hereof, but the
naughty, wanton and foolish bringing up of children by their parents, as I have
declared.

Luke. 14.23. Deuteronomy. 21 18 19.20.21.
Also the slacknesse and unreadiness of the Magistrates to do and execute
their office, is a great cause of this: if they that use tauernes, playing, and
walking up and down the streates, in time of a Sermon: if disobedient
children, to their parents. If Dicers Mu^mers, ydellers, dronkerds, swearers,
Rogues and Dauncers, and such as have spent and made away their living in belly
cheer and unthriftiness were straightly punished, surely there should be less
occasion given to offend, and also good men should not have so great cause to
complain of the manners of men of this Age. Therefore the magistrate must
remember his office: For he bears not his sword for naught, for he is gods
minister and a father of the country appointed of god, to punish offenders:
but nowadayes by reason of liberty without punishmente, and slackenesse of men
in office, which wink at their faults, causes so many idle players and
dau^cers to come to the Gallows as there are, for as the wise man says, who so
prohibiteth not men so to offend when he may, in a manner commands them so to
do: (...), (...) 12.13.14.
for it is better to be a subject to a magistrate under whom nothing is
lawful, than under him, to whom al things is lawful. I feareme greatly
therefore, least the heathen mes severity, and straightness in punishing vice,
shall be a reproach to our magistrars, and accuse them at the last day for their
negligence and slacknesse herein. It is not enough to punish sin only, but
also to prevent and take away the causes thereof.

The fourth cause is, Luke. 12.15.
Security in wealth and prosperity, which does inebriate the minds of men in
such sort, that they neither remember God, nor constantlye purpose to reform
and amend their lives. Therefore it was well said of one, that like as of
prosperity riot proceeds: Even so of riot comes both other common vices,
and also ungodliness, and the neglecting of Gods word and commandments: And
as Seneca af^i^meth, that into great wealth and prosperity, Seneca.
(as it was continual drunkenness) men ^al into a certain sweet and
pleasant sleep. For as Publius says, Riches, makes him a fool, Publius.
whom she cockereth to much. Paul also wills that warning should be given to
the rich men, 1. Timo. 17.18.
that they wax not proud, nor have their affiance in uncertain riches, but
in the living God, to do good, and be rich in good works.

This Security is verily the mother of al vi^e, for by the same a man is made
insensible, 1. These. 5.1. I^dges. 18.7.10 2. Pet. 2.19.
so that in his consciece he feels not the anger and wrath of god against
sin: by Security men's minds are brought into a dead sleep, that they be
not pierced one whit with the fear of gods punishment or with the fear of
death, or of the last day, to leave off their vice and sin. This security
Christ artificiallye painteth out in Luke, Luke. 12.16. Ecclesi. 11.19.
where mention is made of the rich man, which when his land had enriched, and
made him welthy with a fruitful and plentiful croppe, did not go about to
reform his living, and to repent nor to bestow alms upon the poor, but
studied how to enlarge his barnes, and to make more ^oome for his corn, and
said, Now my soul thou have a great deal laid up for thee, which will last
thee for many years: now therefore take thy rest, eat, drink and be of good
cheer. But in this Security, what heard he of god: thou fool, this night thy
soul shall be take away etc. markest thou not, how death comes suddenly upon
him thinking to have had all the commodities and pleasures of the world, as ease,
rest, delicious fare, pastimes, delectations, and safeguard of al his goods?

For this cause then, Paul commands us to awake and be in a readiness at
al times against the coming of the Lord. Christ our Savior also says, wa^ch
and pray least ye enter into tentatio^: again, ^ Cor. 16.^. Col. 4.2. 1. Th^s
5.6.7.8. 1. Pet. 5.8. Mat. 26.41. Cap. 24.42.43. 44.45.46.48.49.50.51. Luke.
21.34.35. Genes. 7.5. Luke 17.26. 27.28.^^. Mat 24.38. ^Pet. 3.20. Luke 17.3^.
1 Cor. 10.6. VVisdo. 3.17.18 James. 4.13.14.
take heed to your selves, least at any time your hearts be oppressed with
surfeting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and least that day come on
you at unawares. For as a snare shall it come onal the that dwell on the face of
the earth, like as it befell and happened in the time of Noe, wheal the world
was drowned, and in the time of Lot when Sodom was burned with fire from
heaven, so verily the last day shall come suddenly, and at the twinkling of an
eye, even when men look least for it. These things might be fair examples and
sufficient warnings for us, if we were not more than senseless.

The fifth cause, is the hope of long life. Among many euilles and naughty
affections which follow the nature of man corrupted by sin, none brings
greater inconvenience than the inordinate hope of long life, as Cicero says,
no man is so old and aged, that he persuades not himself that he may live a
whole year. This is the cause why we defer the reformation of our lives, Luke.
16.2. Ecclesi. 5.^. Gala. 6.7.8.9.10 1. Kings. 10 2. 1. Chro. 9.1. Luke.
11.31.32 Ion 3.5
and remember not, that we have an account to make at the last day. It is to be
wondered, that men do put of, and defer such a great and weighty matter, and
look no more of a thing, which profits so much, and is so necessary unto
salvation. The very heathen I fear me shall in the last judgment be a reproach
to us Christians, in that we are so slothful, and have almost mind at no
time to repent and amend our livings. Pythagoras rule and custom was, when he
went to take rest, Pythagoras custom.
to reckon and call, to remembrance what thing so ever he had said or done,
good or b^d, the day before: which Virgil speaking of a godly and virtuous
man, Virgil.
painteth out to us learnedly: how he never slept til he called to remebrace al
things that he did that day etc. I can not let pass that which Seneca speaks
of this form and order. Seneca. Sextus. Ecclesi. 4.25. Ezra. 10.1. Job. 40.9.
Cap. 10.15. Cap. 31.1. Proverb. 28.1^. 1 Cor. 11.28. 2. Cor. 13.5. 1. Cor.
11.^1.
Sextus (says h^) at the evening ere he went to rest, accustomed to ask of
his mind certain questions: what ill and naughty condition have thou this day
amended? what vice have thou withstanded? what art thou better now than when
thou did arise? And after he adds this: what better form can there be,
than this, to examine the whole day again in this wise? And this rule saint
Paul gives also, saying, let a man therefore examine himself etc. if we would
judge our selves, we should not be judged.

But now of the contrary, let us consider our exercises, and how we use to
reckon our faults, and examine the whole day again, at night ere we go to rest
and sleep: how are we occupied verily, we keep ioly cheer one with an other in
banqueting, Eccl. 7.36. Job. 7.6.7.9. Esaias. 40.6.7. Psalm. 3^.^. Ecclesi 44.18.
1. Pet. 1.24. James ^.10. Cap. 4.14. Job. 14.2. Psalm. 102.3.11. Mat. 25.4.
Ephesians. 5.14. 1. Cor. 6.9.10. Ephesians. ^.3. 1 Timo. ^.
surfeting and drunkenness, also we use all the night long, in ranging from
town to town and from house to house with Mummeries and Maskes, Diceplaying,
Carding and Dancing, having nothing less in our memories than the day of
death: for Salomo^, byddeth us remember our end and last day, and the^ we shall
never do amiss: but they remember it not, therefore they do amiss. The
bereuiti of our life, is compared in Scriptures, unto the smoke, vapor,
grass, a flower, shadow, a span long, to a weauers web, to a post etc.
teaching here by that we should be always preparing to die, for that we know
not what hour it will come: therefore, as wise Virgins let us prepare oil ready
in our lamps, for doubtless the day of the lord is not far off. Dare we
take our rest, and boldly to sleep in these our wicked sins, in which if
any man should die, 2. Pet. 3.4. Hebre. 9.27.
(as no man is sure that he shall live the next morrow following,) he were
utterly cast away, and condemned body and soul; but alas, these things they
remember not. In such wise they flatter themselves with hope of longer life,
(fith with the which so many men be deceived how childish are they, or rather
how do they dote, which do persuade themselves, that they be exempted out of
the number of those, as it were by some singular privilege and prerogative.

These are the chiefest causes that we live so wickedly as we do in these
days. Take away therefore the causes, the effects will easily be remedied. And
for the curing of three notable vices, (among all the rest) I have here made,
(according to my small skill) a Treatise against Diceplaying, Dancing, and
vain plays or Enterluds, Dialogue wise, between Age and Youth, wherein thou
shall find great profit and commodity, and how in all ages, times and seaso^s,
these wicked etc detestable vices of idleness, Diceplaying, Dancing, and
vain Enterludes, has bin abhorred and detested of al nations, and also among
the Heathens, to the great shame and condemnation of Christians, that use no
play nor pastime, nor any exercise more than Diceplaying, Dancing, and
Enterludes. Now therefore (friendly Reader) I have labored for thy sake with my
poor pen, to bring forth this small volume that thou see: VVherin I have
to request and desire thy friendly acceptaunce of the same, because it is a
pledge and token of my good heart and will to thee for which if thou can
afourde me thy good word, I ask no more, Psalm. 12.2.3.4. Exe. 33.30.31.32.
Psalm. 14.6. Psalm. 101.5. Mat. 5.11. Act. 7.57. James. 3.8. Psalm. ^99.2.3.
it shall not be the last (if God le^d me life) that thou shall receive of me.
As for. Arista^chus brood, and Zoilus generation, lurking loyterers, Dicers,
Dauncers, Interlude Players, and frantike findefaults, dispraysing and
condemning ^uerye good endeavor, I wey them not, I am not the first (though the
simplest and rudest,) that their venomous tongs (typped with the Metal of
infamy and slander) have torn in pieces, and uncharitably abused, god forgive
the^ Accept thou therefore, I beseech, the (cutteous Reader) this my travel, and
good meaning in the best part. Thus I bid thee farewell. From Henbury.

John Northbrooke.

A Treatise against Idleness, Idle Pastimes, and Plays.
YOVTH. AGE. GOD bless you, and well overtaken good father Age.

AGE. And you also good son Youth.


YOVTH. From whence came you now good father? if I may be so bold (to presume
of your courtesy) to demand of you.


AGE. I came from thence, whereas you ought to have been, and resort unto.


YOVTH. What place is that, I pray you declare to me?


AGE. In good sooth it is that place which you, and such others as you are,
delight very little to come unto.


YOVTH. I dare hold a ryall, you mean the Church.


AGE. You had monne your wager if you had laid: it is even the very same place
that I mean.


YOVTH. That place is more fit for such old fatherly men as you are, than
for such young men as I am.


AGE. The place is fit, Luc. 14.2^.22.
and open for every man to come and resort unto, of what estate, condition, or
years so^uer he or they be of.


YOVTH. I grant that to be true.


AGE. Why then resort you not thither as you ought to do, and frequent it
oftener?


YOVTH. I have great business other ways for my profit, in other places, and
therefore must do that first, which is the cause of my slack and seldom
coming to the Church.


AGE. Christ bids you seek first the kingdom of God, Math. 6.33.
and his righteousness, and all those things (that you need of for your
body) shall be ministered unto you. But I perceive your care is according to
the Ports saying: Horatius in Epist.
O ciues, ciues, quarenda pecania primum est, Virtus post nummos, that is, O
Citizens, Citizens, first seek for money, and after money for Wertue. Take
heed therefore, least you be one of that crewe which S. Augustine exclaimeth
against, August ad (...) 33.
saying: O quam plures s^nt ex vibes qui prius t^b^rnam visitant, quam templ^n,
prius corpus reficittut, quam animam: prius Demonem sequuntur, quam Deum. O
how many are there of you, which do first visit the Tatertie, then the
Temple, ^ Cor 11 21.
which dor first seed and refreshe their body, then their soul, which do
first follow and wait after the devil. John. 2.15.
then God. ie. Christ made a s^urge of small cords, and ^aue the buyers and
sellers out of the Temple: but now I see that the Magistrates have cause to
make scurges with great ^ordes to wine and compel idle persons, Luc. 14.23.
and buyers and sellers into the Temple.


YOVTH. Cannot I find Christ afwel in a Tavern as in a Temple? Mat. 1^.20.
For he says: Wheresoever two or three be gathered together in his name, he is
in the mids of them.


AGE. In deed^ Christ is to be found in all places, and is amongst the godly
and faithful gathered together according to his will: for his Church and
faithful congregation is not tied and bound to any oue special place (as the
Donatists and Papists affirm) but is dispersed upon the face of the whole
earth wheresoever. I pray you, how can you say that you are gathered together
in Christ's name, Psalm. 50.16.
when you do all things to the disglorie thereof, in breaking of his blessed
commandments, by your swearings, drunkenness, idleness, violating the
Sabbath day, neglecting to hear his word, and to receive his sacraments, and
to resort to the house of prayer with the godly congregation. Psalm. 145.18.
Psalm. 119.155.
As God is near to them that call upon him in truth, so is he far from the
health of the ungodly and wicked. Where did Joseph and Marie find Christ,
when as they fought after him? It was in no Tavern or playing place, but it
was in the Temple, Luc. 2.46.
disputing and apposing the Doctors. (ie. To that purpose Saint Augustine
says: Quaerendus est Christus, sed non in platea vbi est magna vanitas:
August. ad fr^tres in Es rem. sermon. 43
non in foro vbi est grandis aduersitas: non in taberna, vbi est summa
ebrietas: non in secularia Curia, vbi est maxima falsitas: non in sch^lis
mundanorum philosophorum, vbi est insinita peruersitas: Ambro.lib. 3. de viag
aib.
Christis to be sought for, but not iu the streets, where is much vanity:
not in the Judgment place, where is great trouble: not in the Tauernes where
is continual drunkenness: not in the worldly courts, where is great
deceyte: not in the schools of worldly Philosophers, where there is endless
contention.


YOVTH. I perceive that I have ouershotte my self in saying and doing, as I
have said and done: yet I pray you, give me to understand, why you are so
desirous to have had me at Church especially this morning?


AGE. Because I wish your souls health.


YOVTH. Was there a Physician at Church this day, Hebr. 13.17. ^. Pet. 5.2.
that could minister any medicines?


AGE. Yea that there was, who has ministered such medicines to our souls this
day, that no tongue can express the benefit we have gotten and obtained
thereby.


YOVTH. Was he a Physician for the body, or for the soul?


AGE. You may perceive by my words, that it was a Physician for the soul
only.


YOVTH. So I thought, for if he had been for the body, our Gentlemen and
Gentlewomen, with our rich farmours in our parish, would have been there,
although they had been carried in Wagons or Coches.


AGE. You have said truth, and the more to be lamented, because they feel
not the disease of their fayntie and sleke souls, nor yet remember the words
of Christ, that says: The whole need not a Physician, Math. ^.12. Heb.
13.17. Math. 11.28.
but they that are sick. Therefore he calls (by his Preachers) all those
that are wearye, and laden, to himself, and promises to them that come, that
they shall find rest unto their souls. Romans 3.24. Esa. 55.1. Reu. 22.17.
This Physic is given to us freelye for nothing, without any our
worthynesse, merits or deserts. I would to GOD they did feel their
sickness, Esaias. 55.6.
then they would acknowledge it, and make speed to seek for the Physician
whiles he may be found, and labor for the life which shall never decay nor
perish. John. 6.27.
I pray God the old Proverb be not found true: that Gentlemen and rich men
are ^enison in heaven (that is) very are and dainty to have them come
thither. Math. 1^.23 Luc. 12.21.



YOVTH. Do you mean all Gentlemen and rich men in general?


AGE. No, God forbid, for I ^nowe well that there are a great number of
godly, (...) 34.35
zealous, and virtuous Gentlemen, Gentlewomen, and rich men, which do hunger
and thirste for the aduanncement and continual increasing of Gods glory and
his kingdom, (...). 1.23. 1. Cor. ^.12. (...). 2^.20 Romans 4.25,
to the utter subversion of all sin, wickedness, vice, and Popery, and also
do hunger and thirste to be at home in their everlasting habitation, prepared
for the ^ed, through the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ our only
savior.


YOVTH. I understand your meaning very well, how you will urge and persuade
every man to be a bearer of the sermons.


AGE. You have said the truth, that is my purpose and whole desire, which with
all my heart I wish and pray for.


YOVTH. The Church is no wild Cat, it will stand still, where as it is, and
as for Sermons they are not dainty, but very plenty, and therefore no such
great need or haste to run to hear Sermons.


AGE. Although they are plenty (God continue it) yet you must not neglect to
hear Sermons in s^ason and ^ute of season. ie. 2. Tim. 4.2.
For it is a special argument that Christ our Savior uses to discern his
children from the children of Satan by, when he says: John. 8.47. 1. Ioh. 4.6.
Ioh. 10.27.
he that is of God, bears Gods word: ye therefore bear them not, because ye
are not of God. Again, My sheep hear my voice, ie. Saint Gregory says:
Certissimum signum est nostrae praedestinationis Dei verbum libenter audire,
Gregorius.
that is, It is a most sure sign and token of our predestination, gladly and
willingly to hear the word of God. Luc. 10.16. Mat. 10.40 John. 13.20
Therefore if you will be of God and of his fold, bear his voice. pronounced
to you by his preachers, thereby shall you profit your self, please God, and
displease Satan: Contrariwise you shall displease God, and please Satan, to
your own confusion, which God forbid.


YOVTH. I beseech you good father, declare to me plainelye by some proofs of
holy scripture, that Satan is displeased if we hear the word preached or
read, and also that he is so well coutented when as we neither hear nor read
the word of God, but continue in ignorance.


AGE. That I will do good son (God willing.) You may very well percevue his
nature by that our Savior Christ says: Ye do not understand my talk, Io.
8.43.44
because ye cannot hear my word: Ye are of your father the deuiil, and the
lust of your father ye will do, etc. Luc. 11.24: Math. 12.43
Also in these words of Christ: When the unclean spirit is gone out of a
man, he walks through dry places, seeking rest, and when he finds none, he
says, I will return unto my house whence I came out, and when he comes, he
finds it swepte and garnished, then go^th he and takes to himself seven
other spirits worse than himself, and they enter in, and dwell there, so the
last end of that manne is worse than the first. 1. Pet. 5.8
Therefore Saint Peter says: your adversary the Devil goes about like a
roaring Lion, seeking who^ he may devour. etc. Saint Paul says: 2. Co. 4.3.4
If our Gospel be then hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the God
of this world has blinded the minds, that the light of the glorious Gospel
of Christ would not shine. Or^gen in num^r. (...) mil. 27.
etc. Origin says: Daemonibus est super omnia genera tormentorum, and super
omnes poenas, si quem videant verbo dei operam studijs dare, scientiam diuinae
legis, and mysteria scripturaru^ intentis perquirentem. In hoc little omnis
flamma est: in hoc vruntur incendio. Possident enim omnes, qui versantur in
ignorantia. That is, Unto the devils it is a torment, above all kinds of
torments, and a pain above all pains, if they see any man reading (or
hearing the word of God, and with fervent study searching the knowledge of
Gods law, and the mysteries and secrets of the Scriptures, herein stands
all the flame of the devils: in this are they are tormented. For they are
sealed and possessed of all them that remain in ignorance. This you have
heard, and may easily perceive that this is he (who by his ministers the
Papists) shut up the kingdom of heaven before men. Math. 23.13 2. Cor. 11.3.
This is that serpent that beguileth us, that our minds should be corrupt
from the simplicity that is in Christ, he can transform himself unto an
Angel of light. Math. 13.3. (...) 8.12. Mar. 4.1.
This is he that sows Darnell amongst the Lords wheat. This is that ennimie
that comes and raketh away the word of God out of our hearts, least we should
believe, and so be saved.


YOVTH. What means this latter sentence that you recited, I pray you declare
it to me.


AGE. Christ hereby manifests what is the property and nature of Satan, how
he can abide no man for to hear the word of God, Romans 10.17.
and obey it, knowing well that faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
word of God, and that they cannot hear but by the preaching, etc. therefore he
practices by all ways and means to make us deaf, that we may not hear the
preaching, and so believe, and be saved. Therefore my son mark this well,
that when as you, or such others, do little delight, or less regard to hear
Gods word preached, 2. Tim. 2.26
that Satan does possess you and them, Romans 6.16. Ioh. 8.34. 1. Pet. 2.19.
and is become your master, and you his servants and bondmen, as Paul
says: Know ye not, that to whom soever you give your selves as servants to
obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey, Reave. 12.10 Romans 6.23.
whether it be of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness. Thus
you see what an ennimie Satan is to man's salvation, and his wages that he
gives, is eternal death.


YOVTH. How many ways does Satan go about to hinder us from hearing the word
of God?


AGE. He does this by sundry means and ways.


YOVTH. I pray you declare the^ to me as briefly as you may.


AGE. I will so. First he does it by corruption of our natures, and also by
reason we are accustomed continually to sin. Secondly by a vain hope and
trust in our selves and our freewill. Thirdly by an Epicurial and worldly care.
Fourthly, by encouraging our selves to do wickedly, by the examples of other
men that daily offend. Fiftlye, by pleasures, pastimes, and such like. Sixthly,
by his own craftiness and subtlety. Seventhly, by rearing up slanders upon
the preachers of the word of God. Eightlye, by open persecution. etc. These are
the ways and practices that commonly he uses.


YOVTH. I assure you they are dangerous practices and easy means to draw us
from hearing the word of God. Yet hitherto you have not expressed to me
whether there be any danger or punishmente threatened against such as will
not hear Gods word?


AGE. I was about so to do, if you had not interrupted me in my talk so
soon.


YOVTH. I pray you let me hear them, that by those threats I may learn to
avoid the danger that may ensue upon me in not hearing the Sermons.


AGE. As the curses are great against the contemners and negligent hearers of
Gods word, Deuteronomy. 28.13. Deuteronomy. 28.1. Leuit. 26.3.
so the blessings are double fold to the diligent and obedient hearer,
according to that saying in Logique, Contraria inter se opposita, magis
elucescunt, that is, Co^traries being set one against the other, appear more
evident, so by the curses, you may the better consider of the blessings.


YOVTH. In deed I shall so, therefore speak on, I beseech you.


AGE. It is written in Deuteronomie: Deuteronomy. 28.15 16.17.18.19.20.21.22. Lame^.
2.17. Leui. 26.14. Baruc. 1.20.
If thou will not obey the voice of the Lord thy God, all these curses shall
come upon thee, and overtake thee. Cursed shall thou be in the town, and
cursed in the field, cursed is thy basket and store, cursed shall be the fruit
of thy body, and the fruit of thy land, the increase of thy kyne, and the
flocks of thy sheep. Cursed shalt thou be when thou come in, and cursed
when thou go out. The Lord shall send upon thee, cursing, trouble, and
shame, in all that which thou set thine hand to due, until thou be
destroyed, and perish quickelye. The Lord shall make the Pestilence cleave
unto thee, until he has consumed thee from the land, the Lord shall smite
thee with a Consumption, and with the fever, and with a burning ague, and with
fervent heat, and with the sword, and with blasting, and with meldew. etc. as
in that Chapter you may read thoroughly, wherein you shall find most terrible
plagues upon those that are contemners and disobeyers of God and his word. 1.
Sam. 15.22
In Samuel you may read also that Saul was reproved for this fault, and
lost his kingdom for it. Has the Lord (says Samuel) as great pleasure in
burnt offerings and sacrifices, as when the voice of the Lord is obeyed? Behold
to obey is better than sacrifices, and to harken is better than the fat of
Rams: Ierem. 7.23
Because thou have cast away the word of God, therefore he has cast away thee
from being king. Prou. 1.24.25.26.
Solomon says, because I have called and ye refused, I have stretched out my
hand, and none would regard, but ye have despised all my counsels, and would
none of my correction. I will laugh at your destruction, and mock when fear
comes. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not annswere, they shall
seek me early, but they shall not find me, because they hated knowledge, and
did not choose the fear of the Lord, they would none of my counsel.
Therefore shall they eat the fruit of their own way, and be filled with
their own devises. Again he says: He that turns away his ear from
hearing the law, Prou. 28.9. Iere. 44.23.
even his prayer shall be abominable. Read Jeremy, and see what plagues came
upon the people for their neglecting of Gods word. Ezech. 2.10
Ezechiell says, that a book was delivered him (against those that contemned
and would not hear the word of the Lord, Cap. 33.31.32.33.
and frame their lives aunswerable to it) which was written within and without,
Lamentations, and mournings and woe. They that were called to the supper, and
refused to come, Luc. 14.24. Mat. 21.43.
had pronounced against them, that none of them which were bidden, shall taste
of his supper. He says also, that the kingdom of God shall be taken from
you, and shall be given to a nation which shall bring fruits thereof. Also you
may perceive by Christ's weeping over Jerusalem, when he prophesied of their
destruction, Luc. 19.41.
for not coming to him when he called, and for killing his Prophets who were
sent to call them to repentance: how wrathful Gods indignation is against all
such. etc. Uerye well did Saint Paul say: See that ye despise not him that
speaks: for if they escaped not which refused him, Hebr. 12.25.
that spoke on earth, much more shall we not escape, if we turn away from
him, Chrysost^^ populum Antioch. homil. 21.
that speaks from heaven. etc. Chrysostom says: Quanto na^que mayor gratia,
tanto amplior postea peccantibus poena. The greater benefits we receive (at
Gods hands) and do abuse them, or not regard them, the greater punishment
shall fall upon them afterward.


YOVTH. These sayings out of the Scriptures are terrible, and pearce my heart
and conscience very deeply.


AGE. You know that the word of God is a two edged sword, Heb. 4.12.
and enters through (says Saint Paul) even to the dividing asunder of the
soul and the spirit, and of the joints, and the marie, and is a discerner of
the thoughts and ententes of the heart. Whereby you see that it wounds
mortally the rebellious: but in the elect it kills the old man, that they
should live unto God.


YOVTH. These pains and curses are terrible, which makes me to tremble for
fear.


AGE. Si horrescimus poenam, Lauaterus in Paral. p. ca. 21.
horrescamus etiam causam poenae: If we do abhor and fear the punishment,
let us also abhor and fear the cause of punishment (which is sin.)


YOVTH. I perceive now that it is a great sin, and they are in a great
danger that conte^ptuously refuse to hear the word of God when it is preached.


AGE. It is most true. Augusta. causa. 1. quesi cap. interrog.
For as Augustine says: Non minor erit reus qui verbum dei negligenter
audierit, quam ille qui corpus Christi indigne sumit. That is: He is no less
guilty that negligently hears the word of God, 1. Cor. 11.29.
than he that eats unworthily the body of Christ. Cyril in Leu. Lib. 6.
Saint Cyrill says: If we doubt of them that he are the word preached, what
shall we do of them that do never hear the word preached at all.


YOVTH. Will not ignorance excuse us?


AGE. Nothing less, for it will rather accuse us, as Augustine says: August
in Epist. 105.
Ignorantia in eis qui intelligere noluerunt, sine dubitatione peceatum est, in
eis autem qui non potuerunt, poena peccati. Ergo in vtriusque non est iusta
excusatio, sed iusta damnatio. Ignorance in them that would not understand,
without doubt it is sin: in them that could not understand, it is the
punishment of sin. For in either of them there is no just excusation, but
just damnation. Co^^. (...). 4. can. 24.
Therefore was it called the mother (not of denotion, as the Papists term it)
but of all mischief and vice. But we may say of our adversaries the
Papists, as Ireneus said against the Ualentinian heretics, Iren. lib. 2.
Cap. 19.
Veritatis ignorantiam, cognitionem vocant, Ignorance of the truth, and
blindness, they call knowledge.


YOVTH. There are a number that persuade with themselves clean contrary, and
think no offense less, nay, that is no offense at all, to absent themselves
from the Sermons, and never scarce come to the Temple at prayer, having no
just (but rather vn^ust) occasions to follow their own pleasures in
whatsoever, and yet boldly will say and affirm (as I my self have heard the^)
they are Gospellers and Protestants, and do believe very well in God, and
knows as much as the Preacher can, or is able to say, or teach them.


AGE. Math. 7.21.
Christ says: Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into his
kingdom, nor every one that can say the Lords prayer, the belief, and the
ten commandments, is a good Protestant, but they that do the will of our
heavenly father, so the Jews bragged that they had Abraham to their father,
John. 8.41.
and that they were not borne of fornication, but that they had one father
which is God: yet Christ pronounces, that they are of their father the
Devil, for his works they did. And amongst all the works, Christ speaks
of this sinful work of Satan, which was, their bragging that they were Gods
children, and yet would not hear Gods word. Psalm. 50.17.
But to those shall be said: What art thou that take my covenant in thy
mouth, and hate to be reformed, and cast my words behind thee? etc.
Although these men can say well, Math. 17.5.
yet (for that they show not obedience to their heavenly father, that says:
This is my only begotten son, hear him.) He will destroy them with the
hypocrites, that profess they know God, Romans 1.21. Titus. 1.16.
but by works they deny him, and are abominable and disobedient, and unto
every good work reprobate (as Saint Paul says.) Hillarie speaks of these
men, saying: Multi sunt qui simulantes fidem, Hila. lib. 8. de trinitate.
non subditi sunt fidei, sibique fidem ipsi potius constituunt quam accipiunt,
that is: There are many that counterfeyte faith, and yet they are not subject
or obedient to the (true) faith, these men do rather prescribe to themselves a
faith, than to receive the (true) faith and religion.


YOVTH. They say that they believe well, and have the true faith
notwithstanding.


AGE. Hark I pray you, Cyprian de simplicitate prelatorum,
what Saint Cyprian says to them, Quomodo dicit, se credere in Christum, qui
non facit quod Christus facere praecepit? How can be say, that he believes in
Christ, that does not that which Christ has commanded? Whereby you may see
how wide these people are from true religion. It was well said of Saint
Augustine, Augustine quest ex ver. Testamentis quest. 43.
Constat fidem stultam non solum minime prodesse, sed etiam obesse, It is
'certayne that a foolish faith not only does no good, but also hurts.
Therefore (if you and they repent not) ye shall one day feel the just
reward thereof: 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.
when in your torments and endless pains ye shall be forced, Psalm. 75.8.
Wisd. 5.6.
with the wicked in hell, to cry and say: We have erred from the way of
truth, and have wearied our selves in the way of wickedness and destruction.
And we have gone through dangerous ways: but the way of the Lord we have
not known. What has pride done to us? or what profit has the pomp of riches
brought us?


YOVTH. I pray you, what causes are there to move and persuade us, that we
ought to hear and read Gods holy word?


AGE. There are four principal causes.


YOVTH. What are they?


AGE. The first cause (to move us to hear and read the word of God) is, Deuteronomy.
30.4.
the commandment of almighty God our heavenly father, Deuteronomy. 30.4.
which says: Ye shall walk after the Lord your God and fear him, Deuteronomy.
18.15.
and shall keep his commandments, and hearken unto his voice. Again, the
Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet like unto me, from among you,
even of thy brethren, Math. 1^.5. Math. 3.17. Luke 10.16. Mat. 10.40 John
13.20. Mat. 233.3. John. 14.15. John. ^.39. Act. 17.11.
unto him shall thou hearken. etc. This is my well-beloved son, hear him. etc.
He that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you, despises me, etc.
The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses seat, all therefore whatsoever they bid
you observe, that observe and do. etc. If ye love me, keep my commandments,
etc. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal life, and
they are they which testify of me. etc.

Malac. 1.6.
The second cause is, the end that we were created and redeemed for, that is,
to learn to know God, to honor him, worship him, glorify him, to fear him,
love him, and obey him, as our God and father, Chrisost.
as Chrysostom says: Omnia condita esse propter hominem, hunc autem conditum
esse propter deum, hoc est, ad agnoscendum and glorificandum deum. etc. All
things were ordained to be made for man, man was ordained to be made for God,
to the end to know and glorify God. etc. So David said: I shall not die but
live, Psalm. 118.17. Psalm. 86.12. 1. Cor. 6.20. 2. These. 1.12. 1. Cor. 10.31
and declare the works of the Lord. So Paul says: Glorify God in your
body and in your spirit, for they are Gods. Again: Whatsoever ye do, do
all to the glory of God.

2. Cor. 35.
The third cause is our own infirmities, for that we are nothing, we know
nothing, nor can perceive any thing, as of ourselves, without the help of Gods
spirit, and the word of his promise. Ireneus says: Ireneus.
Cum impossible esset sine deo discere deum, per verbum docet Deus homines
scire Deum: When it was impossible to know God without God, God by his word
teaches men to know God. Psalm. 110.9.105. Psalm. 19.7.
So David says: that a young man shall redress his way, by ruling himself
according to Gods word. His word is a lantern to our feet, and a light to
our paths. etc. The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul, the
testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple: the
commandments are pure, Romans 15.4.
and give light unto the eyes: by them is thy servant made circumspect, and in
keeping of them there is great reward. Saint Paul says: Whatsoever things
are written before time, are written for our learning, that we through patience,
and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. Again: The whole Scripture is
given by inspiration of God, 2. Tim. 3.13.
and is profitable to teach, to improve, to correct, and to instruct in
righteousness, that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto
all good works. Bruno in 2. 2. Tim. 316.
That is, says Bruno, it is profitable to teach them that are ignorant: so
reprove and convince them that speak against the faith: to correct sinners:
to instruct those that are rude and simple. Chrysostom in Math. 22. homil. 41.
Chrysostom also says: Quicquid quaeritur ad salutem: totum iam impletum est
in Scripturis, qui ignarus est, inueniet ibi quod discat, qui contumax est and
peccator, inueniet futu^ri iudicij flagella quae timeat, qui laborat, inueniet
ibi glorias and promissiones vitae aeternae: Whatsoever is sought for
salvation, is wholly contained and fulfilled in the scriptures, he that is
ignorant, shall find there what he ought to learn, he that is a stubborn and
disobedient sinner, shall find there scourges of the judgment to come, which
shall make him fear, he that labors and is oppressed, shall find there
promises and glory of eternal life.

The fourth and last cause is, the sharp punishment that God pronounces
against such, Deuteronomy. 28.29.16.17.18.
as you have heard declared before, when we talked of Gods curses and plagues.
Christ says himself, this is the condemnation, John. 3.19.
that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light,
because their deeds were evil. etc. Thus you have heard the causes why we
ought to hear sermons preached by those that preach Christ truly, and to
read the holy Scriptures.


YOVTH. These causes are excellent, and of great importance, and of necessity
to be considered of all men.


AGE. You say truly, they are so, yet for your better instruction, I pray you
answer me to these questions which I shall demand of you.


YOVTH. I will if I be able.


AGE. Why does God erect his throne amongst us?


YOVTH. Because we should fear him.


AGE. Why does he reveal his will unto us?


YOVTH. Because we should obey him.


AGE. Why does he give us his light?


YOVTH. Because we should see to walk in his ways.


AGE. Why does he deliver us out of troubles?


YOVTH. Because we should be witnesses that he is gracious.


AGE. Why does he give us his word?


YOVTH. Because we should hear, learn, and know him.


AGE. Why does he call us by his Preachers?


YOVTH. Because we should repent and so come to him.


AGE. Why does he give us his sacraments?


YOVTH. Because they are seals of his promise, that we should not be forgetful
of the benefits purchased for us by the precious body and blood of our
savior Jesus Christ.


AGE. Why does God give us understanding?


YOVTH. Because we should acknowledge him.


AGE. Why does he give us a will?


YOVTH. Because we should love him.


AGE. Why does he give us bodies?


YOVTH. Because we should serne him.


AGE. Why does he give us ears?


YOVTH. Because we should hear him.


AGE. You have answered truly and directly, whereby I perceive you have read
the Scriptures, and have some knowledge of Gods will, Luc. 12.47.
and therefore since you know your masters will, and do it not, you shall be
beaten with many stripes.


YOVTH. Is it sufficient then to hear the word of God preached, and so to be
hearers only?


AGE. No. For as you ought to hear, so must you be a doer thereof. James.
1.21.22.23.24.
Saint James says: Receive with meekness the word that is graffed in you,
which is able to save your souls. And be ye doers of the word, and not
hearers only, deceyuing your own selves. For if any hear the word, and do
it not, he is like unto a man, that beholds his natural face in a glass.
For when he has considered himself, he goes his way, and forgets
immediately what manner of one he was. etc. Saint Paul also says: Romans 2.43.
The hearers of the Law are not righteous before God, Ephesians. 2.10.
but the doers of the Law. We are (says he) his workemanshippe created in
Christ Jesus unto good works which God has ordained, that we should walk in
them. John. 15.8.
Herein (says Christ) is my father glorified, that we bear much fruit.
Math. 7.24.
Whosoever hears of me these words, and does the same, I will liken him to
a wise builder. etc. Christ joins hearing and doing together, Luc. 11.28.
Math. 5.16. 1. Pet. 2.12. James. 2.18.
with a true Copulative, saying: Beati qui audiunt sermonem dei and obseruant
eum: Blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it. Therefore
Christ bids our light (that is, our faith and religion) to shine to the
world, that the world may see our good works, and glorify our heavenly
father. etc. Whereby we may see, that we ought, and must needs have, with
hearing, doing: with faith, works: with doctrine, life: with knowledge
practice: with science, zeal: with professing, expressing: with hearing,
keeping: with words, deeds: Luc. 10.39.
with talking, walking. So that these must needs dwell together in one house,
as Marie and Martha, two sisters, which ought to be tanquam Comites
indiuidui: John. 14.21.
he that has my commandments, says Christ, and keeps them, is he that
loves me. August in Job. tract. 75.
etc. Saint Augustine upon these words, says: Qui habet in memoria, and
seruat in vita: qui habet in sermonibus, and seruat in moribus: qui habet in
audiendo, and seruat in faciendo, aut qui habet in faciendo, and seruat in
perseuerando, ipse est qui diligit me, He that that has (my word) in his
memory, and keeps it in life: he that has it in words, and keeps it in
manners: he that has it in hearing, and keeps it in doing: or he that has
it in doing, and keeps it in perseuering and continuing, he it is that loves
me. You see then, that we must not only be hearers, but also doers of the
word. It shall not be asked (at the dreadful day of Judgment) how much
we have heard or readde, Reave. 24.23 Math. 25.35
or how much we do know, but how well we have lived. 2 Cor. 5.10 James. 2.18.
What works we have expressed to testify with us of our spiritual
regeneration and inward faith. etc. S. Augustine says: Augustine ^sil. 66.
Audire veritatem nihil est, si non auditionem fructus sequatur, To hear yt
truth is nothing, unless there follow fruits of our hearing. Luke 8.8. Math.
13.23. Mar. 4.8. Titus. 1.16.
Therefore we must be that good ground wherein the seed of Gods word is
sown, which brings fruit an hundredth, sixty, and thirty fold. For we
ought not to be like those that profess they know God, Heb. 6.8.
and deny him with their works. That ground that brings forth such thorns
and briers, is near unto cursing, Mat. 25.41.
whose end is to be burned For every tree that brings not forth good fruit,
Math. 3.10.
is hewn down and cast into the fire.


YOVTH. I perceive now that the doctrine of the Gospel is not a Libertine
doctrine, to give a carnal liberty to men, to do and live as they list, or
that all works, fasting, prayers, and alms deeds, obedience. etc. are
overthrown or denied thereby, as the Popes Catholics have and do report.


AGE. By this doctrine of the Gospel, as you hear, is established and
confirmed all godly life, Romans 3.31.
and good works. But this has been always the practices of Satan and his
Impes, falselye to report of this doctrine, as we read in the holy
Scriptures.


YOVTH. You have satisfied me in this point (I thank God for you) yet I pray
you give me to understand what he was that preached this day at our Church?


AGE. I assure you I know not his name, but whatsoever his name be, he is a
godly learned man, one that beats down mightily by the word of God, Act.
9.22. 2. Cor. 10.4 Romans 3.10.
all Popish religion and superstition, and therewith he is a great enemy to
sin and vice which now reigns too too much amongst all estates and
degrees, and a great friend to virtue and true religion.


YOVTH. I am very glad to hear so good a report of him as I do, 2. Cor.
1.17.18.19. 2. Tim. 3.14 Exo. 28.30.
it is glorious when the Preachers are certain of their doctrine which they
teach, constant therein, and lead lives aunsweswereable thereto, having that
Vrim and Thummim which signifies knowledge, 1. Tim. 4.1^ 2. Tim. 3.10 1. Cor.
9.27
and holiness, declaring thereby what virtues are required in those that are
Ministers and Preachers of Gods word and sacraments, so as they may build up
Gods Church, both with doctrine and conversation of life.


AGE. God defend but that they should be such, 1. Tim. 4.12.
as in all respects they may show themselves to the world, an ensample in
word, in conversation, in love, in spirit, in faith, and in pureness, Math
5.14. Titus. 2.^.
and that they show themselves lanternes of light, and ensample of good works,
with vncorrupt doctrine, with gravity and integrity. etc.


YOVTH. Your great commendation of this Sermon makes me sorrowful that I
had not been at it, but my business was such as by no means I could be there.


AGE. Was your business so great, that it might not have been deferred and put
off for that present, unto another time? I pray you, may I be so bold as to
understand of you, what this great business was, that thus hindered you from
hearing so notable and worthy a Sermon as was preached this morning?


YOVTH. I may show you, for any great weight that it was of. But whatsoever
it was, I put you out of doubt, it was about no matters of any common wealth.


AGE. Then belike you were at prayer with all your family, in your own house.


YOVTH. I tell you truth, I prayed not, but I have playde all this night, that
this morning I could scarce hold open my eyes for sleep, and therefore was
feign for to recover my lost sleep this forenoone.


AGE. You have herein abused Gods ordinance, Psa. 104.20.23. Psalm. 74.16 Psa.
136.8.9
and your self also. For God made the day for man to travel in, and the
night for man to rest in. etc.


YOVTH. Why good father, is it not reason that a man should take his rest, and
sleep when he pleases.


AGE. Yes in deed, so that he uses his rest and sleep moderately and orderly,
that he may the better go about those lawful affairs that he has to do. For
otherwise (as you use your rest and sleep) shall happen to you, Prou. 20.13.
as Solomon says: He that loves sleep shall come unto poverty. etc. Our
life is a watching, therefore we ought to take heed, Mark. 1^.3^ ^. Peter. 5.8.
that we lose not the greatest part of our life with sleep, namely, since of
the same many vices be engendered as well of the body as of the mind. Cato to
this effect says: Plus vigila semper, nec somno deditus esto,
Nam diuturna quies vitijs alimenta ministrat.



YOVTH. You know that sleep was given for man's preservation, for that nothing
having life is there that sleeps not. Aristotle says, Arist. lib. 4. de
(...).
that all creatures having blood, take their repose and sleep. etc. Sleep is
a surceasing of all the senses from travel, which is, or is caused by certain
euaporations and fumes rising of our meat and sustenance received, mounting
from the stomach immediately unto the brain, by whose great coldenesse these
vapors warm are tempered, casting into a slumber every the forces or senses
exterior, at which time the vital spirits retiring to the heart, leave all
the members of the body in a sleep, until such time again, as these said
vital spirits recover new force and strength to them again, and so these
vapors, or ceasing, or diminishing, man again awaketh, and returns to
himself, more apt to his business, than at any time before. And therefore to
sleep and take much rest, is not so noisome or hurtful as you affirm.


AGE. You have herein showed your self like a Philosopher and a Physician: but
far wide either from good Philosophy or wholesome Physic. Although it be
good and necessary for the body, yet must it not be with excess, and
immoderately taken: for that to much sleep says Aristotle, Aristotl^^.
weakeneth the spirits of the body, as well, as also of the soul, even as
moderate and co^petent rest bettereth them, increasing their vigor and their
force, even so immoderate rest hurts and weakeneth. For as many things are
necessary and needful in man's life, so taking in excess and out of season,
annoy and grieve much: as to eat, who feels not how hunger us compels,
and yet he that eats too much, repents it, as we commonly see. Sleep then
must be taken, for necessity only, to revive, refreshe, and comfort the
wearye senses, the spirits vital, and other wearye members. For too much
sleep (besides that it makes heavy the spirits and senses, the party also
becomes slothful, weak, and effeminate with ouermuche idleness)
ingendreth much humiditie and raw humors in the body, which commonly
assault it with sundry infirmities, messengers of death, and of final ruin.
For when we sleep too much, all the moystures and humors of the body, with
the natural heat, retire to the extreme parts thereof, no where purging or
euacuating whatsoever is redundant. So then unmeasurable sleep is not only
forbidden by Philosophers and Physicians but also is a thing odious to the
wise. Ovid with other Poets, term sleep an Image, or pourtraite of death,
saying: What else thou fool, Ovid.
is sluggishe sleep, but form of frosen death?
By settled hours of certain rest, approach thy want of breath.


Therefore be you (and all such as you are) ashamed then, that spend the
greater part of your time in idleness and sleep in your beds, until you
be ready to go to your dynner, neglecting thereby all duty of service both
toward God and man. Holcot in lib Sap. cap. 4.
These are the men that one speaks of, saying: Diu dormiunt de mane, and sero
cito cubant de nocte, They will go very late to bed at night, and sleep
long in the morning. Surely he that so does, his offense is nothing less than
his, that all day does sit in fat dishes, surfeiting like a gross and
swollen Epicure, considering these creatures should only be taken, to the
sole sustentation and maintenance of life, and not to fill or pamper
voluptuouslye the bellye. Dionys. in Romans cap. 13.
Dionysius says: Non viuas, vt edas: sed edas vt viuere posses: ad sanitatem,
non ad incontinentiam habenda est ratio, Thou lyuest not to eat, butte eat as
thou may live: For there must be a government to use it for thy health, and
not to incontinencie. Chrysostom says: Chrysostom in Gene. cap. 6. homil. 23.
Non vita est propter cibum and potum, sed propter vitum cibus and potus. The
life is not appointed for meat and drink, but meat and drink is appointed
for the life. In which sort we must take our sleep, only for necessity, and
nothing for idle pleasure, and that in due time, and not out of season, that we
may the better serve God and our ne^ghbours. If that young man Eutichus, Act.
20.9.
for sleeping at Paul's sermon at Troas in a window, fell down (as a
punishment of God) from the third lofte, dead, what punishment then think
you, will God bring upon you and other like, that sleep from the sermon? and
never come to divine service, but sleep out Sermons and all, which comes to
pass by your night watchings and idle pastimes, therefore no excuse will serve
you herein.


YOVTH. Why good father, is not this a lawful excuse for me to be absent from
the Temple, at prayer and preaching?


AGE. It is no more lawful excuse for you, than it was for them, Luc. 14.19.
that were called to the supper, which seemed to make lawfuller and more honest
excuses than you do: when as one would go to his ferme, another to prove his
Oxen, and another to abide with his new married wife. etc. Mat. 10.37. Luc.
14.26. Eccl 39.26. Eccl. 39.27 P^oue. 28.9
All which things of themselves, and by themselves, are good and lawful. But
when these things are occasions to hinder us, and draw us back from our
obedience unto our GOD in his word, then are they turned into sins, as
Solomon says: He that turns away his ear from hearing the law, even his
prayer shall be abominable. The reason is, Rom 10.17. Romans 14.23
because it is not of faith, which faith is grounded upon Gods word. For
whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. For where a true faith is, there is
always obedience to Gods word, for faith has her certainty of the word of
God, and true obedience wayteth upon faith continually, Psalm. 122.2
as one of her handmaydes.

Luc. 14.16. Mat. 10.37 Ierem. 7.23.
Therefore, if lawful things (of themselves) as Oxen, Fermes, wives, children,
setting our household in order, burying of our fathers, prayers, sacrifices,
good intents and meanings, our own lives, Math. 8.21. 1 Samuel 15.22 2. Cr. 26.17
1. Cro. 13.10
etc. are not to be preferred before Gods calling, or can be any excuse to us
at all: How much less shall our vain and idle plays and wanton pastimes,
be an excuse unto us at the dreadful day of judgment, Wis. 2.6. Isa. 22.13.
1. Cor. 15.32.
though they can say (as Solomon reports of them) Come let us enjoy the
pleasures that are present, let us chearefully use the creatures as in youth,
let us fill our selves with wiue and ointments, and let not the flower of life
pass by us: Let us be partakers of our wantonness, let us leave some token of
our pleasure in every place: for that is our portion and our lot: Wisd. 5.7.
Yet in the end they shall be forced to say in bitterness of heart (if they
repent not) we have wearied our selves in the way of wickedness and
destruction, 8
but the way of the Lord we have not known: what has pride and pleasures of
our youth profited us. Wisd. 2.19
etc. Horrible is the end, says Solomon, of the wicked generation. etc.


YOVTH. All this I must needs confess to be true that you have said: Eccle.
3.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.
yet as Solomon says, there is a time for all things, a time to play, a time
to work, a time to build, a time to pull down. etc.


AGE. If you confess my saying to be true, Luc. 12.47 James. 4.17.
and yet do contrary, you shall be beaten with many stripes. For as Saint
James says: To him that knows how to do well, and does it not, to him it
is sin. This he spoke to such as said in his time, as you do now, that
confessed what was good, but they would not do it. 1. John. 2.17 Marc. 13.31.
2. Pet. 3.11 12. 1. Cor. ^.31. Esaias. 40.8. Luc 12.18. Genes. 6.13.
And as for this place of Ecclesiastes or Preacher, by you alleged, to
maintain your idle sportes and vain pastimes, is not well applied by you. For
he speaks of this diversity of time, for two causes. First, to declare, that
there is nothing in this world perpetual, Omne creatum finitum est, All
things created be finite, that is, it has and shall have an end. So Seneca
says: Senec. lib. 1.
Nihil est diuturnum, in quo est aliquid extremum. Secondly, Iam. 9.7.
to teach us to be pacient, and not grieved, if we have not all things at once,
according to our desires, neither enjoy them so long as we would wish, and not
thereby to maintain idleness and vain pastimes. So may the Drunkerde,
Adulterer, Usurer, Thief, etc. (with the whole rabble of wicked and ungodly
ones) likewise, and to the same effect and purpose allege this place, and
apply it for their practices, as you do for yours. Eccl. 1^.20.
But Syrach teaches you another lesson, saying: God has commanded no man to
do ungodly, neither does he give any man license and time to sin. etc. This
does well appear by the words of Saint Paul, Gal. 6.10.
saying: While we have time, let us do good. Ambros in Gal cap. 6.
etc. Saint Ambrose upon these words, says: Tempus enim idcirco conceditur
vitae, vt iam just versemur, that is: Time is therefore granted unto our
life, that we should live rightly and justly all the days of our life. Luc.
1.75.
The godly man has always said: Veritas filia temporis est, and matter
omnium virtutum, that is: Truth is the daughter of time, and the mother all
virtues. And that no time nor hour ought to be spent ydelly, appears by that
Christ himself said: The Kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain
householder that went to hire laborers into his vineyarde, Math. 20.3. 4.5.
Luc. 10.22. Mat. 25.26.
he went the third, the sixth, the ninth, and the eleventh hour, found some
standing idle, and said to them, why stand ye here all day idle? Go ye
also into my vineyarde. etc. Whereby it appears that we ought to waste and
spend no time, nay, no hour in idleness, but in some good exercise. etc. as
it may only redounde to the glory of the immortal name of God, and profit
of our neighbors. Uerye well was it said of one, Nic. G^rran. in Math. Cap.
20.
upon these words that Christ said to them that stood idle all day. etc.
Tota die, id est, tota vita, in pueritia, adolescentia, in iuuentute, and in
senectute, vobis nihil proficientes, proximis non subuenientes, Deo non
seruientes, hostibus non resistentes, and in posterum non prouidentes, All the
day, that is, all the life (to be idle) in thy childehoode, in thy boyehoode,
in thy youth, in thy age, nothing profitable to themselves, helpefull to their
neighbors, not serviceable to God, not resisting their enuimies, and less
providing against the last day. This made Seneca complain that a great part
of our life perishes, in doing nothing, a greater in doing evil, and the
greatest of all, in doing things unprofitable. Chrysostom says, that we must
be doing Cord, mente, ore, manu: cord credendo: mente co^patiendo: ore
confitendo: manu operando, With heart, mind, mouth, and hand: with heart in
believing: with mind in patience: with mouth in confessing: with hand in
laboring. So that you may well perceive, that to be idle and do no good, is
against the law of God and the law of nature, as Hesiodus says: Illi pariter
iudigna^tur, and dij and homines, quisquis otiosus, both the Gods and men
detest those that are idle: Centuria. 13. Cap. 10 and in folio. 1^5^
and therefore was it said openly, Otiosos and vagos solitus est appellare,
fratres muscas, quod nihil facientes boni, Idlers and wanderers were wont to be
called friars flees, ye are doing no good.


YOVTH. Will you have no leisure times granted unto man? is it not a true
saying: Quies laboris remedium, rest is the medicine of labors and wearines.
Therefore breathings and refreshings from continual labors must be had, because
it drives away irkesomnesse gotten by serious toil, and does repair again
yt bodies and minds to labor: eue^ as too much be^ding breketh a bow, so to be
addicted perpetually to labors, and never to refresh the mind with pastimes,
must needs cause ye mind not long to endure in earnest studies, and therefore
it is said, festiual dais in old time were invented for recreatio^.


AGE. Yes truly, I do allow of honest, moderate, and good lawful active
exercises, for recreation and quickening of our dull minds. And where you say,
that holidays (as they are termed) were inverted in old time for pastimes, I
think you say truth. For ye Pope appointed them (and not God in his word) and
that only to train up the people in ignorance and idleness, whereby half of
the year and more was ouerpassed (by their idle holidays) in loytering and
vain pastimes, etc. in restrayning men from their handy labors and
occupations. S. August speaking of the abuse of the Sabbath day, August in
Psalm. 34.
says: It is better to dig and go to plowe on the Sabbath day, than to be
drunk, and live ydelly: how much more may we say so of these festiual days,
never appointed nor commanded by God? etc.


YOVTH. If you do allow of exercises and recreations, why then do you so
bitterly inuey and speak against plays and pastimes?


AGE. As far as good exercises and honest pastimes and plays do benefit the
health of man, and recreate his wits, so far I speak not against it, but
the excessive and unmeasurable use thereof, Math. 5.29.
takes away the right institution thereof, and brings abuse and misuse, and
thereby is an hinderaunce of man's obedience to Gods word (as it is seen in you
this present day) and therefore they are rather changed into faults and
transgressions, than honest exercises for man's recreation. Therefore we must in
all our pastimes remember what Cicero says: Cic. de offic. lib. 1
Non ita generati sumus a natura, vt ad ludum and iocum facti esse videamur,
sed seueritatem potius, and alia studia grauiora. We are not made and brought
forth into this world by nature, to the intent we might appear and seem to
be created to the maintenance of gaming and pastymes, but we are borne to more
weighty matters, and grauer studies. 1. Cor. 10.31
Therefore S. Paul says: Whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God.


YOVTH. It seems to me, you are so precise, as if you would make us Stoikes,
that will thus exclude pastimes and plays from us, as we now use them.


AGE. Have you so quicklye forgotten (what I said even now) that I did allow
of all honest, good, and lawful pastimes, for those ends and purposes
whereunto they were appointed, for man's recreation and comfort. Cicero says in
his book of Offices, to this effect and purpose: Cicero de offic. lib. 1.
Ludo autem and ioco illis quidem vti licet, sed sicut somno and caeteris
quietibus, tum cum grauibus serijsque rebus satisfeceremus, that is: Honest
games and pastimes are allowable, but we ought to use them as we do sleep and
other eases of the body, and to be taken after such time as we have labored
enough in weighty matters, and serious affairs. As we read of the Roman
Scruola, Valor. lib. ^.
he used often times to play at Tennise, only to recreate his spirits, after
he had taken great pains in weighty matters of the common wealth.


YOVTH. I am very glad that you grant some kind of pastime and plays,
although you tie it to times, matters, and persons.


AGE. Uery good reason it be so granted, as I have said. For as Cicero says:
Ludendi est quidem modus retine^dus, A measure ought to be kept in all our
pastimes, as the Poet says: Est modus in rebus, sunt certi denique fines. Quas
vltra citraque nequit consistere virtus. I pray you what measure or mean keep
you and your companions now a days, that play when you should sleep, and
sleep when you should labor? Mar. 23.^^
The Lord bids you watch and pray, and you watch and play all night long,
whereby you are not able to do your duty in hearing of Gods word, receiving
of his sacraments, praying with the congregation, nor yet able to use your
vocation and calling: whereby you provoke and heap Gods heavy displeasure and
wrath upon you, therefore you have great cause to be heartily sorye, and to
repent.


YOVTH. Why sir, by my sleep I hurt no man, for therein I thought no evil,
and therefore I have not offended, that I need to repent me for it.


AGE. My son, Iam. 3.2. Mat. 15.19. 1. Cor. 3.5. Genes. 6.5. Psalm. 19.12.
Psalm. 52.7.
in many things we offend all, both in thoughts, words, deeds, and dreams,
through corruption of our nature, therefore have we need to say with David:
Who can understand his faults? Cleanse me from secret faults (O Lord. And
whereas you say, by sleeping you hurt no man: That is not sufficient to hurt
no man, but you must do good also. David says: Psalm. 34.14. Psalm. 37.27. 1.
Pet. 3.11.
Eschew evil and do good, seek peace, and ensue it. What good (I pray you)
has your sleep and idle pastimes done to you? which has hindered you from
all good and godly exercises. No good at all, but rather great hurt, for that
you abused, and not used your sleep in due time and order, by reason of your
idle nightwatching plays, and idle wanton pastimes, to satisfy the pleasures
and desires of the flesh, Romans 8.5.6, 7.8.13. Gal. 5.19.
and therefore you need repentance. Hereby is inferred that general rule,
Cuius rei est vsus, eiusdem est and abusus. There is nothing used, but that
also may be abused. Genes. 3.6. Wis. 2.25.
For God in mercy gives us nothing (be it never so good) but the devil is
presently busy to draw us to the abuse thereof.


YOVTH. Do not you remember that Solomon says: Eccl 3.22.
That there is nothing better than that a man should be merye and rejoice in
his affairs, because that is his portion. Wherefore then shall not we in our
youthful days play and pastime?


AGE. Solomon speaks not there of vain, wanton, and idle plays, but
declares that man by his reason can comprehend nothing better in this life,
than to use the gifts of God soberly and comfortably. Also he speaks against
the greedy carfulness of the covetous rich men, that use to become slaves
and bondmen to their mucke and riches (contrary to the rule of David, which he
gives, Psalm. 61.10.
saying: If riches increase, set not your hearts thereon). A little before
the place by you recited, he says: I know that there is nothing good in them,
Eccle. 3.12.
but to rejoice and do good in his life. To that end was it spoken of the wise
man against covetousness, Auar^ semper deest quod habet, quam quod non h^bet,
The rich man lacks that which he has, as well as that he has not. August.
Augustine says: Non solum ille auarus est qui rapit aliena, sed etiam ille
auarus est qui cupide seruat sua, He is not only a covetous man that takes
away another man's goods, but also he is a covetous man that greedily and
niggardlye keeps his own goods (from helping the poor) so that it is a
manifest token of Gods plague, when a rich man has not a liberal heart to
use his riches. August. de verb. Apost. Sermon. 20.
Augustine says: Siignem mittitur qui non dedit rem propriam, vbi putas
mittendus est qui inuasit alienum? If he shall be cast and sent into fire that
gives not of his own proper goods, where think thou shall he be cast and
sent that inuadeth and takes away other men's?


YOVTH. Why do you speak so much to me of this covetousness, I am not rich,
and therefore not covetous.


AGE. You are herein deceived. Exo. 20.17. Romans 7.7.
For Christ in his law says: Thou shalt not covet nor lust: whereby he does
declare that a greedy minded man (although he have no riches) may be, and is a
covetous man. Psalm. 75.6. ^ Sam. 2.7.
So that riches (which is the gift of God) is not cause of covetousness, but
the filthye desire and insatiable mind and heart of man, and also his greedy
desire to have. Therefore Paul says: ^ Tim. 6.10
The desire of money, he says not simply (money) but the (desire) is the root
of all evil, which while some lusted after (he says lusted) they erred from
the faith. Again: They that will be rich, fall into temptation, and snares,
and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and
destruction. So that we see, it is the lust and will, and not the riches per
se, that does make us covetous men. Augustine says: August. in Sermon. 29.
Toll superbiam, and diuitiae non nocebunt, Take away pride and vaineglorie,
and then riches will not hurt. Non enim (says Theophilact) diuitiae nocent,
Theophil. in Luc. cap. 7.
sed solicitudines earum, Riches hurt not, but the carfulness of them.
Chrysostom also says: Chrisost in Epist. ad Phil. cap. 1.
Non est pauper, non est, inquam, qui nihil habet, sed qui multa concupiscit:
vicissim, non est dives qui multa possidet, sed qui nullius eget. etc. Voluntas
hominum and diuites faciunt and pauperes, non pecuniarum vel abundantia, vel
defectus, that is to say: He is not a poor man I say, that has nothing, but
he is a poor man that coueteth and lusts: Again, he is not rich that has
and enjoys much (goods) but he that coueteth no other man's (goods) etc.
the wills and desires of men makes rich and poor, Seneca.
not the want, or abundance of monye. Seneca says: Dives est, non qui magis
habet, sed qui minus cupit, He is rich, not that has much, but that coueteth
least. Therefore Saint Paul says: 1. Tim. 6.6.
Godliness is great gain, if a man be content with that he has. etc. Whereby
you see proved, that you and such others, are covetous men.


YOVTH. Well, let this pass, and let us come again unto our former talk. Is
it lawful for Christians to play at all, or not?


AGE. I have said to you my mind herein already, what need you to urge me so
often to tell you?


YOVTH. I will show you the reason why that I do ask you again.


AGE. What reason is there that so moves you to reiterate this so often?
Declare it.


YOVTH. I have often times heard and affirmed at the mouth of certain grave
learned Divines) that it is not lawful for any Christian man (professing the
faith and true religion of Christ Jesus) to play at any game or pastime at all.


AGE. Although in this point, I am not altogether of their judgment, yet no
doubt they seem to give reasons for it, but yet I must needs confess, these
reasons of theirs are sifted very deep, and very hard, and marvelous precise.


YOVTH. I pray you let me hear what their reasons are, that they seem to
persuade by.


AGE. Their reasons are these. Seeing (say they) that we must yield account to
God of the whole course of our life, and of each particular deed thereof, they
ask what account we are able to yield to God of the time that we leese in
play? And seeing (say they) that we must forbear every idle word that God
rebukes us for, Math 12 36.
yea, though it be neither oath nor blaspheming of the name of God, but only
because it is idle, and spoken to no purpose, 1. Cor. 19.32.
how then (say they) can we excuse our selves of all the idle time that we
spend in playing? We must do all (say they) that we do, be we great or
small, rich or poor, to the glory of God. And when we play, can we say
that therein we glorify God. Ephe 5.16.
Paul (say they) wills us to redeem the time, which we have lost in fond
and evil things when we were Idolaters, shall we think that it is lawful for
us to leese and spend the same in play, now when we are called to the glory
of God? It is sufficient for us (says Saint Peter) that we have spent the
time past of this life after the lust of the Gentiles, 1. Pet. 4.3.
walking in wantonness, lusts, drunkenness, in gluttony, drinking, and in
abominable Idolatries, to the end that the rest of the time that we shall
live in this flesh, we should live no more after the concupiscences of men,
but after the will of God. There are so many duties (say they) that God by his
word requires of us, so many means and holy exercises and occupations, to
bestow our selves either to the glory of God, or the profit of our neighbors,
at all hours both day and night, yea, though they were longer, and that every
day had eight and forty hours. But instead of bestowing our selves in holy
exercises, and better businesses, we spend away our time in playing,
therefore it is intolerable, and by no means lawful for any man that calls
himself a Christian, to play. There is the reading of the word of God, and
other good books, there is comforting the sick, visiting prisoners, relieuing
the nedy, and also the occupations that each man has in his estate and
particular calling: Math. 25.35-36.
all the which, with other like exercises, are express^lye commanded us by
the word of God, and we can scarce find in our hearts to do any of them,
and yet can we bestow (say they) so long time in playing. Certainly all these
things well considered, Amb. lib. 1. off^c. cap. 23^ etiam in Psalm. 118.
Chrisost. in Mat. hom. 6.
we cannot perceive (say they) how it should be seemly, or lawful for a
Christian to lose any time, be it never so little, in play. Saint Ambrose (say
they) does generallye condemn all kind of play. As also Saint Chrysostom.


YOVTH. I promise you they go very near.


AGE. Although they do, yet for my part I will not be so strait or
scrupulous. August. lib. 2. Musicae.
For I say with Saint Augustine, that it is the part of a wise man sometimes to
recreate himself, and rejoice the mind, that he may the better away with,
longer continue, and more chearefully return to his ordinary labor and
vocation. Ambr. lib. 1. offic. cap. 33.
S. Ambrose says: Licet interdum honesta ioca. etc. Honest pastimes are
sometime lawful.


YOVTH. I would very gladly hear your answers to their reasons which they
have made.


AGE. My answer is this: We must make distinction between the ordinary
things that a Christian is bound of necessity to do, and those things which
are permitted, and granted him by God for the refreshing and helping of his
infirmity, as to ease him when he is weary, to sleep after labor, and to
play after long pain. Ovid says: Quid caret alterna requie, durabile non est.
The thing cannot endure that lacks rest. And therefore the holy Scriptures
(which are the rule of good and evil) makes mention of playing, and allows
Christians so to do. Zachary says: Zacha 8.5,
And the streets of the city shall be full of boys and girls, playing in
the streets thereof. Also when Saint Paul says: 1. Cor. 10.31
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever else ye do, do all to the glory of
God. We may by this word, (whatsoever ye do) understand all honest
recreations, which certainly is as lawful and permitted to us, by reason of
our infirmttie, as is either eating, drinking, or sleeping, when we have need
thereof. And as our Lord Jesus Christ says: Marc. 2.27. Luc. 6.5. Math. 12.8.
That man is made for the glory of God, and therefore the Sabbath serves for
man, and not man for the Sabbath: so honest recreation is invented for man and
for his health, which makes us the better and more devout to serve God. Then
to play at honest games and pastimes, is a thing both indifferent and lawful,
and such as are left to Christian liberty, Gala. 12 13.
as Paul says: Brethren, ye have been called unto liberty: only use not
your liberty as occasion unto the flesh, but by love serve one another: which
thing must be observed in any wise. Nevertheless, I confess we ought not to
abuse (through too great pleasure which we take in them) no more than to abuse
any other thing of the like kind. In very deed it should seem too great a
cruelty to restrain wearied natures, ouertoyled bodies, that they neither
might or durst take some recreation. For although we ought to apply al and
every our doings to ye glory of God, and edifying and helping of our
neighbors, nevertheless when we take our honest recreation to maintain and
preserve our vigor and health, or to recover our strength, or to refreshe up
our spirits, that we may afterward the more cherefully and freshly go about
that business that God has called us unto, and do it the better. The same in
the end redoundeth to the glory of God, whom we shall by this means be more
able and ready to serve, and also to seek our neighbors furtherance and
profit. I do not then forbid or condemn all play, neither mislike that a
faithful Christian do sometimes play and sport himself, so that such play
and pastime be in lawful and honest things, and also done with moderation.


YOVTH. Then I perceive by you, that honest recreation, pastimes and plays are
tolerable unto men, and that they may use and frequent it without fault, or
offending God, or hurt to the profession of a true faithful Christian.


AGE. If it be, as I have said, moderately taken, for recreation sake, after
some weighty business, to make one more fresh and agilite, to prosecute his
good and godly affairs, and lawful business, I say to you again, he may
lawfullye do it: yet I would demand one thing of thee my son, if thou will answer me.


YOVTH. That I will. What is it, let me hear?


AGE. What weighty affairs and grave studies have you and your companions
been burdened withal? Has it been studying in your books, either in giving
counsel and advise for government of common wealths, or else in laboring and
toyling in your handie crafts and vocation, for the sustentation and
maintenance of your wives and family at home, that you should have such need
to consume this whole night for recreation, pastime, and vain plays?


YOVTH. I assure you good father Age, my study is not Divinity, for I have
small learning, Luc. 16.3. Prou. 20.4. Cap. 21.25. Cap. 22.13.
nor yet am I any Magistrate, or laboring manne: for in no wise can I labor,
I love not to hear of it, of any thing, much less to use it.


AGE. Your father has the more to answer for, who is commanded by Gods holy
word to have brought you up (as S. Paul says) in the discipline and doctrine
of the Lord. Deuteronomy. 6.7. Ephesians. 6.7. Eccles. 7.6. 2. Tim. 3.15.
S. Paul commends Timothy, that he had known the Scriptures of a child,
and commends him that he had learned the faith that was in him, 2. Tim. ^.5.
of his grandmother Lois, and his mother Eunice. Whereby appears their
diligence in bringing up Timothy in godly knowledge, learning, and
faythfulnesse in religion. Solon the Law maker among the Ithenians, Plutarch
made a law that the child (whose father never regarded to bring up his
son in any good learning or exercise) should not be bound to succor or
relieve his father in any respect, in what (...) he were in. Aristot^^.
Aristotle was demanded, what the learned differed from the unlearned:
answered, Qua viui a mortuis, As living men do differ from the dead. Diogenes.
Therefore Diogenes said well: Learning and good letters, to young men brings
sobriety: to old men comfort: to poor men riches: to rich men an ornament,
etc. Not without just cause did Chrysostom say: Fathers are loving to the
bodies of their children, but negligent and hateful to their souls. Which is
the cause that Ecclesiasticus says: Ec. 30.9.10
If thou bring up thy son delicately, he shall make thee afraid: if thou play
with him, he shall bring thee to heaviness. Laugh not with him, least thou be
sorry with him. etc. And where you say, you cannot labor, I tell you plainelye,
1. These. 3.10 Ephe. 4.28.
then are you not worthy to eat or drink. For he (says Saint Paul) that
will not labor, ought not to eat, that is to say, says a learned man, Nolite
istos otiosos alere, sed fame eos ad laborem cogite, Math. Flace. Illyricus in
2. These. cap. 3
Nourish not among you these idle loytering persons, but compel them with very
hunger to labor: whereby you may learn, Ephe. 4.28.
yt none ought to live ydelly, but should be given to some vocation or calling
to get his living withal, that he may do good unto others also. Thom. de
Aquino in 2. These. cap. 3.
Thomas de Aquine says: Quino^ habet exercitium, vel officij, vel studij, vel
lectionis, periculose viuunt otiosi, They that have no exercise, either of
office, study, or reading, these live daungerously that live ydellye.
Ecclesiasticus therefore says: Eccl. 33.26.
Send thy servant to labor, that he go not idle: for idleness brings much
evil. Cato.
Cato says: Homines nihil agende, discunt male agere, Men in doing nothing,
but be idle, do learn to do evil. Genes. 3.15.
Adam was put (by God) in Paradise, it is added, that he might dress it, and
keep it. Teaching us, that God would not have man idle, Genes. 3.19.
though as yet there was no need to labor. Also God said unto Adam (after
his fall:) In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat bread. Psalm. 128.2. Prou.
10.13.
David says: Thou shalt eat the labors of thine own hands. Solomon says:
A slothful hand makes poor, but the hand of the diligent makes rich.
You, and such as you are, esteem your selves happy and blessed which may live
in wealth and idleness. But the holy ghost (as you have heard) approves them
blessed yt live of the mean profit of their own labors. So that it
appears, of all things, idleness is most to be eschued and avoided of all
men (especially of those that profess the Gospel of Christ) because it is
the fountain and well spring whereout is drawn a thousand mischiefs: for it
is the only nourisher and mayntainer of all filthiness, as whoredom, theft,
murder, breaking of wedlock, perjury, Idolatry, Popery, etc. vain plays,
filthy pastimes, and drunkenness. Eccl. 32.26. Bullinger, in decad. 3. ser. 1
Th^ophila. in 1. Tim. cap. 1. Bonauent. in li. meditatione vit. Christ
Not without cause did Ecclesiasticus say, that idleness brings much evil.
Otium fuge vt pestem (says Bullinger) Flee idleness, as thou would flee
from the plague of pestilence. Otium enim omne malum edocuit, Idleness
teaches all evil and mischief. Bonauenture says: Otiositas magister nugarum
est, and nouerca virtutum, Idleness is the master of fables and lies, and the
stepdame of all virtue. So Ambrose says: Periculosa otia secura esse virtuti,
This secure idleness is most dangerous that can be to virtue. Therefore my
son do according to the old Proverb, Qui fugit molam, fugit farinam.

Solomon reproves such idle persons as you are, by sending them to the Ant,
Prove. 6.6. 7.8. Cap. 30.25.
saying: O sluggarde, go to the Ant, behold her ways, and be wise, for she
having no guide, governor, nor ruler, prepares her meat in the summer, and
gathers her food in the Harvest. Teaching hereby, that if the word of God
cannot instruct us, nor persuade us, yet we should learn at the little Ant,
to labor and provide for our selves, and not to burden others, as Saint Paul
says: 1. Tim. 5.8.
If there be any that provides not for his own, and namely for them of his
household, he denies the faith, Ephe. 4.28.
and is worse than an infidel. Again he says: Let him that stole, steal
no more: but let him rather labor and work with his hands the thing which is
good, that he may have to give unto him that needs. How is it then, that man
shameth not to live a trifling, and an idle loyterer, considering how
painfully and busilye the poor Ant toyleth in the Summer, gathering her
provision and store for the Winter, and also having such manifest precepts in
holy Scripture, to instruct him, as you hear of Saint Paul himself. Therefore
he put that precepte to avoid theft, to move the Ephesians to labor, for that
idleness makes one to consume his own goods and treasures, whereby comes
poverty, of that issues out deceyt, from thence comes theft: he adds a
reason why he should labor, not only to succor himself, but those also
that have need. He bids them simply to work, but says work that is good,
that is to say, that work and vocation which God has ordained and appointed,
which is good and profitable to men. (...)
A learned father says hereupon, Prohibens pratias ac inutiles arts, vt sunt
histrio^um, praestigiatorum, Mag^um, Astrologicae, and alia omnes diuinationes,
aliaeque curiosae (...) sorum generum: Forbidding (by Paul's words) evil and
unprofitable arts, as of Enterludes, Stage plays, Iugglings, and false
sleyghts, Witchcraftes, Speculations, Diuinations, or fortune tellings, and all
other vain and naughty curious kind of arts. Whereby we have to note, with
what kind of labor and exercise we ought to get our livings. For (...) it be
by these or such like ways and means, it is most detestable and abominable
before God and man, and cannot escape without great punishment, unless they
repent, and so turn from their wickedness.


YOVTH. Is there no remedy but that we must get our living with our own labor
and travel?


AGE. There is no remedy, for the Lord has commanded it, Job. 5.7. Psalm.
104.23. Act. 20.34. Ephe. 4.28. 1. Cor. 12.25 2. These. 3.8. 1. These. 4.12
and therefore it must be done, he has so decreed it, as Job says: A man is
borne to travel, as the sparks to flee upward. David says also: Man goes
forth to his work, and to his labor until the evening. Neither are we borne
to our selves only, but to others also. Plato says: Homines hominum causa
esse generatos, Plato.
Each man was borne and brought into this world for others sake, Cic. lib. 1.
de ^fficijs.
as one man to help another. Cicero says: Non nobis solum nati sumus,
ortusque nostri partem patria vindicat, partem amici. etc. We are not borne
and brought into this world, to our selves only, for own sake, but also for
others, for part of our birth and being, our country does challenge, and the
other part our parents and friends do require. For otherwise, Homo homini
lupus est, Gal. 5.35.
A man is a wolf to a man, that is, a deuourer one of another. Therefore let us
labor diligently in good exercises, that we may have to minister to the needy
brethren, remembering always what is said: It is a blessed thing to give,
rather than to receive. Act. 20.35.


Thus you may perceive throughlye how commendable the laboring man is, and
how detestable and odious the loyterers and idle persons are in any common
wealth: Centuria. 13. (...) 10. fo 1152
Otiosos and vagos solitus est appellare, fratres muscas, quod nihil facientes
boni, Idlers and wanderers were wont to be called Friars flies, which never do
any good. Teaching hereby that Popish friars were and are but ydlers and
loytering vagabondes, good for nothing, but even as flies fly abroad upon all
men's meat, to fill themselves of other men's travels: even so do they. For
they go ydelly a limiting abroad, living upon the sweat of other men's travels.
Against such idle Friars and Monks, Saint Augustine wrote a book, reproouing
earnestly their idle covetous life. etc. Seneca passing by a certain town
called Uacia, he saw a Citizen of Rome idle and loytering, said: Hic situs
est Vacia, Here lies or sits the filth and dung of Uacia. It was truly
said of one: Quod otium puluinar est Satanae, That Idleness is Satan's
fetherbed and pillowe that he lays all ydlers and loyterers to sleep upon.
The Prophet Ezechiell says, Ezec. 16.49
it was one of the sins of Sodom, for which God plagued them, saying: This
was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, pride, fullness of bread, and
abundaunce of idleness was in her. etc. Saint Paul also reproves a sort of
young widows which were in his time, and lived ydelly, saying: Refuse the
younger widows, 1. Tim. 5.13.
for they being idle, have learned to go about from house to house, yea they
are not only idle, but also pratlers and busy bodies, speaking things which
are not comely. Here may you see what mischiefs ensue of idleness, both in
men and women.

In old time (we read) that there was usually carried before the maid when
she should be married, Plin. lib. 8. Cap. 40.
and came to dwell in her husbands house, Pro. ^1.10.11.12.13.
a distaffe charged with flare, and a spyndle hanging at it, to the intent
she might be myndefull to live by her labor. Plutarch.
Also among the Romans, when any maid should be married, it was always
solemnized upon the working day, to teach what they must do. etc. Likewise
they were wont in old time, to have painted Snayles in their houses, to teach
them thereby always to keep home within their own house, and to see her
servants labor in their business duly and truly, for the avoiding of
idleness, ^. Cor 14.35
the mother of all other vices. Saint Hierome counsayled the maid Demetrias to
eschew idleness. And therefore when she had made an end of her prayers, he
willed her to go in hand with wool and weauing, that by such change of works
the days seem not long. He did her not to work, for that she was in any
poverty (being one of the noblest women in Rome) but that by such occasion of
working, she should put out of her mind foolish and filthy imaginations and
fantasies. A certain woman of Lacedemon taken prisoner in war, was asked
what she could do: I can (says she) rule an house. So Aristotle says: That
in keeping of an house, it is the man's part to get, and the woman's to keep.
But if she be spending and wastfull, prodigal and idle, Ecclesiasticus
counsel must be followed, where he says: Eccl. 42.6.
Set a good lock where an evil wife is, and to lock where many hands are.
Otiositas ommum vitiorum magistra atque origo est, Idleness (says
Chrysostom) is the mystres and beginning of all vice and wickedness. Cato
says: Segnitiem fugito, qua vita ignauia fertur, Nam cu^m animus languet,
consumet inertia corpus, as if he should say: A slothful and idle life is to
be fled, for when the mind is unlusty, then idleness consumes the body.

Idleness most delectable to the flesh, which deliteth above measure in
sloth, lithernesse, ceasing from occupation, sluggishnesse, and heaviness of
mind, and it has a desire to be doing of nothing, and to be void of all care
and business. Yea, and this remember my son Youth, that filthy lusts are
chieflye nourished by excess and idleness, for thereof is the fire brande
kindled, and thereof is the oil poured in and ministered so abundantly, as not
without cause that learned father Peter Martyr said: Quamuis autem otium alat
alioqui multa mala, P. Martyr^m comment in 2. lib. Sam. cap. 11.
nihil tamen aut facilius aut magis alit, quam lihidinem, that is: Although
idleness otherwise nourishes many evils, notwithstanding the nourishes
nothing more easy than sensuality, and unlawful lust (of whoredom) therefore
was it said of that witty Poet: Quaeritur Aegisthus quare sit factus Adulter.
^^id.

In promptu causa est: desidiosus erat.
That is: It is asked wherefore Egisthus was Adulter made:
The cause is plain, and quickly known: since he with sloth was cladde.



YOVTH. I perceive the blind eats many a fly. For as Christ says: Ioh.
12.35.
He that walks in the dark, knows not whither he goes. And Saint Paul
said, that he knew not lust had been sin, Romans 7.7.
except the Law had said: Thou shalt not lust. Even so may I say, that I had
not known that Idleness had been such a detestable sin as it is, except God
had opened this to me by the means of you. Nor yet that Satan thereby uses to
seduce and bring us from all virtue to vice, from faith to infidelity,
according as Ecclesiasticus says: Eccl. 33.26.
Idleness brings much evil: And as the saying of old has been: Otia dant
vitia.


AGE. It is the way and practice that Satan uses to steal into our hearts,
Math. 13.25
that he may possess us, as Christ says: While man slept, there came his
enemy (Satan) and sowed tares among the wheat. Psalm. 132.3.4.5.
etc. As we see in king David: when he was young, he exercised himself in
preparing a house for the Lord, and said: I will not enter into the
tabernacle of mine house, nor come upon my bed: nor suffer mine eyes to
sleep, nor mine eye lyddes to slumber, until I find out a place for the
Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob. After, when he began to be
idle, it is said in the book of Samuel, that David went not up with Ioab
his Captain, 2. Sam. 22.^.^.30
but sent him, and all his servants with him, against the children of Ammon, to
besiege Rabbath. But (says the text) David remained in Jerusalem, and fell to
lie ydelly upon his bed at noone, or evening tide, and rose up and walked
upon the roof of his palace, and from the roof he saw Bethsheba, Uriah the
Hittites wife washing of her self, and she was beautiful to look upon. etc.
and David sent for her, and she came unto him, and he lay with her, and gate
her with child. etc. By this example you may see the dangerous falls that
Gods children fall into by this detestable vice of idleness. And therefore
that old saying by you alleged, is most true, Otia dant vitia, Idleness
brings and gathers (wheresoever she enters) all manner vices and wicked
sins. Ambrose has a pretty apt similitude to set forth the nature of Satan
unto us, and also his sleightes and crafty practices to deceive us, to the
end we thereby may the better avoid his subtilties.


YOVTH. I pray you good father Age, declare it to me, that I may learn
somewhat thereby to avoid that wicked enemy.


AGE. Ambros. in Hexameron ^ib. 5. cap. 8.
The similitude is of a Crabbe, and of an Oyster, as thus: The Crab (says
Ambrose) deliteth very much to eat of the meat of Oysters, but for that they
(Oysters) are so strongly and well fenced with two hard shelles, which he
cannot break by strength, therefore he wayteth diligently to bring the Oysters
out of the water, into the hot sun. Whiles the Oysters open with the sun,
and with the air and wind, the Crab presently puts a little stone into the
Oyster as he gapeth, whereby he cannot close or bring together again his
shelles, then afterward the Crab without danger puts in his claws, and
deuoureth the flesh at his pleasure. Even so (says he) when men are given to
idleness, and open their minds unto pleasures, the Devil comes, and
casts into our minds and hearts, filthy cogitations, in such sort, that our
shell which before did defend us, cannot be drawn close together again, then
full easily does he devour us clean.


YOVTH. I promise you this is a proper similie very aptly applied by S.
Ambrose, yet I pray you let me a little further trouble you about this matter of
idleness.


AGE. It shall be no trouble to me, say on in the name of God, what you have
to demand, and I will answer you as God shall give me leave and knowledge.


YOVTH. You have hertofore mightily beaten down all idleness, affirming also
that God detesteth it, and yet by your patience) I do read in the Law, that
God himself commands us to be idle, Exo. 20.^0.
saying (in the fourth commandment) The seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord
thy God: in it thou shall do no manner o^ work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy
daughter, nor thy man servant, nor thy maid, nor thy beast, nor the stranger
that is within thy gates. etc. Whereby it appears that the Lord allows of
idleness. etc.


AGE. You must learn to distinguish this word (Idleness) as Saint Augustine
teaches you, A^gust, de v^ra religion ne. Cap. 35.
saying: Est otium desidiae, and otium cogitationis, that is: There is
idleness of sitting still, and there is idleness of meditations. Uerye well
noted also was it of Brentius, ^rentius in Luc. Cap. 9. Homil. 85.
saying: Est otium ignauum, quo inertes parant se non ad negotia, sed ad
delicias and voluptates. Est otium h^nes^um and ne^essariu^, quo boni viri
reddunt sese aptiores ad negotia and vocationes suas sectandas. Tale otium non
solum suasit, sed mandauit Deus in lege, dum instituit Sabbatum, and iuber in
co non hominem tantum, verumetiam iuuenta quiescere. Otiemur non ad luxum, quod
impij and ignaui solent, sed ad pietatem. etc. That is: There is a beastly and
slothful idleness, which idle persons get to themselves, not for labors, but
for pleasures and delites. There is also an honest and a necessary idleness,
whereby good men are made more apt and ready to do their labors and vocations
whereunto they are called. This kind of idleness, God does not only
persuade, but also commands it in his law, in that he appointed the Sabbath
day, and commanded that in it, not only manne should rest, but the beasts
also. Let us then be idle, not for carnal pleasures, as the wicked and
ungodly are wont, but for godliness and virtues sake. etc. Master Bullinger
also says: Sabbatum a Deo institutum est, Bullinger. ^ lerem. ca. ^^
non propter otium per se. Otium enim Deus nuspiam per se approbat: proinde
otium Sabbati commendantur propter aliud, nimirum propter diligens religionis
studium: ideo enim feriandum praecipitur a laboribus manurijs, vt hoc totum
tempus impendamus exercitio religionis, that is: The Sabbath day was appointed
of God, not for Idleness simplye. Idleness of it self is no where allowed of
God: therefore the idleness of the Sabbath day was commended for another
purpose, that is, for the study and diligent desire of religion. Therefore he
commanded to rest from our handie labors, that we might bestow all that time
in the exercise of religion. It is likewise in the very same commandment
said: Exo. 20.11.
that God rested the seventh day etc. Shall we conclude with the heretics,
that God sits ydelly in heaven, and has no care of his creatures by his
heavenly providence, now he has once created them? (God forbid.) This rest of
God (as the Scripture testifies, was a creatione, sed non a gubernatione, it
was from creating, but not from governing and ordering them. For he does
always by his power sustain them, by his providence govern and rule them,
and by his goodness nourishe them. We must rest therefore from handie and
bodily works, but we must not cease from such works as pertain unto the true
worshipping of God. This service among the fathers, were used in iiij. things,
that is. First in reading, interpreting, and hearing of Scriptures. Secondly,
in prayers public and private, in celebrating and receiving of Sacraments.
Thirdly, in collecting and gathering for the poor and indigent. Acts. 11.29.
1. Cor. 16.2.
Fourthly, in visiting and distributing to the poor, and making of peace and
unity among neighbors where any controversy was.


YOVTH. Then I perceive we must refrain from all other labors upon the Sabbath
(except those which you have specified) and so of necessity we ought not to
use any labor or work what need or necessity soever there should be.


AGE. You must note that the Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the
Sabbath, Math. 12.8. Luc. 6.6. Marc. 3.1.
and therefore is the son of man Lord over the Sabbath. The Sabbath was
instituted of God to conserve man, and not to destroy man, and therefore the
Sabbath is to be dispensed withal, as often as it shall be through our
necessity, safety, or health, so required. Of the which thing our Savior
Christ disputes in Matthew and Luke, Luc. 6.9. Marc. 3.4.
for in such things the liberty of the Christians does consist. And whereas the
Priests and Levites were exercised openly in slaying of beasts in the Temple,
Romans 14.6.
scumming, seething, and burning them, prepared for their sacrifices, Number. 28.9.
and were not counted guilty of the breach of the Sabbath day. Mat. 12.5.
In like sort it shall be lawful to prepare meat for our need on the Sabbath
day, 1. Macha. 2.40.41.
and to feed the body. Mattathius thought it had not been lawful to fight
upon the Sabbath day: but when he considered the end of the Sabbath, how it
was ordained to preserve, and not to destroy, willed all men to make battle
upon the Sabbath day, because they might not die all of them as their brethren
did which were murdered by their enemies. Luc. 6.9. Math. 12.11. Luc. 13.15.
So it is lawful upon the Sabbath day, to heal the sick, to visit the sick
and prisoners, to succor the needy, to fight in defense, that we may preserve
the creature of God. If it be lawful (as Christ says) to draw a beast out
of a ditch or mire on the Sabbath day, why is it not lawful on the Sabbath
day to save a house that is ready to fall, or a burning, or to moore a ship
faster that is ready to run against the rocks? Why is it not lawful on the
Sabbath day to gather together corn or hay which has layne abroad a long
time, and to save it, least it should through the injury and force of the
weather, and hie floudes and springs of waters, be utterly destroyed?


YOVTH. If it be so, Number. 15.32.35.30. Exo. 31.13.14.
as you have said, why then did Moses and Aaron command the congregation to
stone to death that man that was found gathering sticks upon the Sabbath day?
Iere. 17.21.
And why does God threaten such plagues on those that carry any burden on the
Sabbath day?


AGE. In that he was stoned to death, was not simplye for gathering of sticks,
or that he did this of necessity, or of ignorance and simplicity (as some
suppose) but for that he did it of set purpose, consumeliously, obstinately,
and stubbornely did break and violate this commaudement of God: Or as it
were in spite of Moses Gods magistrate, would do this in the open face of all
people, teaching others (by his example) to do the like, therefore Moses
commanded to stone him to death according to the law. Number. 15.24
For if he had done it of ignorance, necessity, and simplicity, then should
not he have died (as it is expressed in the very same chapter) but certain
burnt offerings had been offered to the Lord for him. Leui. 4.17.
etc. But (says the Law) if any person does presumptuously despise the
word of the Lord, and break his commandments, he shall be utterly cut off
from among the people. etc. Whereby you may perceive that he was put to death
for his contempt against the Lord. And for that cause Lyra^ supposes this man
was first kept in prison, (...) in N^om cap. 15. in Olo. ordi.
until it was tried out whether he did it contemptuously or ignorantly. And
for that God says: Exodus* 31.14
(He that defiles the Sabbath, shall die the death. etc.) It was repeated of
God, for a special point, teaching hereby, that the whole keeping of the law
stands in the true use of the Sabbath, which is, to cease from our works,
and to obey the will of God. For the observation of the Sabbath does extend as
well unto the faith we have in God, as unto the charity of our neighbors.
Also by this example we see the authority of the magistrate, how it is not
only to punish matters and faults committed against the second table:
Cal^inus in Exodus cap. 15
but also for faults and trespasses committed against the first table, for
matters touching religion. August. con^^^ Crescen.
So S. Augustine says: In hoc Reges sicut eis diuinitus praecipitur Deo
seruiunt in quantum Reges sunt, si in suo regno bona iubeant, mala prohibeant,
non solum quae partinent ad humanam societatem, verum etiam quae ad diuinam
religionem, that is: In this Kings, as it is commanded them of God, do serve
God as Kings, if in their kingdom they command good things, and forbid evil
things, not only those things which pertayne to human society, Dani. 3.29.
but also to all godly religion. Some read of Nabuchodonosor, how he served
God, when he forbad by a terrible law, all men dwelling in his kingdom, from
blaspheming God. So likewise we may read of that godly king Ezechias, 2. Reg.
18.4
how he destroyed the temple of the Idols. etc. Whereby we see that Princes may
lawfully deal in matters of religion, Deute. 13.5.
and also may lawfully put to death open and obstinate Papists and heretics,
that hold any false doctrine manifestly against the word and commandment of
God. Mat. 13.30.
Whereas Christ says: Let both the tares and wheat grow together until the
Harvest. Beza de pu^ nied. haret.
etc. appertains nothing unto the Magistrate, but unto the Minister only.
etc. As for the place of Jeremy, Iere. 17.22*
you shall note, that he goes about to show the Jews the right keeping of
the Law. For by naming the Sabbath day, he comprehends the thing that is
thereby signified: for if they transgressed in the ceremony, they must needs
be culpable of the rest, which is meditating the spiritual Sabbath or rest,
hearing of Gods word, and resting from worldly travels. And does also declare,
that by the breaking of this one commandment, he makes them transgressors of
the whole law, forasmuch as the first and second table are therein contained,
that is, as I have said before, faith toward God, and charity toward our
neyghbors: Nehe. 13.15.
and not for our own fantasy, gain, and pleasure, we should go about our
own business, and leave our duty toward God, and give our selves to al manner
idleness, and Ethnicall sportes and pastimes, as is now used too much
amongst us. That day is most holy, in the which we must apply and give our
selves unto holy works and spiritual meditations. Nehe. 8.1.2.3.4.5.
For if we do but rest (in the Sabbath day) from the works of the body, then
do we take yt like rest as beasts do, and not as the faithful do. Hieronym.
Epist. 17.
Saint Hierome to this says: Non sufficit a malis esse otiosum, si quu fuerit
a bonis otiosus, It is not enough for man to rest and cease from evil things,
if a man be idle from good things. Likewise Saint Augustine says: Quod in otio
non debet esse iners vacatio, sed aus inquisitio veritatis, aut inuentio, that
is: In idleness sluggish rest ought to be away, and when he is at rest, there
ought to be either inquisitio^ of the truth, or invention of the same.


YOVTH. What does this word Sabbath signify?


AGE. It signifies in Hebrew, quietness or rest.


YOVTH. How many Sabboths are there?


AGE. Three. The first is corporal: to cease from our bodily labors. Second
is spiritual: to cease from our sin. Third is heavenly: Esaias. 66.23 ^.
(...) 2.^. Reave. 14.13 ca. 2.2.3.4.^
that is after this our pilgrimage, and end of our life, we shall keep our
Sabbath and rest in heaven with Jesus Christ for ever and ever.


YOVTH. You have throughlye satisfied me in this point, I thank you good Father
for it. Yet I pray you let me understand what Christ means by saying in S.
Mathewe, Mat. 12.36.
that of every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account
thereof at the day of judgment.


AGE. That is a sharp saying and a true, if we shall give account for every
idle word (O Lord be merciful to us) what shall we do then for our idle and
sinful works. By these idle words, (...) in Math 12.
Saint Hierome understands all that is spoken without profit to the hearers,
letting pass good and gracious talk, and speak of frivolous vain things,
full of scurrilitie and baudrie. Bulling. in Math. 12.
etc. Master Bullinger says: Hereby is forbidden all lies, vanities, and
whatsoever springs of the affections of the flesh. Master Musculus says:
M^s^^l in Math. 12.
That Christ hereby declares, that we shall not give accountes to God only
for deeds, but also for wicked words, not only for vain words, but for
idle words: it for idle words, what for hurtful words? what for lyings? what
for slaunderings? what for cursings? what for leastings and mockings? what for
periuries, shall be done hereafter to those at the day of judgment? Psalm.
^39.4.
We see hereby, that there is not a word in our tongue, but the Lord knows
them wholly altogether. Not without great cause therefore did David pray unto
the Lord, Psalm. 141.3.
that he would set a watch before his mouth, to keep the door of his lips.
1. Cor. 15.33
Because (says Paul) evil speakings corrupt good manners. Ephe. 5.3.4
Saint Paul says: that fornication and all uncleanness or covetousness must
not be once named among us, as it becomes Saints. Neither filthiness,
neither foolish talking, neither ^easting, which are things not comelye, but
rather giving of thanks. Collo. 4.6. Ephe. 4.29
Let your speech be gracious always, poudred with salt. He says also: Let no
corrupt communication proceed out of your mouths, but which is good to the
use of edifying, that it may minister grace to the hearers: In fine therefore
he concludes to the Colossians, Collo. 3.17.
thus: Whatsoever ye shall do, in word or deed, do all in the name of the
Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God even the father by him. August. ad fraires in
Erem. ser. 3.
O quam sanctum est os, vnde semper coelestia erumpunt eloquia, O (says
Augustine) how holy is that mouth wherrout comes always heavenly speeches.
Let them take heed therefore which speak what they list, Psalm. 12.4. Psalm.
12.3.
saying with the wicked in the Psalm: With our tongue we will prevail, our
lips are our own, who is Lord over us? But (says the Prophet) the Lord
will cut off all flattering lips, Psalm. 120.3. Iam. 3.9.6.7 Prou. 18.22. Ecc.
5.24.15
and the tongue that speaks proud things. David asks, what the deceitful
tongue brings unto himself? or what does it avail him? Solomon says: that
life and death are in the power of the tongue, and they that love it, shall
eat the fruit thereof.


YOVTH. Is it not lawful then to use any kind of ieasting or merry talk, when
companies are gathered together to make them merry withal?


AGE. Yes, Collo. 3.^7.
so that your talk and ieasting be not to the disglorie of Gods name, or hurt
to your neighbor, you may. For there are diverse examples in the Scriptures of
pleasant talk, which is also godly, 1. Reg. 18.27 Esa. 44.11.12. Baruc. 6.13
14.15.16.17.18.19.20. 2. Cor. 12.23.
as Eliah ^easted with Baals Prophets, saying: Cry loud, for he (meaning
Baall the Idol) is a God, either he talks or pursues his enemies, or is in
his journey, or it may be that he sleeps, and must be awaked. etc. When
honest jesting (to good honest ends) be used, it is tolerable. Therefore
Paul says not simplye (I^asting) but adds, which are things not comely,
meaning ieasting that is full of scurrilitie and filthiness.


YOVTH. Well, let this pass, and let us come again to our talk that we had
before, which was, that you went about to drive me to labor for my living,
and that every man should walk in his vocation, to get his bread in the
sweat of his face. Well, I tell you plain, Plays must be had, and we will
have them, say you to the contrary what you list.


AGE. Solomon says: Prou. 21.17. Cap. 20.^^.
He that loves pastimes, shall be a poor man. Eccle. 10.18.
etc. Again he says: By slothfulness the roof of the house goes to decay,
Prou. 10.4.
and by the idleness of the hands, the house droppeth through: again, a
diligent hand makes rich, but a slothful hand makes poor. Prou. 12.11.
He that tilleth his land, shall be satisfied with bread: but he that
follows the idle, is destitute of defense. etc.


YOVTH. Math. 6.25. 16.28.
And it please you sir, Christ bids us not to be careful for our lives,
what we shall eat and drink, and says that the Lillies of the field labor
not, neither spinne, yet Solomon was never arrayed like unto them. And also
that the birds do not sow, reap, nor carry into the barn. etc. We are
bidden also not to care for to morrow, for the morrow shall care for it self,
the day has enough with his own grief. etc. By this I do gather, ^. Pet.
5.7.
that labor is not so necessary, or that we should have any care, but to
cast all our care upon the Lord, for he cares for us. And therefore what need
we to labor?


AGE. Christ does not here clearly forbid all kind of care, but only that
which comes of a diffidence and mystruste in Gods providence. You must
consider, that there are two sorts of cares. First is that which is joined
with faith, by honest labor to provide for his family things honest and
necessary. For otherwise (says Saint Paul) he denies the faith, ^. Tim. 5.8.
and is worse than an infidel. The second is that, which rises of doubt or
despair, of an Epicuriall care and mistrust in the Lord, and this kind of
care is here by Christ reproved. For Christ's words teach us, that God will
provide for every day, that that shall be necessary, though we do not
increase the present grief thereof by the carfulness how to live in time to
come. And here you must note and mark, that Christ our Savior does not say:
Labor not for meat and drink, but be not careful (says he:) he does not
prohibit or forbid labor, but Heathenishe and an Epicuriall carfulness:
Musculus in Gene. cap. 26.
Verum incrementum Dei non datur otiosis, sed operantibus ac seminantibus, God
gives not increase to ydlers, but to them that work and sow. 1. These. 4.11
12. 2. These. 3.12
etc. So Saint Paul says: ^nusquisque manibus suis laboret, vt habeat and
vnde des necessitatem indigenti. etc. Let every manne labor and work with his
hands, that he may have wherewithal to give them that suffer need. And if
your reason did hold true, then we should need never to pray for our
necessities. Math. 6.8. Math. 6.3^.
For that Christ says: Your heavenly father knows what need we have before
we ask. Again, be not careful what you shall eat or drink. etc. Shall we
therefore conclude hereupon, that we must not pray or care little or nothing
what we eat or drink, whether it be poison, carrion, or any unwholesome
thing. No man is so foolish, I now, so to do. And as for the birds that do
not sow or reap, and the Lillies that labor not, neither spinne. etc.
Although I may say to you, Legibus enim viuimus, non exemplis, We live by
laws, and not by examples. Yet S. Augustine shall answer you in this point,
(who having just occasion to reprove certain idle Monks that were in his
days, which would not labor for their living, as they ought to do, but
took occasion (as you do) by the example of the birds of heaven, and Lillies
of the field, to be altogether idle from any labor or good exercise of their
bodies, or handy occupations, learning thereby to live like the idle Dumble Be
in the hyue, upon the sweat and travels of other men's labors.) Si vultis
(inquit) imitari volucres and Lilia, August. de-opere Mon. cap. 23.
cur haec quoque illa non imitamini? Lilia non comedunt aut bibunt: aues non
recondunt in crastinum, neque congregant in apothecas: neque molunt and
coquu^t, at vos editis and bibitis, and studiose reconditis, that is: If you
will imitate and follow the example of the birds and Lillies (not to labor,)
wherefore do you not imitate them also in this point? the Lillies neither
eat nor drink: the birds do not lay up against the morrow, neither gather
together into the Sellers: neither do they grind corn, sees, or boil
meat, yet you do eat and drink, and are careful and diligent to lay up in
store, you do grynde corn, Ibidem.
and sees and boil meat (for your use) Hoc enim aves non faciunt, this the
birds (and Lilies) do not, says Augustine. S. Chrysostom says: Chrisost.
in Math. cap. 6. homil. 25.
Non dixit, nolite laborare, sed nolite solliciti esse. Ergo sollicitiesse
vetamur, laborare aute^iubemur. Sic enim Dominus loquens ad Adam: non dixit,
cum sollicitudine facies tibi panem, sed cum labor and sudore faciei tuae:
Ergo non solicitudinibus spiritualibus, sed laboribus corporalibus acquirendus
est panis: Sicut laborantibus enim pro praemio diligentiae, Deo praestante,
panis abundat: sic dormientibus and negligentibus, pro poena negligentiae,
Desfaciente, subducitur. etc. That is: the Lord did not say, labor not, but
be ye not careful. Therefore we are forbidden to be careful, but we are
commanded to labor, so the Lord said unto Adam: he said not to him with
carfulness thou shall get thy bread, but with the labor and sweat of thy
face. Therefore not with spiritual carfulness, but with corporal labors
our bread is to be gotten, 2. Tim. 2.6.
as to the laborers for the reward of their diligence (by the blessing and
help of God) their bread increases: so to the slothful and negligent, 2.
Pet. 2.13. Prove. 12.11.
for the punishment of their slothfulness and idleness, God sends them
penury and want. etc. Now my son, you have heard by Gods word, and the
ancient Fathers, what you ought to do, therefore learn you first to seek the
kingdom of God and his righteousness, Math. 6.33. Deuteronomy. 28.1.2.3.4.5. James.
1.18.
and all these other things shall be ministered unto you: that is, apply the
hearing of Gods word, and amend your life, for God of his own will begat us
with the word of truth, that we should be the first fruits of his creatures.
Romans 12.7.8 Math. 5.16. ^. Pet. 2.12. Lu. 1.7 4.75
And also to learn to walk in that vocation, whereunto every man is called,
as God may be glorified, the poor members of Christ comforted, and our
selves saved.


YOVTH. By this your long discourse against idleness, it seems to me, that
you do condemn hereby, all Princes, Noble men, Magistrates, Preachers,
Scholemaisters. etc. for they labor not, nor have any handie craft to get their
living withal.


AGE. To. 13.1.2.3. 1. Cor. 12.28 Ephe. 4.28. Romans 12.4.5.7.8. 1. Cor, 12.11.
1. Timo. 2 2. Acts. 2.28. 1. Pet. 5*2. 1. Tim. 5.17.
You must note, that there are two sorts of labors: One is, of the mind and
wit: the other, of the hands and body. And so the Prince, Rulers, Magistrates,
Preachers, Counsaylers, etc. in their vocation and calling, labors (with
great study, and industry of mind and wit) for the promoting of Gods
glory, the good government and state of the Common wealth, teaching and
preaching to the ignorant people, to keep men in peace and tranquillity, for
you must not think, that they labor not, Eccle 17.15. 1. Cor. 12.14. 1. Pet.
2.13. 1. Tim. 2.2. Ephe. 4.11. 1. Cor. 12.28 Ec. 38.32.3^
which do not labor at the Plowe, Cart, or otherwise with their hands: for
the eternal God has appointed and divided his Church militant, for these
foresaid causes into four parts. First, into Principality. Second, into
Nobility. Third, into Pastoralitie. Fourthly, into Vulgaritie. So that every
member has his office and calling, not to be idle, but always diligent and
laboursome in their vocations accordingly: therefore whatsoever the diversity
is, yet the profit is common, and serves to the edification of the Church. So
that it appears, it is no small carke and care that Princes, Rulers,
Pastors. etc. have and take continuallye, watching when others sleep,
according to this saying: Non decet integram noctem dormire regentem. Inurna^

Whom God has placed to rule aright,
Ought not to sleep a full whole night.


Notwithstanding, yet we read in ancient hystories, that excellent men in
old time (when as they had gotten any vacant or leisure time, Eccl. 4.20
either from holy service, or from civil matters) they spent all that leisure
time, either about husbandry, or about the art of a shepehearde. For they
would not consume the time away in idleness, sumptuousness, gluttony,
drunkenness, and vain pastimes and plays. Judge. 6.11. Act. 20.34, Ioh.
21.2. 1. These. 3.^^
And this shall we not only see in Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Gedeon. etc. and
other holy fathers and Apostles of Christ Jesus. etc. but also it manifestlye
appears by the Roman hystories, wherein appears that Curious and Seranus
and such like, were elected chief Magistrates, when they were in the fields
at plough tilling the ground. It is also written that AEerxes king of Persia,
in vacant time from the affairs of his Realm, he with his own hands would
plant innumerable trees, which long ere he died, brought forth abundance of
fruit. etc. If such men would spend no time ydelly, how much less should
meaner persons do it. Eccle. 22.^ Cap. 33^^
For as the wise man says: A slothful man is to be compared to the dung of
Oxen. etc. For idleness brings much evil.


YOVTH. I pray you show what is idleness, and also whether idleness, be
called idleness, only in respect that the mind or body cease from labor.


AGE. Alexander part. 2. quest. ^16. mem. 2.
Idleness is a wicked will given to rest and slothfulness, from all right,
necessary, godly, and profitable works, etc. Also idleness is not only of
the body or mind to cease from labor, but especially an omission or letting
pass negligentlye all honest exercises: for no day ought to be passed over
without some good profitable exercises, to the praise of Gods glorious name, to
our brethrens profit, and to our selves commodity and learning.


YOVTH. Was there ever any laws made against this kind of idle life, and
sharp punishment appointed for such idle persons? I pray you let me know it,
if there were or be any.


AGE. Alexand. Seuerus.
Yes: There has been laws and punishment from time to time appointed and
ordained for such. Alexander the emperor says: Forasmuch as idleness, that
is to say (says he) ceasing from necessary occupations or studies, is the
sink which receives all the stinking channels of vice, which once being
brymfull, suddenly runs over, through the whole City, and with his
pestiferous air infecteth a great multitude of people, ere it may be stopped
and cleansed. And that notwithstanding, the people being once corrupted and
infected with this pestilence, shall with great difficulty, and with long tract
of time be delivered. And therefore he made a law: That if any one of the
people had been found idle, by the space of one whole day, he should be
whipped, and after by the Conseruatours committed to some one Craft that he
was of, and for every day that he was scene to be idle, the person to whom he
was committed, should (for a Months space) set him to any labor that he
pleased, as his slave and bondsman, and that no man should give him meat, or to
talk with him, unless it were to chyde and rebuke him.

Draco.
Draco the Lawmaker among the Athenians, made a law, that whosoever was found
an idle person, should have his head cut off from his body.

Areopagite did also use great diligence to search out what art or science
every manne had to find himself withal, Areopagite^
and those whom he found to be idle, he did sharpelye punish them.

The Massyliens would suffer, nor receive any manne to dwell within their
City, Massyliens.
that had not some Art and faculty to get his living withal. For (say they)
Nullam vrbibus pestem nocentiorem esse otio, There is no worse pestilence to a
city than idleness. etc. According as Syrach says: A slothful man is to be
compared to the dung of Oxen, Eccl. 22.1.2
and every one that takes it up, will shake it out of his hand: he is like a
filthy stone, which every man mocketh at for his shame.

Queen Elizabeth in the xiiij. and xviij. years of her gracious reygne, Queen
E.8. an. 14. and. ^8
two Acts were made for idle vagrant and maisterlesse persons, that used to
loyter, and would not work, should for the first offense have a hole burned
through the gristle of one of his cares of an ynche compass. And for the
second offense committed therein, to be hanged.

If these and such like laws were executed iustlye, truly, and severely (as
they ought to be) without any respect of persons, favor or friendship, this
dung and filth of idleness would easily be rejected and cast out of this
Common wealth, there would not be so many loytering idle persons, so many
Russians, Blasphemers, and Swinge Buckelers, so many Drunkardes, Tossepottes,
Whooremaisters, Dauncers, Fydlers, and Minstrels, Diceplayers, and Maskers,
Fencers, Thieves, Interlude players* Cutpurses, Cosiners, Maisterlesse
servants, Iugglers, Roges, sturdye Beggars, counterfaite Egyptians. etc. as
there are, nor yet so many Plagues to be amongst us as there are, if these
dunghilles and filthe in Commonweals, were removed, looked unto, and clean
cast out, by the industry, pain, and travel of those that are set in
authority, and have gouernemente. So Moses says: That they must take the
evil away forth of the mids of the City. Deuteronomy. 13.5.
So says Publianus, Bonis nocet, quisquis pepercerit malis, He is very
hurtful to the good men, whosoever favors and spares the evil men.
Therefore they must execute justice, as well upon the proper man that is idle,
as upon the poor man, as well upon one, as upon another, that it may not be
said: Dat veniam coruis, vexat censura columbas.
Crabrones abeunt, recidunt in retia musc^.
What faults great men always commit,
Are pardoned still, and goes quitte.
When as the poor and simple band,
Are vexed cruelly in the land.
Because Hornets are very great,
They easily pass through the net,
When as the silly little fly,
Is taken therein continuallye.



YOVTH. I am very glad (I praise God) that I have had this talk and
communication with you, good Father, I perceive that nothing is to be had or
gotten in absenting from Sermons, but euilnesse and loss of good doctrine and
instructions, which I have done through vain idle pastimes and plays. For
now (by you) I understand, that of idleness comes no goodness, but rather
the contrary, etc. Also I see and learn that every man (in his calling) ought
to labor and get his living in the fear of God, and sweat of his brows. And
therefore I will henceforth (God willing) speak no more against the word of
truth, but will be ashamed of the lies of mine own ignorance, Ec. 4 24.26
Dani. 9.^.6.7.8.9.10. Lu. 15.18.19.
I will not therefore be ashamed to confess my sins, and will no more resist
the course of the river.


AGE. I am glad to hear this of you, that you are so reclaimed, and are not
ashamed to confess your lewd life, Romans 8.26
which is a token that Gods spirit is in you. For as you confess: we ought
(every man in his calling) to do good: for in doing nothing, we learn to do
evil, Ephe. 4.23.
so that you now flee from that vain idle life, which before you have lived,
1. Pet. 4.3.
and spent a great time therein (notwithstanding, Nunquam serum est, Cyprianus.
quod verum est, that is: Never to late done, which is truly done) that will
come to pass that Ovid says: Otia si tollas, Ovid.
periere Cupidinis areus.
If thou flee idleness, Cupid has no might:
His bow lies broken, his fire has no light.



YOVTH. By what means shall I frame my self hereunto, and to redress my
former ways, and naughty idle plays and pastimes, and also my wily wanton
life, which will be hard for me to bridle, according to that saying of
Euripides. What custom we in tender youth, Euripides
by natures lore receive:
The same we love, and like always, and loathe our lust to leave.



AGE. In deed as the Prophet says: Iere. 10.^^.
The way of man is not in himself, neither is it in man to walk and to
direct his steps. Therefore you must with the same Prophet say: Thou have
corrected me, Iere. 31.18. Psalm. 37.23.
and I was chastened as an untamed calfe. Convert thou me (O Lord) and I shall
be converted. The paths of man are directed by the Lord. Psalm. 119.9.105.
etc. Wherewithal (says David) shall a young man redress his ways? In
taking head thereunto (says he) according to thy word. For it is a lantern
unto our feet, and a light unto our paths. etc. This word will deliver thee
(says Solomon) from the evil way, Proverb. 2.12.13.14.20.
and from the^ that leave the ways of righteousness, to walk in the ways of
darkness, which rejoice in doing evil, and delight in the frowardness of the
wicked. Therefore walk thou in the ways of good men, and keep the ways of
the righteous. Romans 12.27.
Therefore (says Saint Paul:) Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil
with goodness. So that you must be now an earnest and continual bearer of
Gods word, often to pray and call upon God through Jesus Christ. Always be
you tied to some labor and business, never give any respit to dishonest lusts,
but with godly studies, and honest occupations resist the pride of the flesh,
and with accustomed fasting, prayers, and repentance, keep under your
lascivious life. Hierony. de consec. did. ^ Cap. Nunqua^
For as S. Jerome says: Semper age aliquid, vt Diabolus adueniens semper te
inueniat occupatum, non enim facile capitur a diabolo, qui bono vacat
exercitio, that is: Always be doing some thing, that when the devil comes,
he may find thee (well) occupied: for he is not easily taken by the devil,
that applies good exercise. etc. You must also call to remembrance what vow
and promise you made in your baptism: Roma. 6.4. 1. These. 4.7 Job. 14.1. Mar.
13.35. Romans ^.18.
you must remember that we be al called to godliness and cleanness: you must
remember ye shortness of your time, and the uncertainty thereof: also the
pains of hell for the ungodly. etc. These things shall draw you away from
the companies of the wicked, and make you desire the company of the godly and
virtuous men.


YOVTH. I beseech God I may follow this your good and godly counsel, I beseech
you let me crave your earnest and hearty prayers unto God for me, that I may
crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof, and as I live in the
spirit, so I may walk in the spirit.


AGE. I will not fail but pray for you, that you may obtain this for his
mercies sake, and now I advise thee hereafter to express by thy doings, Gal.
5.20. Mat. 15.29. Gal. 1.23. Prove. 29.11. 2. Pet. 2.22. 2. Pet. 3.9. Ezec.
18.32. Reave. 22.11
thy inward faith, that God may be glorified, and turn no more to the puddle
and vomit of your filthye idle life. And thus you see the long sufferance of
God, and his patience to us ward, that he would have no man to perish, but
would all men come to repentance. And that you are now righteous, be you more
righteous still, and that you are holy, be you more holy still. etc. So that
if these things be with you, and abound in you, 2. Pet. 1.8.
they will make you (says S. Peter) that ye never shall be idle, nor
unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus, Christ.


YOVTH. I perceive now more and more still, how good and, profitable it is,
Eccle. 6.35. Cap. 8.9. Cap. 9.17.
to accompany always with the godly, thereby a man shall learn godliness,
for in the company of the wicked, there is nothing but wickedness to be
learned.


AGE. It is good counsel (my son) that Solomon gives, Eccl. 11.29.
saying: Bring not every man into thine house, for the deceytfull have many
^raynes. Cap. 34.4.
etc. Again he says: Who can be cleansed by the unclean? Cap. 13.1.
For he that touches pitch, shall be defiled with it, and he that is familiar
with the proud, shall be like unto him. etc. according to the old saying: If
thou with him that haltes, do dwell,
To learn to halt, thou shall full well.



YOVTH. By this your former discourse against idleness, to have men labor in
their vocation and calling, do you hereby include the lame, d^a^e, blind,
aged, impotent, sick. etc. and such as are not found in their members. etc.


AGE. Nothing less. These are exempted, and therefore of necessity must be
helped accordingly, with the aid and comfort of the public collection. Prou.
19.17.
Therefore he that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord, and what he lays
out, shall be paid him again. etc. Marc. 14.7.
The poor, says Christ, ye shall have always with you, August. de verbis
dom. Sermon. 25. Psalm. 41.1.
and when ye will ye may do them good. The fruit of the poor that is cast
into their bosoms, will return again with great profit. Blessed is he that
provides for the sick and nedy, the Lord shall deliver him in the time of
adversity. Give alms (says Tobie) of thy substance, Toby. 4.7.
and turn not thy face from any poor, least God turn his face from thee.
etc. Saint Paul willed the churches of the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 16.1.2 Act.
11.29. Romans 12.13. Acts. 22.25.
as he willed the churches of Galatia, to make gatherings every first day of
the week, and put aside and lay up as God has prospred them, that the
necessity of the saints might be relieved. etc. Yet there must be a
consideration in these also. For many of them which lack the use of their
feet, with their hands may pick wool, and sow garments, or tose O^am. Many
which lack arms, may work with their feet, to blow Smithes bellows. etc.
to serve to go in errantes. etc. so as much as may be in each respect of
persons, we must labor to avoid idleness.

Herein also, we must consider to help the broken aged old men and women,
which need to be sustained of the common collection. Also those that be
persecuted for the Gospel of Christ, must be aided likewise. Math. 25.35.
Also captives and prisoners, either at home, taken abroad in wars, or else
with Turks. Also men that have been rich, and are fallen into poverty,
either by the seas, fire, or else by any other casualty, must likewise be
helped and succored. Also young fatherless and motherlesse children, James.
1.27.
pore scholars, and needy widows. Conc. Thuro. sub. Car. neag a^. 10. and 11.
etc. and such other like, must be succored, aided, and comforted, for the
Church goods are the goods of the poor, and therefore you must not judge,
that I speak so universally, that these impotent and needy ought not to be
helped. In Institut. canonic. sub Ludouico Imp. an. 830.
etc. For as we read in Ludouicus the Emperors canonical institutions, that
Res Ecclesiae vota sunt fidelium, precia peccatorum, and patrimonia pauperum,
The goods of the church be the vows and bequestes of the faithful, prices to
redeem them that are captives and in prisons, and patrimonies to succor them
with hospitality that be poor. Prosp. in lib 1 de vita contempl. cap. 9.
Prosper also says: Viros sanctos, res Ecclesiae non vendicasse vt proprias:
sed vt commendas pauperibus dimisse, Good men took the goods of the church,
not as their own, but distributed them, as given and bequeathed to the poor.
Again he says: Quod habet, cum omnibus nihil habentibus habet commune,
Whatsoever the church has, it has it in common, with all such as have need.
It is reported that the churches did distribute these goods into four parts:
Hebr. 13.2.
one and the greatest part upon the nedie people only: the second part for
lodging of strangers: thirdlye, burying of the dead: fourthly, in healing of
diseases. It is reported, that Serapion had under him ( December millia sub se
Monachorum, In tripaxt. hist. li. 8. ca. 1.
quos omnes sic educabat, vt ex proprijs sudoribus, necessaria compararet, and
alijs ministraret egentibus) Ten thousand Monks, who brought them up in such
order, that they gate by their own labors, sufficient for themselves, and
also wherewithal to aid and help the needye and indigent. etc. Now my son
you perceive what sort of people I speak of, and what sort I speak not of.


YOVTH. You have herein satisfied me fullye, I praise God for it.


AGE. You do well, Iam. ^.^7.
to ascribe the praise unto God for it, for that every good and perfect gift
comes from him.


YOVTH. Seeing that we have somewhat largely talked and reasoned together of
idle plays and vain pastimes, let me crave your further patience, to know
your judgment and opinion as touching Plays and Players, which are commonly
used and much frequented in most places in these days, especially here in
this noble and honorable city of London.


AGE. You demand of me a hard question: if I should utterly deny all kind
of such plays, then should I be thought too Stoicall and precise: If I
allow and admit them in general, then shall I give way to a thousand
mischiefs and inconveniences, which daily happen by occasion of beholding and
haunting such spectacles. Therefore let me understand of what sort and kind
of Plays you speak of.


YOVTH. Are there many kinds and sorts of such like Plays?


AGE. Uerie many.


YOVTH. I pray you declare them unto me, that I may learn what they are.


AGE. Some are called Ludi Circenses, Ludi Circenses.
which used to run with chariots in the great compassed place in Rome called
Circus. Others were called Ludi Compatality, Ludi compatalitij.
which made Plays in the high ways to the honor of Bacchus. Others were
called Ludi Florales, Ludi Florales.
which abominable Plays in Rome, to the honor of their trumpetlike Goddess
Flora, in which common women played naked, with wanton words and gestures.
Another sort were called Ludi Gladiatory, Ludi Gladiatory.
Games of Sword players, fighting one with another in harness, in the fight
of the people, endeavoring each to kill other: a spectacle of cruelty to
harden the peoples hearts against killing in wars. Luci Gymnici.
Others are called Ludi Gymnici, exercises of running, leaping, throwing the
darte, and wrestling. Others were called Ludi Iuper^ales, Ludi Iupercales.
Games wherein young Gentlemen naked having whyppes in their hands, ran about
laughing and beating all that they met. Another sort were called Ludi
Magalenses, Ludi Maga^^^ses.
Plays made to the honor of the mother of the Gods, with many and sundry
other such like vain Plays have been invented.


YOVTH. I never heard so much, nor so many sorts of Plays before, yet you
have not named those Plays and Players which I would gladly hear of.


AGE. What Plays are they which you would so said hear of?


YOVTH. They are Stage plays and Enterludes which are now practiced amongst
us so universally in town and country.


AGE. Histrix is a little beast with speckled prickles on his back, which he
vvil cast of, and hurt men ne with them, which is as Pliny says, a
Porkepine.
Those are called Hist^iones, or rather Histrices, which play upon Scaffoldes
and Stages, Enterludes and Comedies, or otherwise with gestures. etc.


YOVTH. What say you to those Players and Plays? Are they good and godly,
meet to be used, haunted, and looked upon which now are practiced?


AGE. To speak my mind and conscience plainly and (in the fear of God) they
are not tolerable nor sufferable in any common weal, especially where the
Gospel is preached. For it is right prodigality, which is opposite to
liberality. For as liberality is to help and succor with worldly goods the
man which is poor, and stands needful thereof: and also to give to the
marriage of poor Maidens, high ways, or poor scholars, etc. So prodigality
is to bestow money and goods, in such sort as it spent, either in banketting,
feasting, rewards to players of Enterludes, Dicing, and Dancing. etc. for the
which no great fame or memory can remain to the spenders or receyuers thereof.


YOVTH. I have heard say, that one Plautus a Comicall Poet, spent all his
substance upon Players garments. Also one Roscius a Roman and a player in
Comedies (whom for his excellency in pronunciation and gesture, noble Cicero
called his jewel) the Romans also gave him (as hystories report) a stipende
of one thousand groates for every day (which is in our money
xvj.li.xiij.s.iiij.d.) Lucius Silla being Dictatour, gave to him a ring of
gold. etc. Since these and such other gave to such uses, why may not we do the
like?


AGE. Because these are no examples for Christians to follow: Luc. 12.23.
Math. 19.2^ Mar 14.7. Mat. 25.^^ 1. Tim. 6.1^
for Christ has given us a far better rule and order, how to bestow our
goods upon his needy members which lie in the streets, prisons, and other
places, and also those that are afflicted and persecuted for the testimony of
a good conscience for the Gospels cause. Chrisost. ^. ^^m. hom. 5^.
etc. No man (says Chrysostom) was ever blamed, because he had not builded up
costly temples or churches. etc. but everlasting fire of hell (the punishment
of the Deuilles) do hang over us, except we do consider Christ in his
members, wandering as strangers, lacking harborough, and as prisoners wanting
visitation. etc. The like may I say of the gifts, buildings, and maintenance
of such places for Players, a spectacle and school for all wickedness and
vice to be learned in. Saint Augustine says: Aug* in Job. tract. 100.
Donare quippe res suas Histrionibus, vitium est immane, non virtus, Whosoever
give their goods to Interlude and Stage players, is a great vice and sin,
and not a virtue. What do the hystories report of Plautus end that was so
prodigal?


YOVTH. I know not, therefore I pray you show me.


AGE. Histories report, Coop^z^
that he was brought into such poverty, that he was feign to serve a Baker in
turning a Ouerne or handmill to get his living: etc. Respastan gave out of his
coffers six hundred pound to Latin and Greek readers. So did Pliny his
Nephewe the like, for the which they deserved great fame, and increased in
great wealth and riches.


YOVTH. Do you speak against those places also, which are made up and
builded for such Plays and Enterludis, as the Theater and Curtain is, and
other such like places besides?


AGE. Yea truly. For I am persuaded that Satan has not a more speedy way and
fitter school to work and teach his desire, to bring men and women into his
snare of concupiscence and filthy lastes of wicke^ wh^redome, than those
places and plays, and theatr^s are: And therefore n^cessarie that those places
and Players should be forbidden and dissolved and put down by authority, as
the Brothell houses and Stews are. How did the Beniamites overcome and take
away the daughters of Israel? but in watching them in a special open place,
Iud. 21.20 21
where they were accustomed upon the Festival days to sport and dance most
ydelly and wantonly. P. Martyr in lud. cap. 21.
D. Peter Martyr (that famous learned man) upon this place (says:) Hereby we
may perceive, that the virgins gave themselves to plays and daunces, which
was to abuse the feast day. It had been better for the^ to have occupied
themselves about grauer matters. For the feast days were to this end
instituted, that the people should assemble together, to hear (not plays) but
the word of God, to be present at the Sacrifices, where they should both
call upon God, and communicate together the Sacraments instituted of God.
Wherefore it is no maruayle if these Maidens were so stolen away, resorting to
such open place. etc.

Cooper.
Romulus (after that Remus his brother was slain) erected and builded up a
certain spectacle and place of safegarde for all transgressors that would
come thither, practicing thereby to rauishe all Maidens of the country
resorting to their new erected place in Mount Palatine, at solemn games and
plays, overcame the people of Cenia, and slew their king. etc. Saint Augustine
says: August. li. 2. cap 17. de ciuitate dei.
That the women of Saba being of curiosity desirous to be present at open
spectacles, were rapted and ravished by the Romans: whereof followed such
wars, that both nations were almost destroyed. In consideration of this and
the like, Job. Iodoni. ^ines in li. 1. de ciuitate dei, cap. 31.
Scipio Nasica (that worthy Roman) obtained in the Senate, that all Theaters
and Stage plays should be abolished, for that it was so hurtful unto public
and civil manners. Also S.C. destroyed utterly that Theater place, which was
so gorgeously builded, and gave commandment, that no such places should be
builded again in the city of Rome, and that they should not make any seats
or benches to sit upon (for to behold such plays in such places) neither
in the city, nor yet within a mile compass thereof. A good vvishe of the
author.
etc. I would to God our Magistrates would follow those good and wholesome
examples.


YOVTH. I have heard many both men and women say, that they can resort to
such plays, and behold them without any hurt to themselves, or to others, and
that no lust nor concupiscence is inflamed or stirred up in them, in the
beholding of any person, or of the plays themselves. How say you, may it be
so?


AGE. Saint Chrysostom shall answer them, Chrysostom. ni Psalm. 50. nom. 1.
who wrote only of such as you speak of, that resorted to such playing
places. Some curious, dainty, and nyce persons (says he) hearing this, will
say (to excuse their sins and follies) we that do resort to behold and
consider the beauty and fairness of women, at Theaters and Stage plays, are
nothing hurt thereby. David (says he) was sore hurt (in beholding Bersave)
and think thou to escape? Prou. 7.6.7
He did not behold an harlot, but on the top of his house. Tu autem in Theatro
vbi co^demnat animam sapientis, Thou beholdest the^ in an open theater, a place
where ye soul of the wise is snared and condemned: in those places (says he)
thou serst not only Res infauslas, unlawful things: but also hear
spurciloquia, filthy speeches, whereof is (says he) incessu meretricis, the
beginning of whoredom, and the habit of all euilnesse and mischief, where
thou shall by hearing diuelishe and filthy songs hurt thy chaste ears, and
also shall see that which shall be grievous unto thine eyes: for our eyes are
as windows of the mind, as the Prophet says: Ierem. 9.22
Death entered into my windows, that is, by mine eyes. Possible thou will say
(says he) I am not moved with those sightes. Iam. 3.5.6. Prou. 6.27.
What art thou, iron (says he) stone, or an Adamant? art thou wiser, stronger,
and holyer than David? A little sparkle of fire cast into straw, begins
quickly to kindle and flame, our flesh is straw, and will burn quickly, and
for that cause the holy ghost sets David for an example to us, that we
should beware of such contagiousnesse. Job 31.^.
Job said: I have made a covenant with mine eyes, why then should I think
upon a Maid? Psalm. 119.37.
David also made his prayer to God, saying: O Lord turn away mine eyes from
regarding vanity, and quicken me in thy way. Ambrose in Psalm 118. Sermon. 5.
Saint Ambrose upon these words, calls Stage plays, Uanitie, wishing that
he could call back the people which run so last thither, and wills them
to turn their eyes from beholding of such Plays and Enterludes. August in
Psalm. 81.
The like saying has Saint Augustine.

Lactae. Firm. lib. 6. cap. 20
Lactantius says, that the eyes are diners and variable, which are taken by
the beholding of things, which are in the use of men, nature, or delectable
things. Vitanda ergo spectacula omnia, All such spectacles and shows (says
he) are therefore to be avoided, not only because vices shall not enter our
hearts and breasts, but also least the custom of pleasure should touch us,
and convert us thereby both from God and good works.


YOVTH. I perceive by your communication, that none ought to haunt and
frequente those Theaters and places where Enterludes are, and especially women
and maids.


AGE. You have collected the meaning of my sayings (nay rather of the fathers
sayings.) Truly you may see daily what multitudes are gathe^ed together at
those Plays, of all sorts, to the great displeasure of almighty God, and
danger of their souls. etc. for that they learn nothing thereby, but that
which is fleshlye and carnal, which Diogenes saw and well perceived, as
appeared by his doings, when as upon a certain day he thrust himself into the
Theater or playing place, when as the people were coming forth. Being
demanded why he did so, answered: because (says he) I will differ from the
multitude, for the greatest part of men are led rather by affections and
reasons. etc. I wot not what precepts may be given our people, for our custom
now is worse than it was amongst the Pagans. Therefore let the people, and
especially women, give ear to Pagan Ovid, ^uid*
if not to Christian precepts, speaking of those common resortings unto
Plays, says: They come to see, Inuernal. lib. Satyr.
and eke for to be seen,
Full much chastity quailed thereby has been.
Iuuenall the Poet says also: That no wives or maidens, that list to content
and please sad and honest men, will be found and seen at common Plays,
Dauncings, or other great resort of people. Lodoci. Viu^^
For these Plays be the instruments and armor of Uenus and Cupide, and to
say good soothe, what safegarde of chastity can there be, where the woman is
desired with so many eyes, where so many faces look upon her, and again she
upon so many? She must needs fire some, and her self also fired again, and
she be not a stone: for what mind can be pure and whole among such a
ra^lement, and not spotted with any lust? according to the old Proverb,
Cypria. lib. 1. Ep st. 10. and lib. 2. Epist.
Ex visu amor. And as Uirgill says: at vidi vt perij. etc. Saint Cy^rian
persuadeth his f^ende Eucratius mightly, to leave off, and not practice nor
teach such Plays and Enterludes, showing what inconveniences and wickedness
is gotten thereby, and what lust and concupiscence is stirred up thereby in
beholding of it, and what filthy and soul acts are done of whoredom and
baudrie, to the hurt of the beholders, adding this, Histrionicis gestibus
inquinatur omnia, By the gestures of Interlude players, all honesty is defiled
and defaced. Read those places of S. Cyprian, which he wrote of purpose
against Plays, for the inconveniences that he saw and heard to come
thereof. O Lord what would he say and write of our plays now, if he were
alive and saw their order in these days?

For these causes was it, that the godly Fathers wrote so earnestly against
such Plays and Enterludes, and also commanded by Councels, Conc. 3. Caro
^^^g. cap. 11. Syno. Laodi. an. 368. can. 54.
that none should go or come to Plays. As in the third Council of Carthage,
and in the Synod of Laodicea, it was decreed that no christians (and
especially Priests) should come into any place where Enterludes and Plays
are, for that christians must abstain from such places where blasphemy is
commonly used. Chrysostom. be. 31. in Job. 4.
Chrysostom calls those places and playing of Enterludes, Festa Satana,
Satan's banquets, Saluianus does bitterly reprehended those men and women, that
will not abstain from going to such vain Enterludes and Plays, (...) in
(...) prouid. ^^ Page 35.
saying: Spernitur Dei templum, vt concurratur ad Theatrum: Ecclesia vacuatur,
circus impletur: Christum in altario dimittimus, vt adus lterantes visis
impurissimo oculos ludicorum turpium fornicatione pascamus, He despises the
Temple of God, that he may run to the Theater: the Church is always empty
and void, the playing place is replenished and full: we leave Christ alone at
the altar, and seed our eyes with vain and dishonest sights, and with filthy
and unclean plays. And a little after, he declares what innumerable vices
there grows by those plays, and what sins are committed against God and
his laws. Olympiodor. in Ecclesiast. (...) 4.
etc. Also, Olympiodorus says (to all Christians, men and women in general:)
Abstain from profane spectacles and Enterludes, for it is not meet that we
should go with those feet unto Plays, Enterludes, and abominable
spectacles, wherewith we use to go into the Temple of God. For they that will
go with clean unpolluted feet into the Church of God, must utterly altogether
abstain from ungodly and profane places, as these are.




YOVTH. Notwithstanding all this that you have alleged out of the Fathers and
Counselles, I suppose a man or woman does not sin to behold and lust one for
another, except they commit carnal copulation together.


AGE. Math. 5.23.
My son, how do thou read or hear the words of Christ in the Gospel, yt
says: He that looks on a woman, and desires to have her, he has committed
adultery alredie in his heart, etc. Romans 6.23.
And surely they are not spiritual, but carnal, which do not believe that
they have a spring of ungraciousness within them, and force not what the mind
be, 1. These. 5.23.
but the body. I dare boldlye say, that few men or women come from Plays and
resorts of men with safe and chaste minds. Therefore Augustus Caesar gave
commandment, that no woman should come to see Wrastlers and Players. Henricus
Cornelius Agrippa de ^. in. scient. cap. 20.
The Massyltens (as Ualerius says) kept so great gravity, that it would
receive into it no Stage players, because the arguments (for the most part)
contained the acts and doings of harlots, to the end that the custom of
beholding such things, might not also cause a license of following it: and
therefore to exercise this art, is not only a dishonest and wicked occupation
but also to behold it, and therein to delight, is a shameful thing, because
that the delight of a wanton mind is an offense. Alanus.
etc. Alas my son, not withstanding all this, are not almost all places in
these our days replenished with Inglers, Scoffers, Ieasters, Romans 1.^^
and Players, which may say and do what they list, be it never so filthilye
and fleshlye, and yet are suffered and heard with laughing and clapping of
hands. Lacta. Firm. lib. 6. ca. 20.
Lactantius says: Histrionum quoque impudicissimi motus, quid aliud nisi
libidines docent, and instigant, Those filthy and dishonest gestures and
mouings of Interlude players, Cypr. lib. 2. Epist. 2.
what other thing do they teach, than want on pleasure, and stirring up of
fleshly lusts unlawful appetites and desires? with their bawdie and filthy
sayings and counterfeyt doings. 1. These. 5.2^
Saint Paul therefore bids us to abstain from all appearance of evil. etc.


YOVTH. I maruayle why you do speak against such Enterludes and places for
Plays, seeing that many times they play histories out of the Scriptures.


AGE. Assuredly that is very evil so to do, to mingle scurtilitie with
Divinity, that is, to eat meat with unwashed hands. Theopompus intermingled
a portion of Moses law with his writings, for the which God struck him mad.
Theodectes began the same practice, and was stricken stark blind, and will
God suffer them unpunished, that with impure and wicked manners and doings, do
use and handle upon scaffoldes, Gods divine mysteries, with such
vnreuerentnesse and irreligiousnesse? 2. Cor. 5.24
What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? what communion has
light with darkness? Iame. 3.10.
Out of one mouth (says Saint James) proceeds blessing and cursing, these
things ought not so to be. S. Augustine says: It is better that spiritual
things be utterly omitted, than vnworthilye and irreverently handled and
touched. O what rashness and madness is that (says Bernarde) to handle the
word of God with polluted hands, and to utter and speak it with a filthy
mouth, mingled with filthy speeches and words.

And by the long suffering and permitting of these vain plays, it has stricken
such a blind zeal into the hearts of the people, that they shame not to say
and affirm openly, that Plays are as good as Sermons, and that they learn as
much or more at a Play, than they do at Gods word preached. God be merciful
to this Realm of England, 1. Tim. 4.3. Number. 11.4. 5.6.7.
for we begin to have ytching ears, and loathe that heavenly Manna, as
appears by their flow and negligent coming unto Sermons, and running so
fast, and so many, continually unto Plays.etc. Ovid was banished by Augustus
into Pontus (as it is thought) for making the book of the Craft of Love. Hiero
Syracusanus.
Hiero Syracusanus did punish Epicharmus the Poet, because he rehearsed
certain wanton verses in the presence of his wife. For he would not have
only in his house chaste bodies, but also chaste cares. Why then should not
Christians abolishe and punish such filthy Players of Enterludes, whose
mouths are full of filthiness and wickedness. Ephesians. 5.4.
Saint Paul willed the Ephesians, that fornication and all uncleanness
should not once be named among them. Neither filthiness, 5.
neither foolish talking, neither feasting, which are things not comely: but
rather giving of thanks. He shows the reason to the Corinthians why they
should so abstain: Because evil speakings corrupt good manners (says he.)
Again: 1. Cor. 15.33. 2. Cor. 6.17.
Come out from among them, and let us separate our selves, and touch no
unclean thing, and then the Lord will receive us, and abide with us. Tit.
2.11.12
For (says he) the grace of God that brings salvation unto all men, has
appeared, and teaches us, that we should deny ungodliness and wordly lusts,
and that we should live soberly, 13.
righteously and godlily in this present world, looking for the blessed hope
and appearing of the glory of the mighty God, and of our savior Jesus Christ.


YOVTH. Now I perceive it is not good nor godly haunting of such places.


AGE. Eccles. 7.4.
It is truth. For as the Preacher says: It is better to go unto the house of
mourning, than go to the house of feasting. etc. 6.
For the heart of the wise is in the house of mourning: but the heart of fools
is in the house of mirth. And therefore it is better (says Solomon) to hear
the rebuke of a wise man, 7.
than that a man should hear the songs of fools.


YOVTH. Truly I see many of great countenance both men and women resort thither.


AGE. The more is the pity, and greater is their shame and pain, if they
repent not, and leave it off. Many can tarry at a vain Play two or three
hours, when as they will not abide scarce one hour at a Sermon. They will
tun to every Play, but scarce will come to a preached Sermon, so much and
so great is our follye, to delight in vanity, and leave verity, to seek for
the meat that shall perish, and pass not for the food that they shall live
by for ever. Job 21.2.
These people says Job, have their houses peaceable, without fear, and the
rod of God is not upon them, 11.
they send forth their children like sheep, and their sons dance. 12.
They take the Tabret and Harp, and rejoice in the sound of Instruments. 13.
They spend their days in wealth, 14.
and suddenly they go down to the grave. They say unto God, depart from us. 15.
For we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Who is the almighty that we
should serve him? and what profit should we have, if we should pray to
him? Therefore I speak (alas with grief and sorrow of heart) against those
people that are so fleshlye led, to see what reward there is given to such
Crocodiles, which devour the pure chastity, both of single and married
persons, men and women, when as in their Plays you shall learn all things
that appertain to craft, mischief, deceytes, and filthiness. etc. If you
will learn how to be false, and deceive your husbands, or husbands their
wives, how to play the harlottes, to obtain ones love, how to rauishe, how
to beguyle, how to betraye, to flatter, lie, swear, forswear, how to allure
to whoredom, how to murder, how to poison, how to disobey and rebel
against Princes, to consume treasures prodigally, to move to lusts, to
ransacke and spoil cities and towns, to be idle, to blaspheme, to sing
filthy songs of love, to speak filthily, to be proud, how to mock, scoff,
and deryde any nation, like unto Genesius Aralatensis. Genesius As ^elatensis
patria, was a common Ieaster and Player to Domitian the Emperor, which did
mock and scoff most filthily with his iestures, the godly christians. etc.
etc. shall not you learn then at such Enterludes how to practice them? as
Palingenius says: Index est animi sermo morumy^, fidelis, Haud dubie testis.
The tongue has oftentimes witness brought,
Of that which heart within has thought:
And manners hid in secret place,
It does disclose and often disgrace.


Therefore great eeason it is that women (especially) should absent
themselves from such Plays. What was the cause why Dina was ravished? Gene
64.1.
was it not her curiosity? the Maiden would go forth, and understand the
manners of other folks. Curiosity then no doubt did hurt her, and will
always hurt women. For if it were hurtful unto the family of Jacob (being so
great a Patriarch) for a Maiden to wander abroad, how much more dangerous is
it for other families, which are not so holy nor acceptable unto God? Titus.
2.4. Ephesians. 5.23.
But the nature of women is much infected with this vice. And therefore Saint
Paul admonishes women to love their husbands, to bring up their children, and
to be byders and tariers at home. And when he entreats of wanton and young
widows: Timo. 5.23.
They wander abroad (says he) and run from house to house, and at the last
go after Satan. Give the water no passage, Eccl. 25.27.
no not a little (says Syrach) neither give a wanton woman liberty to go out
abroad. If thy daughter be not shamefast, hold her straightly, least she abuse
her self through overmuch liberty. Math. 7.16.
As men cannot gather grapes of thorns, and figs of thistles, neither can
any man or woman gather any virtue or honesty in haunting places where
Enterludes are. As one virtue brings in another, so one vice nourishes
another. Pride ingendreth envy: and idleness is an entrance into lust.
Idleness is the mystresse of wanton appetites, and postresse of Lusts gate.
For no ma^entreth into the palace of Lust, unless he be first let in by
Idleness, and more Idleness can there not bet, than where such Plays and
Enterludes are. Math. 6.24.
Therefore as Christ says: The light of the body is the eye: If then the eye
be single, thy whole body shall be light. But if thine eye be wicked, then
all thy body shall be dark. etc. As if he would say: It thine affections and
wicked concupiscence overcome reason, it is no marvel though men be blinded
and be like unto beatles, and follow all carnal pleasures. To take away this
darkness and blindness, Athenians.
the Athenians provided well when they appointed their Areopagites to write no
Comedy or Play, for that they would avoid all evils that might ensue
thereof.etc. Theodosius.
Theodosius likewise did by express laws decree that daunces and wanton
daliance should not be used, Constantinus centur. 4. cap. 3. fo. 76.
neither Games or Enterludes. Constantinus the Emperor made laws, wherein he
did utterly forbid all Enterludes and spectacles among the Romans, for the
great discommoditie that came thereof.

Saint Cyprian says, it is not enough for his friend Eucratius to abstain
from such Interlude Plays himself, Cypria. lib. 1. Epist. 20. Ambr. lib. 1.
offic. cap. 23.
but also he must not teach others, nor encourage them thereto. S. Ambrose
says: that all such Plays (though they seem pleasant and full of sport) must
utterly be abolished, because no such Plays are mentioned nor expressed in
holy Scripture. August. lib. 1 cap. 32. de ciui^ate deii.
S. Augustine says: that such Enterludes and Plays are filthy spectacles.
For when the Heathen did appoint and ordeyne (says he) Plays and Enterludes
to their Gods, for the avoiding of the Pestilence of their bodies: your Bishops
for the avoiding of the pestilence of your souls, has prohibited and
forbidden those kind of Scenicall and Interlude plays. Thus you may perceive
and understand how those Plays have been thought off among the good and
godly Fathers before time, which instruct us thereby to hate and detest the
like now in this latter time practiced.


YOVTH. Is there no laws or decrees that have been made against such players
of Enterludes, fith they are so noisome a pestilence to infect a Common wealth?


AGE. Uery many laws and decrees.


YOVTH. I pray you express some of them for the better satisfying of my mind
herein.


AGE. Conc. Arelacensis. 2.20.
I will so do God willing. It was decreed under Constantinus the Emperor, that
all Players of Enterludes should be excluded from the Lords table. Johannes
de Burgo sometime Chauncelour of Cambridge, Job de Burg. in pupilla oeil, 7.
partis, cap. 5.0. Distinct. 33. cap. Maritii.
and a Doctor of Divinity, in his book entitled Pupilla oculi, says, that
Histriones, Interlude players, Non sunt ad ordines promouendi, are not to be
promoted to any dignity, the reason is (says he) Quia sunt infames, for that
those Players are infamous persons. He notes further how they are known, Hoc
intellige de his quihis qui public coram p^pulo faciunt aspectum sieve
ludibrium sui corporis exercendo opus illud, Understande this of those Players
which use to make shows openly before the people, or else in using their
bodies to this business, as to make sport to be laughed at. In another place
he says: Pupilla oculi quart partis, Cap. 9.1. Distinct. 86. Cap. Donare.
Histrionibus, Magicis, Scenteis, and alijs infamibus notorijs and manifestis,
non est Eucharistria conferenda, quiatales vita^ ducunt illicitam, The
Sacrament of thanksgiving ought not to be ministered unto stage players of
Enterludes, or to Witches, Sorcerers, Summa Angelica.
or to any such infamous and notorious wicked persons, for that they lead a
lewd and ungodly life. In the decrees, it is so decreed, that all Interlude
players, and Comedy players, Causa. 4. quest. 1. ca. 1. Distinc. 2 de consecr.
cap. pio dilectione. ff. De his qui no. infra. l. it ^ ais praetor vlt. Aug.
lib. 1.2 cap. 12. de ciu^tate dei. 11. Cornelius Agrippa de vanit. sciens. cap.
20.
Heretics, Jews and Pagans, are infamous persons, and ought to be taken for
no accusers of any, nor yet to be produced as witnesses in any matter or cause
before any Judge, if they be the law is, that the party may lawfully except
against them, and say, they are infamous persons, for they are Players of
Enterludes. And this may you do also against common Minstrels. S. Augustine
says also, that those Interlude players are infamous persons. Cornelius
Agrippa says: There was in times past no name more infamous than Stage
players. And all they that had played an Interlude in the Theater, were by
the Laws deprived from all honor and dignity. Also there is a notable
Statute made against Uagabondes, An. Elizab. 14. cap. 5.
Roges, etc. wherein is expressed what they are that shall be taken and
accounted for Roges. Amongst all the whole rablement, Common players in
Enterludes are to be taken for Roges, and punishment is appointed for them to
be burnte through the ear with an hot iron of an ynche compass, and for the
second fault to be hanged as a Felon. etc. The reason is, for that their trade
is such an idle loytering life, a practice to all mischief, as you have heard
before.


YOVTH. If they leave this life, and become good true laborers in the Common
wealth, to get their own livings with their own hands, in the sweat of
their face, shall not they be admitted and taken again to the Lords table, and
afterward to be reputed and taken for honest men?


AGE. Yes truly. Concilium. 3. Carthagine. cap. 35. De consecra. Did. 2. cap.
Scenicis ato que histrionibus.
And therefore in the third Council of Carthage, it is put down in these
words: Scenicis atque Histrionibus, caeteris^ personis huiusmodi, vel
Apostatis, conuersis ad Dominum, gratia vel reconciliatio non negetur, To
Players of Enterludes and Comedies, and other such like infamous persons and
Apostates, converting and returning to the Lord (by repentance) grace and
reconciliation is not to be denied. And this is according to the saying of the
Prophet Ezechiell: Ezec. 18.21.
If the wicked will return from all his sins that he has committed, and
keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely
live and not die. etc.


YOVTH. I pray you show me from whence those kind of Plays had their
beginning, and who devised them.


AGE. Chrysostom says: Chrisost, in Mat. hom. 6.
the Devil found out Stage plays first, and were invented by his craft and
policy, for that they conteyne the wicked acts and whoredoms of the Gods,
whereby the consciences of godly men are grievously wounded, and wicked lusts
are many ways stirred up. And therefore the Devil builded Stages in cities.

Arnobius says: Arnobius lib. 7.
The Heathens supposed to have pleased and pacified their Gods from their wrath
and displeasure, when as they dedicated to them the sounds of Instruments and
Shalmes.etc. August. lib. 2 cap. 32. de ciuilate dei.
Stage plays and Enterludes. Saint Augustine says: The heathen did appoint
Plays and Enterludes to their Gods, for the aduoyding of pestilent infections.
Theoph. lib. 3 contra Aus colicum.
etc. Theophylus says: Gentes suos dies habebant quibus publica spectacula.
etc. religiosa. etc. The Gentyles had their certain days appointed for open
spectacles and shows etc. which they dedicated religiouslye unto their Gods.
Clem. in oratione ad ge^t. Theopb. lib. 2 cont. Autol. Tatianus in orati.
contra Graecos.
Clemens and others say: Diabolus sir author Gentilium superstitionum, That the
Devil is the author of the Gentiles superstitions. For these causes and many
other, says Theophilus, christians were forbidden to use any such like
Plays.etc. If you will know more hereof, I will refer you unto Polydore
Virgil, and also unto John Textor, Pol. Virgil. de rerum mue^t lib. 3. cap.
3.10. Rauisij Textoris officin. fo. 906
where you shall fully see the original of all those Plays. etc.


YOVTH. I marvel much (this being as you say) that these Plays and
Enterludes are tolerated and suffered now a days in a Common wealth, being so
evil of it self, and having so evil patrons.


AGE. It is much to be maryled at in deed, my son, for where Gods Gospel is
preached and taught, such vain idle and filthy pastimes and myrthes should
sur cease, and be banished far away from Christians, B. Rhenanus in librum de
corona milit.
from whence it came, Beatus Rhenanus says: Non solum temperandum fuit, quae
manifestam pra se ferrent impietatem: sed etiam. etc. It was meet for them to
refrain, not only from such things, as have a manifest show of wickedness,
but also from such things as might be called indifferent, partly least any of
the weaker christians should be corrupted: partly also, least the Heathens
should be encouraged in their errors, thinking that thing, for that the
christians themselves do it, Tertul. de Idolaria.
to be the better. Tertullian says also: De hoc primo consistam etc. Herein
will I first stand, whether it be lawful for the servant of God, to
communicate with whole nations in such things: either in apparel, or in diet,
or in any other kind of their pastimes and mirth. Basil, de na^ali Christia.
Saint Basil says: Let idleness and superfluous things be put to silence,
where Gods church is. What means this (says Saint Origin) leave her no
manner of remnant. Origin in Iere. hom. 34.
The meaning is this: Abolishe not certain of the superstitions of the
Chaldes, reserving certain. Therefore he commands that nothing be left in
her, Aug. cons fess. li. 6. ca. 2
be it never so little. Therefore S. Augustine says, that his mother left
bringing of wine and cakes to the church, for that she was warned, it was a
resemblance of the superstition of the heathen. Tertul. de coron.militi^.
Tertullian reasons vehemently, that a christian man ought not to go with a
Laurel garland upon his head, and that for none other cause, but only for
that the Heathens used so to go. etc. How much more should we leave off to
imitate those filthy Plays and Enterludes that came from the Heathens, Le.
18.3.30.
nay from the Devil himself. But as one says: Dolosi hominis dolesae vestis,
Macrobius.
Crafty man, crafty coat. These Players, Seneca.
as Seneca says: Malunt personam habere quam faciem, They will rather wear a
visarde, than a natural face. And therefore Saint Cyprian vehemently
inueygbeth against those which contrary to nature and the law do attire
themselves being men, Cypria, lib. 2. Epist. 10. Lib. 2. Epist. 21.
in women's apparel, and women in men's apparel, with Swannes feathers on
their heads, Deu. 22.5.
Silks, and golden apparel, etc. showing forth in their Plays. very Venus it
self, as if they were fully in the kingdom of Satan. etc.


YOVTH. You have, in my judgment, painted out those things to the full, and
opened such matters by the effects, as will iothe any honest man or good
woman to come near such Plays.


AGE. Nay truly, I have rather given but an ynkling hereof, than opened the
particular secrets of the matter.


YOVTH. The publishing and opening of the filthy matters thereof, is
sufficient to prove that they ought to be overthrown and put down.


AGE. You say truth.


YOVTH. Yet I see little said and less done unto them, great resort there is
daily unto them, and thereout suck they no small advantage.


AGE. S. Alanus.
They are like unto the citizens of Sybaris, which were in all kind of
sensuality delicious, far passing all other, for they used commonly to bid
their guestes a whole year before, that neither the bidder might lack time to
prepare all dainties, and delicious fare, and costly furniture, nor the guestes
to adorn and trim themselves up with gold. etc. So they use to set up their
bills upon posts certailie days before, to admonish the people to make
their resort unto their Theaters, that they may thereby be the better
furnished, and the people prepared to fill their purses with their treasures,
that they may sing, which Horace says: Hon. lib. le Episto.
Now are the brave and golden days,
Now same with play we gain,
And gold can show us many ways
Men's favor to attain:
For money they hear the Music sweet,
And Plays they buy with gold,
We seek for gold, and straight unmeet,
Our name by it is sold.


Therefore of them Boethius says: How they do get, sewe folks do care, but
riches have they must,
By hook or crook we daily see, they draw men to their lust.
(...)
No faith nor fear of God have they, which do those plays pursue:
Their hands are given to sell and spoil, their gain they call their due.



YOVTH. I do now well perceive the wickedness hereof, by that I have heard
of you, out of ancient authorities, Councels, Laws, and Decrees, and I would
to God such laws were now executed upon such things, which are occasions and
load stones to draw people to wickedness. I marvel the magistrates suffer
them thus to continue, and to have houses builded for such exercises and
purposes which offend God so highly, fithe it came from the Heathen, Satan
being the author, as you have proved: For my part I shall henceforth (Jesus
Christ willing) absent my self from such places and theaters, and shall
provoke others to do the like also. and.c. Yet I maruayle much, fithe the
rulers are not only negligent and stowe herein to do, but the Preachers are as
dumme to speak and say in a Pulpitte against it.


AGE. I doubt not but God will so move the hearts of Magistrates, and loose the
tongue of the Preachers in such godly sort (by the good deuont prayers of the
faithful) that both with the sword and the word, such unfruitful and barren
trees shall be cut down, August. in Psalm. 8.^.
to Gods great glory, comfort and safety of his people, and increase of
virtue and christianitis, which God grant for his Christ Jesus sake.


YOVTH. Amen, Amen, good Lord.


AGE. Now that you are resolved in this point, according unto your request and
desire, let this suffice at this time, as touching this matter, and let us go
forward to reason of some other matter.


YOVTH. Before we reason of any other matter, let me understand your
indgement as touching Comedies, and such like things, which Scholars do
many times practice and use, both in the Uniuersities, and also in diverse
other good Schools.


AGE. Saint Cyprian writing unto his friend Euagrius in a certain Epistle,
Cypr. Epist. 10. lib. 1.
says that he is ( Doctor non erudiendorum, sed perdendorum puerorum, etc.) A
teacher not of learning, but of destroying children, which practice them in
these Interlude and Stage plays. For (says he) Quod male didicit, cateris
quo^abque insinuit: that evil which he has learned, he both also communicate
unto others. etc. Not withstanding, you shall understand ye S. Cyprian speaks
here of him that did teach and practice only this kind of vain pastimes and
plays, and did allure children up therein. But to show you my mind plainlye,
I think it is lawful for a Scholemaister to practice his scholars to play
Comedies, observing these and the like cautions. First that those Comedies
which they shall play, be not mixed with any ribaudrie and filthy terms and
words (which corrupt good manners.) Secondly, 1. Cor. 15.33.
that it be for learning and utterance sake, in Latin, and very seldom in
English. Thirdly, that they use not to play commonly, and often, but very
rare and seldom. Fourthlye, that they be not pranked and decked up in gorgious
and sumptuous apparel in their play. Firstly, that it be not made a common
exercise publicly for profit and gain of money, but for learning and exercise
sake. And lastly, that their Comedies be not mixte with vain and wanton toys
of love. These being observed, I judge it tolerable for scholars.


YOVTH. What difference is there, I pray you, between a Tragedy and a Comedy?


AGE. There is this difference: A Tragedy properly is that kind of Play, in
the which, calamities and miserable ends of Kings, Princes, and great Rulers
are described and set forth, and it has for the most part a sad and heavy
beginning and ending. A Comedy has in it, humble and private persons, it
begins with turbulent and troublesome matters, but it has a merry end.


An Inuectiue against Dice playing.
Since you have instructed me so well against Idleness, and vain Pastimes, and
Plays, I pray you instruct me further also, as touching other plays
(especially of one kind of play) which is commonly used of most people in
this land, whether it be evil or good to be used?

AGE. According unto my simple talent, I shall be ready to imploye it, in what
I may, for your better instruction, and therefore declare unto me among all,
what play that is which you mean, which you say is so much practiced now a
days amongst all sorts and degrees.


YOVTH. If you will give me a walk or two about the fields, I will declare
the whole matter of the play, for I would gladly hear your judgment of it.


AGE. I will go with you willingly, and hear your talk gladly, and wherein I
may do you any good, I shall be ready (the Lord willing) to satisfy your
request, which is my desire,


YOVTH. Sir, I yield you humble duty for this your so great and vndeserned
turtesie, come on, lead you the way, good father, I beseech you, for
reverence is due unto the aged, as Boles says: Leui. 20.32 Pro. 20.30.
Rise up before the hoar beade, and honor the person of the aged.


AGE. The honorable age (says Solomon) is not that which is of long time, V
Vis. 4.^.
neither that which is measured by the number of years: 9.
but wisdom (says he) is the gray hear, and an undefiled life is the old
age. Now my son, say on in Gods name what you have to say.


YOVTH. In our former communication between us, you have spoken against vain
Plays and idle Pastimes, yet you allowed of certain moderate and active
pastimes, for exercise and recreations sake.


AGE. It is very true, I granted it, and do allow of them, so far forth as
they are used to that end wherefore they were appointed.


YOVTH. I pray you let me understand what those Plays are, which you allow
off, and also of those which you allow not off.


AGE. Before I speak of them, it shall be good to distribute and divide Plays
into their forms and kinds.


YOVTH. I pray you do so.


AGE. I must herein make two exceptions: First is, that by this my speech I
mean not to condemn such public games or prices as are appointed by the
Magistrate: Secondly, that such games as may benefit (if need require) the
Common wealth are tolerable.


YOVTH. I pray you let me hear your division of Plays in their kinds.


AGE. There are some kind of Plays which are utterly referred unto chance,
as he which casts most, or casts this chance or that (at Dice (carries
away the reward. There are other, whereby the powers either of the body or mind
are exercised.


YOVTH. I pray you speak first of those Plays, which are for the exercise of
the body and mind.


AGE. Those Plays which are for the exercise either of the powers of mind or
body, (...).
are not utterly forbidden. Justinian when he had utterly taken away Plays
that depended of chance (at Dice) ordained certain kind of Plays, as
throwing a round ball into the air (which play is at this day much used among
my countrymen of Devonshire) handling and tossing the Pyke or staff, running
at a mark, or such like, etc. Aristotle in his Rhetorikes, commends these
exercises of the body. So we see at this day, public wealths do sometime
set forth unto such as can best use weapons, a reward or price, to the end
they may have the people the better encouraged and exercised (always taking
heed, that those Plays be not hurtful or pernicious, and that it be not
dangerous, either to themselves; or to the beholders, as are the Turneys, and
such like, etc. Such kind of plays are forbidden, Decree. lib. 5 in glos
cap. Ludos.
Adlegem Aquiliam, in the Law, Nam Ludus, and in the Decretals, it is also
expressed, De tornementis.


YOVTH. What other Plays are there which are tolerable?


AGE. That which was used of old time.


YOVTH. What Plays were that I beseech you?


AGE. To labor with poyses of Lead, or other metal, called in Latin,
Alteres, Lifting and throwing of the stone, bar, or bowl with hand or
soote, casting of the darte, wrestling, shooting in long Bows, Crossebowes,
handgurmes, ryding, trayning up men in the knowledge of martial and warrelike
affairs and exercises, knowledge to handle weapons, to leap and vault,
running, swimming, Barriers, running of horses, at the tilt, Hom. lib. 8.
Vergil. lib. 5. Eucid.
or otherwise, which are called in Latin, Luda, Discus, Cursus, sieve, Saltus.
Cestus, Certamen equestre vel Currule. All which Plays are recited partly by
Homer, partly by Vergil, and partly by Pausanias, etc.


YOVTH. What say you by hauking, hunting, and playing at Tennise?


AGE. These exercises are good, and have been used in ancient times, Gene.
27.5. Ciccio.
as we may read in Genesis. Cicero says: Suppeditant autem and campus noster,
and studia venandi, honesti exempla ludendi, The fields (says he) hunting of
beasts and such other, do minister unto us goodly occasions of passing the
time, yet he adds thereunto this saying: Ludendi est quidem modus retinendui,
A measure ought to be kept in pastime. For in these days many Gentlemen will
do (almost) nothing else, or at the least, can do that better than any other
thing. And this is the cause why there are found so many raw captains and
soldiers in England, among our Gentlemen, when time of service requires. And
also it is the cause of so many unlearned Gentlemen as there are. For they
suppose that it is no part belonging to their calling, for to hear sermons,
pray, and study for learning, nor to be exercised in heroical acts and
martial affairs, but only to hawk and hunt all day long.


YOVTH. I have heard old woodmen say, he cannot be a Gentleman which loves
not a dog.


AGE. If that be true, he cannot be a dog that loves not a Gentleman. As I do
not hereby condemn all Gentlemen, so must I needs (God be praised) justify
many, which are desirous to hear preaching, to use prayer, study for lerning,
and exercise martial affairs, ready to serve at al commandments for just
causes.


YOVTH. What say you to Music and playing upon Instruments, is not that a
good exercise?


AGE. Music is very good, if it be lawfully used, and not unlawfully abused,
therefore I think good first to declare, from whence it had his beginning, and
to what end it was instituted. Secondly, whether they may be kept in the
Churches. Lastly, what kind of songs and measures are profitable and
healthful.


YOVTH. I beseech you let me hear this thoroughly, and I will give attentive
ear thereunto, for that some men disprayse it to much, and think it
unlawful, others commend it as much, and think nothing so lawful: and a
third sort there are, which make it a thing indifferent.


AGE. Two sorts that you speak of, are to be reproved, but the third sort is
to be commended.


YOVTH. I pray you let me hear your judgment hereof, and first of all, as
you promised, of the beginning and institution thereof.


AGE. As touching the first: Men of the old time were accustomed with common
vows to sing certain solemn ditties, both when they gave thanks to God, and
also when as they would obtain any thing of him. Wherefore Orpheus, Limus,
Pindarus, and Horace, and such like Poets, which used the Harp, wrote their
hymns for the most part, for these uses. Also in the Roman public wealth,
the Priests of Mars which were called Salij, Satij.
carried shieldes, and sang their verses through the city. Furthermore it was
the manner, that Music and verses were had, when the praises of noble men
were celebrated, chiefly at feasts, whereby they which stood by, might be
admonished, to imitate their noble acts, and detest such vices, which were
contrary unto their virtues. Moreover, they used them to recreate the minds,
and to comfort such as were pensive, beauy, and sad for the dead. 1 Sa. 16.23.
As Saul being heavy. etc. caused David to play upon the Harp to refresh
him etc. The use hereof also we may read in Mathews, Math. 9.23.
when as Christ our Savior came into the Rulers house to raise up his dead
daughter, the Minstrels and people were making a noise, that is (according to
their custom) to play and sing. Exo. 15.2.20
etc. Contrariwise, when any great cause of joy happened, it was expressed by
Music and songs, as we may read many examples hereof in the holy
Scriptures, as of Moses sister Miriam, Judge. 11.34. Iudet. 16.2.
Judith, Iephtah his daughter. etc. Likewise in weddings they were wont to
play musically, and to sing wedding songs. All these things if they be done
moderately, and in due time, are tolerable. For Music and songs contain
three kinds of good things, that is, honest, profit, and pleasantness. For
although singing of it self delights the minds of men, yet when words are
joined unto it, which are of a just number, and bound by certain feet (as
Uerses are) is much more pleasant. And undoubtedly Poetry had hereof his
beginning, and cannot be denied but it is an excellent gift of God: yet this
ought to be kept pure and chaste among men, because certain lascivious men
have and do filthily defile it, applying it to wantonness, wicked lusts, and
every filthy thing.


YOVTH. Why does Music so rapte and vanishe men in a manner wholly?


AGE. The reason is plain. For there are certain pleasures, which only fill
the outward senses: and there are others also, which pertain only to the
mind or reason. But Music is a delectation so put in the midst, that both
by the sweetness of the soundes it moves the senses, and by the
artificiousnesse of the number and proportions, it deliteth reason it self.
And that happens then chiefly, when such words are added unto it, whose
sense is both excellent and learned. Pythagoras
Pithagoras opinion was, that they which studied his doctrine, should be
brought in sleep with a harp, and by the accordes thereof also wakened,
whereby they might quietly enjoy the time both of sleeping and waking. Cicero
affirms, Cicero.
that rocks and wildernesses do give a sound, and cruel beasts by singing
are assuaged, and made to stand still, as it is reported of the Unicorne: when
as men will take him, they put a young maiden into the wilderness, and when the
Unicorne sees her, he stands still, and when he hears the maid sing and
play on an instrument, he comes to his, and sleeps hard by her, and layth
his head upon her lap, and so the hunters kill him.

I may also speak how the Poets fable, that when the walls of Thebes the
city were buylt, the stones of their own motion came together with the found
of the Harp. And no man is ignorant, what the same Poets have written of
Arion (who being taken by pirates) playing so melodiously upon his harp, the
Dolphin fish, with the great Whales, delyted so much in his Music, that
when as the Pirates cast him into the sea, the fishes carried him safely unto
the shore. So have they feigned of Orpheus. Psalm. 57.8.1. Psalm. 4.3.4.1 Psalm.
149.3. Psalm. 150.4. Psalm. 33.2. Psalm. 98.5.6.
And also who knows not how much David here and there in his Psalms,
prayseth both Music and Songs.

Secondly, we must consider whether it may be used in Churches. In the Cast
part the holy assemblies even from the beginning, used singing, which we may
easily understand by the testimony of Pliny in his Epistle to Traiane the
Emperor: Plinici.
where he writes that Christians used to sing hymns before day unto their
Christ, and therefore were called Antelucanos coetus, the morning assemblies.
And this is not to be ouerslipte, that these words were written in that time
that John the Evangelist lived, Eusebius. lib. 20 cap. 2.
for he was alive unto the time of Traian. Wherefore if a man shall say, that
in the time of the Apostles there was singing in holy assemblies, he shall not
stay from the truth. Paul who was before these times, Ephis. 13.19.
unto the Ephesians, says: Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess: but be
filled with the spirit, speaking unto your selves in Psalms and Hymns, and
spiritual songs, singing and making melody to the Lord in your hearts,
giving thanks always for all things unto God even the father, Collo. 3.16.
in the name of Jesus Christ. To the Colossians he says: Let the word of
Christ dwell in you plenteously in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing your
own selves in Psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, singing with a grace in
your hearts to the Lord. 2 Cor. 14.26
To the Corinthians he says: When ye assemble together, according as every one
of you has a Psalm, or has a doctrine, or has a tongue, or has revelation,
or has interpretation: let all things be done unto edifying. By which words
is declared, that fingers of songs and Psalms had their place in the Church.

But the west Churches more lately received the manner of singing. August. li.
9. confesess'd
for Augustine testifies that it happened in the time of Ambrose: For when
that holy manne together with the people, watched in the Church, least he
should have been betrayed unto the Arrians, be brought in singing, to anoyde
tedrousnesse, and to drive away the time. But as touching the measure and
nature of the song, which ought to be retained in Music in the Church, Aug.
lib. 10. confess. ca. 33.
these things must be specially noted, Saint Augustine in his book of
Confession, confesses and is also sorry, that he had sometime fallen,
because he had given more attentive head unto the measures and cords of
Music, than unto the words which were under them spoken. Which thing hereby
he proves to be sin, because Music and singing were brought in for the
words sake, and not words for Music. And he so repented this his fault,
that he exceedinglye allowed the manner of the Church of Alexandria used
under Athanasius, who commanded the Reader, that when he sang, he should but
little alter his voice, so that he should be like rather unto one that
reads, than unto one that sings. Howbeit on the contrary, when he
considered, how at the beginning of his conversion, he was inwardly moved with
these songs, in such forte, that for the zcale of piety he burste for the
into tears, and for this cause he consented, that Music should be retained
in the Church: but yet in such manner, that he said be was ready to change
his sentence, if a better reason could be assigned. And he adds: that those
do sin deadlye (as they were wont to speak) which give greater heed unto
Music, Hieron. in Epist. ad E phes.
than unto the words of God. Saint Hierome, and also Saint Gregory say: Non
vox sed votum, Did. 92 capt. Cantantes, and in cap. Sancta Romana.
non cordula Musica, sed cor,
Non clamans, sed amans, cantat in aure Dei,
The voice though it cry never so clear,
The Lord delights not for to hear:
Nor string of Music very sweet,
Except the heart conioyne and meet.


Franciscus Petrarcha de remedijs us vtriusque fortuna.
Franciscus Petrarcha declares that Athanasius did utterly forbid singing to
be used in the Church at service time, because (says he) he would put away
all lightness and vanity, which by the reason of singing does often times arise
in the minds both of the singers and hearers. Distinct. 92. ^n cap. in Sancta
Romana.
Gregory also says: Plerunque vt in sacro ministerio dum blanda vox
quaeritur, congrua vita negligatur, Whiles the sweetness of the voice is
sought for in the holy ministry, the life is neglected. Therefore says
Durandus: Propter carnales, Gulielmus Durand. li 2. rat. di offi^. cap de
can^ore.
non propter spirituales cantandi vsus in Ecclesia institutus est. etc. The use
of singing in the Church was ordained for carnal men, and not for spiritual
minded men.


YOVTH. Let me hear then what is to be done and observed, to the end Music
may lawfully and fruitfully be used in the Church.


AGE. Pet. Martyr in Iudicum.
First we must take heed that in Music be not put the whole sum and effect
of godliness, and of the worshipping of God, which among the Papists they do
almost euerywhere think that they have fullye worshipped God, when they have
long and much sung and piped. Further we must take heed that in it be not put
merit or remission of sins. Thirdly, that singing be not so much used and
occupied in the Church, that there be no time in a manner lest to preach the
word of God and holy doctrine. Whereby it comes to pass, that the people
depart out of the Church full of Music and harmony, but yet hungerbaned and
fasting, as touching heavenly food and doctrine. Fourthly, that rich and large
stipends be not so appointed for Musicians, that either very little, or in a
manner nothing is provided for the ministers which labor in the word of God.
Fifthly, neither may that broken and quauering music be used, wherewith the
standers by are so let, that they cannot understand the words, no, though
they would never so feign. Lastly, we must take heed, that in the Church
nothing be song without choice, but only those things which are contained in
the holy Scriptures, or which are by just reason gathered out of them, and do
exactly agree with the word of God.

Now to conclude this matter, I say, that godly, and religious songs may be
retained in the Church. And yet I confess that there is no precept given in
the new testament of that thing. Wherefore if there be any Church, which upon
just causes uses it not, the same Church cannot iustlye be condemned, so that
it defend not, that the thing it self of his own nature, or by the
commandment of God is unlawful, and that it do not for the same cause
reprove other Churches, which use singing and Music, or else exclude them
from the fellowship of Christ. Yet this ought to be considered, that if we
shall perceive, that christian people do run unto the Church, as to a Stage
play, where they may be delighted with pyping and singing (and do thereby
absent themselves from hearing the word of God preached) in this case we must
rather abstain from a thing not necessary, than to suffer their pleasures to
be cockered with the destruction of their souls.


YOVTH. What say you of Minstrels that go and range abroad, and thrust
themselves into every man's presence and company to play some mirth unto them.


AGE. These sort of people are not sufferable, because they are loyterers and
idle fellows, Anno Elizabeth. 14.
and are therefore by the laws and statutes of this Realm forbidden to raunge
and roaue abroad, counting them in the number of Roges, and to say truth,
they are but defacers of Music.


YOVTH. Are there any other good exercises?


AGE. Yes, as Scholars to make Orations, to play good and honest Comedies, to
play at Tennise, and such like: etc. Notwithstanding in all these exercises
that I have spoken off before, this must I add for your instruction, that none
of them ought to be a hinderance or let to any man, from his duty toward
Gods word.


YOVTH. Now that you have declared to me what exercises are lawful for the
powers of the mind and body, I pray you to show me, what that play is,
which you call chance or hap?


AGE. These Plays that depend upon chance, are those which we call Dice
play, which kind of Play is to be eschewed and avoided of all men. So Cato
gives counsel to all youth, saying: Cato.
Trocho lude, aleas fuge, Play with the top, and flee Diceplaying.


YOVTH. What mean you to speak against Diceplaying, fithe so many
honorable, worshipful, and honest men use so commonly to play at it?


AGE. The persons make it not good, but rather it makes them the worse: for it
causes many of them (oftentimes) to bring a Castle into a Capcase, a whole
Manor and Lordeshippe into a Cottage, their Fee simple into Fee single, with
other infinite like discommodities, according to the old verse: Dives eram
ductum, me secerunt tria nudum:
Alea, Vina, Venus, tribus his sum factus egenus.
Sometime rich I was, and had thereof great spare,
But three things has me made, to go full poor and bare:
Dyce, wine, and Generie, were to me great speed,
These three did hasten all my woe, and brought me to great need.


Yet notwithstanding, although these men that you speak of, use to play at
Dice, and love that game so well, yet in no myse will be called Dice players,
or Dicers, it is so ovious a name, the reason is, for that it is an ovious and
wicked play: so the these, the Oueane, the Papists, Murderer. etc. will not be
called by that name, of that fault and filthy sin which they use, because
they know it is most wicked and abominable.


YOVTH. This fault of losing their goods, is not to be imputed to the play it
self, but to them that play.


AGE. Yes sir, it is in the Play also: Take away the whore, there will be no
whoredom: take away fire, there will be no burning: take away powder and
shot, none shall be murdered: take away poison, none can be poisoned. etc.
take away Play, there will be no playing. This did Marcus Antonius the
Emperor very well see, who lying in his death hedde, Aero (...) lib. 2.
said to his son Commodus these words: It is a most hard thing and a
difficiil matter for a man to keep measure in liberty (of Plays) or to be
able to restrain the vryble of things desired (unless the things themselves
be taken away that are desired) for surely we be all made worse, both old and
young, by reason of this liberty to play at Dice, to enjoy our own filthy
desires.


YOVTH. I pray you, who was the first deuisour of Dyce playing? It appears
that it has been of a long continuance.


AGE. There are diverse opinions hereof. Some say that it was one Attalus:
Others suppose that it was devised by one Brulia. Polyd. Virg. in lib. 2. ca 8.
de inuentos toribus rer.
Polydose Virgill says, that one Lydi devised this among the Lydians a people
of Asia, of great love and policy, what time a great famine was among them,
that by passing away the time with this Play, they bare out their hunger the
better, and their vittailes endured also the longer. etc. Others say, that one
Palamedes, Job. Rauisius Textor.
being (In an army of the Greeks against the Troianes) idle, invented this
Diceplaye to pass the time away and also to save vittails. etc. But certainly
those that write of the inventions of things, have good cause to suppose
Lucifer the Prince of Deuilles, to be the first inuenter thereof, and hell (no
doubt) was the place where it was first founded. for what better alectiue,
could Satan devise to allure and bring men pleasantly into damnable servitude,
than to purpose to them a form of Play (which is his principal treasury,
wherein the more part of sin and wickedness is contained, and all goodness,
virtue, honesty, and godliness clean confounded.


YOVTH. I assure you, I never heard before, that Diceplaying was so wicked, as
you say.


AGE. (...).
Publius says: Quanto Aleator in art melior est, tant^nequior est, As much
more running the Dicer is in that art, so much the more wicked he is. There
cannot be a more plain figure of Idleness, than Diceplaying is. For (besides
that there is no manner of exercise of the body or mind therein) they use
great and terrible blasphemings and swearings, wicked brawlings, robbing, and
stealing, craft, covetousness, and deceyte, ^h, why do we call that a play,
which is compact of covetousness, malice, craft, and deceyte?


YOVTH. What craft, deceit, and robbery can there be in Dice playing? Are not
the little Dice cast down upon the table, that every man may see them that
has but half an eye, and may easily tell every prick and point upon them?
And therefore I cannot see, how any man should thereby be deceived, I suppose
there is not a more plain play, and less deceyte (being always before men's
eyes) than is Diceplaying.


AGE. The blind cateth many a fly, and feeth it not. For I perceyne that you
are (or else you seem so to be) ignorant of their skill and doings. If you did
understand thoroughly of their false Dice, cogging terms, and orders, it will
make you to abhor, detest, and desie all Diceplaying.


YOVTH. Is there any more to be considered in this Play, than plainly and
simply so play with two dice, and cast them out of our hands upon the plain
boorde?


AGE. Yea, my son, much more, both for their craft in casting them, and
making them, and also for the sundry names of their Dice, to be guile the
simple and ignorant withal.


YOVTH. I had never thought that there could be such deceyts in Dice playing,
or that men had any cunning or sleyght therein to beguile any.


AGE. For the obteyning of this skill (of filthy Dice playing) they have made
as it were an art, and have their peculiar t^rmes for it. And a number of
lewd persons have and daily do apply it as it were Grammar, or Logike, or any
other good service or science, when as they associate together with their
harlots and fellow thieves.


YOVTH. What have Dicers to do with harlots and thieves?


AGE. As much as with their very friends: for they are all of one hall and
corporation, and spring all out of one root, and so tend they all to one
end, ydlely to live by rauine and craft, devouring the fruits (like
Caterpillars) of other men's labors and travails craftily to get it into
their own hands as thieves.


YOVTH. I pray you show me the occasion, why men so earnestly are given to
Dice playing?


AGE. The first occasion to play, is tediousness and lothsomnesse of good
labors. 1. Tim. 6.10 Ierem. 6.13.
Secondly, is covetousness and greediness for other men's many, which
covetousness, says S. Paul, is the root of all mischief.


YOVTH. I perceive by you, that there grows great and dangerous
inconveniences and mischiefs by this Diceplaying.


AGE. You have said truth. For it is a door and a window into all theft,
muriher, whoredom, swearing, blaspheming, banketting, dancing, rioting,
drunkenness, pride, covetousness, craft, deceyt, lying, brawling, fighting,
prodigality, nightwatchings, idleness, beggerie, poverty, bankcrupting,
misery; prisonment, Chrysostom, in Man, bom. 6.
hanging. etc. And what not? Saint Chrysostom ^ayth: that God never invented
Plays, but the Devil: for the people sat down to eat and drink, and rose
up to play, in the honor of a most filthy ydoll, Ambr. lib. 1. de offi^. ca.
2^.
for when they had worshipped the calfe, and committed ydolatrie, they seemed
to have obtained this reward of the Devil: Sir Thomas Eliot knight in his
book of the governors.
namely to play. Saint Ambrose says also, that Plays and pastimes sweet and
pleasant, when as yet they are contrary to the rules of christianity, Sir
Thomas Eliot knight says to such as are Diceplayers: Every thing (says he) is
to be esteemed after his value: but who hearing a man, whom he knows not to
be called a Dicer, does not a^on suppose him to be of a light credit,
dissolute, vain, and remiss? How many Gentlemen, how many Merchants. etc.
have in this damnable pastime (of Diceplaying) consumed their substance, as
well by their own labors, as by their parents, with great study and
painful travel, in a long time acquired, and finished their lives in debt and
penury? How many goodly and bold young men (says he) has it brought to
theft, whereby they have prevented the course of nature, and died by the order
of the laws miserably? These are the fruits and revenues of that wicked
merchandice (of Diceplaying.)


YOVTH. Is it lawful for any man to play at any game for money, to win it,
keep it, and purse it up or no? I pray you let me know your judgment herein.


AGE. I say generally, it is not lawful to play for money, to win it, and
purse it up, that is, either to lose his own, or win others, to witholde it
as good gain.


YOVTH. What reason is there hereof?


AGE. The reason is most clear and plain: First that play (whatsoever it be)
was not appointed or permitted as a mean and way to get or win money, but
only for exercise of the body, or recreation of the mind: so that whosoever
uses it to other end, makes it no game, but abuses, changes, and alters
the nature of the recreation, into a filthy and insufferable gain, and
therefore dishonest. Which (be they high, be they low) Christians ought to
flee and shun, 2 T^m. 3.8.
as Saint Paul says, August. in Epist. 54. ad Macedoni^i. Distine. 35. (...)
Episcopus.
from filthy lucre. And in the Distinitions out of Augustine, it is said: Hoc
autem iure possidetur quod just: Et hoc just quod been, omne ig^tur quod male
possidetur, alienum est. etc. That is rightly possessed, that is rightly
gotten: and that is rightly gotten, that is well and truly gotten: therefore
whatsoever is possessed falsely and naughtily, is another man's and not thine.
etc. Tullie says also: Nihil vtile est, quod non sit honestum, Nothing is
profitable or gain (to thee) which is not honestlye gotten: otherwise it is
Turpe lucrum, filthy gains. Furthermore, gaming was never allowed as a kind
of bargaining, traffike, or occupying among men: if we either consider Gods
law or man's. Amongst all ye laws in the world, which have thoroughly decided
all means how to get, and justly to possess other men's goods, never make
mention that gaming was a just mean. The Roman law, which we call the Civil
law, has very largely and diligently determined of it. But amongst all the
honest means whereof the Civil law makes mention, gaming is not mentioned,
nor once within the compass. Yet he speaks of contractes in sale, of letting
to hire, making restitution, and such like, whereby we may justly have and get
that which is others: but there is no mention at all made of Play, or that we
may thereby win or possess any thing. So that whosoever takes and keeps
the money of another which he has won in play, withholdes it without lawful
cause, and therefore against conscience, and to speak plainly, shows himself
a flat thief. If S. Paul forbids us to use deceyte in bargaining and
selling, what should we do in gaming? And if this should be suffered, we
shall bring in a greedy covetousness, in stead of the recreation of the
mind, and to be short, a desire to beguile each other, in stead of folace and
pastime.

To gain then by play, and especially at Dice, is as much as to steal and
rob, notwithstanding any customs, evil uses, or corruptions of manners.
Francis H^^toman in lib^. de vsuris, cap. 2.
One master Francis Hotoman, a notable lawier and a christian, confirms my
sentence and judgment, and shows that by the meaning of the law, that gain
gotten and pursed up by play, is forbidden, and to be condemned. And S.
Augustine says, August. in Epist. 54. ad Macedoni^^.
that ye money should be given to the poor that is gotten by play, to the end
that the loser should not have his loss again, and also that the winner
might be disappointed of the hope to have that which he had so euilly gotten.
Also it is very reasonable, that besides this loss, the magistrate should put
them both (that play) to a good fine, to be bestowed to common uses. For* I
pray you what reason is there to turn that to covetousness, which was
appointed for recreation and comfort of man? The poor which are so many in the
Church of God, and so nedye, as all the world sees so many small children
that are orphans, lacking schooling for want of help, and that he which
counts himself a christian and a brother to these poor, and acknowledges
them for the members of Jesus Christ, should play away and spend his money at
his pleasure, and should not rather give it in a^mes to his brethren, Esaias.
58.7.
which are, as Esaias says, his own flesh? Alas how dearly is that pleasure
sometimes bought of us, and what shame shall we have before Gods angels for
such lavishness, Mat. 25.44.
yea before the poor people of God, as it is written in Saint Mathewe. When
rich Churles shall eat and drink, Luc. 12.19.
and after fall to play, like to that cursed man of who^ Saint Luke speaks
of, Luc. 16.19.
and in the mean season poor Lazarus our brethren shall lie and starve at our
doors, on whom the very brute beasts to their powers, bestowed their alms in
licking their sores, and we that are men of his own likeness, have money to
play away, and can find in our hearts to bestow none on them.

Luc. 16.9. 1. Tim. 6.17.
Let us according to the commandment of God, make friends with our monye, not of
such as win it of us by play (for they will never conne us thank for it) but
of the poor people of God, which cause it to be restored again (at that great
day of Gods judgment) with profit and increase. Prou. 17.19.
Saint Augustine says: Foecundus est ager pauperum, August. de v^rbis dom.
sermo. ^5.
cito reddit dominantibus fructum: Dei est pro paruis magno pensare, Profitable
is the field of the poor, and yields fruit very quickly to the owners, it
is Gods property to restore great things for small things. Saint Augustine
therefore allows not that any christian man should give his money to any
Iugler, or Stage player, although they show us some pleasure with their
pains, much less does he allow us to give our money to a gamster that plays
with us, to whom we show as much pastime as he shows us: Let me then
conclude, that which I have said, is true: that is, that money gotten and
pursed up by play, is flat theft: and to gain by such means, is plainly to
rob, and to possess other men's goods without just cause, and against
conscience, because it is plain against the commandment of God, Exo. 20.15.
that says: Thou shalt not steal. Notwithstanding, that there be a consent
of the Players, yet there is a burning lust and desire of each others money, and
to obtain this their greedy covetous purpose, they use this wicked and
crafty play at Dice to deceive, which is called blind fortune. For that
purpose Iustinianus the Emperor, Cod. lib. 3. tit. vltimo.
made a decree that none should play publicly, or privately in their houses.
etc. Thus we see what gain and profit by play is gotten, Luc. 6.25.
even as Christ says: They that now laugh, shall weep, and they that now
have plenty shall want. etc. Saint Augustine to this says: Quae est ista rogo
animarum insania, August. de verbis dom, sermo. 25.
amittere vitam, appettere mortem, acquirere aurum, and perdere coelum, What
madness is this of men, to lose life, and desire death, to seek for gold,
and lose God.


YOVTH. They say, they cannot delight in play, except they play for money.


AGE. I would gladlye know again to what use they would put that (money
gotten) unto.


YOVTH. Peradventure they will bestow it upon some feast, or else upon the
poor people.


AGE. But I say still, it is much better and safer not to play for any money at
all, for that (as you have heard) it is not lawful. Again, it may be, that
you your self are not touched with covetousness: but possible the other with
whom you play, is touched therewith: 1. These. 5.22
therefore let the occasions of evil be taken away, which otherwise are very
many which move unto evil, And if there were nothing else to fear the^ away
from this play, yet let them for Gods sake weygh this (as I have said before)
how great the penury and need is, and what number of poverty there is
euerywhere replenished, that we may say as S. Jerome said: Hieron. ad
Gauden^iu^.
Nudus atque esuriens ante fores nostras Christus in paupere moritur, Christ
naked and hungrye, lying before out gates, dies in the poor. The law of God
requires so many duties, that not our whole life long is able to perform
them; and yet will we bestow time in playing at Dice? We are otherwise
sufficiently sick with covetousness of money, with ambition to overcome and
excel others. etc. Why then do they stir up these diseases with plays?


YOVTH. They say, this is not stirred up in them.


AGE. Romans ^4.21 1. Cor. 8.13. Math. 18.6. Luc. 1^.1. Marc 9.43.
Now they must remember, that they may be easily stirred up, when they enter
once in play. And they must see not only to themselves, but that they bring
not other also unto the same disease, for though they know their own mind and
strength, yet they know not others.


YOVTH. What and if they will so play their money? are they not Lords of their
own things? They say, they do no wrong to their neighbors, they take away no
other man goods by violence, what then can be said unto them?


AGE. Haggens.
That is not true. For the Prophet says in the person of God: The silver is
mine, and the gold is mine, says the Lord. For you must note, that God
delivers unto us his riches and treasure, according to his good pleasure, as
unto stewardes to use them, Tobi. 4.8. Eccl. 20.11.
and bestow them as God in his word commands. And therefore they ought to
understand, that it is the duty of the Magistrates, Psa. 4.17.18 Deuteronomy. 26.2.
3.4.5. Leuit. 27.32 Genesis 14.20. Cap. 28.22. Exo. 22.29. Leu. 27.30. Nan^^
18.22. 23.24.28.29 Mat. 10.10. Luc 10.7. 1 Timothy 5.8. Pro. 31.15.21 Math. 22.21.
Romans 13.7. Deuteronomy. 24.19 Leuit. 2^.9. Cap. 23.2.
to see that every man use his own things honestly and well. And they ought
more deeply to consider, that God gave them riches and money for four special
ca^^es and purposes. First, wherewith they might maintain preaching of Gods
word. Secondly, for the nourishing and maintaining of themselves and their
family. Thirdly, to pay tributes, taxes, and customs to the Prince, for the
better maintenance and defense of their people and country. Fourthly, to
help the pore and needy members of Christ. etc. those are the ends whereunto
riches is given unto us, and not for to waste it foolishly at Diceplaying, and
so put it to the stippernesse of fortune. Also it behooves every one
(especially those that profess the Gospel) to represent the image of God, who
governs and rules all things with reason, Psalm. 112.9. Tob. 4.7.8. Eccl.
^.1.2. 3 4.5. Luc 14.13. Cap. ^9.8 Math. 25.8. 1. Tim. 9.18.
mercy, love, and wisdom. But so to consume their money and goods at Dyce,
and vain plays, is not to be as Lords over their own things, but tyrants
and spoylers, and not to use them with mercy, love, and wisdom, but with
unmercifulness, hatred, and foolishness, to abuse them. And on the other
part, what thing soever is gotten by this kind of Diceplay, is Turpe lucrum,
Habbac. 2. 6.1^.12.
filthy gain: and that gain so gotten, shall be a witness against them at
the last day of judgment, if they repent not, and it shall be gain put in a
bottomless purse, as the Prophet says, H^ggai. 1.6
that is, they shall never have joy or good thereof, as the Poet says: De
bonis male quaesitis, vix gaudebit h^^res tertius: Evil gotten goods shall
never prosper. I penny naughtily gotten, says Chrysostom, is like a rotten
apple laid among found apples, which will rot all the rest. Therefore we must
hold fast and firmly determine, that such plays are very theft and robbery,
and therefore ought not in any wise to be suffered, for that they are governed
by chance and rashness, so that thereby goods and money are indaungered: and
also for that it belongs to the public wealth, to see that those things be
rightly governed: For God gives goods to be spent to good uses, and not upon
vain fond abuses.


YOVTH. These Players are honest, substantial, and credible men, and though
they play at Dice, yet they give to the poor nevertheless, and pay their
duty to the Prince never the latter.


AGE. Their credites are much cracked that use this play, so that they can not
beautify or garnishe it by no policye, but contrary wise, Prou. 21.17 Eccl.
34.18.
that does altogether foil them. And for their giving to the poor, it both no
more excuse them, than if they robbed a man to give to the poor. They say,
they give nevertheless, I pray you do they give by that ever a whitte the
more? If they do; yet we may not do evil, that good may come thereof. Romans
3.8.
(says Saint Paul) whose damnation is just. Yet I pray you let me
understand what they give weekly to the poor.


YOVTH. Every of them gives according to his ability, some a penny, others
two pence, another four pence, and the best commonly gives but six pence.


AGE. What is this to the purpose, in respect of their play, whereat they will
not stick to venture at Dice, v. s. x. s. xx. s. yea x. li. xx. li. at a cast,
and will thereat consume xl. li. or an C. li. yea all that they have. etc.
which is lamentable to hear and see. But whatsoever they give to the poor, it
is done (contrary to the rule of Scriptures) grudgingly, Roma. 12.8 2. Cor.
9.7. Prou. 11.25. Eccl. 35.10.
murmuringly, and unwillingly. Some of them have lost as much in one hour,
nay, in one quarter of an hour (at Dice) as they have given to the poor two
or three years before. Is not this to be corrected and amended (by the
rulers?) If they neglect it, no doubt God will be revenged of it, it is so
wicked and ungodly. It is a world to hear and see what ado the Magistrates
have to make them and such like to be contributories to the relief of the
poor weekly, according to the statutes etc. What excuses, what allegations,
what protestations, what loquations, what persuations will they use, who
knows not? either yt they are not able, or that they are fallen behind hand,
or yt they are not so much worth now by a great sum as they have been, or that
they have great losses, or that they keep some poor man or woman, or else some
fatherless children for alms deed, or else they give every day at their
doors to the poor, or that they will give their alms themselves, or that it
is not given well. etc. Or what not? so they may not give to the poor. But to
give and put into a box for a Mu^merie or mask to play at Dice, they will not
stick at ten pound, twenty pound, or an hundredth pound, so frank and
liberal they are to please their own covetous desire, and vain pleasure. But
to help needy Christ in his members, they are poor and want money: but to the
furnishing forward of Diceplaying, we have money and gold plenty, yea, if need
be, their wives also are allowed their xx. s. xl s. yea twenty nobles to
maintain them to play at Dice, supposing that it is a great taken (to the
world) of credit, ^ a sign of excellent love between that is them, when in
deed it is utterly a discredit to both of them, and a token that they love not
in the Lord. Ierem. 4.22
Thus we are wise (says the Prophet) to do evil, but to do well we have no
knowledge.


YOVTH. Eccle. 7.17.
They say it is written in Ecclesiastes, that we ought not to be too
righteous, nor too superstitious: for that were the way to bring in
superstition again, and to take away christian liberty.


AGE. 1. These. 5.22.
Saint Paul commands the faithful not only to forbear from that which is
evil of it self, but even from all show of evil. But these chance and
Diceplayes that I have spoken of, or any such like, are evil things of
themselves, and not alone simple shows (as you have heard before:) and in
effect, I would feign know what ouerstrait rigor and severity of life we do
enjoin to Christians, if we allow them honestly and moderately to play and
sport themselves at all other games, that either stand upon sharpness of
wit, or wholesome and moderate exercise of the body? Saint Chrysostom in his
homily of Iolenesse, in his time, Chrysostom. in hom. 1.
aunswering to like objections, says: That when we do restrain from the
godly their superfluities, we mean not to bring them to too great straitness
of life. To be short, christian liberty (even in indifferent things) must be
subject to the politic laws of the countries, Romans 14.16. 1. Cor. 8.12 1.
Cor. 10.23.
and to the edification of our neighbors: therefore we ought much less to
take liberty in such hurtful things: Let reason (says Syrach) go before
every enterprise, Eccl. 37.16.
and counsel before every action.


YOVTH. They say, there is no harm if they play at this game without swearing,
chasing, or covetousness.


AGE. If there be money laid down, it is impossible that they should play
without covetousness and desire to win: which must needs be unseemly (as I
have declared before) and utterly unlawful. And where they say they see no
harm: besides the great mischiefs (that is too great) in this Diceplay (as we
have said) this my answer is ready, that the end of such games shows the
mischief thereof. Prou. 14.12. 13.14.
Therefore Solomon speaks very aptly to this matter: There is a way (says
he) that seems right unto men, but the end thereof is the way to death:
yea, while they laugh, they shall have heavy hearts, and the end of their joy
is sorrow: a backslyding heart shall be filled with his own ways, but the
good man shall depart from him. And so it seems that they do but ween and
think that there is no harm in it, being carried away with affections, but
the trial proves the harm too too great, and therefore good men can perceive
it.


YOVTH. They allege that there is none but common gamehouses and tabling
houses that are condemned, and not the playing sometimes in their own private
houses.


AGE. Cod. lib. 3. ^^. vltimo.
That game (which is called Alea) is condemned, and not the house alone where
the play is usually kept, and what allureth us to customable and ordinary
play, but only the beginning to handle Dyce in our own houses? To say that
there is a virtue called courtesy, which in Greek is called Eutrapelia, that
consists in man's sporting and recreating themselves together: I likewise say
so, but that virtue allows not to play at such detestable games, as this
Diceplay is, but only at honest and lawful games, as are the Chesse, and
Tennise. etc. or such like, and also to do that but at convenient times, and
that moderately, without any excess. To be short, there is no usury in the
world so heinous, as the gain gotten by this play at Dyce, where all is
gotten with a trice over the thumb, without any traffic or loan. Seeing
therefore that these games are so contrary to the word of God, so hurtful
and wicked, and of so dangerous beginning and mischievous a consequence, we
ought utterly to forbear and detest them.


YOVTH. They object further and say, that Diceplaying is not specially
forbidden in the Scriptures, and therefore they may use it.


AGE. So likewise there is nothing found in the scriptures, specially of
Bakers, Brewers, Cooks, Sadlers, Shoomakers, Tanners, Clothiers, Taylers. etc.
Therefore may they do in their occupations what cra^t and deceit they list, to
deceive the commons, as to use false and unlawful wares, to make unwholesome
bread, and drink, and meat for the common people. etc. no wise man will
grant them that liberty: and yet you shall not read of them in the
scriptures yet you must learn, Eccl. 4.4 5. 1. Cor. 10.33. Colo. 3.17. Math.
7.12. Luc. 6.31. Job. 4.16.
that all things are found generally in the holy Scriptures, as in this:
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God:
Again: Whatsoever ye shall do in word or in deed, do all in the name of
the Lord Jesus. etc. I pray you what glory of God is there in all their
Diceplaying? nay rather, what disglorie is there not? what swearing and
blaspheming is used among them? what covetousness and craft, what falshoode
and the every, what fighting and brawling, what pride and idleness, what
poverty, shame, and misery, with such other like fruits, I have sufficiently
declared unto you already, and therefore I am sure no Christian man will say,
that God is hereby honored, but rather dishonored, and therefore to be left
off, refused, and detested of all good men. Yet by their leave, this game of
Diceplaying is spoken of in two special places in the Scripture, that expressly
make mention of it with as great detestation as is possible. The one is in the
old Testament, Psalm: 22.18.
in the Psalms. And the other is in the new Testament in Saint John, Ioh.
19.24.
where he speaks of the game that was played for our Savior Christ's
garment, and plainly declares that it was at lottes (that is at Dice) to show
that the Church of God should first be bewitched with such like games, to
make the breach first to all other losenesse of life, and that the unity of
the Church should be broken by such means. etc.


YOVTH. Has any honest man of credit and reputation been evil thought of, for
playing at Dice, before this time?


AGE. That there has, and not of the meanest sort, but Emperors, Princes,
and Counsaylers.


YOVTH. I pray you receite one or two to me for example.


AGE. That I will. First the most noble Emperor Octanius Augustus, for that he
played at Dice (and that but seldom) has among writers in diverse of his acts
sustained (in hystories) a note of a sharp reproach and shame for his
Diceplaying, Suetonius^^ vita August. Imperat. cap. 71.
notwithstanding that he had many great virtues. Cicero reproched Marcus
Antonius in open senate, ^^cero in ^illipic^. 2.
as with one of the notablest faults that he could cast in his teeth, that he
played at Dyce, (which he calls Aleam.) Claudius Caesar Emperor of Rome
showed himself to be a fool and a very blockhead (not only for his other
vices) for that he played at Dice. Sueronius.
Also the Lacedaemonians sent an Ambassador to the city of Corinth,
Lacedemo^^ans.
to join friendship with them: but when the Ambassador found the Princes
and Counsailers playing at Dyce, departed without doing his message, saying
that he would not maculate and defile the honor of their people, with such a
reproach, to be said, that they had made aliance with Diceplayers.

^. Demetrius.
Also they sent unto Demetrius the king of the Parthians, for his lightness in
playing at Dyce (in a taunt) a pair of golden Dyce. For the better credit I
will recite to you Chaucer which says hereof in verses.


YOVTH. I pray you do so, for I am desirous to hear what he says hereof.


AGE. Chaucer.
Stilbone that was holden a wise Ambassador,
Was sent to Corinth with full great honor,
Fro Calidon, to make him aliaunce:
And when he came, happened this chance,
That all the greatest that were in that land,
Playing at Dyce he them fande:
For which as love as it might be,
He stale him home again to his country.
And said: there will I not lose my name,
I will not take on me so great a shame,
For to ally you to no hassardours.
For by my truth I had lever dye,
Than I should you to hassardours allye:
For ye that be so glorious of honors,
Shall not allye you with hassardours:
As by my will, or by my treaty,
This wise Philosopher thus said he.
Look thee how King Demetrius
The King of Parthes, as the book says us:
Sent a pair of Dice of gold in scorn,
For he had used hassardie there beforne.
For which he held his glory and his renoume,
Of no value or reputation.
Lords might find other manner play,
Honest enough to drive the day away.

YOVTH. This is very notable: but yet I pray you show me what Chaucers own
opinion is touching Dice play?


AGE. His opinion is this, in verses also: Dycing is very mother of leesings,
And of deceyte, and cursed forswearings,
Blasphemy of God, manslaughter, and waste also,
Of battle, oughtinesse, and other mo,
It is reprofe and contrary to honor,
For to behold a common Dicesour.
And ever the higher he is of estate,
The more he is holden desolate,
If thou a Prince do use hassardie,
In all governance and policy.
He is as by common opinion,
Holden less in reputation.


Sir Thomas Eliot knight, says: That every thing is to be esteemed after his
value: Sir Thomas Eliot knight in his book of the governor.
but who hearing a man (says he) whom he knows not, to be called a Dicer,
does not suppose him to be of a light credit, dissolute, vain, and remiss.
etc.

Nicholas Lyra (in a little book of his entitled Praeceptorium de Lyra)
alleges nine reasons against playing at Dyce. Lyra in lib. praeceptoriu^, in
S. praecept.



YOVTH. I pray you let me hear what those reasons are?


AGE. 1. Tim. 5.10.
First reason is: the covetous desire to gain, which is the root of all evil.
Second reason is, the desire and will to spoil and take from our neighbors
by deceyte and guyle, that he has. Third reason is, the excess gain thereof,
which passes all kind of usury which goes by month and years, for gain:
but this Diceplay gayneth more in an hour, than usury does in a year. The
fourth reason is, the manifold lyings, vain and idle words and
communications that always happens in this Diceplay. The fifth reason is, the
horrible and blasphemous oaths and swearings that are thundered out in those
Plays against God and his majesty. The sixth reason is, the manifold
corruptions and hurt of our neighbors, which they use to receive and take by
the evil custom and usage of this Diceplay. The seventh reason is, the
offense that it gives to the good and godly. The eight reason is, the contempt
and breach of all good laws both of God and man, which utterly forbids this
Diceplay. The ninth and last reason is, the loss of time, and doing of good,
which in this time of Diceplay are both neglected. For these causes (says
Lyra) Laws were ordained to suppress Diceplay. etc.


YOVTH. Surely these are very good reasons to prove that Diceplay is a very
evil exercise, and that in all ages and times it has been detested and
abhorred.


AGE. Summa Angel ^a cap. ^aulus.
You may look more of Diceplay in summa Angelica, in the Chapter Ludus.

Dicing is altogether hazarding, the more studious that a man shall be thereof,
Henr. Corn. Agrippa de van tat e setentiarum.
the wickedder and vnhappier he shall be, whilst that in desiring other men's
goods, he consumes his own, and has no respect of his patrimony. This art
is the mother of lies, of periuries, of theft, of debate, of injuries, of
manslaughter, the very invention of the Devils of hell. An art altogether
infamous, and forbidden by the laws of all nations. At this day, this is the
most accustomed pastime that Kings and noble men use. What do I call it a
pastime: nay rather their wisdom, which herein has been damnably instructed
to deceive.


YOVTH. I marvel and wonder very much that ever this wicked Diceplay could
be suffered in any Commonwealth.


AGE. It has been never suffered, nor tolerable at any time in any good
Common wealth. For the Greek and Latin hystories (and also our own laws of
this Realm of England) be full of notable laws and examples (of good Princes)
that utterly exiled and banished Diceplaying out of their seigniories and
countries, and whosoever used Diceplaying, was taken, reputed, and holden as
infamed persons.


YOVTH. I pray you declare to me some examples and laws hereof.


AGE. Justinian the Emperor made a decree, Cod. lib 3. tit. vltimo.
that none should play at Tables and Dice publicly or privately in their
houses, Alexander Seuerus.
etc. Alexander Seuerus the Emperor, did clean banishe all Diceplayers,
having always in his mouth ^his saying: Our forefathers trusted in wisdom and
prowess, and not in fortune, and desired victory for renoume and honor, and
not for money. And that game of Diceplaye is to be abhorred, whereby wit
steepeth, and idleness with covetousness is only learned. He made a law
therefore against all Diceplayers, that if any were found playing at Dice, he
should be taken for frantic and mad, or as a fool natural, which could
not well govern himself, and all his goods and lands should be committed
to sage and discrete personages, appointed by the whole Senate, employing upon
him so much as was necessary for his sustinance. etc. Finally, next unto
thieves and extorcioners, he hated Diceplayers most, ordeyning that no
Diceplayer should be capable or worthy to be called either to any office or
counsel.

Ludowicke king of France returning home from Damiata, Centuria. 15. ca. 7.
fo. 749.
commanded that Omnes foeneratores, Iudaeos, Aleatores. etc. All usurers,
Jews. Diceplayers, and such as are raylers and evil speakers against the word
of God, should depart out of his realm.

In the Digests, the Praetor says: If a diceplayer be injured, he will give
no aid unto him, and if a man compel another to play at dice, In Dig. de
aleatoribus, lib. 9. tit. 5. number. 1.
let him be punished, and cast either in the quarries to dig stones, or else
into the common prisons. Also in the same Digestes it is said: That if any
manne stryke him in whose house he plays at Dice, or do him any wrong or
injury: Or if during the time of their play, any thing be piltered or stolen
out of his house, he shall have no law at all for it at my hands (says the
Praetor.) Also whosoever lends money in this play, or lay any wagers among
themselves, they are not firm and good, because it is a wicked exercise, not
sufferable, but punishable.

Conc. ^liber^^nu^, cap. 79.
In this Council it was decreed, that if any Christian did use to play at
Dice, and would not give over and leave it, he should be debarred from the
Communion a whole year at least.

Decret. lib. 3 cap. Clerici.
In the Decrees, it is there forbidden that Priests should be present at
Plays ( Qui Aleator est, repellitur a promotione, nec debe^t inspectores ludi
huiusmodi) That Priest which is a Dicer, let him be expelled from his
promotion, neither ought they to look upon such play. Distinct 35. cap.
Episcop.
Also in the Distinctions, it is forbidden the^ to be drunkards and Dicers.
etc. And the Gloss thereupon says: Simi^iter Laicus priu^tur aut verberetur,
Likewise let the Lay man bet restrained, Cano. 41.42.
or else let him be beaten and punished. Also in the Canons, that are
attributed unto the Apostles) this wicked Dice play is utterly forbidden. So
wicked and detestable has this play been esteemed by all laws. And at one
word, this kind of play (as it is reported of a truth) has overthrown the
kings of Asia and all their estate: Iuuenal. in Sat. 14.
therefore Iuuenall counts Diceplaye among those vices that easi^iest corrupt
a whole household, and is ye worst example that can be in a well governed house,
saying: If ancient folk before their youth,
do play at Cards or Dice,
Their youth will seame to do the like,
and imitate their vice.



YOVTH. I besecche you let me hear also what our own laws say against this
Diceplaying.


AGE. An. 12. R. 2.
In the time of King Richard the second, all unlawful games were forbidden
universally, and namely Diceplaying.

In the time of king Henry the fourth, An. 21. ^. 2.
Diceplayers should be punished by imprisonment for six days, and if the
head Officers and Sherifes made not diligent search for gamesters, they should
forfeyte xl. s. And if it were a Constable, for his negligence he should pay
vj. s. viij. d.

In the time of king Edward the fourth, An. 17. E. 4.
it was ordained, that all such as kept any houses for play at dice. etc.
should have three years imprisonment, and to forfeyte twenty pound. And the
players to have two years of imprisonment, and to forfeyt ten pound.

In the time of king Henry the seventh, An. 11. H. 7.
it was also ordained, that diceplayers. etc. should be set openly in the
stocks, by the space of one whole day. And the housekeepers that suffered them
to play, to pay vj. s. viij. d. and to be bound to their good behavior.

In the time of king Henry the eight, An. 33. H. 8.
it was ordained, that every housekeeper that used to keep diceplaying within
their houses, should forfeite forty shillings, and the players to forfeyte vi.
s. viii. d. and be bound by recognisance never to play any more at these
unlawful games.

Also in the reign of the same king Henry the eight, An. 3. H. 8.
it was ordained, that if any persons did disguise themselves in apparel, and
cover their faces with visors, gathering a company together, naming themselves
Mummers, which use to come to the dwelling places of men of honor, and other
substantial persons, whereupon Murders, Felony, Rape, and other great hurts
and inconveniences have aforetime grown, and hereafter be like to come, by
the color thereof, if the said disorder should continue not reformed. etc.
That then they should be arreasted by the Kings liege people as vagabondes,
and be committed to the Jail without bail or Mainprise, for the space of
three months, and to fine at the Kings pleasure. And every one that keeps
any visors in his house, to forfeyte xx. s.

In the reign of our gracious Queen Elizabeth (that now is, An. E. ^^
it was ordained, that all those which use (to go to the country and play) and
unlawful games and plays, shall be taken as Roges, and to be committed to
prison, and for the first offense to have a hole made through the gristle of
their ear with a hot iron of an ynche compass. And for the second offense
to be hanged as a fellon.


YOVTH. These are excellent good laws, whereby I see that in all times (this
Diceplaying especially) has been abhorred, detested, and sharp laws made to
correct and punish it.


AGE. They are good laws in deed: but I fear me it may be answered, as one
answered the Athenians (who bragged of their laws) that they had good laws
in deed, but few or none duly executed. For I see that a great many of our
Rulers and Magistrates, do not only neglect the execution of laws herein,
upon Diceplayers, but are content to receive into their houses very worthily,
such loytering Diceplayers and Mummers: yea, rather than they shall depart
without play, they join fellowship with them, and play at Dice themselves,
whereby they do great hurt to the people whom they rule over, as Tully says:
Plus nocent exemplo, Tully.
quam peccato, They do more hurt by their example of lewd life, Esaias. 1.23.
than by the sin it self. Esaye the Prophet said of the rulers in his time,
that the rulers were rebellious and companions of thieves. etc. Seneca says:
Grauissimus morbus est qui a capite diffunditur, Seneca.
It is a most dangerous disease that comes from the head.


YOVTH. It is most certain that you say, and therefore the more pity: for in
so doing they are nurses to foster their evil doings, and allure the people by
their examples, as the old saying is: Qualis praeceptor, talis discipulus, As
the Master is, such is his scholars. And therefore a greater account have they
to make before the throne of God, at the day of judgment.


AGE. Eccle. 10.2.
It is very true, as Syrach says: As the Judge of the people is himself, so
are his officers, and what manner of man the ruler of the city is, Syracides.
such are all they that dwell therein. Syracides admonishes rulers to be good
examples in manners, life, and doings, that they may shine, and be as lights
before the people, that they whom they rule, may behold their doings, and
follow their good, just, and virtuous examples, saying: Scilicet in vulgus
manant exempla regentum,
V^que ducum lituos, sic mores custra sequuntur^
Such as do the people rule,
according unto law:
Examples they must give to them,
how they should live in awe.
For as the Captains trumpe does sound,
so will his host prepare:
To follow him where as he goes,
to sorrow or to care.



YOVTH. Is not this gaming condemned likewise by the holy Scriptures?


AGE. Yes truly most manifestly.


YOVTH. I pray you let me hear how it is forbidden by the holy Scriptures.


AGE. First it is ordained against the express and third commandment of
God, which says: Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain.
So that whosoever uses this chance of lottes in idle and trifling things,
takes the name and providence of God in vain. For the lot is one of the
principal witnesses of Gods power (as Solomon records) that it is ruled and
governed immediately by his hand, Prou. 16.33. Cap. 18.18.
power, and providence. And therefore we may not use lottes so triflinglye, as
it were to tempt God, and to try what care he has of the world, but only
in matters of great importance, and where his divine will should be
extraordinarilye known and understood. as in dividing of goods, Acts 1.26.
choosing of Magistrates, and such like, to end all quarrels or corruption of
voices, and not in sleyght things, as though we would make God servant to
our Pastymes and Sportes, and try what care he had of them. Secondly, this
play is instituted contrary to the true nature and end of that which we in
English call Play or Pastime, and the Latins call Ludus. And therefore the
Play at Dice is a very corruption of Gods holy permission, and of true and
honest play. For all plays are appointed and lyked of men for two causes
only: either for the exercise of the body (whereof Diceplay is wholly
contrary, being a sport of a sort of idle unthrifts:) or else Play should
serve for the recreation of the mind, and refreshing of our bodies, whereunto
Diceplaye is wholly repugnant and contrary: for therein is no exercise of our
wits, but we only stay upon the chance of the Dyce, while as well he that
wins, as he that loses, is amazed and unsure of his chance, but always
gapeth for the chance of his hap, without any pleasure, but only a covetous
desire to gain. Also we see that the more they play at such games, the more
they may, without any such contentment or pleasure of the mind as is found in
other honest and lawful games. Thirdly, the forbidding thereof by the Civil
laws, and commandments of magistrates, makes these Plays offensive,
wicked, and unlawful, though of their own nature they were not so. For Saint
Paul says thus: 2. Cor. 8.13.
Though I should forbear from eating of flesh all the days of my life,
rather than offend my brother, I ought to do it: Much more ought we for fear
of offense to forbear this play, in that it is nothing necessary for the
sustayning of man's life, nor of like commodity to the use of flesh, which S.
Paul wills us yet to forbear, if occasion serve. For there are other ways
to pastime and sport us, Ephe. 5.16. Colos. 4.5. 1. Pet. 4.2.
than by those plays. Fourthly, the spirit of God commands us by Saint
Paul, to redeem the time that we have lost in idle and unprofitable things,
and to bestow the time present in good and holy things to edification, because
the days are evil. For when God gives us leisure either to read his holy
word, to visit the poor, to comfort the afflicted, or to do such like
dutiful deeds, Mat. 25.36. James. 1.27.
we ought to do it quickly, because that incontinently one let or other may
happen, which may withdraw our minds therefrom, a thousand afflictions are
present before us, and it will be hard to recover that which we so slightly
ouerslippe. But I pray you is that well spending the time and the leisure which
God gives us to do good in, Gal. 6.10.
to lose it in playing at Dyce, which I have declared to be so offensive?
Fifthly, the beggarly and greedy desire in that game does so far exceed all
other, that there is nothing that does more entise and encourage a man to play,
than this Diceplay does. And the reason thereof is manifest, that seeing the
loser perceyueth that such loss happens not by the cunning of the Player,
but rather by his hap and chance for that time, he hops to recover his
money by the said hap, which is likely to change, being naturallye
chaungeable, and therefore plays on hoping for better chance, and so
continues, feeding himself with looking fvr the change of the Dice: so as
this game is proved to be the very occupation of loyterers and vagabondes, but
in plays of skill and cunning, the cause of the loss is soon espied and to
be perceived, and therefore he that perceyueth himself to be the weaker, does
immediately leave play. What shall I speak of the insatiable covetousness
that is in this Play, while either party seeks to win others money, or
rather the one of them to undo the other, and also go about to deceive the
other? What shall I speak again of the great and excessive losses that have
always been, and daily are in the said play? Some play away their houses,
horses, clothes: some all that ever they have, or can borowe, ere they can
leave off, till all be gone: so entising and alluring is this game above all
other, which causes so many come to beggary, stealing, and finallye to that
untimely death of the gallows. To this effect, a certain Poet and a Doctor
of both Laws, says: The damnable lust of Cards and of Dice, Sebastianus
Brant. in lib. Stultifera nauis.

And other games prohibit by law,
To great offenses some fools does attice.
Yet can they not themselves therefro withdraw,
They count their labors and loss not worth a straw,
Caring naught else, therein is their delight,
Till Christ and health be escaped from them quite.
There is almost no manner of degree,
Man, child, woman, pooreman, or estate,
Old or young, that of this game are free,
Nor yet the Clergy, both poor Priest and Prelate,
They use the same almost after one rate,
When by great loss they brought are in a rage,
Right few have reason their madness to assuage.
And to be plain, great inconveniences,
Proceeds to many by this unlawful game,
And by the same often youth does sue offenses,
To his destruction, and all his friends shame.
Often some by folly falls to be a thief,
And so end in shame, sorrow, and mischief.



YOVTH. What say you to Card playing, is that to be used and allowed among men?


AGE. I tell you plainly, it is even almost as badde as the other, there is
never a Barrel better Herring (as the Proverb is) yet of the two evils it is
somewhat the less, for that therein wit is more used, and less trust in
chance and fortune (as they term it) and yet I say, therein is no laudable
study or good exercise. Diceplaying is the mother, and Card playing is the
daughter, for they draw both with one string, all the followers thereof unto
idleness, loytering, blaspheming, misery, infamy, shame, penury, and
confusion.


YOVTH. Is there as much craft and deceit at Card playing, as there is in
Diceplaying?


AGE. Almost one, I will not give a straw to choose: they have such sleightes
in sorting and shuffling of the Cards, play at what game ye will, all is lost
aforehande, especially if two be confederate to cousin the third.


YOVTH. As how I pray you?


AGE. Either by pricking of a Card, or pinching of it, cutting at the nicke,
either by a Bumbe card finely under, over, or in the mids. etc. And what not
to deceive? And therefore to conclude, Cyprian.
I say with that good Father Saint Cyprian: The play at Cards is an
invention of the Devil, which he found out that he might the easilier bring
in ydolatrie amongst men. For the Kings and Coat cards that we use now, were
in old time the images of Idols and false Gods: which since they that would
seem Christians, have changed into Charlemaine, Lancelot, Hector; and such
like names, because they would not seem to imitate their idolatry therein,
and yet maintain the play it self, the very invention of Satan the Devil,
and would so disguise this mischief under the cloak of such gaye names.


YOVTH. They use to play at Cards commonly always after Supper. etc.


AGE. I will condemn no man that does so. Plato.
But Plato says in his Banquet, that Players and Minstrels that are used after
suppers, is a simple pastime, and fit for brutish and ignorant men, which know
not how to bestow their time in better exercises, I may with better reason
say the like by all Carders and Diceplayers.


YOVTH. What say you to the play at Tables?


AGE. Playing at Tables is far more tolerable (although in all respects not
allowable) than Dyce and Cards are, for that it leans partlye to chance,
and partly to industry of the mind. For although they cast in deed by
chance, yet the castes are governed by industry and wit: In that respect
Plato affirmed, Plato.
that the li^e of man is like unto the play at Tables. For even as (says
he) in Table play, so also in the life of man, if any thing go not very
well, the same must be by art corrected and amended. etc. as when a cast is
evil, it is helped again by the wisdom and cunning of the Player.


YOVTH. What say you to the play at Chesse, is that lawful to be used?


AGE. Of all games (wherein is no bodilye exercise) it is most to be commended:
for it is a wise play (and therefore was named the Philosophers game) for in it
there is no deceyte, or guyle, the wit thereby is made more sharp, and the
remembrance quickened, and therefore may be used moderately. Yet do I read
yt that notable and constant martyr (John Hus) repented him for his playing at
Chesse, ^ward^
saying: I have delighted to play oftentimes at Chesse, and have neglected my
time, ^^es and Momuments of the Church in the first volum, so. 747
and thereby have unhappily provoked both my self and other to anger many
times by that play: wherefore (says he) besides other my innumerable faults,
for this also I desire you to invoke the mercy of the Lord, that he would
pardon me. etc. O merciful Lord, if this good and gracious Father, and
faithful martyr of Christ, did so earnestly repent him for his playing at
Chesse (which is a game without hurt) what cause then has our Dice and
Cardplayers, to repent and crave pardon at Gods hands for their wicked and
detestable playing? And I pray unto God for his Christ's sake, that this good
martyr may be a patron and an ensample for all them to follow.


YOVTH. Well, now I perceive by you, that Table playing and Chesse playing,
may be used of any man soberly and moderately, ^ in my judgment you have said
well: for that many men who (by reason of sickness and age) cannot exercise
the powers of their bodies, are to be recreated with some pleasure, as with
Tables or Chesse playing.


AGE. The sick and aged have more need to pray than to play, Job. ^ 13. 14.
considering they hasten to their grave, and therefore have need to say
always with Job: The grave is my house, darkness is my bed, rottenness thou
art my father, and worms are my mother and sister. etc. Solomon says: Though
a man live many years, and in them all he rejoice, yet he shall remember the
days of death, Eccl^. 1.8.
all that comes, is vanity. etc. Yet I do not utterly deny, but that these
kind of plays serve such, that sometime they may be permitted, so that they
bring no hurt, refreshe the powers, be joined with honesty, without playing
for any money at all. And that that time which should be spent upon better
things, be not bestowed upon these plays in any wise, that henceforth (says
Saint Peter) they should live as much time as remains) not after the lusts
of men, 1. Pet. 4.2. ^.
but after the will of God. etc.


A Treatise against Dancing.
Now that you have so well contented my mind as touching Diceplaying etc. I
beserche you let me trouble you a little further, to know whether Dancing be
tolerable and lawful to be used among Christians or no?

AGE. If your demand be general of all kind of Dauncings, then I must make
a distinction. If you speak specially of our kind and manner of Dancing (in
these our days) then I say it is not lawful nor tolerable, but wicked and
filthy, and in any wise not to be suffered, or used of any christian.


YOVTH. Are there diverse kinds of Dancing?


AGE. Yea that there are.


YOVTH. I am desirous to know them, least I do (through ignorance confound
one in another, and one for another.


AGE. There are Daunces called Chorea, which signifies joy, because it is a
certain testification of joy. And Seruius (when he interprets this verse of
Uergil, Omnis quam chorus and socij comitantur onantes, that is: When all the
Dance and fellows followed with mirth) says that Chorus is the singing and
dancing of such as be of like age. There is also another kind of dancing,
whereby men were exercised in warrelike affairs, for they were commanded to
make gestures, and to leap, having upon them their armor: for that afterward
they might be the more prompt to fight, when need (for the public weal)
should require: Plato lib. 3. de Legibus.
this kind of dancing was called Saltatio Pyrrhica, because it was exercised
in armor. Of those Daunces Plato speaks largely. etc. There is another kind
of Dancing which was instituted only for pleasure and wantonness sake: this
kind of Daunces Demetrius Cynicus derided, calling it a thing vain and
nothing worth. And if you speak only of this kind of Dance, I say as he
says, it is vain, foolish, fleshly, filthy, and diuelishe.


YOVTH. Who was the first inuentour and deuisor of this latter kind of
Dancing?


AGE. There are diverse opinions hereof. For as Solynus says: it was first
devised in Crete by one Pyrthus, that was one of Sybilles priests. Others say
that the Priests of Mars (called Salij.) invented it, Polyd. Virgil de invent.
verum, lib. 2. cap. 8.
for they were had among the Romans in great horror for their dancing.
Others do refer it to Hiero a tyrant of Sicilia: for that he to establishe
his tyranny, forbade the people to speak one to another. Whereupon men in
Sicilia began to express their meanings and thoughts by books and gestures of
the body: which thing aftewarde turned into an use and custom. Some others
suppose that men when they beheld the sundry motions of the wandering stars,
Rodul, hus Gualterus in Marc. hom. 51. cap. 6. Chrysostom. in Mat. hom. 6.
found out dancing. Others affirm that it came from the old Ethnickes. etc.
But what so ever these say, Saint Chrysostom an ancient Father says, that
it came first from the Devil. For when he saw (says he) that the people had
committed Idolatry to the golden Calfe, he gave them this liberty, that they
should eat and drink, and rise up to dance. One Sebastian Brant agrees
hereunto, saying: Sebast. (...). lib. Stultifer. (...).
The first beginning and cause original,
I say the cause thereof is worthy blame,
For when the Devil to deceive men mortal,
And do contempt to the high God eternal,
Upon a stage had set a calfe of gold,
That every man the same might clearly behold,
So when the fond ground of misgouernance,
Caused the people this figure to honor,
As for their God, and before the same to dance,
When they were drunken, thus fell they in error
Of Idolatry, and forget their creator.
Before this Idol dancing both wife and man,
Despising God: thus dancing first began.


Whereby you may easily perceive from whence this dancing came, Math. 7.16.
17.18.20. Luc. 6.43.44.45. Mat. 12.33.34. Iam. 3.11.12
even from the devil himself, for there can never come good effects, when the
causes are evil, as out of a stinking puddle can not come clean water, nor of
thorns men can gather grapes, or figs of thistles. etc. even so out of our
kind of dancing can come nothing but that which is evil and naught.


YOVTH. Why do you speak so much against dancing? sith we have so many
examples in the Scriptures of those that were godly and daunced: Exodus 25.20.
As Miriam Moses and Aarons sister took a timbrell in her hand, and all the
women came out after her with Timbrels and daunces etc. Judge. 11.34.
Also Iephtah when he came at Mizpeh unto his house, his daughter came out to
meet him with Timbrels and daunces. 1. Sam. 38.6.
etc. Also the women came out of all cities of Israel, singing and dancing
to meet King Saul, with Timbrels, with Instruments of joy, and with rebecks.
etc. King David also daunced before the Lord, 2 Samuel 6.14.
with all his might. Judith. 15.12.13.
etc. Also all the women of Israel came together to see Iudeth. and blessed
her, and made a dance among them for her. etc. And she went before the people
in the Dance, leading all the women, and all the men of Israel followed in
their armor. etc. Solomon says: Eccl. 5.4.
There is a time to mourn, and a time to dance. It is said in Saint Luke by
Christ himself: We have piped unto you, Luc. 7.32.
and ye have not daunced. etc. Many such like examples I could recite, to
prove Dancing to be laudable, and not so wicked as you seem to make it.


AGE. I perceive you use to read the Scriptures, for you have collected out
many examples for your purpose, which serve you nothing at all, to maintain
your filthy Dance. Herein you show your seife like unto the Papists, for
wheresoever they read in Scripture Peter's name, up goes the Popes false
supremacy. Wheresoever they read this word Cross, they advance out of
hand their Roode and Roodeloft: where they read Light, they set up their
Tapers and Torches: and where they read this word Will, up goes their
freewill works: and where they read of works, there they maintain merits:
where they read of fire, there they say is meant of Purgatory. And when they
read this word Uowe, they apply it unto their single and unchaste life. etc.
So play you, and those that maintain Dancing: for wheresoever you read this
word (Dance) presently you apply it in such sort, as though were meant thereby
your filthy Dauncings, which is not so, if it be diligently considered. Saint
Hierome says: Hieron. in Epist. ^d Gal. cap. 1.
Nec putemus in verbis scripturarum esse Euangelium, sed in sensu: non in
superficie, sed in medulla, non in sermonum folijs, sed in radice rationis, Let
us not think that the Gospel. (says he) consists in the words of the
Scriptures, but in the meaning, not in the bark, but in the pith, not in the
leaves of words, but in the root of the meaning.


YOVTH. I speak not of words only, but I speak to prove Dancing by certain
examples.


AGE. The Logitian says, that an argument made only upon examples, halteth
always upon one foot, that is to say, that it is but half an argument. As
if he would say: We must not build and make a rule upon examples only,
without there be some other reason and authority. And therefore it is said:
L^gibus enim viuimus, non exemplis, We live by laws, and not by examples. If
then a Logitian so say upon profane arguments, we ought a great deal more so
to say, touching divine causes. And if a Logitian will not allow an argument
which is not made but upon examples, think thou that the holy Scripture
does admit and allow it?


YOVTH. And why not, I pray you?


AGE. Because the people then would fall into sin and great errors. As a
man would say: Abraham had the company of his servant Agar, and therefore I
may have the company of my servant. Likewise a man might say, that Jacob had
two sisters to wife, and therefore I may also have two. A man might likewise
say: Abraham pleased God, in that he sacrificed his son Isaac, therefore I
shall please him in sacrificing my son unto him. etc. And so if we must argue
by examples, without reason, and authority of holy Scripture, there should be
nothing but confusion in christian religion.


YOVTH. I pray you then, let me hear your reasons to the contrary, that these
examples and such like. etc. serve not for the maintenance of Dancing.


AGE. Nevertheless (that I have spoken sufficient hereunto) yet I will make
answer to your examples.


YOVTH. I shall give attentive ear thereunto.


AGE. First, that Dance that Miriam Aarons sister (and the other women used)
was no vain and wanton Dance, for carnal and filthy pleasures (as yours is)
but it was that kind of Dance which is called ( Chorea) for they did it in
praising God, signifying and declaring their great joy, that Moses and Aaron,
with all the children of Israel, were passed the red sea in safety, and
their enemies (Pharao and his host) destroyed. etc. And the like order did
Iephtah his daughter use, for the victory that God gave unto her father
against his enemies. etc. And so did the women in meeting king Saul And also
Judith, and the residue of the women. etc. praised God for the victory that
Saul had over the Philistines. And Judith with the residue, magnified God (as
appears in the xvj. Chapter) for that the City of Bethulia was delivered
from the enemies by the death of Holofernes, and so in going altogether hand
in hand, rejoiced and praised God in Psalms. Also here is to be noted in
these examples, that you allege for Dancing, that Miriam and the other women,
and Iephtah his daughter, the women that daunced in meeting Saul, and Iudeth
that daunced with the other women of Israel, for joy of their deliuerye. etc.
daunced not with young men, but apart by themselves among women and maidens
(which celebrated their victories) but severally by themselves among men. Also
their daunces were spiritual, religious, and godly, not after our hoppings,
and leapings, and interminglings men with women. etc. (dancing every one for
his part) but soberly, gravely, and matronelyke, moving scarce little or
nothing in their gestures at all, either in countenance or body: they had no
Minstrels or pypers to play unto them: but they took their Timbrels into their
own hands (that could play) and not as our foolish and fond women use to
mix themselves with men in their Dance. And as for that place of Solomon that
says: There is a time to dance. etc. He means this kind of dance which
these good women used, which is a ioyfulnesse of heart, which brings
spiritual profit, and not carnal pleasures (as our Daunces do.) Also
Solomon hereby teaches us how we should use times in their order: As when
there is a time and cause to mourn and lament, then must we use it. When God
sends again, good things, we must also use that, and to be merry and rejoice
in the Lord. A time of sorrow the widow had in losing of her groate. ^uc. 15.9.
Another time also when it was found, to be merry and joyful. Teaching us
hereby also, that sorrow shall not continue for ever, but God will send some
joy and comfort. So likewise joy shall not continue still, but God will
send some corrections to nurture us. etc. Therefore you may easily perceive
hereby, that Solomon means by this word Dance, ioyfulnesse and comfort.
And by the word Mourning, he means sorrow and calamity. etc. Also you
must note in these foresaid Daunces, that it was an ordinary custom and
manner among the Jews, to use such kind of godly Dauncings in certain
solemnities and triumphs, when as God did give them good and prosperous
successes against their enemies. Are our Daunces applied, reserved, and kept to
such, uses? nothing less.

As for David's dancing before the Lord, it was for no vain pleasure and
carnal pastime (as your Daunces are, or as Micholl his wife foolishly judged)
as appears by David's own words, saying: It was before the Lord, which
chose me rather than thy fathers. etc. And therefore (says he) I will play
before the Lord. In that he daunced, it was done in two respects: one for
joy that the ark of God was restored again: the other for that God had
exalted him to be a King and Ruler over Israel, Amb. in Luc. lib. 6. cap. 7.
and this kind of Dance that he daunced, may be called Saltatio pyrrhica.
Saint Ambrose speaking of David's dancing, says: Cantauit David, and ante
arcam Domini, non pre lasciuia, sed pro religione saltauit. Ergo non
h^st^ionicis motibus sinuati corporis saltus, sed impigraementis and religiosa
corporis agilitas designatur, David did sing and dance before the ark of the Lord, not for wantonness and pleasure, but for religion: not leaping and
turning of his body with Playerlyke mouings and gestures, but did express his
diligent mind, and religious agilitie of his body. Again: Est honesta
saltatio, qua tripudiat animus, and bonis corpus operibus reuelatur, quando in
salicibus organa nostra suspendimus, There is an honest dancing, when as the
mind daunceth, and the body shows him self by good works, when as we hang
our instruments upon the Willowe trees. In that he says there is an honest
dancing, argues that there is a contrary dancing which is dishonest: and no
doubt he means these and such like foolyshe and filthy Daunces, as we use
in these days. Therefore he says: Docuit nos Scriptura cantare grauiter, and
saltare spiritualiter, The holy Scripture teaches us to sing reuerentlye, and
to dance spiritually (says he.) And that David's dance was a spiritual and
religious Dance, appears by the Ephod that he put on. etc. If you and such
like Dauncers (if you will needs dance) had that spirit that David had when he
daunced, Rodulphus Gualterus in Marc. ho. 51. cap. 6.
in praising and lauding God for his great benefits, dau^ce a Gods name. M.
Gualter says: Nimis friuolum est, cum de choris sacris intelligi deb a^, in
quibus vel solae mulieres, vel viri soli eximia Dei benificia carminibus ad eam
rem compositis, non sine concinno and decoro corporis motu celebrabant, It is a
great foolishness (to maintain dauncings by those examples of Marie Moses
sister, David, and others. etc.) For their Daunces were holy and religious, in
the which all the women together alone, or all the men alone (by themselves)
did celebrate and set forth the goodness and benefits of God, in verses made
for those purposes, not without a comely and decent order and gesture in moving
of their bodies.

(...).
And as for that place of Luke, where Christ said: We have piped, and you
have not daunced. etc. serves nothing at all to maintain your dancing: It
was not to that end and purpose spoken by Christ, but Christ spoke it against
the obstinate Phariseys, greatly accusing thereby the invincible hardness of
their heart, he does reproach them, because the Lord had tried by diverse means
to bring them unto him, and they with froward and rebellious minds and
hearts refused and despised his grace offered unto them, as appears plainly
by these words a little before: then all the people that heard, and the
Publicanes justified God. etc. But the Phariseys and the expounders of the Law
despised the counsel of God against themselves. etc. Then Christ said:
Whereto shall I liken the men of this generation. etc. They are like to
children sitting in the Market place, and crying one to another, and saying: we
have pyped unto you, and ye have not daunced: we have mourned to you, and ye
have not wept. etc. As though Christ would say: Nothing can please this
froward generation. John preached the Law, and badde them repent and mourn
for their sins. I (being the Messiah) do preach unto them the gospel of
joy, peace, comfort, and forgiveness of sins freely, without their merits
and deserts, so that they will neither mourn at John's preaching, nor dance
at my pype, notwithstanding I pipe joyful and merry things unto them. Christ
teaches also hereby, that the songs of little children are sufficient to
condemn the Phariseys and such like. Christ therefore by this similitude
shows what was the wonted wonted pastime of children, and it seems to be
taken out of the Prophet Zachary. Zacha. 8.^.
And as this was spoken of the Phariseys, I fear me it may be likewise
verified in us, you may now easilye perceive what Christ meant by this pyping
and dancing, not mayntaining thereby your fond, foolish, and vain dancing,
but rather it teaches you, that if you refuse the sweet pyping of the
preaching of the Gospel of Christ now offered (which will make your heart and
soul to leap and dance within you for joy and gladness) and follow these
transitory pypes to dance after that tune and facion. You shall one day (if
you repent not) weep for your laughing, sorrow for your ioying, having your
swinging hands, Mat. 22.13.
and leaping legs bound fast and cast into utter darkness, where shall be
weeping, wayling, and gnashing of teeth. So that in stead of great houses and
palaces, you shall hau^ hell: for delicate fare and pastimes, everlasting
pains: for pleasant songs, woe and weeping.


YOVTH. You cannot deny but there was dancing allowed of in the Scriptures, by
your own saying.


AGE. I must needs grant, that there is dancing expressed in the Scriptures,
but I doubt whether it was allowed of or not.


YOVTH. You find nothing to the contrary.


AGE. Exodus 32.6. Esa. 5.11.12. Eccl. 9.4. To. 13.12.13. Ephesians. 5.4. 1. Cor.
10.7. Mat. 14.6.7. Mat. 6.22.
Yes, I find that dauncings were often times reproved: but never commanded
(in the Scriptures) to be used, as you may read in Exodus, Esaias,
Ecclesiasticus, Romans, Corinthians, Ephesians, Mathewe and Mark (which
places, in the margent you shall find them.)


YOVTH. Although it were after another sort and facion than our daunces are,
yet you cannot deny but that they daunced. For it is one thing to reason and
speak of the abuse, and another thing to speak or reason of the thing it self.


AGE. I did distinguishe Daunces at the beginning of our talk. And I wish in
God, we might follow those godly people, men and women, who now and then used
dancing: but yet such as were moderate, chaste, honest, and religious. So that
the men daunced by themselves, and the women apart by themselves, and did by
such kind of Daunces show forth the gladness of their mind: they sang
praises unto God, and gave him thanks for some notable benefit which they had
received at his hands. But we read not in all the holy Scriptures of mingled
Daunces of men and women together. And therefore not only the abuse, but also
the Dancing it self ought to be taken away, and not to be used of any godly
Christian, for that there comes of it all wantonness and wickedness.


YOVTH. Will you say that Dancing simply of it self is vicious and evil?


AGE. I say not so, if you speak generally, as you have heard before: but if
you speak specially of your kind and fashion of Dauncings (as it is now used
in these days) I say to you, it is not to be used, nor the dance to be
allowed, for that it is wicked and filthy.


YOVTH. What should move you to be so earnestly bent against this merye and
pleasant pastyme of Dancing, sith so many Noblemen, Gentlemen, Ladies, and
others, use it continuallye?


AGE. Because that they that love God with all their heart, and with all their
strength, Heb. 12.1. Math. 3.29.
ought not only to observe his commandments: but also to cut off all
occasions, whereby the observing of them might be let or hyndered.


YOVTH. What occasion of hinderance or let is Dancing unto the observation of
Gods law and commandments?


AGE. They are most manifest occasions of transgressions of the laws of God,
they are snares and offenses, not only unto the Dauncers, but also to the
beholders: for they stir up and inflame the hearts of men, which are
otherwise evil enough, even from their beginning. And that thing which is to
be suppressed and kept under with great study and industry (as the lust of
the flesh, 1. Ioh. 2.16.
the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life) the same is stirred up by the
wanton enticementes of Daunces. I may say of Dancing, as Saint Augustine
says of Drunkenness, O dolorosa saltatio, August. ad frair. in. Eremo. Sermon.
33.
omnium malorum matter, omnis luxuriae soror, omnis superbiae pater, O
deceytfull Dance, it is the mother of all evil, the sister of all carnal
pleasures, the father of all pride. Undoubtedly, if a m^n will consider
himself, either by experience, or by reason, he shall find the lusts of the
mind not a little kindled and inflamed. And he shall perceive that men return
home from those Daunces less good than they were, and the women also less
chaste in their minds (if not in bodies) than they were before. Therefore
perilles are rather to be avoided than nourished. Psalm. 119.37.
David therefore prayed unto the Lord, and said: Turn away mine eyes from
beholding vanity. etc. Syrach says: Eccl. 9.7.8.
Go not about gasing in the streets of the City, neither wander thou in the
secret places thereof. Turn away thine eye from a beautiful woman, and look
not upon others beauty, for many have perished by the beauty of women: for
through it love is kindled as a fire. It is said therefore, that the sons of
God saw the daughters of men, Genesis 6.2.
that they were fair, and took them wives of all that liked them. The eyes
are therefore called, Fores and foenestrae animae, the doors and windows of
the mind. Job. 31.1.
Job said (when as he felt the discommoditie in beholding such vain sightes)
I made a covenant with mine eyes: why then should I think on a maid? As if he
would say: Since I use not these wanton looks to behold vain pastimes and
beauty, I have no desire and lust kindled in me. So that you may perceive,
nothing so soon quenches lust and concupiscence, as not to be present, or to
behold such vanities. Otherwise as Solomon says: Prou. 6.27.28.
He which loves danger, shall fall therein. Can a man (says he) take fire in
his bosom, and his clothes not be burnt? Or can a man go upon coals, and
his foot not be burnt? Eccle. 13.1. Deute. 7.8.
for he that touches Pitche, shall be defiled with it, and he that is familiar
with the proud, shall be like unto him. And for that cause Syrach says: Use
not the company of a woman that is a Singer, and a Dauncer, neither hear her,
least thou be taken by her craftynesse. Sebastianus Brant says: Sebastianus
Brant. lib. Stultifera na^is.
What else is Dancing but even a nurcerie,
Or else a bayte to purchase and maintain,
In young hearts the vile sin of ribaudrie,
Them fettering therein, as in a deadly chain:
And to say truth in words clear and plain,
Uenerous people have all their whole pleasaunce,
Their vice to nourishe by this unthrifty dance.
And wanton people disposed unto sin,
To satisfy their mad concupiscence,
With hasty course unto this dance run,
To seek occasion of vile sin and offense,
And to express my mind in short sentence,
This vicious game often times does attice,
By his lewd signs chaste hearts unto vice.



YOVTH. Whereas Dancing is so against manners, and do kindle lust, the same
comes rashly and by chance, but every thing is to be judged, not of these
things, which happen by chance: but of these things which are in it of it
self and by nature. For there are some so chaste and vncorrupt, that they can
behold these Daunces, with a perfect and chaste mind.


AGE. I grant that which you say may sometimes happen, but I add thereunto
also, that all accidents are not of one and self same kind. For there are
some which happen very rarely. Other some which by their nature may as well be
present unto any thing, as absent. And some such as are wont to happen often
times, and for the most part, these last accidents ought in every thing to be
considered, and most diligently to be weighed. Neither must we take heed
only, what may be done: but also what is wont to be done.


YOVTH. Aristippus.
I read that Aristippus daunced in purple, and being reproved, he made an
excuse, that he was made never a whit the worse by that dancing: but might in
that softness keep still his Philosophical mind chaste.


AGE. Demosthenes says (and is also cited of the Lawiers) that we must not
consider what some certain man does at a time, Demosthen.
but what is wont to be done for the most part. Grant that there be some one
man or other so chaste, that he is nothing moved with such inticements: but
how are the people and multitude in the mean time provided? Shall we for the
perfectness and integrity of one or two, suffer all the rest to be
indaungered? Vna hirundo non facit Ver, One Swallowe proves not that Summer is
come.


YOVTH. If these reasons of yours hold true, 2. Cor. 2.^
then take away Sermons also, and Sacraments, meat, and drink. etc. For many
hear the word of God, 1. Co^. 11.^^. Eccl. 21.30.
sometime to their condemnation, and receive the Sacraments to their
damnation, and many eat and drink, and are drunk, and do surfeyte. etc. and
so dye.


AGE. You must understand, that certain things are profitable to the
salvation of men, and are commanded by the word of God, which things ought by
no means to be taken away. And some things that of necessity we must have,
as meat, drink. etc. to nourishe our weak bodies, or else we cannot live
here. etc. And certain other things are indifferent, which if we see they
tend to destruction, they are not to be suffered. We have the law of God for
hearing of Sermons, receiving of Sacraments, to eat and drink (soberly:) but
for dancing there is no commandment given by the word of God. Wherefore
these things are not to be compared together.


YOVTH. It is well known that by Daunces and leapings very many honest
marriages are brought to pass, and therefore it is good and tolerable.


AGE. It may be as you say (sometime) but we may not do evil, Romans 3 8.
that good may come thereof. For you have heard me say often, that it is
evil and not good to dance as you do. But I am not of that opinion to have
marriages contracted by these arts and acts, Tob. 4.12. Genes. 6.2. Prou.
31.30.
wherein a regard is had only to the agilitie and beauty of the body, and
not unto godliness and true religion. etc. There are other means much more
honest, let us use them in Gods name, and leave these as little chaste and
less shamefastness. Let us remember, that although honest matrimonies are
sometime brought to pass by Dancing, yet much more often are Adulteries and
Fornications wont to follow of these Daunces.


YOVTH. You speak more evil of Dancing, than there comes hurt by dancing,
as far as I can judge.


AGE. No my son, not half as much evil as it deserves, can I speak of,
nor yet can utter one quarter of the wicked and filthy mischiefs that come
thereof. Mark the effects thereof, and then you shall tell me another tale.
Is it not written in S. Mathewe, Math. 14.6. Marc. 6.22.
that the daughter of Herodias daunced at a banquet which the king made: and the
king took pleasure in her (whom he would not openly without shame behold,
for she was a manifest testimony of his unlawful matrimony and incest) of
that Dancing it came to pass, that John Baptists head was cut off at her
desire. etc. so inflamed she the Kings heart by her filthy and wanton dance.
Theoph. in Mar. cap. 6.
Theophilact says hereupon: Mira collusio: Saltat per pueliam Diabolus: etc.
This is a wonderful collusion: for the Devil daunced by the maid. She
daunced not rudely, as do the common sort of people, but finely, and with a
comelye gesture with measure. etc. as some write. But that worthy man Erasmus
says: Non subsilijt, vt populus putat, quemadmodum ges^iculantur in choreis,
Erasmus in Annot. in Math. ca^. ^4.
She daunced not with silence and modesty, as the common people suppose, but
she daunced as others used to dance, with signs and outward gesture. etc.
But howsoever she daunced, it was evil, as the effect and fruit thereof
declares. Thus you may perceive what fruits you shall gather of this tree.
Uery well is it noted of Master Rodolphus Gualter upon this, what fruits come
hereof: Inflammatur enim libidinis igne concupiscentia, datur scortandi and
moechandi occasio, officij and conditionis suae obliuiscuntur, Rodolphus
Gualt^ran Marc. hom. 51. cap. 6.
qui mundo mori and Deo vni viuere debebant: accedunt sermones lasciuij,
promissiones inconsideratae, amantium obtestationes, and periuria, and
frequentes rixa and pugna incidunt, quas non raro caedes miserabiles comitari
solent, Concupiscence is inflamed (by Dancing) with the fire of lust and
sensuality, it gives occasion of whoredom and adultery, it makes men
forget and neglect their duties and services, which ought to die to the world,
and live to God: there are present wanton talks and communications, unadvised,
and rash promises, taking Gods name to witness in vain, of the lovers,
whereby perjury is committed, and many times happens brawlings and
fightings, by the which oftentimes miserable murders are wont to be committed
and done. Sebastian Brant also says: Such blind follies and inconvenience,
Sebast. (...) lib. (...) nauis.

Engender great hurt and incommoditie,
And sows seed, whereof grows great offense,
The ground of vice, and of all enormitie,
In it is pride, foul lust and lechery,
And while lewd leapes are used in the dance,
Often froward bargains are made by countenance.



YOVTH. There does happen no such thing as you speak of in our Daunces. etc.
that lust is thereby inflamed in them that dance.


AGE. If it be so, why then do not men dance with men apart from the women by
themselves? And why do not the women and Maids dance by themselves? Why are
men desirous more to dance rather with this woman, than with that woman? And
why are women so desirous rather to choose this man, than that man to dance
withal, before all the residue, but only to declare thereby how they are
inflamed each to other in filthy concupiscence and lust. And I am assured that
none of you (which are Dauncers) can deny this to be true, for that each of
you have and do daily feel in your selves this infla^mation whenever you
dance together man and woman.


YOVTH. Still I maruayle why you speak against Dancing, as against things
which are of their own nature evil, and prohibited by the law of God. etc.


AGE. I say to thee my son again, that things are not always to be weighed
by their own nature, but by the disposition and abuse of our flesh. We cannot
deny but that wine of his own nature is good, which yet, is not given to one
that is in an ague, not that the wine is evil, but because if agrees not with
a body that is in that manner affected. So the people of Israel made a calfe
of their golden earings, ^^od. 32.6. ^ Cor. 10.7.
to worship it, they sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play, that
is, to dance (as Lyra says: (...) 1. Cor. 10. Thomas de Aquino in 1. (...) 10.
Cantabant in choro, They did sing in the Dance. And Thomas de Aquino says:
Surrexerunt ludere, id est, ludes facere sicut choreas, They rose up to play,
that is, (says he) they made plays after the manner of Daunces. etc.) So that
you may see hereby that these Daunces are evil also of their own nature,
whereby good natures many times are corrupted by them, as appears by the
effects, both by John Baptist, and also by the children of Israel, and
therefore I may say of it as Augustine said of Drunkenness, August. ad ^^ in
E^ ^, Sermon. 33.
Saltatio est blandus demon, dulce venenum, suaue peccatum, that is, Dancing
is a flattering Devil, a sweet poison, and a pleasant sin, which will bring
in the end utter destruction to them that use it (if they repent not.) And
where you say it is not against Gods commandments, that is false. Does not
the Lord in his law command, that ye should not covet the wife, Exo. 10.17.
maid, or servant of your neighbors. etc. Much less then, that thou should
consent to thy concupiscence, that thou should draw and choose her to thy
self, to be thy fellow dauncer, which to do, is not lawful for thee. Also,
when Christ said: He has committed adultery already in his heart, Math. 5.28.
that looks on a woman to lust after her. What then shall we say of them,
that not only with wanton countenances, and filthy talk allure them, but
also embrace them with their arms, handle them, and by all means provoke
thereby the burning lust of concupiscence, with their vain kissings?
Therefore, Christ says: Math. 3.10.
that tree which brings forth no good fruit shall be hewn down, Eccl. 9.11.
and cast into the fire. Syrach says: Sit not at all with another man's wife,
neither lie with her upon the bed, nor banquet with her, least thine heart
incline unto her, and so through thy desire fall into destruction. What hurt
then ensues hereof, flat against the law of God, who sees not?


YOVTH. You speak this as of your self alone. For I believe none of the
ancient fathers did ever speak against Dancing, or that it has been
forbidden by any Counsels, or mislyked by any good men, or by any good examples
that you are able to show and bring forth: therefore I wonder much of your
strait order of talk against our dancing in these our days, I suppose it is
because you are aged, and now are not able to do as other young men and women
do, and this makes you to envy it so much.


AGE. Every truth is to be believed: but every belief does not justify,
neither shall your belief in this point. The cause why I speak against
Dancing, is very evil gathered of you, my age is not the cause, nor my
inhabilitie the reason thereof: but the cause that ^^oueth me thus to speak
against dancing, is the word of God, whereon my conscience, talk, and
judgment is grounded, which word is so pure and clean, that it cannot abide
any impuritie or unhonesty (which in your Dauncings want none, as I have
already declared unto you.) And whereas you say, that I speak of my self
alone without authority, is untrue. For I have already by the authority of
holy Scriptures disproued it, (which authority of it self is sufficient, and
to be preferred before all authorities of men whatsoever they are. S. Hierome
to this, Hieron. ^ Math. cap. 23
says: Quod de Scripturis non habet authoritatem, eadem facilitate
contemnitur, qua probatur, That which has no authority out of the Scriptures,
may be as easilye denied as affirmed.) Yet notwithstanding I will prove by the
ancient Fathers, Councels, and many examples, that your Dauncings are evil,
and therefore they envied and decreed against it. If I can declare this to you,
then your belief (that you speak of) is vain, and grounded upon your own
ignorance, otherwise you would have set your finger upon your mouth.


YOVTH. I pray you let me hear it, and then I will believe it.


AGE. John. 6.20. Luc. 17.^. (...) 1.29.
To believe is the gift of God, and not of your own power, therefore you have
not spoken well in so saying.


YOVTH. I pray you bear with me herein, for it was spoken (I confess) very
unadvisedly, therefore I beseech you say on.


AGE. Ambros. de (...) lib. ^. ad Marcell. (...)
Saint Ambrose says (writing to his sister Marcellina) mirth ought to be in a
clear conscience, and a good mind, and not in spiced bankets, and wedding
feasts full of Minstrelsie. For therein shamefastness is ill defended, and
unlawful abusion suspected, where the last end of pleasure is dancing, from
which I desire all Uirgins of God to keep themselves. For no man (as a
certain wise man of the Paganes says) daunceth, if he be sober, except he be
mad. Now then, if that either drunkenness or madness be reckened to be the
cause of Dancing among the Paganes, what then shall we count to be commanded
in the holy Scripture: where we read that Saint John Baptist (the messenger of
Christ) was put to death at the pleasure of a Dancing wench? By the which
thing we may take example, that this unlawful pastime of Dancing has been
cause of more hurt, than the frenzy of Robbers and Murderers. This dedly
feast was prepared with a kingly largeness and excess, and watch laid when
the company was at the most, and then the daughter which was hid up before in
secret, was brought forth to dance before the people. What could the daughter
learn more of her mother (which was an harlot) but to lose her honesty? For
nothing incly neth folk more to bodilye lust, than by uncomely moving and
gesture, to show the operation of these parts, which either nature has hid
secretly, or good manner and nurture has covered: or to play castes with her
eye, or shake the neck, or swinge her arms and hear. Wherefore they must
needs fall into offense against the majesty of God. For what honesty can be
kept there where dancing is? So then the King delighted with that pastime,
bid her ask what soever she would. etc. Thus far Saint Ambrose.

Chrysostom. in Math. ca. 14
S. Chrysostom says (speaking of the dancing of Herodias daughter before
Herod:) At this day Christians do deliver to destruction, not half their
kingdoms, or another man's head: but even their own souls. For where as
wanton dauncings are, there the devil daunceth together with them, in such
Daunces his servants delight. God gave us not feet to dance with camels: but
that we should be companions with angels.

Ye have heard (says he) of marriages (entreating of the marriage of Jacob) but
not of daunces, Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 56.
which are very diuelishe. etc. For the Bridegroom and the Bryde are both
corrupted by dancing, and the whole family defiled.

Thou see and read of Marriages (says he) but thou see and read of no
daunces in holy scripture. Chrysostom. hom. 48.


Saint Augustine says: August. ^^ Psalm. 32.
It is much better to dygge all the whole day, than to dance (upon the Sabbath
day.) Again he says: August. de dec^m cords cap 3.
It is better that women should pick wool, or spynne upon the Sabbath day,
than they should dance impudently and filthily all the day long upon the days
of the new Moon.

Erasmus says: Erasm. Roter, in lib. de e^ temptu m^^ di, cap. 7.
And when they be wearye of drinking and banketting, then they fall to reuelling
and dancing. Then whose mind is so well ordered, so sad, stable, and
constant, that these wanton dauncings, the swinging of the arms, the sweet
found of the Instruments, and feminine singing, would not corrupt,
overcome, and utterly mollify? Yea, and further the Ballades that they sing,
be such, that they would kindle up the courage of the old, and cold Laomedon
and Nestor. And when the Minstrels do make a sign to stinte, then if thou do
not kiss her, that thou leading by the hand did dance withal, then thou
shall be taken for a rusticall, and as one without any good manners and
nurture. What filthy acts hereby (says he) are committed: therefore as thou
desire thine own wealth, look that thou flee and eschew this scabbed and
scuruie company (of Dauncers.)

Ludouicus Uiues a learned man, Erudit muheris christianae, li. 1. ca. 14.
says: Love is bred by reason of company and communication with men (for among
pleasures, feastings, laughing, dancing, and voluptuousness) is the kingdom
of Uenus and Cupide. And with these things folks minds be entised and snared,
and especially the women, on whom pleasure has sorest dominion. O woman
(says he) how miserably art thou entangled of that company, how much better
had it been for thee to have bidden at home, and rather to have broken a
leg of thy body, Eodem libro cap. 13.
than a leg of thy mind? Again he says:

Some Maids do nothing more gladly, and be taught also with great diligence
both of father and mother, that is, to dance cunningly. Feastings out of time,
and pleasant sportes, and delicate pastime brings always Dancing in the
last end. So that Dancing must needs be the extreme of all vices. But we
now in christian countries have schools of Dancing, howbeit that is no
wonder, seeing also we have houses of baudrie. So much the Paganes were better
and more sad than we be, they never knew this new fashion of Dancing of
ours, and vncleanlye handlings, gropings, and kissings, and a very kindling of
lechery: whereto serves all that bassing, as it were Pigeons the birds of
Uenus?

What good does all that Dancing of young women, holding upon men's arms, that
they may hop the higher? What means that shaking unto midnight, and never
weary, which if they were desired to go but to the next Church, they were not
able, except they were carried on horseback, or in a chariot: who would not
think them out of their wits?

I remember (says he) that I heard upon a time say, that there were certain
men brought out of a far country into our parts of the world, which when
they saw women dance, they ran away wonderouslye afraid, crying out that
they thought the women were taken with an uncouth kind of frenzy. And to say
good sooth, who would not reckon women frantike when they dance, if he had
never seen woman dance before?

And it is a world to see, how demurely and sadly some sit beholding them that
dance, and with what gesture, pace, and moving of the body, and with what
sober footing some of them dance. Wherein also a man may epsy a great part of
their folly, that go about to handle such a foolish and mad thing so sadly:
neither see themselves have a matter in hand without any wisdom, nor any
thing worth, but as Cicero says, a companion of vices. What holy woman did we
ever read of, that was a Dauncer? Or what woman now a days (that is sad
and wise) will be known to have skill of Dancing? etc. For what chastity of
body and mind can be there, where they shall see so many men's bodies, and have
their minds entised by the windows of their eyes, and by the means of the
most subtle artificer the Devil. Thus far Ludouicus Uiues.

Master Marlorat (a famous man) says: Marlorat in Math. cap. 24.
Whatsoever they are, that have had any care of gravity and honesty, have
utterly condemned this filthy dancing, and especially in Maidens.

Master Bullinger says: Bullinger Mar. cap. 14.
There follows (in Feastings) unshamefast Dancing, which is the root of all
filthiness and wantonness.

Master Rodulphus Gualter, Rodolphus Guulterus ^^ Marc. cap. 6. hom. 51.
an excellent learned man says: Dauncings (says he) which we now a days
use, came from the Gentiles and Heathens first unto us. When as they used
always at celebrating of their sacrifices to do it with Dauncings unto their
false Gods. Which the Israelites seemed to imitate when as they daunced about
the golden calfe. etc. Afterward this dancing began to be used publicly in
Plays, before the face of the people, of whom afterward the women learned
it, and exercised it, least they should be accounted no body. Then when shame
and honesty began to decay, women also and Maidens used to dance, and had
their proper daunces appointed them. At last (when all shame in deed was past)
by reason of the long use and time of their dancing. This increased and went
forward, that men and women being mixed, daunced together. Of which there can
be no more vncomelynesse showed, than to see men and women dance together,
hand in hand, to lead and carry them about, that the beholders of them may
see the quickenesse and agilitie of their bodies, by wanton mouings and
gestures. Contrary to that Saint Paul says: ^. These. 5.22.
Abstain from all appearance of evil. etc. and that no filthynesse, neither
foolish talking, Ephe. 5.3.4
neither ieasting, which are things not comely, neither fornication and all
uncleanness, or covetousness, be once named among you, as becomes Saints.
etc. By these Dauncings, concupiscence is inflamed with the fire of carnal
lust, thereof comes also whoredoms, and adultery, neglecting of our duties
and services to God and man. By Dancing comes filthy talk and
communication, unadvised promises, crafty bargaynes and contra^tes, periuries,
brawlings, and fightings, and many times mischievous murders are wont to be
done in dauncings. etc.

(...). ^0.
Master Calvin upon these words of David: Thou have turned my mourning into
dancing. etc. says: By the word (dancing) there is not meant every manner of
wanton or ruffianly leaping and frisking, but a sober and holy utterance of
gladness, such as the holy Scripture makes mention of, when David conveyed
the arc of covenant into his place.

^ Cal^^n. in l^b cap. 21. (...) 75.
He writing upon these words (They send forth their little ones like sheep) and
their children dance. They play upon the Taber and the Harp. etc.) says: We
see it is no novelty in the children of this world, to excede measure in the
vanities which God condemns, as in dancing, and such other like looseness.
It has been so at all times. For the devil (all whose driftes tend to blind
men, and to draw them from the regarding of God, and from the spiritual life)
has had these knacks from time to time, and men have willingly followed that
which they have lyked of, and which pleased the flesh. Therefore whereas now a
days we see many seek nothing but to royst it, insomuche as they have none
other countenance, but in seeking to hoppe and dance like stray beasts, and
to do such other like things. Let us understand that it is not of late
beginning, but that the devil has raygned at all times. Howebeit, let us
know also, that the evil is never the more to be excused for the
auncientnesse of it. Men have always done so: yea, and that was because the
devil has always reigned: but must God therefore be quite dispossessed?

Music of it self cannot be condemned: Cal^n ^o^ i^ hi^ 80 Ser. (...) 21.
Cap.
but forasmuch as the world does almost always abuse it, we ought to be so much
the more circumspect, we see at this day that they which use Music do swell
with poison against God, they become hard hearted, they will have their songs,
yea, and what manner of songs? Full of all villainy and ribauldrie. And
afterward they fall to Dancing, which is the chiefest mischief of all. For
there is always such unchaste behavior in dancing, that of it self, and as
they abuse it (to speak the truth at one word) it is nothing but an
enticement to whoredom.

Wherefore we ought to take warning to restrain our selves, In his 7^. Sermon
vp^o^ the 21. ^^^.
and whereas we see there are many whose whole delight is to seek such
pastymes, let us say, a mischief on them. And if we will not have the same
curse to light upon our selves: let us learn to absent our selves from such
loose and wanton pastimes: but let us rather advisedly restrain our selves,
and set God always before our eyes, to the end that he may bless our
mirth, and we so use his benefits, as we may never cease to travail up to
heauenwarde, so must we apply all our mirth to this end, namelye that there
may be a melodye sounding in us, whereby the name of God may be blessed and
glorified in our Lord Jesus Christ.

To Music belongs the art of Dancing, Henricus Cornelius Agrippa.
very acceptable to Maidens and Lovers, which they learn with great care, and
without tediousness do prolong it until midnight, and with great diligence
do devise to dance with framed gestures, and with measurable paces to the
sound of the Cymball, Harp, or Flute, and do as they think, very wisely,
and subtly, the sondest thing of all other, and little differing from
madness, which except it were tempered with the sound of Instruments, and
as it is said, if vanity did not commend vanity, there should be no sight
more ridiculous, nor more out of order than Dancing: this is a liberty to
wantonness, a friend to wickedness, a provocation to fleshlye lust, enemy
to chastity, and a pastime unworthy of all honest persons. There oftentimes a
matrone (as Petrarcha says) has lost her long preserved honor: oftentimes the
unhappy maiden has there learned that whereof she had been better to be
ignorant: there the fame and honesty of many women is lost. Infinite from
thence have returned home unchaste, many with a doubtful mind, but none chaste
in thought and deed. And we have often seen that womanlike honesty in
dancing has been thrown down to the ground, and always vehemently provoked
and assaulted: yet some of the Greek writers have commended it, as they have
many filthy and wicked things. But it is no marvel that the Greeks do in
this sort study Philosophy, which have made the Gods authors of Adultery,
of whoredom, of murder, and finallye of all wickedness. They have written
many books of Dancing, in which is contained all the kinds, qualities, and
measures, and have reckened up the names of them, and of what forte every one
of them should be, and who invented it: wherefore I will speak no further of
them. The ancient Romans, grave men by reason of their wisdom and
authority did refuse all Dancing, and no honest matrone was commended among
them for dancing.

Dancing is the vilest vice of all, and truly it cannot easily be said what
mischiefs the sight, and the hearing do receive hereby, which afterward be
the causes of communication and embracing. They dance with disordinate
gestures, and with monstrous thumping of the feet, to pleasant soundes, to
wanton songs, to dishonest verses. Maidens and matrones are groped and handled
with unchaste hands, and kissed, and dishonestly embraced: and the things which
nature has hidden, modesty covered, are then oftentimes by means of
lasciviousness made naked, and ribaulorie under the color of Pastime is
dissembled. An exercise doubtless not descended from heaven, but by the
Deuilles of hell devised, to the injury of the Divinity, when the people of
Israel erected a calfe in the desert, which after they had done sacrifice,
began to eat and drink, and afterward rose up to sport themselves, and
singing, daunced in a round.

I could allege you many more, if I thought these did not satisfy your mind.


YOVTH. Satisfy, quoth you, yea, I assure you, they have even cloyed me and
filled me to the full, I never heard so many worthy fathers alleged, as you
have done, both of old and later writers, against Dancing, which begins to
make me loathe and even detest this vice and filthy Dancing: Yet for promise
sake, I pray you let me hear what Councels and examples there are against this
dancing.


AGE. In the Counsel of Laoditia (holden in the year of our Lord God 364.
under Pope Liberius) it was decreed thus: Conc. ^aodicease. ^^.53.
It is not meet for Christian men to dance at their marriages. Let them dyne
and suppe gravely and moderately, giving thanks unto God for the benefit of
marriages. Let the Clergy arise and go their ways, when the players on the
Instruments (which serve for Dancing) do begin to play, least by their
presence they should seem to allow that wantonness.

In this Council (which was holden in the time of Theodoricus the king) it was
decreed, Concilium Illerdense.
namely that no Christian should dance at any marriages, or at any other time.

Justinian the Emperor made a decree, Justinian in code, titu. de f^ri^s, in
lege die. fesl.
saying: We will not have men give themselves unto voluptuousness, wherefore
it shall not be lawful in the Feast days to use any dauncings, whether they
be for lusts sake, or whether they be done for pleasures sake.

Emilius Probus (in the life of Epiminonda) says: Emil. Probus
That to sing and to dance was not very honorable among the Romans, when the
Grecians had in it great estimation.

Salust writes, Salust.
that Sempronia (a certain lascivious and unchaste woman) was taught to sing
and dance more elegantlye than became an honest matrone: saying also, that
singing and dancing are the instruments of lechery.

Cicero says, Cicer. lib. 5. de offici^s.
that an honest and good man will not dance, in the market place, although he
might by that means come to great possessions. And in his oration (that he
made after his return into the Senate) he calls Aulus Gabinius in reproach,
Saltator Calamistratus, a fine mincing dauncer. It was also objected to Lucius
Murena for a great fault, because he had daunced in Asia. The same thing also
was objected unto the king Deiotarus. Also Cicero aunswering for Murea, said:
No man daunceth being sober, unless peradventure he be mad, neither being
alone, neither in the fields, neither yet at a moderate and honest banquet. He
did vpbraide and cast Anthony in the teeth for his wicked dancing. The Poet
Brant says: S^^^. Brant. ^ Stuls^fera (...).
Than dancing, in earth no game more damnable,
It seems no peace, but battle openly.
They that it use, of mind seem unstable,
As mad folk running with clamor, shout and cry:
What place is void of this furious folly?
None, so that I doubt within a while,
These follies the holy Church shall defile.



YOVTH. You have alleged strong authorities against this dancing, whereby I
do taste how bitter it is unto me, for I perceive by you how full of
filthiness and wickedness it is.


AGE. It is most certain, that it is full of all wickedness: therefore come
you away from it, 2. Cor. 6.17. ^^ay. ^2.11.
and use it no more, nor have you any pleasure in such works of filthynesse,
as the old saying is: He that will none evil do,
Must do nothing belonging thereto.


August. in Epist. 144.
Saint Augustine says: Nam qui gehennas metuit, non peocare metuit sed ardere:
ille autem peccare metuit, qui peccatum ipsum sicut gehennas odit. Tantum porro
quisque peccatum odit, quantum iustitiam diligit, He that fears hell, fears
not to sin, but to burn: Therefore he fears to sin, that hates the very
sin it self ash hates hell. So much does every man therefore hate sin,
as he loves righteousness. So Horace says: The wicked fears to sin,
because of punishment: the godly man hates to sin, for the love of virtue,
according to this saying: If I knew that God would forgive sin, and that
men should not know it:
Yet for the vileness of sin, I would not commit it.



YOVTH. These your sayings have pierced my heart, and done me very much good,
Romans ^.4.
I pray God that I may follow this good counsel of yours, for I see now,
that we must and ought to walk in a virtuous life and conversation, that are
baptized into Jesus Christ.


AGE. You have said right: and therefore you must understand that there be
three kinds of lives: One is occupied in action and doing: the second in
knowledge and study: the third in obiectation and fruition of pleasures and
wanton pastimes. Of which, the last kind of life, delicious, voluptuous, or
given to pleasures, is beastlike, brutishe, abject, vile, unworthy the
excellency of man. Therefore Paul says (unto all such as are come to the
knowledge of Christ) The night is past, Romans 3.12.
and the day is at hand: Let us therefore cast away the works of darkness,
and let us put on the armor of light. 13
So that we walk honestly as in the day time, not in riot and drunkenness,
neither in chambering and wantonness, Ephesians. 5.4.
nor in striving and envying. etc. Neither in filthiness, neither foolish
talking, neither ieasting, which are not comely, but rather giving of thanks.
It is sufficient (says Saint Peter) that we have spent the time past of our
life, 1. Pet. 4.3. Ephesians. 4.23.
after the lusts of the Gentyles, walking in wantonness, lusts,
drunkenness, in gluttony, drinkings, and in abominable ydolatries. Therefore
(says he) let us henceforwarde live (as much time as remains in the flesh)
not after the lusts of men, 1. Cor. 10.31.
but after the will of God. And whatsoever we do, let us do all to the glory
of God.


YOVTH. O Lord, how beastly they are, which are led by the sensuality and
pleasures of the flesh.


AGE. 1. Pet. 2.12.
It is very true my son: for so says Saint Peter, that those as brute
beasts, led with sensuality, and made to be taken and destroyed, speak
evil of those things which they know not, and shall perish through their
own corruption, and shall receive the wages of unrighteousness, as they which
count it pleasure to live deliciouslye for a season, spots they are and
blots, delyting themselves in their deceyuings and feastings.


YOVTH. What can be more plainly spoken and said against Dancing, than is
already spoken and alleged by you? I thank God it has done me much good,
more than I am able to utter.


AGE. What would these Fathers say now, if they were presently alive, to see
the wanton and filthy daunces that are now used in this clear day and light
of the Gospel? What Sabbath days, what other days are there, nay what
nights are ouerpassed without dancing, among a number at this time? In Summer
season how do the most part of our young men and maids, in early rising and
getting themselves into the ^^lers, at Dancing, what foolish toys shall not
a man see among them? what unchaste countenances shall not be used then among
them? or what coals shall there be wanting that may kindle Cupids desire?
Truly none. Through this dau^cing many maidens have been vnmaydened, whereby I
may say, it is the storehouse and nurserie of Bastardie. What ado make our
young men at the time of May? Do they not use nightwatchings to rob and steal
young trees out of other men's ground, and bring them home into their Parish,
with minstreels playing before: and when they have set it up, they will deck
it with flowers and garlandes, and dance round (men and women together, Exo.
^.6.
most unseemly and intolerable, as I have proved before) about the tree,
like unto the children of Israel that daunced about the golden calfe that they
had set up. etc.


YOVTH. I maruayle much that the Magistrates do suffer this to be used,
especially where the Gospel is daily taught and preached.


AGE. It is greatly to be maruayled at in deed. But I may say as S. Paul said
to the Romans: Roma. 1.3.
These men which knew the law of God, how that they which commit such things,
are worthy of death, yet not only do the same, but also favor them that do
them. Which you know is as much as to consent to the^, which is the full
measure of all iniquity, as the Prophet Esaye says: Esaias. 1.23.
Thy rulers are rebellious, and companions of thieves. etc. Also you shall
oftentimes see what grave women (yea such as their either husbands are, or
have borne offices in a common weal) and others that make much of their
painted sheathes, use to dance: It is for their recreation for sooth (say
they) and then it is a world to see, nay a hell to see, how they will swing,
leap, and turn, when the Pypers and Crowders begin to play, as if they had
neither wisdom, gravity, chastity, sobriety, honesty, or discretion, in
such sort (do they use themselves in these wanton and unchaste dauncings) that
I cannot tell whether that Democritus has more cause to laugh at their
follies, than Heraclitus to weep at their miseries. The Poet says: To
dancing come children, maids, and wives,
And flattering young men to seek to have their pray, Sebast. ^ran. lib.
Stultife. nauis.

The hand in hand great falshoode often contriues.
The old queen also this madness will assay,
And the old dotarde, though he scantly may
For age and lamenesse stir either foot or hand,
Yet plays he the fool with other in the hand.


What new kind of daunces, and new devised gestures the people have devised,
and daily do devise, it will grieve chaste ears to hear it, good eyes to
see it, or tongue to utter it: so that it may truly be verified that the wise
man says: He that will seek for a dancing place,
Shall find there all manners that lacks grace.



YOVTH. God grant that we may leave this filthy vice of Dancing among all
the rest, and that the Magistrates and rulers may in such sort cut down this
wicked vice, that it may be no more used and exercised, and set sharp
punishment for the users and teachers thereof, as is most meet for them, so as
God may be glorified and sin abandoned.


AGE. You have made a very good prayer, which I pray also unto God it may take
effect, for his mercies sake. Amen.


YOVTH. Now give me to understand, I pray you good father Age, what answer
shall I make unto them that will allege and say, there must be some pleasures
in our life and pastimes, whereby we may be recreated, and our wits refreshed,
that are wearied with toil, labor, and study.


AGE. You must grant them that: but in the mean time they must be admonished,
that there are other pleasures more religious and honest, Ephe. 5.19.
as Saint Paul says: Speak unto your selves in psalms and Hymns, and
spiritual songs, singing and making melody to the Lord in your hearts.
Colos. 3.16.
Again he says: Let the word of God dwell in you plenteously in all
wisdom, teaching and admonishing your own selves in Psalms. etc. singing to
the Lord with grace in your hearts. Iam. 5.13.
Also Saint James says: Is any among you afflicted? let him pray: Is any
merry? let him sing. Tertul. in Apologetico.
Saint Tertullian says, that Christians used assemblies together, to their
moderate short suppers, and when they were refreshed with meat, they sang
divine praises, or recited some thing out of the holy Scriptures, provoking one
another by them, and by this means they returned home soberlye. So Syrach
says: Eccl. 32.12. 13^14.
Stand up betimes, and be not the last: but get thee home without delay, and
there take thy pastime, and do what thou will, so that thou do no evil, or
use proud words. But above al things, give thanks unto him that has made
thee, and replenished thee with his goods. etc.

There are other honest pleasures, as Problemes, wherewith the wits may be
exercised and refreshed. There are notable histories, as the Acts and
Monumentes of the Church, made by That good and blessed manne master John
Fox. For hystories (says Cicero) is a witness of times, Cic. lib. de Oratore.
the light of truth, the life of memory, the mystresse of life, the messenger
of antiquity. etc. Those praises certainlye are great, and yet they agree not
with every kind of hystori^s, but with those only in which these rules are
observed: namely, that it set forth no lies, or be afraid to tell the
truth, etc. which in my conscience never none wrote a more true and faithful
history, than master John Fore has (whatsoever the carping Papists prate
and say to the contrary) so that I say to you, there is no history so
slender, which is not very much profitable for some part of man's life.

But above all, Psalm. 1.2. Deuteronomy. 6.6. Joshua. 1.8. Prou. 6.20. Chr sost. in Mat.
22 ho. ^ Grego. ad Leandram.
let them read the holy Scriptures, and exercise themselves therein day and
night. etc. Saint Chrysostom says: He that is ignorant shall find to learn
there: he that is stubborn and a sinner, may find there scourges: he that is
troubled, may find there joys and comfort of eternal life. etc. It is a sea
(says Gregory) for Elephants to swim in, and the sillye Lamb to walk in.
etc. These are the exercises that we ought to take our repast and pleasure in
all the days of our life. etc. Plato says: That the life of a Philosopher is
the meditation of death. The like I may say, that the life of a christian man
is a perpetual study and exercise of mortifying the flesh until it be
utterly slain, the spirit getting the dominion in us.


YOVTH. These are very good and godly exercises, and necessary to be used in
these dangerous days wherein we now live.


AGE. In deed if they do consider the dangerous times that we are in, 2.
Kin. 5.10.
they have little cause to use those follies, for in stead of playing they
would use praying: in stead of Dancing, repenting: for joy, sorrow: for
laughing, mourning: for mirth, sadness: for pride, patience: for wantonness,
woefulness. etc. Is it now (think you) a time to be merry, dice, dance, and
play? seeing before our eyes, how the blouddie Papists murder and slaughter
in all places round about us our poor brethren that profess the Gospel of
Jesus Christ. Luc. 19.41.
Christ wept over Jerusalem for his eminent and imminent destruction, and do
we laugh at our brethrens destruction?

Luc. ^3.2.
Christ said to the Jews: Suppose ye that those Galileans were greater sinners
than all the other Galileans, because they have suffered such things? I tell
you nay: But except you amend your lives, ye shall all likewise perish. So I
say to thee England: Do thou suppose that those French men, which were
cruellye murdered, (...). ^^
and unnaturally slaughtered by the bloudye and unmerciful Papists in
France, were greater sinners than thou art? I tell thee nay: But except thou
England amend thy manners, and bring forth better fruits of the Gospel,
thou will likewise perish also. For thou drawest iniquity with cords of
vanity and sin, Esaias. 5.18. ^. Peter. 3.4. Eccl. 4.17.
as with Carte roapes. And yet as Solomon says: They know not that they do
evil.

God grant to open the eyes of England, that it may see his sins, and be
ashamed thereof, and fall to repentance, and to rent their hearts and not
their garments, Joel. 2.13.16.
and turn to the Lord God, for he is gracious and merciful. etc. Let the
people therefore be gathered together, E^ech. 1^.
sanctify the congregation, gather the Elders, assemble the children, and
those that suck the breasts: let the Bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and
his Bryde out of her Bryde chamber, let the Priests, the Ministers of the
Lord weep between the Porche and the Altar, and let them say: Spare thy
people (O Lord) and give not thine heritage into reproach, that the Heathen
Papists should reygne over us. Mica. 7.10. Psalm. 42.10.
Wherefore should they say among the people: Where is their God?


YOVTH. You have made a godly prayer, and the Lord grant it may take effect
in us all: But I fear me it is, as it was in the time of Abraham: whiles he
prayed, the people played: Ge. 19.22.23.
whiles he wept, they laughed: whiles he desired, they deferred: and while he
persuaded God, they daily provoked God to anger. etc.


AGE. Yet my son, Abraham left not to pray for them, neither ought we, 1.
King^. 19.18.
for no doubt but God has his children, among the wicked of this world, as he
had Lot among the Sodomits, Abdias with Achab and Iesabel, Nichodemus among the
Pharisees. Matthew and Zacheus among the toll takers. Paul among the
persecuting lawyers and Scribes, Luke. 19.2.
etc.


YOVTH. Truly good father, I see that as they used Lot, so are the preachers
now used, Psalm 58.4.5. 2. Cor. 2.15.
for the more they call them back from playing and Dancing, the faster they
run forward, the harder they cry, the deafer they are, the more they love
them, the worse they hate them.


AGE. That is lamentable, Gala. 4.16.
that the preachers are become their enemies for telling them truth, and their
foes for helping them. 2. Timo. 4.2. Ezech. 2.5.
The old saying is true, Veritas odium parit: Truth gets hatred: yet they
must not leave off to preach the word continually, in season and out of season,
improve, rebuke, exhort with all long sufferings and doctrine, 1. Cor. 3.7.
let them cast out the seed of Gods word, and let the Lord alone with the
increase thereof.


YOVTH. There was never more preaching, and worse living, never more talking
and less following, never more professing, and less profyting, never more
words and fewer deeds, never trewer faith preached and less works done,
than is now, which is to be lamented and sorowed.


AGE. You must not nor ought not, to impute it unto the preaching of Gods word,
Mat. 24.32. Luke. 21.29. Mat. 16 2.3. Mat. 3.12. Mat. 24.37 Mark 13.32. Luke
17.28.
but unto the wickedness and perverse nature of man's corruption: you know my
son, by the buds and fruits of trees, times are discerned and known: So
truly by these their fruits (which springs of their corrupt and rotten
trees of their flesh) we are taught in the Scriptures that the time of harvest
is at hand.

For Christ says, that as the days of Noe were, so likewise shall the coming
of the son of man be: Mat. 24.12.
for in the days before the floude came, they did eat and drink, mary, and
gave in marriage, plant, buy and sell etc. and knew nothing til the flood came
and took them al away etc. he says also, iniquity shall be increased and the
love of many shall abate, (...) 6.2.^.
the preachers shall be hated and evil spoken of, they shall be excommunicated
and killed, etc. And Paul also speaks of those fruits (largely) that men
shall bring forth in the last days, saying:

This know also, that in the latter days shall come perilous times, for men
shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, cursed
speakers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural
affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, intemperate, fierce, despisers of
them which are good, traitors, heady, high minded, lovers of pleasures more
than lovers of god, having a show of godliness etc. al which fruits we may
see evidently with our eyes, reigning too much in all estats and degrees.
Therefore, it is no marueyle if they hate the light of Gods word: for that their
deeds are so evil, and now made manifest to the world, for he yt does evil
hates y^ light, says our savior Christ etc.


YOVTH. John. 3.19.
Truly you have declared their fruits, whereby we may easily gather, that the
day of judgment is not far off, but all this while, they pass not for any
exhortations, nor have any regard and consideration in the day of judgment:
for they do imagine with themselves, that there is no immortality of the
soul, and that it is but a fable of Robyn hoode, to tell them of the day of
judgment, and think death ought never to be remembered of them.


AGE. 2. Pet. 3.3.4.
These are the same people, that saint Peter speaks of, saying: This first
understand, that there shall come in the last days, mockers, which will walk
after their lusts, and say, where is the promise of his coming? for since the
fathers died, all things continue alike from the beginning of the creation.
Even such as those. Eccle. 41.1.
Epicures, and Atheistes which you speak of. And Syrach shows the reason,
why these wicked ones cannot abide, death. O says he, how bitter is the
remembrance of death to a man that lives at rest in his possessions and
pleasures etc. Although they use to say (for a little time) come let us enjoy
the pleasures yt are pr^sent, let us al be partakers of our wantonness: let us
leave, some token of our pleasure in every place: For that is our portion and
this is our Lot, but one day they shall cry out and say, in bitterness of
conscience (if they repent not in time) what has pride profyted us? Wis.
2.6.7.8.9. Wisdom. 5.8. 9. 1. Chro. 29.15.
or what profit has the pomp of riches and pleasures brought us? al these
things are passed away like a shadow, and as a post that passes by. Therefore
says Solomon, the hope of the ungodly is like the dust yt is blown away with
the wind, Cap. 25.
and like a thin foam that is scattered abroad with the storm, and as the
smoke that is dispersed with the wind, and as the remembrance of him passes,
that tarieth but for a day: but the righteous shall live for ever: their reward
also is with the Lord, and the most high has care of them, etc.

Now my son Youth, time calls me away, I will take my leave and commit you
to the tuitio^ of the Almighty: for I must hasten homeward: and look what I
have said to you, keep it, and practice it all your life long, look back no
more to filthy Sodom, least it happen to you as did to Lots wife, neither turn
to your vomet like a dog, neither yet to your filthy puddle and mire, like a
swyne, for if you do* your portion will be with those that shall be shut out of
gods kingdom. For if you, after you have escaped from the filthiness of the
world, through the knowledge of the Lord, are yet inta^gled again therein, and
overcome, the latter end is worse with you than the beginning. Eccle. 6^36.
etc. Therefore be never obliuious, for as the wiseman says: Tantum scimus
quantum memoria tenemus:
So much we know assuredly,
As we do hold in memory.



YOVTH. I give you most humble thanks, Eccle. 6.36.37.
for your good and godly counsel and fatherly instructions: and by gods grace I
shall hereafter hate (among al other vices) this naughty loytering idleness:
prodigal and wastful Diceplaying, and filthy wanton Dancing, and I will draw
and persuade as many as I can or may (by any means) from it likewise, Psalm.
51.13 Luke. 22.22. Eccle. 6.36.
and by the grace of Jesus Christ, I shall never let slip out of my mind, these
your godly sayings and fatherly instructions, but will write them up in my heart.


AGE. If you so do, it is very well: and in all your actions and doings, what
soever you take in hand, remember the end, and you shall never do amiss.


YOVTH. God grant that I may so do.


AGE. Farewell my son Youth, God bless thee, and rule thee always with his
holy spirit in the end and to the end.


YOVTH. And you also good father, for his Christ's sake. Amen.


FINIS.
IMPRINTED AT LONdon by Henry Bynneman for George Bishop.


