EIGHT SERMONS PVBLIKELY PREACHED IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD, the second at St
Peter's in the East, the rest at St Mary's Church. Begun in the year 1595.
December. XIIII.

NOW FIRST PVBLISHED BY SEBASTIAN BENEFIELD Doctor, and Professor of Divinity
for the Lady MARGARET.

ROMANS 1.16. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: for it is the power of
God unto salvation, to every one that believes.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1614.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS LORD ELLESMERE, LORD HIGH CHANCELLOR OF
ENGLAND, AND THE MVCH HONORED CHANCELLOR OF THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.
RIGHT HONORABLE
THese Sermons, the first fruits of my labors in the Ministry, preached many
years since in the public assemblies of this famous University, do now at
length adventure to go into the Country, to see what entertainment they can
find there. There they doubt not of respect, if they may be graced with the
countenance of some worthy patronage. It is my part to seek it for them. And
of whom shall I rather seek it, then of your HONOR? They were studied,
penned, and delivered in that renowned Academie, whereof now, when they are
published, your HONOR is the chief ruler. To your HONOR therefore do they of
right belong. Receive them much-Honoured Lord into your protection, and shield
them against the tongues of railers. They will say: Is this the myrrh, the
incense, the gold? are these the pearls, we looked he should bring to the
building of the Tabernacle? I reply, that Goats hair, Ex. 35.23
and the skins of Rams, and Badgers, are welcome to that work: and do wish,
that some willing offering of theirs may further it. If it be demanded, why at
this time I offer so simple a present to your Honorable view? My answer is; I
do it to testify that dutiful observance, and thankfulness, which I owe unto
your HONOR. We Scholars, of all others must acknowledge our selves obliged to
your HONOR. Many, as well in this, as in that other University, might bury
their bones in their cloisters, did not your HONOR daily send them forth to
labor (God grant they all prove laborers) in the vineyard of the Lord. Mat.
9.38.
For mine own particular; your Honorable countenance was of late most ready
to settle me in the Divinity Lecture for the Lady MARGARET, and was within
these few weeks as forward to advance me to a higher preferment; but it
pleased God otherwise to dispose of that. This your Honors more then credible
benignity toward one, whom your HONOR never saw, can I forget? Its
impossible. My right hand should deserve to loose her cunning, Psa. 137.5
would she not take her first opportunity to write of so great bounty. For
this cause, at this time, is this poor talent of mine presented to your
HONOR. Accept it Honorable Lord, as the sincere testimony of my thankful
heart; and vouchsafe me still your Honorable favor. God Almighty shower down
plentifully of his best blessings upon your HONOR, and make you happy, and
blessed in all your ways: and after fullness of age and felicity in this
world, crown he you with everlasting glory in the Highest Heavens. From my
Study in Corpus Christi College in Oxford, July 2. 1614.

YOUR HONORS most bounden in all duty, and service, SEBASTIAN BENEFIELD.

THREE SERMONS ON LVKE CHAP. 9. VERSE. 23. And he said unto all, if any man will
come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross daily, and follow
me.
THE righteous Ierem. 23.5.
branch raised unto David by the Lord God of Israel, of who^ it was foretold,
that he should come, like a Mal. 3.2, 3, 4
purging fire, and like fullers soap, and should be ready to sit down, to try
and fine the silver, even the sons of Levi, as also to fifth Judah and
Jerusalem, yea, all that would be his, that their sacrifices and works might
be as purified gold, acceptable to the Lord as in old time; having descended
from the highest heavens; well content in flesh to be Esai. 53.5.
wounded for our transgressions, and broken for our iniquities, even then, when
he Esai. 53.4.
carried our sorrows, was by diverse diversely reputed. Some thought of him as
of Mat. 16.14.
John Baptist: of others he was taken for Elias; and there wanted not such as
said, he was Jeremy or one of the old Prophets risen again: but asking his
disciples ( Verse. 15.
whom say ye that I am?) he heard otherwise. Verse. 16.
Thou art that CHRIST, the son of the living God.

And knowing that his disciples (howsoever they were well assured, that he was
that King and Priest, promised to our forefathers, and foreordained by the
almighty to save mankind) were notwithstanding ignorant of the means of man's
redemption and salvation, and so were ignorantly by a common error of their
time deceived, looking for an earthly kingdom in him whose Psalm. 45.6.
scepter is a scepter of righteousness, he taught them in a few words, what
estate and condition, both of his kingdom and priesthood, should be looked
for, even that al our salvation must wholly depend upon the merit of his death,
and virtue of his resurrection: and so much he signified unto them, in the
former verse, the 22. verse. of this chapter, saying, The son of man must
suffer many things, and be reproved of the elders, and of the High Priests, and
Scribes, and be slain, and the third day rise again.

Having thus instructed them, he delivers a new doctrine, in these words of
my text, whereby all are taught, what must be done by them, who are willing to
be partakers of that salvation, which he for his followers has deserved. Which
place is so much the more worthy our memory and due consideration, because
small fruit may redound unto us, from all, that is delivered concerning Christ
and the whole work of our redemption, except we thoroughly understand the
means, by which we may be made his disciples. For to them only belong all the
promises of his kingdom, and the inheritance thereof. Our Savior therefore
being unwilling that any thing should be hidden from us, which might direct us
in the pathway to our salvation, has said unto all, if any man will come after
me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me.

The occasion of these words, although omitted by this Evangelist, is
notwithstanding expressed by S. Matthew in the 22. ver. of his 16. chapt. and
by S. Mark, chapter 8. ver. 32. where we read how that Peter offended at the
former words of Christ, wherein he mentioned his own death, began to advise
him to the contrary, and Math. 16.22.
took him aside, and rebuked him. The^ Christ turning back reproved Peter,
saying get thee behind me, Satan, thou art an offense unto me, because thou
understand not the things that are of God, but the things that are of men.

And because he knew, that this was a common fault to all his disciples, and
therefore much more common to the people, who were all earnestly bent to the
heaping up of worldly wealth, unwilling to endure tribulations and afflictions,
he thought it now high time to instruct them unto patience, and therefore
called the people with his disciples unto himself; and said unto all, if any
man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily,
and follow me.

Which words containing a perfect doctrine, or an exact rule sufficient for the
teaching or guiding of the followers of Christ, do yield unto our consideration
three things.

The first, who they are, whom this doctrine concerns, in these words, and he
said unto all.

The second, the condition, for which this doctrine is proposed, in the words
following: if any man will come after me.

The third, the doctrine it self: in the last words, let him deny himself,
and take up his cross daily, and follow me.

They whom this doctrine concerns, are not comprehended in a small number;
for they are all; and he said unto all. The condition imports a necessity of
this doctrine, if any man will come after me. The doctrine contains 3.
precepts. 1. let him deny himself; 2. let him take up his cross daily, 3. let
him follow me. Of these in their order.

And said unto all] here is the universality of this doctrine, delivered by our
Savior, not only to his disciples and their successors in the ministry of
the church; nor to the people only, which were then with him, but jointly to
all: yet not to all simply as some have defined, but to all with are straint,
even to all that will follow him. For albeit we have learned that God 1. Tim.
2.4.
will that all men shall be saved, and come unto the knowledge of the truth;
and Romans 11.32.
has shut v^ all in unbelief, that he might have mercy on all; and 2. Pet.
3.9.
would have no man to perish, but that al should come to repentance; yet if our
understanding of these, and the like places be right, we shall find, that
their generality is also restrained. God will that all men shall be saved. 1.
Tim. 2.4. yet God will not that all men shall be saved. For Tophe^ is prepared
of old; it is even prepared for the King, it is made deep and large, the
burning thereof is fire and much wood, the branch of the Lord take a river of
brimstone does kindle it, Esai. 30.33. God has st^^^ up all in unbelief, that
he might have mercy ^n all, Romans 11.32. yet God will not have mercy on al. For
he will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will, he hardens,
Romans 9.18. God would have no man to perish, but would that al should come to
repentance, 2. Pet. 3.9. yet he will have some man perish, and denies some to
come to repentance. For he hated Esau, and made his mountains wast, and his
heritage a wilderness for dragons, Malach. 1.3.

What shall we say then? that there is mutability in the highest? God forbid.
Mat. 5.18. Luke 16.17.
Heaven and earth shall perish, before one jot, or one tittle of his word shall
escape not fulfilled. He wills that 1. Tim. 2.4.
all shall be saved, and therefore it must be so. He says, al shall not be
saved, and how can it be otherwise? All indeed shall be saved, if by all, we
understand the elect and chosen of God. But if under all we comprehend the
reprobate, all shall not be saved. Say all the elect, Joan. 17.12.
not one of them shall perish; all shall repent; for God will have mercy on
all. Say all the reprobate; all shall perish, and none shall repent, for mercy
shall be showed to none.

St Augustine in his book de correptione and gratia, cap. 14. teaches as much.
Ita dictum est, omnes homines vult salvos fieri, vt intelligantur omnes
praedestinati, quia omne genus hominum in iis est.
God will, says he, that all men shall be saved, meaning by all, all that are
predestinate to salvation, because all sorts of men are amongst them. Kings and
private men, Jews and Gentiles, Grecians, and Barbarians, bond and free, men
and women, rich and poor, all are one in Christ Jesus. All are chosen and
predestinate to live with Christ, but then by all we must understand (as the
Perkins in his golden chain. p. 341.
learned have well noted) Omnia genera singulorum, non singula generum, all
sorts of particulars, not each particular of all sorts. And so Kings, and
private men, Jews, and Gentiles, men and women, and the rest are predestinate
to salvation, though not every King, and every private man, every Jew and every
Gentile, every man and every woman, and so forth in the rest. For he that was
worthy to take the book, and to open the seals thereof, because he was
killed, Rev. 5.9. has redeemed men and women to God by his blood, out of every
kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation.

It was Dictum est Pharisaeis, Decimatis omne olus: vhi non est intelligendu^
nisi omne, quod habebant. Neque enim omne olus, quod erat in toto terraru^
orb. decimabant.
said unto the Pharisees, Luke 11.42. ye tithe all herbs. Is it credible, that
they tithed all the herbs, which the earth yielded? understand rather, that
they ^^^ed all such herbs as they had.

St Paul says, give none offense, Sicut and ego omnibus per omnia placeo
Nunquid enim qui hoc dixit, placebat etiam tam multi^ persecutoribus f^i^? Sed
placebat omni genari hominum, quod Christi co^gregabat Eccles^a.
even as I please all men in all things, 1. Cor. 10.33. yet who knows not,
how far he was from pleasing the silver smyth Demetrius, and others of the Jews
which persecuted him. He meant therefore by all men, all sorts of men gathered
together in the Church of Christ.

It is a rule of St Augustines, and a rule full of truth, that all may be used
for many, and many for all, though sometimes all cannot be many, nor many, all.
His discourse is to be read in his 6. book against Julian the Pelagian and 12.
Chap. Possunt esse aliqua omnia, qua non sunt multa, faith he, etc. Of
somethings we may say, they are all, when we cannot say they are many; as we
say all the Evangelists, but cannot say many, because they are but four.
Again, of some things we may say they are many, when we cannot say they are
all: and so we say many do believe in Christ, when all do not believe, for all
men have not faith, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. But that which God said to Abraham, in thy
seed all the nations of the earth shall be blessed, Genesis 12.3. expounded by
himself saying, I have made thee a father of many nations, sufficiently
declares the indifferent use of all and many. By one man sin entered into the
world, and death by sin, and so death went over all men, Romans 5.12. and here,
all are but many: for in the 19. ver. of the same Chapter it is said, by one
man's disobedience many were made sinners. Again in the same Chapter and 18.
verse. we read, that by the justifying of one, the benefit abou^ded toward all
men to the justification of life. Where by all men only many are understood:
for in the verse following 19. verse it is said, By the obedience of one, many
shall be made righteous. So then Genesis 12.3.
all nations of the earth shall be blessed in the seed of Abraham, not as if
all must needs be blessed, but because that all that shall be blessed, shall be
blessed in his seed: and so Romans 5.12.
by one man's disobedience all must be condemned, not as if all of necessity
must be condemned, but because all that must be condemned, must be condemned
in that one man's disobedience: and Romans 5.11.
all men shall be justified by Christ his justice, not as if all necessarily must
be justified, but because all that shall be justified, shall be justified by
Christ's justice. The holy Ghost then uses this word, all, to give us to
understand, that none may be blessed but in Abraham's seed; none condemned, but
by Adams disobedience, and none saved but by Christ's justice.

If there be Aug. contr. Iulianum Pelag. lib. 6. c. 12 Sicut possumus dicere,
in aliquam donum per vnam ian^a^^intrar^ OMNES, non quia OMNES homines intrant
in ea^dem domum, sed quia nemo intrat nisi per illam.
one way into a house by one only door, we properly say, that all men go into
that house by that door, not because all men go into that house, for
thousands will never come near it by thousands of miles; but because all that
come into that house come in by that door. So is it here: we have one way to
salvation, by one only door, the justice of Christ; and the ever true God
says, that all men shall be saved by Christ's justice, not because all shall
be saved, for assuredly the lake burning with fire and brimstone never to be
quenched, is not prepared in vain; but because all that shall be saved, shall
be saved only by Christ's justice.

Truth cannot pass forth without contrarieties and quarrels of judgments; and
no marvel, for so it has been from the beginning. Kain could not endure
that his brother Abels oblations should be acceptable to the Lord, and not his,
but he would kill him for it, Genesis 4.8. Esau hated Jacob because of the
blessing wherewith his father blessed him, and thought in his mind to slay him
for it, Genesis 27.41. The kingdom of darkness was ever against the kingdom of
light. The Scribes and Pharisees were grieved with Christ: infinite have been
the Heretics which have opposed themselves against the glory of the Gospel.
And now, though the truth it self teaches us, that these general
propositions before alleged, cannot be spoken of, all, simply, but with a
restriction; and that all shall not be saved; yet they who have given their
names to the woman that sits upon the skar^^^ colored beast, having been
often drunken with the blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus, do band
themselves against the Lords anointed, and teach that for truth, which that
lying woman, the mother of abominations, has taught them, saying: See Perkins
golden chain cap 54. error. 1. p. 199.
There is an universal election by which Almighty God, without any restraint
or exception of persons, has purposed by Christ to redeem and reconcile unto
himself, all mankind, the whole nature of man decayed in Adam; even every
private man, so that no man may be called reprobate, no man exempted from
salvation.

But as Aarons rod devoured the rod of the Sorcerers, Exodus 7, 12. so will
truth devour error. They say, there is an universal election, the truth
says, few are chosen, Mat. 20.16. They say that al mankind, yea every private
man is redeemed and reconciled to God by Christ; the truth says, that Christ
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from al iniquity, and purge us to
be a peculiar people unto himself, Tit. 2.14. They say, that Christ gave
himself as well for them, whom we call reprobate, as for the elect. The truth
says, I lay down my life for my sheep, Ioh. 10.15. They hereto reply, that
all men are Christ's sheep; the truth it self answers them: My sheep hear
my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal
life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of mine
hand, Ioh. 10.27, and 28.

They add further that all men shall be taught of God, Esai, Sicut integre
loquimur, cum de aliquo literarum Magistro, qui in civitate solus est dicimus
OMNES iste hic literas docet; no^ quia OMNES discunt, sed quia nemo nisi ab
illo discit, quicunque ibi literas discit ita recte dicimus, OMNES Deus docet
Venire ad Christu^; non quia omnes veniunt, sed quia nemo aliter venit.
54.13. and therefore that all men may be saved; else, if all men may not be
saved, to what end shall all be taught of God? I answer them, with that, which
St Austine has in his book, de praedestinatione sanctorum, cap. 8. If, says
he, in a city there be but one schoolmaster, we may well say of him, this man
teaches all in the city, not because all men in the city are taught, but
because no man is there taught, except he be taught by him. Even so God
teaches all men to come to Christ and be saved, not because all men therefore
come and are saved, but because no man comes and is saved, except he be
taught by God. If this be so, say they, what is become of Gods justice, why
does he teach some, and not others; choose some and not all?

Such busy and too curious demanders may learn of S. Paul, that Gods will and
pleasure is the only chief cause, why he electeth some, and reproves the
rest; that this point of doctrine, is to be believed by faith, not to be
examined by reason: and that whosoever shall dispute, to find a reason of Gods
will, besides that which is revealed in his word, is a pleader against God. Romans
9.20.
O man, says he, what art thou, that pleadest against God? But, I mind not to
enter into the depth of this doctrine; I leave it, as better beseeming greater
years, and riper judgments, and the rather, because not long since this same
secret, how profound soever it is, has been learnedly discovered out of this
place, by a zealous disposer of Gods secrets. Only I may warn them that shall
so plead against God, in whose hands they are as Rom 9.21.
pots in the hands of the potter, that they take heed least themselves be among
the^, whom the same God, with his scepter of iron shall Psalm. 2.9.
crush and break in pieces like potters vessels. And so I come to the second
thing considered in my text.

Such is the condition for which this doctrine is delivered, that thereby every
one, that will be Christ's Disciple, is assigned to the necessary observance
thereof. If he be a Romans 9.21.
vessel of honor, having his name written in heaven, exempted from the power
of Satan, as dear to God, as is the apple of his eye, yet in coming after
Christ, he must be directed by Christ his doctrine; he must deny himself, he
must take up his Cross daily, and must follow him. It is not then put to our
choice, to do, or not to do after this rule prescribed unto us by our
Savior, but we must do after it: otherwise a heavy dome is pronounced
against us; Mat. 7.23.
I know you not, you cannot come after me. Then shall we be Esai. 1.30.31
as oaks with fading leaves, and as gardens that have no water. Our selves, how
well soever we think of our selves, shall be as towe, and our pleasures as
sparks, and we shall both burn together.

How much better is it for us to harke^ unto the voice of our Lord, and to be
ruled by him? He teaches us that we must deny our selves, and take up our
crosses daily, and follow him, if we will be his disciples. A hard doctrine
indeed for flesh and blood to consent unto, yet a necessary one, and therefore
not to be refused. You will count him a bad servant, unworthy his masters
favor, that will not do, or grieve to do, that which his master shall
command. The wise man says, that, howsoever the pleasure of a king is in a
wise servant, yet his wrath shall be toward him that is lewd, Pro. 14.35.
Gehazi offends his master Elisha, because he takes money and raiment of Naaman
the Syrian; but how shall Gehazi be rewarded for it? The leprosy of Naaman
shall cleave unto him, and to his seed for ever, and himself shall be a leaper
as white as snow, 2. King. 5.27. The king of Egypts chief baker must not
offend his master, without loss of his head, Genesis 40.22.

If we be Christ's servants why do we not, or why grieve we to do, that which
he enioineth us? If he be Malac. 1.6.
our master, where is his fear? Surely he is not a king in vain; his lewd
servants shall smart for their lewdness. Why do we grieve him? If we would
give him leave; if we would but sweep our house, and make it clean for him;
he would come down unto us, and would dwell in us. Why do we offend him?
Whosoever shall offend one of these little ones, which believe in me, says
Christ, it were better for him, that a millstone were hanged about his neck,
and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea, Mat. 18.6. What! shall the
offenders of the little ones that believe in Christ be so hardly entreated?
and shall we, that offend Christ himself, look to escape blameless?

S. Chrysostom is of opinion, that there cannot be a more grievous sore to a
man's conscience, then to offend Christ, for in his 37. homil. out of the 11.
Chap. of Mat. he says; Et simulti Gehennam omnium malorum supremum, atque
vltimum pu^a^t^ ego tamen sic censeo, sic assidue praedicabo, multo acerbius
esse Christum offendere, qua^ Gehenne malis vexari.
Howsoever men judge of hell, as of a place of the most bitter, and the
extremest torture that may be, yet I think, and will always teach, that it
is a more bitter and an extreamer torture to offend Christ by living ill, then
to be tormented in hell fire. Yet, assure your selves, that they which go
down to hell for their transgressions against the LORD, have not very easy,
and pleasing punishments: for, their worm shall never die, their fire shall
never be quenched, and themselves shall be an abhorring to all flesh, Esa
56.24. Since then it is so dangerous a thing to offend our Christ, let us
endeavor to offend him no more.

The displeasure of an earthly king brings many enemies with it; and shall
the King of all kings, moved to wrath and displeasure by our wanton and vicious
lives, not be able to set his creatures against us? yes. For his hand is
stretched out still. For him, the Josh. 10.13.
Sun abode in Gibeon, and the Moon stood still in the valley of Aialon, and
there rained Josh. 10.11.
haylstones from heaven to take part, in the discomfiting of the five kings of
the Amorites, Josh. 10.5. For him fire and brimstone fought against Sodom and
Gomorah, Genesis 19.24. For him, the water returned, and covered the chariots and
horsemen, even all the host of Pharaoh, Exodus 14.27. For him, the earth opened
her mouth, and swallowed up the murmurers, Dathan and Abiram with their
families, and all the men that appertained to Korah, and all their goods, Numb.
16.32. For him, the Lions spoiled the Idolaters, their wives, and their
children, and brake all their bones in pieces, Dan. 6, 24. For him, two Bears
came out of the forest, and tore in pieces two and forty of them, which
mocked Elisha in his way to Bethel, 2. King. 2.24. Thus has God dealt with
them, with whom he has been displeased; and yet, his hand is stretched out
still. O that the wicked would consider this, and at last forsake their
wickedness.

But, I fear me, their blindness is so great, that they will not see: Esai.
5.18.
they draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as with cartropes: Verse.
20.
they speak good of evil, and evil of good: V. 21.
they are wise in their own conceits: many of them are V. 22.
mighty to drink wine, and among them, they are greatest, who are strongest
to power in strong drink. I could wish that such would read over the 22. verse
of the 5. Chapter of the Prophecy of Esaias, it is but short, and happily it may
yield them a sovereign salve for their sore: without doubt if they have any
feeling of God, they will stand in awe of him, when he denounces a woe
against them; and if they will pass but the next verse, and come to the 24.
they shall there find, that, as the flame of fire devoureth the stubble, and as
the chafe is consumed of the flame; so their root shall be as rottenness, and
their budde shall rise up like dust, the reason is added; because they have
cast off the law of the Lord of hosts, and have contemned the word of the holy
one of Israel.

It may be they are the loather to leave their pleasures, and to part with
their sins, because they have some persuasion, that God hides his face from
them, and sees them not. Let them not deceive themselves; a godly preacher
assures them, that their pleasures are spurs, and their sins very
hypocrites, honey in their mouths, but poison in their stomachs. Could Samuel
tell Saul all that was in his heart? 1. Sam. 9.19. and could Elisha know that
Gehazi had taken bribes? 2. King. 5.26. And shall not God be able to know the
deeds and thoughts of men? yes, if Miriam and Aaron speak but against Moses,
the Lord will hear them, Number. 12.2. and old Sarah must not think to laugh, and
not be seen. Genesis 18.13. Hell and destruction are before the Lord, says Prove.
15.11.
Solomon, how much more the hearts of the sons of men? He has Esai. 40.12.
measured the waters in his fifth, and counted heaven with his spanne, and
comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and waighed the mountains in
a weight, and the hills in a balance, there is no thought hid from him. Let
them therefore harke^ unto the words of this God in the 3. Chap. of Mal. verse.
5. I will come near to you to judgment, and I will be a swift witness
against the soothsayers, and against the adulterers, and against false
swearers, and against those that wrongfully keep back the hirelings wages,
and against them that vex the widow, and the fatherless, and oppress the
stranger; and against all that fear not me, says the Lord of hosts.

If Elah king of Judah drink till he be drunken, his servant Zimrie must kill
him, 1. King. 16.9. If the men of Gibea play the adulterers with an harlot,
25000. Beniamites must loose their lives for it, Judge. 20.46. If Achan be found
to be covetous, he, and all that he has, must be burnt with fire, Josh. 7.24.
If the swearer persist in his swearing, the liar in his lying, the idle
minister in his idleness, and every wicked one in his wickedness, behold, he
that Rev. 19.15.
treads the wine press of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God, shall
come quickly, Verse. 13
clothed with a garment dipped in blood, his eyes shall be as a Verse. 12
flame of fire, out of his Ver. 15.
mouth shall come a sharp sword, his reward shall be with him to thrust every
one of them into the ever burning pit. This shall be the portion of their cup,
if they will not turn from their wicked ways.

But if they will return from all their sins, and keep the statutes of the
living God, and do that which is lawful and right, God will have mercy on
them. If their transgressions were more in number then the sands of the earth,
yet God will be ready to forgive them. Rehoboam could no sooner humble himself,
but he was forgiven, howsoever before he had forsaken God, 2. Chron. 12.7.
Manasseh did evil in the sight of the Lord, like the abominations of the
heathen, and was therefore taken by the Captains of the king of Assyria, put in
fetters, bound in chains, and carried unto Babel, yet he could no sooner pray
unto God, but his prayer was heard, and God brought him back again to
Jerusalem, and placed him in the kingdom, 2. Chron. 33.13. If the thief, even
the^, when he is on the cross will pray to Christ to remember him, Christ will
tell him, that he shall be that night with him in Paradise, Luke 23.43.

Since then, such is the compassion of our God, let us not grieve him; let us
not provoke him to 2. Kin. 21.13
stretch over us the line of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Ahab,
left so he wipe us, as a man wipeth a dish, who wipeth it, and then turns it
vpside down: let him that is covetous be covetous no more; let the swearer
swear no more; let every one mend one; and then our Esai. 1.18.
crimson sins shall be white as snow, and our skarlet sins shall be as
wool; for God has spoken it, Esa. 1.18. Is there any soul among us, that
has often times fallen, and most infinitely offended his maker? with such a
soul God communeth in the 3. of Ierem. 1. in this sort: They say, that if a
woman depart from her husband, and do join her self to another man, she may
not return to her first husband again, for that she is polluted and defiled;
and yet whereas thou have departed from me, and have committed fornication with
many other lovers, do thou return unto me again, and I will receive thee,
says Almighty God.

Remember the Ninevites; Gods sentence was gone out against them: Ion. 3.4.
yet 40. days and Nineveh shall be overthrown. Come, see, and taste, how good
our God is: Esal. 54.10.
the mountains shall remove, and the hills fall down, but Gods mercyes shall
not depart from his people, neither shall the covenant of his peace fall away.
The Ninevites could no sooner in detestation of their former lives, Ion. 3 5.
proclaim a fast, put on sackcloath, and turn from their wicked ways, but
Ver. 10.
God repented him of the evil, which he had said, that he would do unto them,
and he did it not.

Let us look to our selves: Gods sentence is given, against all Idolaters,
adulterers, wantons, and the like, they shall not inherit the kingdom of God,
1. Cor. 6.10. yet let not such despair of Gods mercy, and so be hardened to
persist in living wickedly; the Ninevites can assure them, that they may be
forgiven. If they have fallen, they may rise again; if they have been lost
companions, yet they may be saved; if they have committed adultery, or have
been drunken for the time past, they may be continent, and sober for the time
to come: if they have delighted in lewd and evil company, they may hereafter
acquaint themselves with good. This only is necessary that they begin their
conversion out of hand, that they repent unfeignedly, and thoroughly reform
themselves. If they do this they shall live. Yea we must all do so, or else we
shall not live. We must repent us of our sins from the bottomes of our hearts,
and turn from our wicked ways, and now at last begin to deny our selves and
to take up our crosses daily and to follow Christ; and this is the doctrine
which I noted in the third place.

Diosc. li. 4. ca. 77. Describing the nature of the Nerii sive Redodaphnes.
Enecant folia floresque ejus jumenta quadrupedesque omnes. Eade^ homini contra
venenatorum morsus medicina^ faciunt. Vide and Leon. Fuchsium Comment. de hist.
stirpium cap. 204.
rose-laurel, says that the flower thereof is a very strong poison to al
cattle and four footed beasts, but to men of a sovereign remedy against
poison: of such a nature is this doctrine of our Savior. It is as poison to
the wicked and unbelieving, the very 2. Cor. 2.16.
savor of death unto death; but to the godly and believing, it is a
preservatiue against poison, even the Ibid.
savor of life unto life.

The first precept contained therein is, that we must deny our selves; in which
the whole nature of man is rejected and disallowed, together with all the
powers and desires thereof, as far unfit to be in any of Christ's disciples.
What is man that he should be clean? and he that is borne of a woman that he
should be just? Job. 15.14. we are Psalm. 51.5.
borne in iniquity, and our mothers have conceived us in sin; yea, we are
servants of sin; Genesis 6.5.
all the imaginations of our hearts have been evil even from our youth. By this
corruption of our nature, self love has been so rooted in us, that we
marveilously please our selves, even in our worst desires. But S. Paul tells
us, that the wisdom of the flesh, is enmity against God, because it is not
subject to the law of God, nor indeed can be, Romans 8.7. Wherefore since they
that live in the flesh, overruled by the affections and pleasures which are
naturally engrafted in them, cannot please God; it is very necessary that we
deny our selves in renouncing all such delights, in humbling our selves under
the almighty hand of God, and consecrating our selves wholly to him through the
obedience of faith. We then being commanded to deny our selves, are commanded
nothing else, then that, which is signified by the mystery of regeneration,
John. 3, 3. and by the mortifying of our earthly members, Colos. 3.5. In the
first place Christ tells us: Joan. 3.3.
Except a man be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. In the other
S. Paul warns us Coloss. 3.2.
to set our affections on things which are above, and not on things which are
on earth. Abraham denied himself when he went out of his country, and from his
kindred, and from his fathers house, not knowing whither he should go, or
where he should find any rest, Gen, 12.1. Moses denied himself, when he
refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, and chose rather to suffer
adversity with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sins for a
season, Heb. 11.24. Paul denied himself when he accounted all things loss,
and judged them to be filthe for Christ's sake, Phil. 3.^

Will thou know what it is to deny thy self, says S. Chrysostom. hom. 56. in 16.
Matt? Then consider what it is to deny another man. If thou see another
beaten with rods, or imprisoned, or stoned, or suffer any other ill, as hunger,
thirst, cold, nakedness, or the like, and do not seek to help him, nor
take pity upon him, then thou deniest him: Sic nullo nos pacto corpori
nostro parcere vult, vt neque si caeditur, neque si pellitur, neque si vritur,
nec si quid aliud eius. modi patitur, ei parcamus.
so if thou will deny thy self, thou must not favor thine own body,
whenever it shall be beaten, or stoned, or burnt, or howsoever it shall be
afflicted. S. Gregory upon Ezechiel says, Semetipsum aburgat, quicunque
mutatur ad meliora, and incipit esse quod non erat, and definit esse quod erat.
Be thou changed from worse to better, and begin to be that which thou have
not been, and leave of to be that which thou have been, and thou have denied
thy self. S. Hierom. in 16. of Matthew. says that he, Qui deponit vererem
hominem cum operibus suis, denegat semetipsum.
that puts of the old man with his works, denies himself. But, howsoever
Christ has commanded us to deny our selves, we may not presume of our own
ability herein. For he that is 1. Pet. 1.23.
borne again, is borne not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man, but of God, by the seed of his word, by the lively operation of
the holy Ghost.

Yet God would not have us to be idle and careless, he has therefore
appointed certain exercises for us, as good helps for our denying our selves.
1. We must pray for Gods assistance. So did David; Create in me a clean heart
O God, and renew a right spirit within me, Psalm. 51.10. So did the spowse; draw
me, and we will follow thee, Cant. 1.3. So did the Apostles: Lord increase our
faith, Luke 17.5.

2 We must use a daily and a serious meditation of our professions and
vocations. As God has called every man, so let him walk. Romans 7.17. We give no
small occasion to sin when we carelessly forget our estates, or but seldomly
think of them, and that as by the way, nothing mindful of our account which
we are to render unto God, who is ready to require at our hands, the blood of
all such as shall perish by our negligence. The consideration hereof without
doubt made David pray to the Lord, that he would lay the pestilence upon him
and his fathers house, and spare the people committed to his charge, 2. Sam.
24.17. the like affection was in Moses, when he prayed that his name might be
rased out of the book, wherein God had written him, rather then the sins of
the people under his government should not be for forgiven, Exodus 32.32. Such
was the zeal of S. Paul, when he wished with his own damnation, to redeem
the reiection of the Jews, Romans 9.3. Such should be the affection, love, and
zeal of all the ministers of Gods word.

But as she in respect of her tribulations, said, Ruth. 1.20.
call me no more Naomi, but call me Mara, that is, call me no more beautiful,
but call me bitter; so may too many of the ministry of this age, say very
justly, call us no more Pastors, that is freeders of our flocks, and call us
no more Doctors, that is, teachers of others; but call us robbers, for such we
are: call us sleepers, for we never watch in our vocations: neither is there
any other reason, why they should be called pastors and doctors, which feed
not, and teach not the people committed to their charges, then that the Idols
which Genesis 31.19.
Rachel stole were called Gods, because in Labans judgment they were like Gods,
when indeed they were very stocks. Such may learn of Solomon, that as a bird
is that wandreth from her nest, so is a man that wandreth from his own place,
Prove. 27.8.

3 We must duly consider the estate of the things of this world, and confer
them with things celestial and eternal: and so finding nothing under heaven,
worthy to make us desirous of our lives, we shall be the more ready to deny our
selves. The preacher considered all the works that were done under the sun,
and behold, all was vanity and vexation of the spirit, Eccle. 1.14. Eccl. 2.4.
He made great works, he built houses, he planted vineyards, he had large Ver.
7.
possessions of beeues and sheep; and he Ver. 8.
gathered together silver and gold, the chief treasures of kings and
provinces; he provided himself men singers and women singers, yea all the
delights of the sons of men; Ver. 10.
whatsoever his eyes desired, he withheld it not from them; he withdrew not his
heart from any joy, he was great, and increased above all that were before him
in Jerusalem; yet when he looked on all his works that his hands had wrought,
behold all was vanity and vexation of the spirit, Eccles. 2.11. Of such a
spirit was S. Paul, judging all the things of this world to be dross for
Christ's sake, yea, he desired to be dissolved and to be with Christ, Phil.
1.23. He saw a law in his members, rebelling against the law of his mind,
leading him captive unto the law of sin, which was in his members, which made
him to cry out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? Romans 7.24. As for the Epicures and carnal men, who, making Philip.
3.19
their belly their God, admire the things of this world, and think it far
better to be a Eccles. 9.4.
living Dog, then a dead Lion, not caring how abject and vile soever they be,
so that they may live: they may know, that it shall advantage them nothing Matt
16.26.
to win the whole world, because they destroy and loose themselves for it: they
may believe, that whosoever will save his life shall loose it, and whosoever
shall loose his life for Christ's sake, the same shall save it, for he that is
all truth has said it, Luke 9.24.

4 The careful breeding of a man from his childhood, shall be much available to
the denying of himself. To do or to suffer, whatsoever, contrary to the sense
of the flesh, shall be very easy to him, that has been taught, and
accustomed in his first years to keep under, and to bridle his affections. It
is good for a man, that he bear the yoke in his youth, says the Prophet,
Lament. 3.27. for so when afflictions grow greater, his patience also by
experience shall be stronger.

Here all governors to whom the oversight of the younger sort is committed,
may remember themselves of their duties, Plin. lib. 7. cap. 2. reports of a
nation in India called Pandora: that the inhabitants thereof have Ctesias
tradit, gentem ex his quae appellatur Pandorae, in co^vallibus sua^, annos
ducentos vivere. In juve^ta candide capillo, qui in senectute nigres. cat.
hoare hayres when they are young, but black, when they are old. I would it
might not be reported justly of this place, that many scholars, young
gentlemen, and others, come to our University, as it were with hoare hayres,
well nurtured, full of tokens of sobriety and modesty; which staying here but
a short time, have black hairs, (such is the contagion of this place) their
manners are lost; the tokens of their modesty and sobriety are no more to be
seen. For the better wiping away of this blot, it were to be wished, that all
they, who are any way in place to govern, (remembering, that Prove. 29.15.
a child set at liberty makes his mother ashamed, and that wisdom is given by
the rod and correction) would be no less careful to teach the young ones
under their rule to walk in truth, then was that noble Lady to teach her
children, 2. John. 4.

It remains that I should come to the second precept, but that, with the last
I must omit, because of the shortness of the time. 1. Sam. 6.10
Here therefore I will conclude. As the Philistines shut up the calves at home,
whilst the two milch-kine carried the ark of the Lord to Bethshemesh, because
the crying of the calves should be no stay to the kine; even so let us, that
live here on earth as pilgrims, travailing toward our own home, shut up as it
were, al things wherein we have delighted, let us deny our selves, let us not
give ear to the cryings of our Fathers and Mothers, or of any our wretched
companions, that they be no stay to us in this our journey; and then as these
kine went on, till the Lord brought them where the arc should rest, so shall
we go on, till the Lord bring us where our rest shall be. To which rest of
blessedness the Lord of his infinite mercy vouchsafe to bring us all, for the
love of his only son, our Savior, Jesus Christ.

THE SECOND SERMON ON LVKE, CHAP. 9. VERSE. 23. And he said unto all, if any man
will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross daily, and
follow me.
THat Zach. 5 1.
flying book, which the Zacharias,
son of Berechiah saw in a vision, Zach. 5.2.
bearing in length 20. cubits, and in breadth 10. contained Verse. 3.
that curse, which then was gone forth over, and yet is continuing upon the
face of the whole earth. For every one that steals shall be cut off, as well
on this side, as on that: and every one that swears shall be cut off, as well
on this side, as on that: and every one that makes light of the law of his God
shall be cut off, as well on this side, as on that: Of this curse flying about
with this book, the LORD of hosts has said, Verse. 4.
I will bring it forth, and it shall enter into the house of the thief, and
into the house of him, that falsely swears by my name, and it shall remain in
the midst of his house, and shall consume it with the timber thereof, and with
the stones thereof.

When not long since I began the unfolding of this piece of Scripture which I
have now read unto you, containing a perfect doctrine, or an exact rule,
sufficient for the teaching, or guiding of all that will follow Christ, then in
part I declared the means, by which we might be so qualified, that the curse
of this flying book, might no way take hold of us, or any our houses. Then in
this Scripture I considered,

First the universality, in these words, And he said unto all.

Secondly, the necessity employed in the condition, in the words following, if
any man will come after me.

Thirdly, the doctrine it self, divided into 3 praecepts, in the last words,
let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me.

You heard then, that this doctrine was universal, for that Christ delivered
it unto all, yet to all not simply, but to all with a restraint, to all the
elect, not to any one of the reprobate. And then likewise you heard that this
doctrine was necessary: for that every one that would not harken to the same,
was to look for no better, then to be cast into old, deep, and large Esai
30.33.
Tophet, whose burning is fire and much wood, kindled with the breath of the
Lord, as with a river of brimstone. And then last of all, I spoke of the third
praecept, wherein you heard that the whole nature of man was rejected and
disallowed, together with all the powers and desires thereof, as far unfit to
be in any of Christ's Disciples; and therefore that a necessity was laid upon
us to renounce all fleshly delights, to humble our selves under the Almighty
hand of God, and to consecrate our selves wholly to him, through the obedience
of faith, and that for the better performance hereof, we ought, First, to pray
for Gods assistance. Secondly, to use a daily and a serious meditation of our
professions and vocations. Thirdly, to confer the estate of the things of
this world, with things celestial and eternal. And lastly, to be careful of
our living and conversing even from our childhood, till both our feet be put
into the grave. So far I then proceeded as God gave utterance, leaving the 2.
precept with the 3. unspoken of according to which if we will frame our lives,
we shall find that they are most forcible means to make the curse of the
Zach. 5.1.
flying book of no force against us.

The 2. precept therefore is, that we must take up our crosses daily; wherein
let me desire you, to consider with me, First, what crosses are, for every
man must take up a cross. Secondly, what cross it is that every one must take
up, it is his own cross; let him take up his cross. Thirdly, of what
behavior every one must be in bearing his cross; he must show willingness
and obedience, for he must not so much as dislike when his cross is imposed
upon him, but he must take it up. Fourthly, when this cross is to be taken up,
and how long to be borne; this cross must be taken up to day, and not be
laid down again to morrow; for it must be borne daily. Of these only at this
time.

Man that is borne of a woman is of short continuance, and full of troubles,
Job. 14.1. troubles by land, and troubles by sea, troubles by day, and troubles
by night; many are Psalm. 34.19.
the troubles of the righteous, and many are the sorrows of the wicked, every
day adds a new affliction, and every night a new cross: every man has cause
to cry out, and say: Our transgressions and our sins are upon us; we are
consumed because of them, Ezech. 33.10. That which is unsavory shall it be
eaten without salt? or is there any taste in the white of an egg, says Job.
6.6. What delight then can we take in our lives, whose griefs and miseries,
were they well weighed and laid thgether in the balance, would be Job 6.3.
heavier then the sands of the sea: Verse. 4.
the arrows of the Almighty are in us; their venim has even drunk up our
spirits. Wretched man, that thou should be thus troubled with crosses.

Howsoever these crosses seem to be infinite, yet the smallest number may well
include them. For either they are such as are common to all men in general,
whether vessels of honor or of dishonor or else they are such as are proper
only to the vessels of honor. For after that the first man had offended against
the law, which he had received of his God, a curse was pronounced against him,
and against all other creatures of the earth for his sake: cursed is the earth
for thy sake in sorrow shall thou e^^e of yt all the days of thy life; thorns
and thistles shall it bring forth unto thee, and thou shall eat the herb of
the field; in the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return to
the earth again, Genesis 3.17, 18, 19. Here you see a common cross: labor for
every man, of what estate soever he be: labor for the servant, and labor for
the master, labor for the subject, and labor for the King. Art thou a Ephesians.
5.6.
child of disobedience, reserved unto the day of destruction, to be brought
forth to that great Romans 2.5.
day of wrath? Then have thou no reason, why thou should not labor. Art
thou an obedient child registered in the book of life, and thereby exempted from
the power of Satan? then have thou reason to rejoice; but yet behold, in the
Genesis 3.19.
sweat of thy face, thou shall eat thy bread.

Other crosses there are, as common to all men, as this former. Consider, and
there shall appear unto you a man's sorrows at his birth, his whole life a
valley full of sorrows, and his sorrows at his death: besides the
infiniteness of diseases, to which every man is by nature subject. The reason
of al which is, for that every one of us in our first pare^t, when he should
have sown to him self in righteousness, that he might have reaped after the
measure of mercy, has plowed wickedness, and reaped iniquity, Hos. 10.12. to
all which the patient man respects, saying: Misery comes not forth of the
dust, neither does affliction spring out of the earth, but man is borne unto
travail, as naturally the sparks of the fire fly upward, Job. 5.6, 7,

Now, because the world lying wholly in wickedness, unable to receive the
spirit of truth, hates with all bitterness all such, in whom the light of the
truth shows it self; other crosses there are proper to the vessels of honor
only. Such are the strange and diverse kinds of persecutions, in which the
faithful have been from time to time afflicted, with false accusations, with
imprisonments, with loss of goods, with banishment, with dreadful deaths
before unheard of. Eliiah for killing Baals Prophets, found Iezebels heart set
against him even to the death, 1. King. 19.2. Micaiah for speaking to Achab
according to the word of the Lord, was put into a dungeon, and there fed with
bread and water of affliction, 1. King. 22.27. The hot burning furnace was
thought punishment little enough, for the three children which refused to
worship Nebuchadnezzars God, and his golden Image, Dan. 3.20. All which, and
like afflictions of the godly, of what sort soever they be, are called here by
Christ, crosses, to put us in mind, of the communion, which is between us and
himself. For as he for our sins has endured upon the cross unspeakable
griefs, and a cursed death, so must we for his sake hating this world, and
the pleasures thereof, be ready to bear all such afflictions as shall befall
us, that our faith in him may be kept holy, and undefiled.

Every Christian therefore is to take up his cross, his own cross, even such
a cross, as God shall lay upon him, as his own; yet so, that he must not
neglect the miseries of others. The rule of charity inviolably to be kept by
all Christians, bids us to weep with them that weep, Romans 12.15. Pharaohs
daughter teaches us, when we meet with a child cast of to the wide world, to
take it up, and nourish it, Exodus 2.6. The Samaritan shall condemn us, if when
we find our neighbor in the high way wounded, we take no compassion upon him,
Luke 10.33.

We are all 1. Cor. 6.15. Ephesians 5.30.
members of one body; Christ Jesus is our Ephesians. 5.23.
head; where is the sympathy should be between us? Can one member be grievously
tormented, and the rest 1. Cor. 12.26.
suffer nothing? You know that in your natural bodies, if the foot be hurt,
the hand is ready to lay a plaster to it. Why should it be otherwise in this
our spiritual body? Can your hearts suffer you, seeing the poor in this time
of dearth crying out unto you at your doors, and in the streets for relief, to
yield them no succor? Be not loath to lend unto the Lord, for he will repay
it, Prove. 19.17. Learn counsel of the wise man. He tells you, that
whosoever gives unto the poor shall never lack, but he that hides his face
from the poor, shall have many curses, Proverb. 28.27.

Our Savior then commanding us to take up our own crosses, does not forbid us
to pity such, as are to be pitied, but signifies unto us, that the cross,
which we are to take up, is such a cross, as God in his good pleasure shall
lay upon us, and thereby is made our own. Shall there be any evil in the
city, and the Lord has not done it? says Amos. 3.6. Howsoever we are fed
with the bread of affliction, we must still acknowledge God (...) be the
author thereof, our sins moving him thereto. Miriam spoke against her brother
Moses, the servant of the Lord. Number. 12.2.
God said a cross upon her for it; she was made leprous like s^^^e, Number.
12.10. Baasha, he walked in the way of Jeroboam, and made the people of Israel
to sin, and with their sins provoked the highest God. Behold his cross for
it: He that dies of Baashaes stock in the city, him shall the dogs eat;
and that man of him, which dies in the fields, shall the fowls of the air
eat, 1. King. 16.4. 2. Chro. 2.6
IEHORAM walked in the way of the king of ISRAEL, as the house of Ahab had done
before him, ^^e Verse. 4.
slew all his brethren with the sword. See, God had a cross for him in
readiness; for he Verse. 14.
smote his people, his children, his wives, and all his substance, with a great
plague, yea, he smote Iehorams own bowels, with an incurable disease, so that
in process of time Verse. 19.
after the end of two years, they miserably gushed out, 2. Chron. 21.18.

What is man that he should be clean, or he that is borne of a woman that he
should be just? Job. 15.14. God has found no Job 15.15.
steadfastness in his saints; yea the heavens are not clean in his sight,
Verse. 16.
how much more is man abominable and filthy, which drinks iniquity like
water? he is altogether sinful; sinful in his conception; sinful in his
birth; in every deed, word, and thought, wholly sinful. And can we so sinful,
by our sin provoking to wrath our good God, think to escape our due crosses?
let us believe St Paul; he tells us, that all that will live godly in Christ
Jesus, shall suffer persecution, 2. Tim. 3.12.

Yet behold, she that has been so often Apoc. 17.6.
drunken with the blood of the saints and martyrs of Jesus, teaches her
followers to undertake new crosses, which are not laid upon them by Gods
finger. Some must bring down themselves with needles fastings, others must vow
pilgrimages full of dangers; many must make choice to live poor hermites in an
hermitage; such as keep themselves within the walls of their cloisters, must
watch much, lodge hardly, even upon the grownd; and often scourge themselves.
All which they do not without pretense; for every one must take up his own
cross.

St. Austin in his 50 Epist. written to Bonifacius, speaks of three kinds of
deaths wherewith the Donatistes willingly desired to be killed, or rather
killed themselves. Ad Paganoru^ celeberrimas solennitates inge^tia turbarum
[Donatistaru^] agmina veniebant, non vt idola frange^ent, sed vt
interficerentur a cultoribus idol^rum.
Some of them would make request to the worshipers and keepers of Idols to
destroy them; Quidam etia^ se trucidandos armatis viatoribus ingerebant,
percussuros eos se, nisi ab eis perimerentur terribiliter comminantes.
others would offer themselves to armed men lying by the high ways side to be
slain of of them; and there wanted not such among them, Per abrupta
praecipitia, per aquas and flammas occidere se ipsos, quotidianus illis ludus
fuit.
as delighted to cast themselves down headlong from high places into the water,
and into the fire. This these did with like pretense: Every one must take up
his own cross.

In these our days the Anabaptists desire to have crosses laid upon them,
without just cause, and before God layth them on there shoulders, they are
willing to forsake wife, children, substance, and country to, to oppose
themselves to manifest dangers. A Gualter. in Matthew. homil. 209. ad c. 16. Vidi
ego mulierem, quae cum multis annis cum marit^ honest vixisse^, hoc furore
percitam relictis septem liberis, and quidem minimo natu adhuc lactente, ad
Anabaptistas profugisse, nec aliam sui facti excusationem praetexuisse, quam
quod Christus nos ad Crucem vocat.
zealous preacher of late years of Zurich says that himself saw a woman,
which (after that she had lived many years, honestly with her husband, and
among her neighbors) instructed by the Anabaptists, ran away from her husband,
and forsook her seven little children, nothing pitying the youngest, although
a sucking child, and when she was asked why so unlike a mother, she left her
children, she had that pretense which the rest of the Anabaptists have, Every
one must take up his own cross Monks, Donatists, and Anabaptists, all account
themselves blessed, for their voluntary taking up of their own crosses.

The searchers out of natural causes do teach, that in many senseless
things, there is a secret friendship, so that the one is much the better for
the presence of the other. Pliny says, that the Elm florisheth if it be set
by a vine, Lib. 16. cap. 17 and that Rue grows best being planted under a
fig tree, Lib. 19. c. 8. and the Heliotropium, spreads her leaves at the
presence of the Sun, Lib. 22. cap. 21. All which will not be of so good
liking, if these their natural loves be removed from them: the Elm will
scarce thrive; the Rue will hang down her tops: the Heliotropium will close
her leaves again. Me thinks that zeal is not of a far unlike condition.

If it be joined with a good cause, how gracious is it in the eyes of the Lord!
The zeal of Phin^has, manifested in his killing Zimrie and Cozbi, was of force
to turn away the anger of the Lord from the children of Israel, Numb. 25.11.
The zeal of Hezekiah breaking in pieces the brazen serpent set up by Gods
word, when it was abused unto Idolatry, was a sweet smelling sacrifice; the
Lord was with him for it, and he prospered in all things that he took in hand,
2. King. 18.7. The zeal of Moses commanding the Exodus 32.27, 28.
Levites to kill all them, which worshipped the golden Calfe did so please God,
that he turned the curse of Jacob against Levi to a blessing, Deuteronomy. 33.8. etc.

But once take away a good cause from zeal, and the very absence of it shall
make zeal iniquity. If Ioshuah in zeal desire Moses to forbid Eldad and
Medad to prophecy, Moses will tell him that his zeal is envy, Numb. 11.29.
And let not Peter in zeal desire Christ to pity himself, unless he will be
called Satan for it, Mat. 16.23. Though Saul never so zealous (as he thinks,
in Gods cause) breath out threatenings and slaughter against Christ's Disciples;
yet in the end he shall receive a reproof from Gods own mouth; It is hard
for thee, Saul to kick against the prick, Act. 9.5.

I can easily persuade my self, that all such men, as these were, (of whose
forwardness in taking up their own and voluntary crosses, you have already
heard) are very zealous in their sufferings; yet because their zeal is not
accompanied with a good cause; because they do, whatsoever they do in this,
with a misconceit of Gods word; I must needs say, that their zeal is not worth
commendation, it is superstition, it is abomination. Although Martyrdom be an
excellent work, and the gift of God; and howsoever Polycarpus did very well,
to give thanks and praise to God when he was put into the fire, as Eusebius
specifieth, Lib. 4. Eccles. hist. cap. 15. yet hence it cannot be proved, that
a man should voluntarily endanger his life, or any way torment himself. Let
Marculus fling himself down headlong from a rock, and let Donatus in like
sort cast himself into a pit, both with intent to end their lives, yet shall
they not therefore be called Martyrs, says St Austin Trac. 11. in cap. 3.
Iohannis.

Do thou deserve to be called Ier. 6.30.
reprobate silver, because the LORD has rejected thee? or art thou to be
compared to the Esai. 57.20.
raging sea, whose waters cannot rest, but must cast up mire and dirt? Be thou
never so wicked, yet thy death may be like to the death of a Martyr. Aug. conc.
2. in Psalm. 34
There were three at once on the cross; one, the Savior of the world: the
second a repentant sinner, which was to be that night with Christ in Paradise:
the other a thief far from repenting, who was to be rewarded with
damnation: All these three had like punishment, howsoever their causes were
altogether different. Would thou be counted a Martyr at thy death? says the
same father in his 71. Ep. which is to Dulcitius, be thou then a good Christian
in thy life assuring thy self, that it is not the punishment, but the cause
that makes the Martyr. Eor, says he, Lib. 1. c. 17. contra ep. Parmeniani, if
punishment, without due regard of the cause be sufficient to eternize a Martyr,
then let Pagans be Martyrs, as often as they are lawfully punished for their
superstition, which in their opinions, is holy religion: yea then let the
devils be Martyrs too, for they also in a sort suffer persecution at the hands
of Christians; when their temples all the world over are overthrown, their
Idols broken, their sacrifices prohibited, and their worshippers punished. The
consideration of the absurdity hereof, makes him in the same place to
conclude: Non ergo ex passione certa est iustitia, sed ex iustitia passio
gloriosa est, A man is not therefore righteous because he suffers, but his
suffering is therefore glorious, because it is for righteousness. And therefore
the Lord has not said in general, blessed are they which suffer persecution,
but he has restrained it, blessed are they which suffer persecution for
righteousness sake, Mat. 5.10.

It is the righteous cause then that makes the persecution glorious; if our
death be for righteousness sake, blessedness shall attend us: yet with a
caveat, that we be not the procurers of our own persecutions, that we be not
the causes of our own deaths. For if we are such, the goodness of our causes
cannot excuse us. Christ his counsel is; when they persecute you in this
city, fly unto another, Matt. 10.23. So far is he from willing us to
undertake needless crosses. Whereupon Clemens Alexandrinus in his 4. book of
his Stromata, discourses thus: Christ persuades thee to fly, not as if it were
ill for thee to suffer persecution, or as if thou should fear death; but
that thou might not be author of any ill, either to thy self, or to thy
persecutors. Will thou not obey him, then art thou presumptuous and over rash,
running unadvisedly into manifest dangers. Thou can not be ignorant, that it
is sin against God, Exodus 20.13
to kill a man. Know this then, that if thou do not fly in time of
persecution, but do offer thy self to be apprehended by the persecutors,
thou killest thy self; and as much as in thee lies, thou give assistance to
effect the wicked intents of such as persecute thee.

What then? Is it lawful to fly in time of persecution? He that flyed not,
but stood to it, and suffered death for us all, tells us that the good
shepherd gives his life for his sheep, Ioh. 10.11 but an Ioh. 10.12.
hireling, and he which is not the shepherd, neither the sheep are his own,
sees the wolf coming, and he leaves the sheep and flies, and the wolf
catches them, and scatters the sheep; Ioh. 10.13
so the hireling flies, because he is an hireling, and cares not for the
sheep. If then the shepherd ought to put his life in ieopardy for his sheep,
and if all that fly be not shepherds, but hirelings, how is it that the
shepherd may fly?

St Austine in his 180. Epist. which is too Honoratus, is of opinion, that
Christ's flock, purchased and gotten with his own blood, may not be forsaken,
and made destitute of the necessary ministry. Whereupon this is his
resolution, that the Pastor, when, and where, there is none to supply his room,
so that in flying, his sheep may be brought in danger of destruction, ought
not to fly, but with a bold mind to abide, and sustain persecution, eve^ unto
death, if need be. When S. Paul fled from Damascus, let down through the wall
in a basket, Act. 9.25. the Church was not left void of the necessary
ministry, but the thing which ought to be done was accomplished by other
faithful brethren, which remained there; all which willed and egged him
forward, that he should preserve and keep himself to the use and profit of
the Church: and therefore he adds; let the servants of Christ, the ministers
of his word and sacraments, do that which he has commanded and permitted; let
them fly at all times Mat. 10.23.
from city to city, when any of them specially and personally is sought of the
persecutors, so that the Church be not left desolate of others, which are not
so persecuted, that their fellow servants may have their food; and if it shall
happen, that the peril and persecution be general, pertinent to the whole
number of Bishops, and the Clergy; then either let them all go to places,
where they may all be defended, that they may altogether live; or else let the^
all tarry, that they may altogether suffer.

To which S. Austines judgment, Lyranus, expou^ding the 11. verse of the 10.
chap. of S. John, gives his consent, saying: nomine lupi venientis super oves,
aliqua^do intelligitur diabolus, per tentationes fideles infestans: aliquando
haereticus, per falsam doctrinam corrumpens; aliquando tyrannus, violentia
armorum persequens, etc. The name of wolf has three significations for
thereby is meant either the Devil, which molesteth the faithful by often
temptations: or the Heretic, which seduceth them by his false doctrine: or
the Tyrant, which persecuteth them by his mighty violence. In the first and
second significations, if the wolf come to the sheep, the Pastor must not
fly: for such wolves are not to be resisted by the Pastor corporally, but
rather spiritually, by devout prayer, by holy preaching, and by sound doctrine.
In the third signification of the name of a wolf a distinction is to be made;
for the persecution is either personal, or general: if personal, so that it
be against the Pastor only, and not against the flock committed to him, then
he may lawfully fly: but if it be common, both against the shepherd, and
also against the flock, yet a distinction is to be made; for either there is
but one Pastor, or else there be many: if but one, he ought not to fly, and
forsake his flock, for so he should be a hireling and not a shepherd: if many,
of whom the Church has need, then some ought to remain, and others may fly;
the flock remaining behind ought to be sufficiently provided for. Wherefore
if they shall contend, who shall tarry, calling for the grace of the holy Ghost,
they may decide it by lots.

Aug. ep. 180
Athanasius that good Bishop of Alexandria, seeking by flight to escape the
fury of the Emperor Constantius, left behind him a sufficient, and a learned
ministry to govern the Church; and in his Apology to Constantius, using many
examples out of Gods book to prove his flight lawful, as the flying of Jacob
from Esau, of Moses from Pharaoh, of David from Saul, of Elias from Iesabel,
of Christ and his disciples from the Jews, (I omit the rest) makes this his
resolution: Our Savior commanded us to fly away, and to hide our selves, as
often as we shall be persecuted, and sought for to the death, (...).
Siquidem in aequilibrio est, and seipsum occidere, and se inimicis ad
occidendu^ propinare: for it is all one, says he, for a man to kill himself,
and to offer himself to his enemies to be slain.

So then, if the Pastor can leave his flock sufficiently provided for, he may
fly in time of persecution; but if there be none to supply his room, he must
stand to it: he must take up his own cross: yea every Christian is bound to
the obedience of the same law: as he must not be froward in taking up needless
crosses, which may not be called his own; so he must not be backward in
bearing such crosses, as God in his good pleasure shall lay upon him; for they
are his own. Wherefore let us now see of what behavior we must be, in bearing
our own crosses, which is my third note of the second precept.

Jacob served Laban for Rachel 7. years, and they seemed unto him but a few
days, because he loved her, Genesis 29.20. Harken all yea that are negligent, and
wretchlesse, by living in all ingratitude toward God: consider this, that just
one for the love of Labans daughter purposed withal willingness to serve Laban
7. years. He resolved with patience to endure whatsoever pains and cares
might befall him in a shepherds life; his love so fed him with hope, that so
many years were but as a few days unto him. How can thou be excused before
God, thanklesse Christian? a LOVE is offered thee; not Labans daughter, but the
son of God, even thy Savior CHRIST JESUS; I know thou would gladly obtain
this love; yet art thou unwilling to serve God, (I say not 7. years,) but 7.
days for him: thou art not resolute with patience to endure such crosses as
must befall thee in thy Christians life: howsoever thy love feeds thee with
hope, yet so few days seem as many years unto thee. Would thou know in
this thy froward course how to be amended? Harken unto thy love; he bids thee
take up thy cross. When it shall please God to visit thee with any kind of
affliction, thou must bear it willingly, thou must bear it patiently.

Here you see what behavior is required of us, in bearing our crosses; we must
be willing, we must be patient. He could give good counsel that said; Refuse
not the chastening of the LORD, nor be grieved with his correction, Prove. 3.11.
His counsel there is not without reason, because the Lord corrects him,
whom he loves, even as the father does the child, in whom he delights.
What! shall we receive good at Gods hand, and not receive evil? Job. 2.10. Let
us arm our selves with patience; which is as powerful to the seasoning of our
crosses be they never so bitter, as was the tree, which Moses cast into the
spring of force to season the bitterness of the waters, Exodus 25.25.

The Persians had a custom among themselves, as often as they would punish any
noble man, to take from him his head tire and his upper garment, and to beat
the^ instead of the man himself: Gods dealing to us ward is not much unlike;
our sinful souls provoke him to wrath, in stead of the^ he punishes our
bodies with diseases, our fields with barrenness, our goods with fire, or
otherwise.

Behold though Luke 16 20.
Lazarus lie at the gate; Genesis 39.20.
Joseph in prison Jeremy in the dungeon, Dan. 6.16.
Daniel among the Lions, Dan. 3.20.
the children in the furnace; yet shall they not be tempted above that they are
able to bear, 1. Cor. 10.13. Though the troubles of the righteous are great,
yet the Lord delivers him out of all Psa. 34.19. Though for a time we dwell
in darkness and in the shadow of death, bound in misery and iron, Psalm.
107.10, yet at last comes the year of Iubilee, (wherein all the Lords
prisoners, all prisoners of hope, so called because they may hope to be set at
liberty, Zach. 9.12, shall be set at liberty) and then shall we have our liberty
too. Then those sweet scriptures will have their end: the Lord retains not
his wrath for ever, because mercy pleases him, Mich. 7.18. After two days he
will reviue us, and in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in
his sight, Hos. 6.2. Surely there is an end, and thine hope shall not be cut
of, Prove. 23.18. Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy shall come in the
morning, Psalm. 30.5.

Ps. 107.8.
O that we would therefore Praise the LORD for his goodness, and declare the
wonders, that he has done, and does for us. Rather then Eliah shall starve,
the ravens shall feed him, 1. King. 17.6. Rather then Jonah shall be drowned,
the fish shall save him. Ion. 1.17. and if the glutton will not, the dogs shall
pity Lazarus; Luke 16.21. For as David charged his soldiers, not to kill
Absolon his son, although he sent them against him, to stay his rebellion, 2.
Sam. 18.5. So God forbids his crosses to destroy his children, though he
send them against his children to purge their corruptions. In regard thereof P.
Martyr upon the 4. verse of the 5. chapter to the Romans, likeneth us Nos
sumus tanquam quaedam aro mata quorum odor, nisi ea contuderis, no^ sentitur.
Sumus veluti lapides Pyritides, qui no^ exeruat vim eam, quam habent ad
comburendu^ nisi cum premuntur digitis.
to certain spices whose sweet smells cannot be perceived, except they be
bruised; and to the Marchasite, which cannot exercise that force which it has
of burning, unless you press it between your fingers.

If that which has already been spoken, be not of force to work in us
willingness, and patience, at such times as crosses are upon us, let us enter
into a due consideration of Gods providence, without which no afflictions can
come near us. And what are we, that may dare to say, why has God done this?
If Mat. 6.29. Luke 12.27.
Solomon in all his majesty could not make himself so brave, as the Lilyes of
the field; if we cannot add Luke 12.25.
one cubite to our stature, not change the color of one Mat. 5.36.
hair; if no Mat. 10.29.
sparrow lights upon the ground without the foresight of God; if no water
falls from the clouds without his ordinance; if the very Psalm. 56.8.
tears which trickle down our cheeks, be numbered in his bottle; how is it,
that we dare repine, when we are afflicted, finding fault with our ill luck
or hard fortune.

The scripture teaches us that all things, howsoever many of them seem
casual and contingent to our weak conceits, are notwithstanding determined
and regular in the course of providence. See my first Lecture upon Amos, 1. p.
11.
The fish that came to devour Jonas may seem to have arrived in that place by
chance; yet the Scripture says the LORD had prepared a great fish to swallow
Jonas, Ion. 1.17. The storm it self which drove the Pilots to this straight,
may like wise seem centingent to the glimse of carnal eyes; yet the prophet
says, I know that for my sake, this great tempest is upon you, Ion. 1.12. The
fish which Peter took, might seem to have come to the angle by chance; yet
he brought in his mouth the tribute, which Peter paid for his LORD and
himself, Mat. 17.27. By the diversity of opinions among the brethren touching
the manner of dispatching Joseph out of the way, we may gather that the selling
of him in Egypt was but accidental, and only agreed upon, by reason of the fit
arrival of the Marcha^ts while they were disputing, and debating, what they
were best to do; yet says Joseph to his brethren, you sent me not hither,
but God, Genesis 45.8. What may seem more contingent in our eyes, then by the
glancing of an arrow from the common mark to kill a traveller that passes by
the way; yet God himself is said to have delivered the man into the hands of
the shooter, Exodus 21.13. Some may think it hard fortune that Ahab was so
strangely made away, because the Scripture tells, that a certain man having
bent his bow, and let slip his arrow at hap hazard, without aim at any
certain mark, 1. Kin. 22.34
stroke the King; but here you shall find no luck, nor chance at all,
otherwise then in respect of us, for the the shooter did no more, then was
denounced to the King by Micheas from Gods own mouth before the battle was
begun, 1. King. 22.17. What in the world can be more casual, then lottery;
yet Solomon teaches, that when the lots are cast into the lap, the providence
of God disposes them, Prove. 16.33. The Prophet says that evils shall light
heavily upon our necks, whose original or cause we shall not understand, Esaias,
47.11. yet howsoever in respect of us, and our knowledge, they may seem
casual and contingent; in Gods good providence they are absolutely necessary.

The consideration hereof made Job even then bless God, when news was brought
him of the loss of his sons, and al his substance: The LORD has given, and
the Lord has taken it, blessed be the name of the Lord, Job 1.21. The like
consideration made David forbid Abishai to hurt Shimei: though Shimei came out
from Bahurim cursing, and casting stones at David, and all his servants; and
crying: come forth, come forth thou man of blood, and thou man of Belial; yet
David said unto Abishai; Behold, my son, which came out of mine own bowels,
seeks my life; then how much more may this son of Iemini? suffer him to
curse for the Lord has bidden him, 2. Sam. 16.11. Our Savior respected the
same, when he said unto Pilate; thou could have no power at all against me,
except it were given thee from above, Ioh. 19.11. Hence it was that the
Macedonians in great trial of affliction had their joy abounding, 2. Cor. 8.2.
And for the same cause the Apostles reioiced in their tribulations, Romans 5.3.

Why then do not we, with like consideration of Gods providence, bless God,
when we are punished? Why do we not glory and rejoice in our tribulations?
Happily you will say, that they are evil, and therefore make a question, how
we may glory in them? I must needs grant, that they are evil, and death,
sergeants, far to be removed from the godly. For God shall wipe away all
tears from the eyes of his Saints, Rev. 7.17. Yet must I ad, that they are
evil in their nature only, e^i^ to the reprobate; but to the elect by Gods
mercy, good and profitable. For we know, that all things work together for
the best unto them that love God, even to them that are called of purpose, Romans
8.28. Neque enim pij patiuntur ad noxam, sed ad triumphu^, says P. Martyr,
Romans 5.3. The godly are not afflicted for their hurt, but for their triumph.
And therefore he compares afflictions to the red sea, wherein Pharaoh was
drowned, but Israel saved; they make the wicked often times desperate, when the
godly are confirmed in a most sure hope by them. They are the Lords
instruments, by which he tries our hearts, as the fining pot is for silver,
and the furnace for gold, Prove. 17.3. By them he chastneth us, that we should
not be condemned with the world, 1. Cor. 11.32. And therefore be the cross
never so bitter, yet is it sweet to the hungry soul, Prove. 27.7. Resolve we
then to take up our crosses daily; which is my last note of the second precept.

The body is then of best liking, when it is daily exercised, and the godly are
then of best living, when they are daily afflicted. Agur knew it well: and
therefore he prayed God not to give him riches; but only to feed him with food
convenient, lest he should be full and deny God, and say who is the Lord?
Prove. 30.9. When Israel waxed fat, he spurned with his heel, and regarded not
the strong God of his salvation, Deuteronomy. 32.15. When Gedeon was poor, and a
thresher of wheat, the Angel of the Lord visited him; but after that the Lord
had given the Midianit^ into his hands, he made an Ephod of golden earings, and
placed it in his city, OPHRAH, so that all Israel went a whoring after it,
Iud. 8.27. We find not that Jeroboam was reputed evil, as long as he was of
low estate, but when he was once preferred to be ruler of the 10 tribes, he
made two golden calves, and called them the Gods of Israel, 1. King. 12.28.

We likewise since God has given us prosperity, since he has withholden
from us his afflicting hand, are very ready Ierem. 5.7.
to forsake him: to swear by them that are no Gods, yea impiously to swear by
him that is the revenging God, to commit adultery, to assemble our selves by
companies in harlots houses; to rise up in the morning like Ierem. 5.8
fed horses; to account religion a pretty policy to keep the meaner sort in
awe; to think him scarce worthy a Gentleman's company, that will make a
conscience of committing any vice, be it never so brutish? Shall I not visit
for these things, says the Lord? shall not my soul be avenged on such a
nation as this, Ierem. 5.9.

Many of these were the sins of Judah, and all of them are our sweet sins.
Would you know, what was the portion of Iudahs cup, for these her
transgressions. The 15. verse. of the 5. Chap. of Ierem. will show you what the
LORD has said I will bring a nation upon you from far, a mighty nation, an
ancient nation, a nation whose language thou know not, neither understand
what they say: whose Verse. 16.
quiver is an open sepulcher: they are all very strong; Verse 17.
they shall eat thine harvest and thy bread, thy sheep and thy bullocks, thy
vines and thy fig trees; they shall devour thy sons and thy daughters, they
shall destroy with the sword the fenced cities, wherein thou have trusted.
Shall our trespasses against God be more then Iudahs were, and can we look
that our punishments should be less? Let us not flatter our selves: there is
scarce any one of us, that has not heard news of a nation, that is This
Sermon was preached, March 28. 1596.
coming against us from far, a mighty nation, an ancient nation, a nation
whose language we know not, neither understand we what they say. If they come,
we have learned so much, that God in his good providence, brings them upon
us, and who knows whether God will strengthen them, that they shall be able,
with fire and sword to beat down all our forces, to devour our sons and
daughters, to eat up our harvest and our bread, our sheep and our bullocks,
our vines and our fig trees. It may be, that the strength of our country
makes some, little to regard the invasion of any foreign enemy.

O put your trust in God, for vain is the help of man. The king is not saved
by the multitude of an host, neither is the mighty man delivered by his great
strength, Psalm. 33.16. Iabin, with his confederats, even thirty and one Kings,
with all their forces, must fall by the edge of the sword, if the LORD do but
send Joshua with a few against them, Josh. 12.24. The whole host of the
Midianites shall be discomfited, if the LORD do but once bid Gedeon go with
his three hundred men, Iud. 7.7 The Moabites and Ammonites, be they never so
many, shall yield to Iehoshaphat and his small number without resisting, 2.
Chron. 20.17. And what are we, that we may be sure, that the LORD will not
deliver us into the hands of our enemies? how can we presume to think so,
since, as a cage is full of birds, so are our houses full of deceits, Ier. 5.27.

Many among us are become great and rich; Ier. 5.28.
they are waxen far and shining; they do overpasse the deeds of the wicked,
they execute no judgment, no not the judgment of the fatherless. Verse. 29.
Shall not the LORD visit for these things? shall not his soul be avenged of
such a nation, as this? He turns the floods into a wilderness, and the
springs of waters into dryness, and a fruitful land into barrenness for the
wickedness of them, that dwell therein, Psalm, 107.33. It may be Josh. 7.20.
Achan offends; yet three thousand Israelits shall be put to flight for it,
Ios. 7.4. David 2. Sam. 24.1.
commits the sin; yet seventie thousand of his people must die for it, 2.
Sam. 24.15. Baasha may be the man, that 1. King. 16.2
transgresses; yet his whole household, his kinsfolk, and friends shall smart
for it, 1. King. 16.11.

Rent your hearts therefore, and turn unto the LORD your God with fasting, with
weeping and with mourning, for he is gracious, and merciful, slow to anger,
and of great kindness, and repents him of the evil, that he has said he
will do, Joel. 2.13. Who knows if he will return, and repent, and leave a
blessing for us, and make his cup to pass from us? His mercies are called
everlasting, because they endure for ever: but his anger is compared to the
clouds, because it lasts but a season: whom he loves, he loves to the end;
but whom he scourges, he scourges till they repent. Ezechias was sick, but
until he wept, 2. King. 20 3. Nebuchadnezzar was banished, but until he
repented, Dan. 4.34. And no doubt, if we will repent us unfeignedly of our sins
we shall find that, to be the best remedy against our present famine, and the
wars we look for.

Now as peace, plenty, and prosperity makes men, yea many of us, to think
that there is no God, at least to forget him, so on the other side, daily
afflictions will make us feel that there is a God, and daily to remember him.
The blewnesse of the wound serves to purge the evil, and the stripes within
the bowels of the belly, Prove. 20.30. Sharp punishments that pierce even the
inward parts, are profitable for us to bring us to amendment. When we are
tried, we shall receive the crown of life: we shall then be bl^ssed, when we
endure tentations, Iam. 1.12. Let us therefore take up our crosses daily; that
is, as S. Peter does interpret it, every day, if need require, 1. Pet. 1.6. or
every day, if the will of God be so, 1. Pet. 3.17.

Here might I take just occasion to reprove diverse sorts of men, which are so
far from taking up their crosses daily, as that they refuse to take them up
at all. No excuse can be made for these Christians, which in time of
persecution become Turks, denying Christ, and renouncing their faith: nor for
our sea-me^, which, rather then they will be taken by their enemies, will sink
their ship, and drown themselves: nor for those at land, which in their
miseries, are their own murderers: nor for those poor ones, which make light,
(so they may relieve their poverty) to be thieves, robbers, usurers, enemies to
Churches, and Colleges, covetous persons, malicious and shameless slanderers,
and the like. But neither the time, nor your patience can suffer me, to speak
of al these: yet let me briefly touch them, which loosing but an ox, or having
any about them strangely fallen sick, run forthwith to the wise ones of this
our age, to cunning men and cunning women, to witches, enchanters, coniurers,
and the like, seeking for help of them; and it shall appear, that neither
these may be excused.

God has promised by his prophet, that whosoever calls upon his name, and
gives ear to his voice, as to the sole and only shepherd of his soul; good
things shall betide him in this world and his soul shall live, Ier. 38.20. His
plants shall prosper his counsels shall take effect, his corn and oil shall
multiply; he shall Deuteronomy. 15.6. and 28.12.
lend unto many, but he shall not borrow himself; his Psalm. 128.3.
children like olive branches, shall encloase his table round about. On the
other side, whosoever will not give ear to the voice of the LORD his God, but
will seek unto strange Gods and oracles, to false prophets, to witches, and
conjurers, making more account of Beelzebub, then of Christ; of Gerizzim, then
of Syon; of the prince of darkness, then of the morning star; of pleasing
error, then of smarting truth; shall Deuteronomy 28.^8.
sow his field, but never reap it, for the grasshoppers shall destroy it: shall
Verse. 39.
plant a vineyard, and dress it, but shall neither drink of the wine, nor
gather the grapes; for the worms shall eat it: shall Verse. 40.
have olive trees in all his coasts, but shall not anoint himself with the
oil; for his olives shall fall: shall Verse. 41.
beget sons and daughters, but shall not have them; for they shall go into
captivity: the Lord shall Verse. 22.
smite him with a consumption, with a fever, with a burning ague, with fervent
heat, with the sword, with blasting, with the mildew; all these shall pursue
him till he perish, the Heaven, that is over his head, shall be brass, and the
Earth, that is under him, iron, Deuteronomy. 28.23.

Was King Asa punished with death, because in his sickness he sought for help
of the Physicians, and not of the LORD, 2. Chron. 16.12. and think thou that
runnest to Satan's instruments, for recovering of thy lost goods, or of thy
health, to escape unpunished? If Ahaziah consult with Beelzebub the God of
Ekron about the recovering of his health, the LORD will send him word that he
shall not come down from his bed, but shall there die the death, 2. King. 1.4.
If Saul ask counsel of a witch the archers shall wound him, and his 1. Chro.
10.4.
own sword shall kill him, 1. Chro. 10.13. If Manasseh use them, that have
familiar spirits, and are soothsayers, God will send him such evils, as that
who so hears of it, both his ears shall tingle, 2. King. 21.12. And can you,
that have consulted with Ekrons God, with witches, with them that have familiar
spirits, think that God will not smite you.

O turn unto the Lord with unfeigned repe^ta^ce, that God may withhold his
revenging hand from you, and you may live in his sight. For as S. Hierome
writes, that God knows not the women which are painted, because they carry not
that face, or favor which his hands have made, so if you fly from witches, and
coniurers unto him upon necessity, and not for love, his answer will be, I
know you not: Come you to dem^^nde advise of me? As sure as I live says the
LORD God, when I am asked, I will not answer you, Ezech. 20.3.

And therefore, whenever it shall please God to visit us with loss of
goods, with want of health, or other like afflictions, let us not seek, by
those wicked means, to be relieved. Why should we, so much desire to live at
ease? What are we else, the^ earthen vessels, soon broken? A spider poisons us,
a gnat chokes us, a small pin kills us. Why then should any crosses in this
life, so trouble us? As he said, Genesis 45.28
it is enough for me, that Joseph my son lives; so let it be in our greatest
miseries our song, it is enough for us, that our Savior Christ reigns. He
our head is already crowned, we his members, are thereby honored: he is
already glorified, because he has ascended, whither at last we must ascend,
that we may be glorified. To which place of glory the LORD of his infinite
mercy: vouchsafe to bring us all for his son Jesus Christ his sake, to whom
with the Father and the holy Ghost, be all praise, power, majesty, and
dominion, both now and ever. Amen.

THE THIRD SERMON ON LVKE, CHAP. 9. VERSE. 23. And he said unto all, if any man
will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross daily, and
follow me.
St John in his Revelation, as appears, chap. 19. ver, 11, Saw heaven open,
and behold, there was a white horse, and he that sat upon him, was called
faithful and true, and he judges and fights righteously. Rev. 19.12.
His eyes were as a flame of fire; on his head were many crowns, and he had a
name written, which no man knew, but himself. Verse. 13.
He was clothed with a garment dipped in blood, and his name is called, THE WORD
OF GOD. Verse. 15.
Out of his mouth went a sharp sword, wherewith he might smite the heathen;
them shall he rule with a rod of iron. He it is, that treads the wine press
of the fierceness and wrath of almighty God. Verse. 16.
Upon his garment, and upon his thigh, has he a name written, KING OF KINGS,
AND LORD OF LORDS.

This our great captain, because he daily comes forth to battle against the
enemies of his church, has set down a rule inviolably to be observed of all
such as will come after him, and fight under his banner: for he has said unto
all, if any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
cross daily, and follow me, when heretofore I entered the examination of this
rule, then in part I declared how every Christian soldier guided thereby,
ought to prepare himself to follow this high captain. For the better
explication whereof I observed 1 That this rule was general out of the first
words: And he said unto all. 2 That it was necessary, as it is employed in the
condition, if any man will come after me. 3 That the rule it self consisted of
3. precepts; let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me.


You heard then that this rule was general, for that Christ delivered it unto
all, yet to all not simply, (for the beast, and the Kings of the earth, with
their armies, following this beast, and fighting under his colors, are no way
to be guided by this rule) but to all with a restraint, but to all the Rev.
19.14.
armies in heaven, which the divine saw following him that sat upon the white
horse, which howsoever, they are called armies in heaven, are notwithstanding
men upon the earth: such are Godly Kings, Princes, Nobles, worthy Captains,
and Soldiers, which with the material sword, defend the Gospel: such are
zealous Ministers, and preachers of the truth, which with the spiritual sword
fight against Antichrist: such are all blessed Christians, walking before God
in the places, whereto they are called, warring daily against their proud
enemies, the flesh, the world, and the devil. All which are said to be the
armies in heaven, (albeit as yet they live on earth) in regard, that their
cause, for which, and the power, by which, they fight, are both from Heaven.
These ride upon white horses, and are clothed in fine white linen, and pure;
these come strongly, swiftly, and chearefully to this battle: these are
clothed with sincerity, integrity, and purity of faith, love, and other
affections, for all is pure white about them. To these only, and to all these
does this rule appertain: for he said unto all, if any man will come after me.

Out of this condition you have also heard, how necessary this rule is; even so
necessary, that neither subject, nor prince, neither people, nor pastor,
neither soldier, nor captain, how godly soever they seem in man's eyes, can
be fit to follow this highest Captain, except he be qualified according to
this rule Let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me,
says CHRIST.

Of the first two precepts, I have likewise already spoken; now let us consider
the third: And follow me. Which words do lead me to speak.

1 Of imitation, or following in general.

2 Of following the best; of such an imitation as beseems Christians.

Man by nature how strangely he is given to following, if I should hold my
peace, servants, soldiers, all inferiors would make it manifest: servants
will eye their masters, soldiers their captains, inferiors their rulers: be
they good, or be they bad, get they honor, or get they discredit, come their
profit, or come their loss, their lives will be instead of laws, and that
must be holden for well done, which is done after their example, says
Siraches son, Cap. 10. verse. 2. Thus examples, not laws, do (when laws,
not examples, should) teach men to live.

And so it was in former ages. In regard whereof the divine Philosopher would
by no means suffer Homers book to be read in his commonwealth, because in
them, Gods and Goddesses were fained to be such; as no honestly minded man, or
woman would have their sons, or daughters like them, Yea so it was from the
beginning. Eues eating the forbidden fruit, was sufficient, to make Adam do
the like, Genesis 3.6. The younger sister would make her father Lot drunken, as
well as the elder, Genes. 19.35. When Judah was forward, his brethren were
ready to give their consents, to sell Joseph to the Ishmeelites, Genesis 37.27.

Dead flies cause to stincke, and putrify the ointment of the Apothecarie,
says the Preacher, Cap. 10. verse. 1. Dead works the works of darkness in
the better sort, do cause to stink, and putrify the towardly inclinations of
the inferiors. For if any man see thee which have knowledge, fit at table in
the Idols temple, shall not the conscience of him that is weak, be boldned to
eat those things, which are sacrificed to Idols? says St Paul, 1. Cor. 8.10.
Thou that Romans 2.21.
preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal? Thou that should
punish adulterers and reprove swearers, do thou, by thy oaths give them
example? Verse. 22.
do thou commit adultery? Marvel not then, if thy weak brother, seeing thy
knowledge, become a swearer, a thief, and an adulterer. Thy life shall be his
law.

Upon consideration hereof a country man of ours, has added, that we of all
other people under heaven, are most famous yea, and infamous too, for our
imitation. For do we not imitate, Rogers Ep to the followers of Christ. A. 7.
b.
the Spanish in his braverie? The French in his vanity? The Italian in his
perfidie? Yea we follow the Dutch in luxury, who hears not of it? The Papists
in idolatry; who knows it not? The Atheist in all impiety, and impuritie of
life; why lament we not?

O come hither, all ye, that are any way either for birth, or calling, whether
it be spiritual, or temporal, better then other men; yea and all ye too,
which in the same respect are worse then others: for here are lessons for you
both, to teach you to look unto your footings. Is there old custom against
you? Respect it not; for it will be foiled by a better custom. Is the flesh
against you? Care not for it; for that will be bridled by the heat of the
spirit. Is that old serpent Satan against you? Fear him not; for he both at
your prayers will fly, and by your godly exercises will be made to run away.

First therefore for those, that are better then others; wonder we may, what
the matter is, or with what spirit they are led, or what comes into their
minds, that knowing their lives and examples to prevail when laws cannot, do
notwithstanding with such care, and study seek after vile, and vanishing
things; and so seldom call their wits together to think of doing any good. Is
it not because they are persuaded that the LORD spares the Cedar tree, for his
height, the oak for his strength, the poplar for his smoothness, the Laurel
for his greenenesse? O! then they are deceived: for from the Cedar that is in
1. Kin. 4.33.
Lebanon, even to the Hysop, that grows out of the wall, Matthew. 3.10. and
7.19.
every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into
the fire. Is it not, because they partly think that God hides his face from
their sins, and sees them not? O! then they are deceived: for Samuel could
tell Saul all that was in his heart, 1. Sam. 9.19. And Elisha knew, that his
servant had taken bribes, 2. King. 5.26. And shall not God be able to know
their deeds, and thoughts? yes: if Miriam, and Aaron speak but against Moses,
the LORD will hear them, Number. 12.2. And if Sarah laugh, but within her self;
God will see her, Genesis 18.13. Hell and destruction are before the Lord, says
Solomon, Prove. 15.11, how much more the heart of the sons of men? Ad to this
what the Prophet Esai has chap. 40. verse. 12. God has measured the waters in
his fist, he has counted heaven with his spanne, he has comprehended the
dust of the earth in a measure, he has weighed the mountains in a weight and
the hills in a balance. Can their deeds then, yea can their thoughts be hid from
so powerful a God? Is it not because man (of whose censure they stand more in
awe, the^ of Gods wrath) is not able to discrie their wickedness, which they
have so secretly wrought? O! then they are deceived. For town and country
howleth and cries out, too much overladen and wearied with adulterous
Shichemites, tyranous Saul's, negligent Elies, cruel Ahabs, proud Herod's,
incredulous Pharaohs; here ambition, there covetousness, every where glutony,
and excess.

One mole or freckle in the face offends more, then many and great spots, and
scarres in the other parts of the body. Men in authority, all, I mean, that
are better then others, either for birth, or calling, are as the face of the
commo^wealth. One small escape in them, hurts more, then many great and
grievous faults in the inferiors, and therefore one was bold to compare the^
to a book, after whose pattern others are printed; if the first draught have
faults, all the books printed thereby, must needs be faulty; but if there be
no fault in the first, all the rest will have the fewer.

Whosoever opens a well, or diggeth a pit, and covers it not, and an ox or
an ass fall therein, Exodus 21.34
the owner of the pit shall make it good, says God by his servant, Exodus 21.33.
Has any of us by bad living caused his inferior, his weak brother, to sin.
O! let us not be deaf (beloved in the Lord.) That man, whosoever he be, has
opened a well, and dug a pit, which he has not covered, into which, because
his neighbor has fallen, and so perished, he must look to make answer for it;
his blood shall be required at his hands.

Thou shall not sow thy field with mingled seed, it is the Lords commandment,
Levit. 19.19. What is this militant church wherein we live, but Gods field,
whose husbandry yea are, 1. Cor. 3.9. Whosoever in this field, sitting either
in Aarons seat, or Moses chair, shall say, but not do; shall say good things,
but do the contrary; shall in word sow wheat, but in example cast abroad the
troublesome seed of cockle and darnell, he it is, that sows mingled seed in
Gods field, and such are they whom the author of the book of wisdom aims
at, chap. 6.6. When he says, that mighty men shall be mightily tormented.

In the second place, instruction is here to be had for such, as are, either by
birth or calling, worse then other men. They seeing themselves so addicted by
nature to follow others, in duty ought to take special heed whom they follow.
For all may not be followed. Ask counsel of the wise man, and he will
persuade with you, by no means to follow g^uttons, sleepers, and drunkards:
for the glutton shall be poor, and the sleeper shall be clothed with rags,
Prove. 23.21. As for the drunkard, he shall have no want of Prove. 23.29
woe, sorrow, strife, murmuring, wounds without cause, and redness of the eyes:
he shall be bitten as with a Verse. 32.
serpent, and hurt, as with a cockatrice: he shall be, as one that sleeps in
the midst of the sea, or on the top of the mast, Prove. 23.34. Ask counsel
of S. Paul, and he will persuade with you, by no means to follow
fornicators, idolaters, adulterers, covetous persons, and the like: for such
shall not inherit the kingdom of God, 1. Cor. 6.10. Ask counsel of the LORD
himself, and he will persuade with you, by no means to follow the Levit. 18.3.
doings of the land of Egypt, or the manners of the land of Canaan. For if you
commit such abominations, the land shall spue you out, Levit. 18.28.

O, Psalm. 1.1.
walk not in the counsel of the wicked, nor stand ye in the way of sinners,
nor sit ye in the seat of the scornful, for such may not be blessed. You
know who has said it. Assured I am, that in Noah's arc, among his three
sons, there was one cursed Ham: that in Isaac's house of 2. sons, one Esau
was rejected: that in Jacobs house among twelve brethren, one only Joseph was
innocent; that in Christ's house among twelve Apostles, there was a treacherous
Judas; neither may I deny, but that at this day among many Magistrates,
Preachers, and Masters, there are some licentious Magistrates, some bad living
Preachers, some too too wicked Masters. But what is that to us? We must all
appear before the judgment seat of Christ, to receive according to our own
deeds: For so may we read, 2. Cor. 5.10. The licentious life of the Magistrate
shall not quite the subject, if he disobey the laws: the wickedness of the
Master may not excuse the servant, if he be ungracious: the bad living preacher
is no cause to save my soul, if I be ungodly. For God himself tells us,
that, that soul that sins shall die the death, Ezech. 18.4. And thus from
the general imitation; I come to that which best beseems Christians.

Follow me] The Lion has roared who will not be afraid? The LORD God has
spoken, who can but prophecy? Amos 3.8. Ever worthy is his Majesty to be
revere^ced, whose voice nothing (be it above or beneath, in heaven or in earth,
sensible, or insensible) ought to disobey. Esai. 1.2.
Hear then o heavens, and hearken, o earth; and therefore hear and harken
both men and women, for the LORD has said: follow me. Else whom will ye
follow? Is not he the way to guide you? Follow him; and he will lead you in the
paths of righteousness, Pro. 4.11. Is not he the truth, to give you light?
Follow him, and the sun of justice shall arise unto you, Malac. 4.2. Is not
he the life, to feed you? Follow him, and you shall go in and out, and find
pasture. John. 10.9. He is the way, in example: for he has given an example,
that we should do, even as he has done, John. 13.15. He is the truth, in
promises; for his covenant he will not break, nor alter the thing that is gone
out of his lips, Psalm. 89.34. He is the life, in reward; for howsoever the
wages of sin is death, yet the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus
Christ our LORD, Romans 6.23. This our LORD, the way, the truth, and the life, in
his journey toward heaven, began betime; for at Luke 2.42.
twelve years of age he went about his Verse. 49.
fathers business: and he kept the right way; for he boldly said, who can Ioh.
8.46.
accuse me of sin: and he made speed; for he spoke, and did more good things
in 33. years, then might be contained in all the Ioh. 21.25.
books in the world: and he continued unto the end; for he Mat. 27.50.
died Act. 8.32.
like a lamb, Luke 23.34.
prayed to his father, and forgave his enemies; See here, those four notes, to
which my desire is you should well listen, because they may be much for
instruction in this Christian imitation; wherein you are to begin betime, to
keep the right way to make speed, and to continue to the end. And first begin
betime.

Know ye not, that man as soon as he was created, had a law given him? Hence
may we learn, that every one of us from the first day of his birth is to live
under obedience to the great lawgiver. Does not experience teach you, that in
infancy ye are baptized in the name of God? Hence are we taught, that when we
are not able to run to Christ, yet should we, as well as we may, creep unto
him. Is it possible for you to forget your daily prayer? Therein you pray,
first, that Gods will be done, and then you ask your daily bread: to show us
that the very food whereby we live, is no way to be preferred before the
blessed will of God.

God requirest the first borne for his offering, and the first fruits for his
service: and dare we presume to present him with our second labors? He
requires a morning sacrifice, as well as an evening. Abraham rose early in the
morning to sacrifice his son to God, Genesis 22.3. So should we rise early in
the morning of our lives, even in our youthful days, and sacrifice our selves
to God. We should give up our bodies, Romans 12 1.
living sacrifices, holy, and acceptable to him. For why should not he that is
Rev. 1.8.
Alpha, the first, the beginning in every thing, be the first and the beginning
in our conversion too? Manna was to be gathered betime before the rising of
the sun, otherwise it would melt away, Exodus 16.21. So fares it with him,
whom ye ought to follow; if you come not to him betime, but stay till
business and pleasures arise unto you, well may you seek him, but you shall
not find him. For wisdom her self has said, they which seek me early shall
find me, Prove. 8.17. but of them which are slow in seeking her, she has also
said; they shall seek me, but they shall not find me, Prove. 1.28.

The guests are bidden, yet no man comes: all things are ready, yet no man
regards. One says, I have bought a Mat. 22.5 Luke 14.18.
farm, and must needs go out, and see it; O let me be excused: a second
says, I have bought Luke 14.19.
Oxen, and I go to prove them; I pray thee have me excused: another says, I
have Verse. 20.
married a wife, and therefore I cannot come: if our Mat. 8.21. Luke 9.59.
fathers be unburied, if our friends be not Luke 9.61.
bidden farewell, then in reason we think we may be excused for not coming.
O, says one, were I a freeman; and another, were I a rich man, and a third,
were I an old man, then should we be at leisure to come to Christ; but yet,
and till then let us be excused.

Thus the whole Esai. 1.5.
head is sick, and the whole heart is heavy, and within us is nothing but
Verse. 6.
wounds, and swelling, and sores full of corruption. For although we persuade
our selves that Christ ought by us to be followed, yet can we not by any
means accord of the time, when to begin to follow him. Wherein we are not
much unlike those Jews: spoken of, Agge, 1. 2. who knowing that the Lords
house ought by them to be builded, did notwithstanding sing always this song:
The time is not yet come, that the Lords house should be builded. And did they
for this escape unpunished? Read ye but the 6. verse of the same chapter, and
you will say no: for they did sow much but brought in little; they did eat,
but had not enough; they drank, but were not filled; they clothed themselves,
but they were not warm; they did earne wages, but the wages was put into a
broken bag.

We know that the Lord is Joel. 2.13.
gracious and merciful, slow to anger and of great kindness, otherwise
doubtless ere this, his scepter of Psalm. 2 9.
Iron should have crushed, and bruised us in pieces. For what is he among us
all, that in his heart has not said, the time is not yet come, that the Lord
Jesus should be followed? How long, how long, o ye sons of men, will ye
Psalm. 4.2.
turn Gods glory into shame, by loving vanity, and seeking lies? you say the
time is not yet come, that the Lord Jesus should be followed: but the holy
Ghost says, behold, now the acceptable time; behold, now the day of salvation,
2. Cor. 6.2. To day if ye will hear his voice, Psalm. 95.7. To day, even this
day, if ye will hear his voice harden not your hearts.

There was at Jerusalem the poole Bethesda, where the sick, the blind, the
halt, and the withered lay; once in the day an Angel came, and stirred the
water; and then whosoever stepped in first was made whole, of whatsoever disease
he had, Ioh. 5.4. He which stepped in first was made whole, says John; none but
he, which stepped in first. This is the acceptable time, this is the day of
salvation, this is the day wherein we may hear Gods voice: take we then this
opportunity while it is offered; and let us not forslow the time; for the
strongest of us all is not able to assure himself, that he shall live till to
morrow. Elias would be served before the widow, although she had but a little
cruse of oil, although she had not enough for her self, 1. King. 17.13. And
can we be so senseless to think, that God will be served after us, after the
flesh, after the Devil? God would not have the laborers hire stay in thy
hands all night, but would have thee pay him before thou sleep, Levit. 19.13.
Yet we dare keep Gods due from himself, shall I say, day and night? I may
say, many days, and many nights, many weeks, many months, yea and perhaps
many years too.

Thus have we cast behind us the first lesson which John Baptist taught, that
was, repent, for the kingdom of Heaven is at hand, Mat. 3.2. Thus have we set
at naught the first lesson, which the Disciples taught; and that was, repent,
for the kingdom of Heaven is at hand, Mat. 10.7. Thus have we spurned against
the first lesson which Christ himself taught; and that was, REPENT too, for
the kingdom of Heaven is at hand, Mat. 4.17. Mat. 11.15.
He that has ears to hear, let him hear.

REPENT is the first lesson to be learned both by young and old. It is not
sufficient for a young man to say, I will repent: for assuredly, could Judas
have repented, when he had listed: he would never have hanged himself:
neither may it suffice an old man to say, I have repented; God is, I am; and
therefore is best pleased with, I am; he cares not for, I was, or will be. And
this the Preacher knew well, and therefore in the first verse of his 12.
Chapt. he directs his speech to young men: there he says; Remember thy
Creator in the days of thy youth. And because young men are very ready to
post over this remembrance, unto age, that general day, which all men set for
themselves to repent in, he in the verses following brings in the old man,
with the Eccl. 12.3.
keepers of his house trembling, with his strong men bowing down, with his
grinders ceasing, with his lookers out by the windows darkened, with his Verse.
4.
doors shut, with his daughters of singing abased; that is, he brings in the
old man, feeble, lame, deaf, blind, and stammering, for the young man to
behold; as if he should say, See here my son, is it possible for this man to
serve God, he can neither hear, nor see, nor feel, nor speak, nor go.
Therefore serve thou thy God in the days of thy youth.

The chiefest thing that made Rehoboam in the beginning of his reign to choose
young counselors, was, because they were his companions before, 1. King. 12.8.
Because they were his companions before, therefore they became his counselors
after. This is the preferment of your sins, if they have been your
companions in youth, in age they will look to be your counselors, yea, and
it may be, your masters too. Begin therefore, as 1. Sam. 2.18
Samuel did, to serve God in your minority; and use, as 2. Tim. 3.15.
Timothy did, to read the Scriptures in your childhood; the^ shall you, as
Luke 1.80.
John did, grow in spirit, as you ripen in years. O blessed are you, if you
begin betime: yet so, that you keep the right way. Which is the second note,
to be observed in Christian imitation.

Many false Prophets shall arise, says our Savior, and shall say unto you,
lo, here is Christ, and lo, there is Christ, but with all he counsels you,
not to believe them, Mat. 24.23. Long have some continued, and yet they are not
weary of professing, that there is life in their pardons, life in their
pilgrimages, life in their sacrifices. Rather then fail, they can make shift
to clamber to Heaven, by Angels, by penance, by merits. Each of them has his
way, yet not one of them the right way.

I doubt not, but that all that hear me this day, are sufficiently already
persuaded not to believe them. For you have learned, that Jacob in his way to
Haran, saw, not many, but one ladder reaching up to heaven, Genesis 28.12. And
that the forerunner of Christ prepared, not the ways, but the way of the Lord,
Esai, 40.3. And thereby are you taught, that there is but one ladder to clime,
but one way to walk in, to come to Heaven. And as Mat. 2.13.
Herod sought over all Jury for Christ, but could not find him, because he
followed not the star; so may you, long enough, seek for Heaven all the broad
way over, but you shall not be able to find it, unless you follow the straight
way, and enter in at the Mat. 7.13.
narrow gate; for that way alone leads to Heaven. One only river, the river
Jordan was of force to deliver Naaman the Syrian from his leaprosy, neither
Abana, nor Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, could do it, 2. King. 5.12. One only
way, the true and living way, Christ, our Savior, is able to set us in our
resting place, in the place of eternal bliss; neither the seeming powerful
Revel. 13.1
beast, nor any other besides is able to do it. For as he, which promised a
land to the Israelites, sent before the Israelites a pillar of fire to bring
them to that land, Exodus 13.21; so he, the same God, having prepared a Heaven
for us, has sent before us that everliving Ioh. 1.1.
word, clothed with our own flesh, to guide us unto Heaven.

Behold here the pattern of your imitation, such a pattern, as must be
followed, always and necessarily. Always, for that no deceit was in his
mouth, Es. 53.9. and necessarily, because St Peter does counsel it, 1. Pet.
2.21. Always, for that no man was able to rebuke him of sin, Ioh. 8.46. and
necessarily, because St Paul commands it, Ephesians. 5.1. Always, for that he
is perfectly good, 1. Ioh. 3.5. and necessarily, because himself will have it
so, Mat. 11.29.

Always therefore, and necessarily, Christ is to be followed, yet not without
a limitation. For as he was God, many things were done by him, wherein we may
not follow him, without note of superstition, or zealous impiety. It was for
God alone with Mat. 15.34.
seven loaves, and a few little fishes, to feed, and suffice four thousand
men, besides women, and children, Mat. 15.38. It was for God alone with Mat.
14.17.
five loaves and two little fishes to feed and suffice five thousand men,
beside women and children, Mat. 14.21. It was for God alone, to rebuke the
waves of the sea, and the winds, and to cause them to cease raging, Luke 8.24.
To Mat. 4.2.
fast forty days, and forty nights; to Ioh 2.9.
turn water into wine; to Mat. 14.26.
walk on the Sea, as one dry land; to restore Mat. 11.5.
sight to the blind, health to the sick, life to the dead; these are miracles
wrought by God alone, which we may not dare to imitate, because there is
neither commandment that we should, nor example of any Disciple, or Apostle,
that would, or durst do so. In those things therefore, which Christ did as
God, worship him religiously; but in those things, which he did as man, follow
him zealously. Love and detest whatsoever Christ, as God, loves and detesteth,
and so shall you imitate Christ, as much as a man may imitate God; but with
all, do that as Christ did, as man, and so shall you follow Christ, as a
Christian should.

And here, for that my limited time will not suffer me to be long, I can but
only point at a few of the particulars, wherein you are to follow Christ.
Follow him therefore in obedience, for he is become Phil. 2.8.
obedient unto the death, even the death of the cross. Accursed are the
disobedient; the Lord shall laugh at their destruction, Prove. 1.26. Follow him,
in innocence, for in his Esai. 53.9.
mouth was found no guil^. Accursed are the wicked; they are kept unto the day
of destruction, and shall be brought forth to the day of wrath, Job. 21.30.
Follow him in humility, for he Psalm. 110 7.
drank of the brook in the way, he made himself of Philip. 2.7.
no reputation, and became for us a servant; Accursed are the proud: though
their excellency mount up to the heaven, yet shall they perish for ever like
their dung, Job, 20.6.

He is an example for you in patience, for he was oppressed and afflicted, yet
as a Esai 53.7. Act 8.32.
sheep before his shearer was he dumb, and opened not his mouth; being
reviled, he reviled not again; suffering, he threatened not, but committed it
all to him that judges righteously, 1. Pet. 2.23. He is an example for you in
Charity: for he prayed for his enemies; Father forgive them, for they know
not what they do, Luke 23.34. He is an example for you in Constancy: for he
died like a lamb, Revel. 5.6. These, and such like, are the things wherein
Christ must be followed, always, and necessarily: which although it may not be
gainesaid, does notwithstanding permit the examples of good men to be imitated,
sometime, and in some things.

For the better conceaving whereof, let it not be troublesome to us, to
observe four sorts of examples of the elect, and righteous, set down unto us
in the holy Scriptures.

1 Some we find, were singular, such as neither others in those days might,
nor we in our days may follow; for that they alone had the special, and
extraordinary motion of the holy Spirit for their warrant. Such was Abraham's
readiness, to kill his own, and only son Isaac, Genesis 22.3. Such was the
spoil of the Jews made of the Egyptians, by detaining their jewels of gold and
silver, Exodus 12.35. Which deeds in them, because they were commanded, were
commendable; but in us, because they are forbidden, should be most damnable.

2 Others in those days were general, which we in our days may not follow,
without displeasure of the Highest. They circumcised their male children the
eight day: but we may not do so; for if we be circumcised, Christ shall
profit us nothing, Gal. 5.2. They offered bloody sacrifices unto the Lord; we
are forbidden so to do; for being dead with Christ, from the ordinances of the
world, we ought not, as though we lived in the world, be burdened with
traditions, Coloss. 2.20. Among them one brother married the wife of another.
Far from us let such weddings be removed. It is not lawful for Herod to have
his brothers wife. Mat. 14.4.

3 There were wicked examples, which none of us, I hope, will dare to follow.
You cannot, but hear of Genesis 19.33.
Lo^^ incest, Number. 20.12
Moses incredulity, 2. Sam. 12.9
David's adultery, Mat. 26.70.
Peter's denial; the Mat. 18.1.
ambition of the Apostles, and such like: which all are set before us; but
doubtless for good ends. First to show us, how false it is, which some teach,
that the elect, and regenerate sin not. 2. To make us wary how we walk: for
if such, whom God has favored so highly, and adorned so singularly with his
celestial gifts; if such, I say, did fall, and so filthily defile themselves,
with how great Philip. 2.12
fear and trembling ought we to make an end of our salvation? 3. To
strengthen us, that though we sin, we go not on forward in sinning, nor
despair of Gods mercy, no more then they did. For the son of man came to
seek and save that, which was lost, Luke 19.10. and he came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance, Mat. 9.13. and by him Paul did attain
mercy to the ensample of them, which shall in time to come believe on him unto
eternal life, 1. Tim. 1.16. Last of all, to teach us, that as God is merciful,
so should we show mercy unto all, that in Gods judgment we may find mercy.

4 There were good examples, which we may be bold to follow; as Romans 43.20
Abraham's faith, Genesis ^9.9.
Joseph's chastity, Psalm. 69.9.
David's zeal, and the like; which are set before us, as the Apostle
witnesses, that we should not be sloathfull, but followers of them, which
through faith, and patience, inherit the promises, Heb. 6.12. And hitherto
belongs that which S. Chrysostom has, Homil. In Graeca Savilii editione,
est hom. 61.
62. in Mat. 18. If, says he, it seem a hard matter unto thee to imitate God,
betake thy self to the imitation of his servants. Imitate Joseph; for he was a
relief unto his brethren in time of famine, although they injuriously sold him
into bondage, Genesis 42.25. Imitate Moses; for he spared not to power forth his
prayers to the living God for the people, although they had done him many
wrongs, Exodus 32.11. Imitate S. Paul, for he could have wished that he might
be separated from Christ, for the Jews, although they had many times oppressed
him, Romans 9.3. Imitate S. Steven, for he praid for the people, even then when
they stoned him: LORD lay not this sin to their charge. A and 7.60. Imitate
Joseph, Moses, Paul, Steven, and the whole company of holy ones, as Paul
himself desires to be imitated: Be ye followers of me, says he, even as I
am of Christ, 1. Cor. 11.1.

Walk therefore in the way, which the LORD has made plain for you; and tread
ye those paths, wherein by the good examples of Gods Saints ye are directed;
and so shall ye be able to follow the lamb, whithersoever he goes. O blessed
are you, if you keep the right way; but withal you must make haste. Which is
my third circumstance observed in Christian imitation.

The wise man passed by the field of the sloathfull, and lo, it was al grown
over with thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof, and the stone wall
thereof was broken down, Prove. 24.30. Our corrupt nature, what is it, but this
field? If we be sloathfull, and slack in husbanding it, how can it bring forth
any thing, but thorns, and nettles? The wise man passing by, may easily
through the broken wall, descry all manner of filthiness, and abomination. If
Saul lie sleeping with his servants, it will be no hard matter for David to
come, and take away the spear, and the pot of water, even from Saules own
head, 1. Sam. 26.12. If we, being now set in the right way, in the Lords way,
shall be negligent, and given to sleeping, too easy will it be for Leviathan,
that pearcing serpent, that crooked serpent, that serpent which fell down from
heaven like lightning, to come and steal away all good motions, even from our
inmost heart.

The enemy came, and sowed tares among the wheat, but it was while men slept,
Mat. 13.25. The foolish virgins, were not provided to go with the bridegroom,
for they slept too, Mat. 25.5. It is time then to watch, that the enemy choke
not up out whom with his tares: it is time to watch, if we mean to accompany
the bridegroom.

We must run (for a slow pace will not serve the turn) we must run, if we
look to obtain, 1. Cor. 9.24. CHRIST tells us, that the kingdom of heaven
suffers violence, and the violent take it by force, Mat. 11.12. And why does
he tell us so, but to teach us, how earnest, and zealous, we must be in our
professed religion? If we be but lukewarm, you know, God has threatened to
spew us out of his mouth, Revel. 3.16. If our righteousness surpass not the
righteousness of Pharisees, Heaven is no place for us, we may not enter therein,
Mat. 5.20. If we be no more then statute protestants, that is, if we think our
duties sufficiently discharged, in coming once a month to the church to pray,
in hearing once a quarter a sermon, in communicating at the Lords table once a
year, well may we hope to come to Heaven, but that shall be then, as a late
and zealous preacher has said, when hypocrites have leave to come out of Hell.

Therefore were the golden Cherubins set upon the two ends of the mercy seat,
with their wings spread out on high, Exodus 37.9. to teach us, to be as quick
about the Lords business, as the Cherubins. Therefore did God reject the blind,
and the halting sacrifice, Deuteronomy. 15.21. to show us, how he abhors slacknesse
in all our duties. Therefore did the Apostles leave all, and follow Christ,
Mat. 19.27. for our instruction, that we should speedily follow Christ too. For
he is not accursed only which does not the Lords business, but he also, which
does the Lords business negligently, Ier. 48.10.

Watch therefore the Mat. 2.2
star, so soon as it arises, and follow the Exodus 13.21
Pillar, so soon as it remooveth, and so shall you withal speed, be received
into the 2. Cor. 5.1.
building, that precious building, not made with hands, and shall dwell in
those Heb. 9.11.
tabernacles, those joyful tabernacles, which God himself has pitched. O
blessed are you if you make have: yet not so, unless you continue to the end.
And this is my last note.

Some came into the vineyard at morning, and some at noone, but no man received
any reward, but they which staide until night, Mat. 20.8. Jacob did not
prevail with God, when first he began to wrestle with him, but when he had
wrestled with him all night, Genesis 32.26. It is not your praying this day only,
that can do you good, for you must pray continually, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. He runs
in vain ( run he never so swiftly) that sits him down before he comes at the
goal. Heaven is the goal, whither our race is intended. Begin we this race
betimes, and keep we the right way, and make we have too, yet if we continue
not to the end, our portion shall be as his, whom CHRIST has said, the last
estate of this man is worse, then the first, Luke 11.26.

Having hitherto been fed delicately, and brought up in scarlet, shall we now
perish in the streets, shall we now embrace the dung? Lam. 4.5. Having as yet
had our heads of gold, shall we now (to become like to Nabuchadnezzars image)
have our feet of clay? Dan. 2.33. Having already begun in the spirit, shall we
now end in the flesh; Gal. 3.3? 1. Cor, 10.12.
He that thinks be stands let him take heed that he fall not.

What shall I say (says Josh. chap. 7.8. When Israel turns the back. What
shall I say? The trembling of the Pillars is enough to make the whole Temple
shake. Peter, he which said even now, that Mat. 26.33.
though al should, yet he would never forsake Christ, Verse. 74.
curses and swears, that he knows not the man. Lot, he which erst strived
so much to preserve his daughters chaste in Sodom, does now in the mount commit
Genesis 19.33.
incest with his daughters. Solomon himself, which so lately erected a Temple
for the worship of God, falls now to the worshipping of Idols: As if the stars
were falling from their heaven, and the light departing from the sun.

But it is not long since we were taught, that the Saints of God, though they
fall not finally in the end, nor utterly at any time, do notwithstanding, fall
grievously, and dangerously: of which we then heard in all plenty, and
sufficiency, so that I may well surcease to speak thereof. Only let me say
once again, 1. Cor. 10.12.
He that thinks he stands, let him take heed, that he fall not. For not
every one, but he only that (...) shall be saved, Mat. 10.22. and not every
one, (...) faithful unto the death, shall receive the (...) of life, Revel.
2.10. and not every one, but such only as are marked in their foreheads with
the letter Ta^, with the note of perfection, and perseverance, shall enter the
inheritance of the blessed, Ezech. 9.4.

Let the 2. Pet. 2.22.
dog return to his vomit, and the sow to her wallowing in the mire, but do
you (as Abraham did) hold on your sacrifices unto the evening, the last evening
of your lives, and so shall a full measure be measured unto you. O ever
blessed shall you be, if you continue to the end. Then shall the prayers which
you have devoutly made, and the tears which you have repentantly shed, and the
alms, which you have charitably given, set upon your heads the crown of
glory, and the Angels shall triumph for your glorious coronation, and the
Saints shall rejoice at your blessed perfection, and God himself shall say
AMEN, to your never dying happiness. To which happiness (O gracious father)
receive us all, for his sake in whom thou art best pleased; to whom with thee
and the holy Ghost, be all praise, power, majesty, and dominion, both now and
for ever, AMEN.

FIVE SERMONS ON THE EPISTLE OF St JAMES, CHAP. 4. VERSE. 10. Cast down your
selves before the Lord, and he will lift you up.
CVrious questions, and vain speculations how like they are to plumes of
feathers, each of us in part may judge; for that many very earnestly, and
others nothing at all, are desirous to be seen in them. The time was, when
Paul reproved such, as had their heads troubled with 1. Tim. 1.4. Tit. 3.9.
Genealogies: were he now living, to see, how men and women of our days, busy
their heads about as vain questions, tracing dangerously upon the pinacles,
while they might safely walk upon the pauement, could he, (think you) be
silent? It is a world to see, how many at this day are much more desirous to
learn where Hell is, then to be instructed any way how they may escape Hell.
much more ready to hear what God did purpose before the world began, then to
learn, what he will do, when the world is ended: much more willing to
understand, whether they shall know one another hereafter in Heaven, then to
know now whether themselves belong to Heaven, or not. Unwise, though
worldlings: so ready are they to search mysteries, before they know
principles: so presume they Romans 12.3.
to understand, above that which is meet; not much unlike the 1. Sam. 6.19
Bethshemites, who were not content with the sight only of the Arc, but they
would also pry into it, and finger it.

The Mat. 2.9.
star when it came to the place, wh^^^ Christ was, stood still, and went no
further: We likewise when we are come to the knowledge of Christ, should stand
still, and go no further. Are we better then St Paul? he was content to 1.
Cor. 2.2
know^ nothing save Christ Jesus, and him crucified. For he knew well, how
impossible it was for man's wit, to found the deapth of Gods secrets. And
farther; what shall it avail a man, subtly to dispute about the TRINITY, if
through his want of Humility, he displease the TRINITY? How can it profit
thee, to have the whole book of God at thy fingers end, if through thy want of
Charity God withdraw his favor from thee? it cannot benefit me, schollerlike
to define what sin is, if beastlike wallowing in my sins, I provoke Gods
wrath against my self.

It is an item for us al: To him, that knows how to do well, and does it
not, to him it is sin. Howsoever in our age less, knowing is not, yet more
doing beyond all question is required. It has pleased God to bless many among
us with great, and each of us with some, measure of knowledge; this place is
ple^tifull in witnessing as much. But how small fruit arises from this
knowledge, our careless kind of living makes to plain a declaration. So that
I may fitly seem of these our days, to make that complaint, which Jeremy
made of his, cha. 12.11. The whole land lies wast, because no man sets his
mind on it. Because no man regards Gods word, no man considers the plagues
which he has sent upon the land, therefore are the destroyers come upon all
the high places; therefore the Lords sword devoureth all the land from one end
thereof unto the other: therefore no flesh may look for peace. And why may I not
use that which he has added in the 13. verse? For see we not Gods Ministers
painful, and labor some in sowing of wheat? Yet behold, the badnesse of the
ground is such, that they can reap nothing but thorns. Are they not even stoke
with lamenting sinful souls? Yet, where is their profit? They are, and that
worthily, (because worthily they may be) ashamed of such a peoples fruits,
which instead of amendment grows worse and worse.

Do I speak this for a fashion only? or do not Gods heavy judgments
testify the truth hereof? does not his fierce wrath speak as much? O then,
let us humble our selves under the Almighty hands of this revenging God, that
so once again his face may shine unto us. Away for a time with your subtle
questions, and attend you the amendment of your lives, for, if not so; Gods
anger may not be appeased. And that you may in part know what belongs to the
amendment of your lives, let not your hearts be shut against St James his
counsel, as it is in the first words of my text: Cast down your selves before
the LORD. And how can you disobey this counsel, if you do but think of the
reason used by him for persuasions sake, in the words following? And he will
lift you up.

In his counsel, we observe 3. notes.

1 (Not lift up, but) cast down. 2 Cast down (not others, but) your selves. 3
Cast down your selves (not before me^, but) before the Lord.
And in delivering this third note, I may be fitly occasioned to speak
somewhat of the reason brought to persuade us to the obedience of this
counsel; for we must cast down our selves before the LORD, who, as he is most
liberal to us, most present with us, most able to help us, when we stand in
need, is also most willing at all times to work our ease; and therefore has
our Apostle added, and he will lift you up. Cast down your selves before the
LORD, and he will lift you up.

Lift not up, but cast downe] It has been observed, that the Peacocke, as
proud as he is of his gallant feathers, as soon as he beholds his foul
feet, abateth himself, and is humbled. Here might we learn so much wit, as
by the feeling, sight, and apprehensio^, of many our foul feet, of our
corrupt, and perverse passions, which rule, and reign in us, to humble our
selves, and to abate our pride engendered but of a few feathers, and those
indeed very black, howsoever they carry an appearance of beauty. But the
prince of darkness, that subtle serpent, which Luke 10.18.
fell from Heaven like the lightning, not content with that rule, which he has
over the children of unbelief, has so busied himself to obscure even those,
which should shine as lights in this world; that (although the Esai. 24.23.
Moon shall be abashed, and the Son ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts shall
reign in Mount Syon and in Jerusalem, yet) we, dust and ashes, clothed in
iniquity, and replenished with the loathsome infection of sin, are bold to
lift up our heads in the presence of Gods Majesty, nothing ashamed of our
selves, and that at this time, when in our Syon, and Jerusalem he reigns
gloriously. For examine we our selves, and we shall scarce find one, that can
endure to cast down, that strives not, with all his might to lift up himself.

Some are never contented with their present estate, but would feign be higher;
and these do ambitiously lift up themselves. Others, pretend glory, and praise
in those gifts and graces, which they have received from the Lord; and these do
proudly lift up themselves. Ambitious men, and proud men, both are lifters up,
foul sins, and infectious: most of you know them to be such. Notwithstanding
that we may the better see into them, and by seeing into them more willingly
endeavor to avoid them, let not a several examination of each of them, seem
tedious unto you.

The first is Ambition, an evil deeply rooted in man's heart; Ambitio subtle
malum, secretum virus, pestis occu^ta, doli artifex, matter hypocrisis. Livoris
parens, vitiorum origo, criminu^ somes, virtutum ae^ugo tinea sanctitatis,
excoecatrix cordium, ex remedus morbos creans, generant ex meditina languorem.
an evil, that makes man evermore discontented with his present estate: a
secret poison, a hidden sin, a forger of fraud, a mother of hypocrisy, a
spring of envy, the fuel of all vice, a moath to holiness, a blinding of
the heart; it converts remedies into diseases, and medicines into languishing;
so says S. Bernard, Sermon. 6. in Psalm. 91. Here might we wonder, how it can be
possible, that man, so excellent a workma^ship favored so highly, and adorned
so singularly with all celestial gifts, and that by the highest God, should
suffer so foul a mo^ster to nestle with in his breast! Yet so it is; man has
a long time fostered, and yet is not weary of making much of his sweet Ambition.

A long time it has been fostered; the beginning of al ages witnesses as
much. Eve would be as a Goddess, Genesis 3.5. The builders of Babel would up to
Heaven, Genesis 11.4. Miriam and Aaron would speak for the Lord, as well as
Moses, Number. 12.2. Look we to succeeding ages, and they will speak the same.
Did not Jonathan say unto David, Thou shall reign, and I will be next to thee?
1. Sam. 23.17. Did not Zebedees wife make suit to Christ, that her children
might sit in his kingdom, the one one his right hand, and the other on his
left? Mat. 20.20. Did not Christ's disciples among themselves contend, who
should be the greatest? Mark. 9.34. Yield we then, that a long time Ambition
has been fostered, and yet behold we are not weary of making much of it.

The Church and Common wealth both do find it to be so. The Church, she
groaneth, for that she is almost eaten up. The Common wealth has cause to
lament too; for (albeit she yields to every one sufficient for his vocation,
yet) no man is contented with that he has. Both in Church and Common wealth
every one is set to lift up himself.

For the Church what shall we say? Sisac must be lifted up; his wealth must be
increased; but how? even thus: He will spoil the Temple: he will take away the
treasures of the Lords house: Salomons golden shields, shall be turned in
Rehoboams shields of brass, 1. King. 14.26. Dionysius his religion is not
forgotten: if Jupiters coat be rich, it must be had away: it is too cold for
winter, and too heavy, or to hot for summer: It is a shame the son should have
a beard, since the father had none; and thus wittily (they think) they carry away
the golden beard. In that old Arc of the testament overlaid round about with
gold, were these three things, Manna, Aarons rod, and the tables of the
testament; for so may we read, Heb. 9.4. Our Arc had these sometimes; but
those times are gone. Many Sisackes, and many of Dionysius his scholars, have
fatted themselves with a great part of our Manna; that little which remains
they snatch at too; and would willingly feed thereon, could they but pull down
Aarons rode; and so would they leave us nothing but the two tables, nothing but
poor scholars books to live by. So common a thing it is to rush into Gods
treasury, and to rob his sanctuary.

It may be, they are persuaded, that herein they do God no wrong. If they be
so persuaded, the surely they remember not, or they care not for, Dan. 5.5.
that writing hand which appeared to Belshazzar, while he was drinking in the
place, which his father had taken from the Temple in Jerusalem: for some of
them have done so, and more: and then surely they remember not, or they care
not for, the word of the Lord, who has said, ye have spoiled me, by deteining
your tithes and offerings, Mal. 3.8. for many of them have done so, and more:
and then surely they remember not, or care not for, the dreadful judgment,
which befell Ananias, Act. 5.5. and 10.
and his wife for keeping back part of the price of their own possession,
which they sold to the use of the Church; for all of them have done (shall I
say so? I may not; for neither their ancetors have ever brought so much as one
stone to the foundation, nor themselves so much as one tile to cover the roof
of the church) but, I must say al of them have done much more and more wickedly.

And yet they are not without all excuse; for were there no buyers, there could
be no sellers; would no man give them the liuelyhood of the Church, they could
not take it: Ambitious Pastors do make their Patrons rich. Thus while the
seller defends himself by the buyer, the taker by the giver, the patron by
the hireling, and each by the other, they are all become like to Samsons foxes,
Iud. 15.4. in their tails they are united, they are knit together in
mischief, and they have their firebra^ds too, to burn up the commodities of
the CHVRCH.

Silvester 2. gave himself to the Devil, that he might attain to the
papacy, so writes Platina in the life of Silvester. Silvester has left many
sons behind him, as desirous of preferment as himself: I forge it not,
neither suck I it out of mine own fingers ends: the decayed maintenance of
some of our Bishoprics, Deaneries, Probends, Personages, and Vicarages cries
out, and tells you it is so.

I meddle not with particulars, being very willing with Sem, and Iaphet to
cloak, and cover our fathers nakedness. For I persuade my self, I may not
reveal all their sins, lest the uncircumcised rejoice: yet know I withal,
that I may not cover some of their sins, jest the uncircumcised increase. One
said, if some men's drunkenness were not reproved, they would be drunken
still, and make a common wealth of drunkards: let me change the speech, I say,
if Simonie were not reproved in some, they would use Simonie still, and fill
the Church with other like themselves. To what end serve those warnings,
reproves, excommunications, and corrections which Christ has appointed, if
every man's nakedness should be covered? We may, and must be content to cover
the first nakedness, if they will repent and do no more so.

But now, when in the hardness of their hearts, that cannot repent, they say
they stumble not, although every man may see them lie groueling on the ground,
shall we follow them, like a blind man's boy, to stay them so often as they fall?
Shall we say, all our Bishoprics are as good as ever they were? shall we
say, none of our Deaneries are impaired? shall we say all come freely to their
Prebends, their Parsonages, their Vicarages? shall we thus cover their
nakedness? So should we indeed make a cloak for their Simony, but it were a
cloak of flattery, not of reverence, and therefore not worth the having.
Wolves are not the Lambs fathers, but the Lambs butchers; shepherds learning
finds that to be true. The maintenance of the Church, the liuelyhood of the
young Lambs, the Lambs not yet borne, is even consumed, by the greediness of
the Wolves. How can we call them Fathers, since they are our Butchers? Let them
speak to their own children to cover them: let the dead bury the dead; the
wicked are fittest to cover the wiked. We have a rule, and this it is: Them
that sin openly, reprove openly, that the rest may fear, 1. Tim. 5.20.

You have heard the groaning of the Church; consider now what cause the Common
wealth has of lamentation. Her members will be no longer members; they must be
exalted too. But how? How they care not, so they be exalted. Athaliah would be
sole governor and Queen, and that made her destroy all the Kings seed, 2.
King. 11.1. It was a kingdom that Sellum looked for, and therefore Zachary must
be done to death, 2. Kings 15.10. Abimelech will not stick to murder his 70
brethren, if so thereby he may attain to a soveraignety, Iud. 9.5. And what
shall I say more? For the time would be too short for me to tell of Absolon, and
of Scheba, and of Adoniah, and of Zimrie, also of Assuerus, Schebna, and many
others, which through a desire of lifting up themselves, have wrought
wickedness, co^spired against their masters, rebelled against their rulers,
not spared their own fathers; have packt craftily, and got of the best offices
into their own hands, ever aspiring to the highest; have made feasts only to
show forth their riches, their glory, and the honor of their majesty: have
been full of wrath, because others have not bowed the knees unto them: whom
the world was well weary of, because they wearied all, but themselves. And can
we now look for a milder flame, when the fuel of all vice is heaped up upon
the fire?

Honor is the mark we shoot at; and honorable we cannot be, except we be
rich; for that is against the fashion of the world. Well, if that be all, we
will be rich. Deceit, briberie, oppression, rapine, and usury, all are our
helpers. Tell me, does not the country gentleman enclose his commons? does not
the landlord rack his tenants? does not the seller then think his gains
best, when he deceaues the buyer? Conceive you of the rest. For a general
deluge of wickedness is gone over the whole world. Now may Amos say justly of
us, as sometimes he said of the Jews. Chap. 2.6. They sell the righteous for
silver, and the poor for shoes.

Thus you see, the Church has her sore, and the Commonwealth her gall; both so
festered that they may not abide long spurring. And therefore it is high time
that we endeavor to cure them. One salve may serve for both; and the receipt
thereof is prescribed by Sf Paul, 1. Tim. 6.6. Godliness, says he, is great
gain, if a man be content with that he has. The neck of ambition both in
Church, and Commonwealth will soon be broken, if men be content, with that
they have. Esther. 5.13. and 7.10.
Had Haman been contented, when Mordekai refused to do him like honor, as
others did, he might have enjoyed his honor longer then he did. 2. Sam.
17.7. Verse 23.
Had Achitophel contented himself, when the counsel of Chushai the Arachite
was preferred before his, he would not for despite have hanged himself. And
could this contentment but once possess us, the number of our ravening
Harpyes, our cruel Tigers, and our devouring Cannibals, which draw the
skins of the poor from their flesh, and the flesh from their bones, to the
very dividing of their ioints and marrow, would soon be lessened.

Never was Barzillai so happy, as when he would not be exalted, 2. Sam. 19.34.
Never had the Shunamite such quiet as when she cared not for preferment, 2.
Kings 4.13. Never did the Disciples seem so rich, as when they were willing to
leave all, Luke 5.11.

Art thou poor? so were the Smyrnians, be content as they were; Revel. 2.9.
and then what God said to them, shall be said to thee, I know thy poverty,
but thou are rich. Art thou afflicted? so were the Apostles: Romans 12.12.
be content as they were, and then shall thou rejoice in thy tribulations. Art
thou spoiled by thieves? has fire consumed all thy goods? or is it worse with
thee? such was Jobs lot: be content as he was, and even then shall thou say,
blessed be the name of the LORD. Job 1.1^.


Thus is contentation like the waters of Jordan, wherein Naaman was washed, 2.
Kings 5.14. For as his flesh, which before was leaprous, became fair, and
clean after his washing; so after we are once bathed in the rivers of
contentment, proceeding from so sweet a fountain as Godliness is, all our
tedious and irksome leprosies shall be cleansed, all our actions, and labors,
and afflictions shall become joyous, and pleasant, and comfortable. It is like
that tree, which Moses cast into the spring to season the bitterness of the
waters, Exodus 15.25. or that salt, which Elisha cast into the noisome waters to
make them wholesome, 2. King. 2.21. or that meal, which the same man of God
put into the bitter pottage to make it sweet, 2. Kings 4.41. For come anguish,
come sickness, come injuries, come losses, come famine, come banishment, come
death, and worse then death, if worse may come, all shall be sweet to the
contented soul.

This did Abraham's grandchild know well, and therefore for worldly matters, he
desired no more of God, but bread to eat, and clothes to put on, Genesis 28.20.
And Agur knew it well: and therefore his prayer was not for riches, but to be
fed only with food convenient, Prove. 30.8. And Paul knew it well too: whereupon
his counsel is; when we have food and raiment, let us be therewith contented,
1. Tim. 6.8. Neither does he herein counsel us to that which himself had not
undergone, for he had learned in whatsoever state he was, to be content
therewith, as appears, Philip. 4.11. And that you may in some measure learn
the same, take with you these three notes.

1 See, that in worldly things you propound not to high an estate to your
selves. You are compared in the Scriptures, Psalm. 44.11.22. Romans 8.36.
not to Lions or Horses, such proud creatures, but to sheep; to put you in
mind of the modesty, and simplicity, which is required of you: and you are
likened not to the high oak, or tall Cedar, but to the low creeping vine; to
remember you of humility.

2 Take heed that at no time ye deny, or lessen the benefits of God, but
labor ye rather to seek them al, and acknowledge them to be so great as they
are, that so in respect of them you may confess your estate to be so good as
it is. It will be imputed to you for great ingratitude, if being fed even with
Psalm. 78.25.
Angels food, as you are; ye speak of it contemptuously as the Israelites did,
and say, there is nothing but this Manna.

3 Persuade your selves of Gods fatherly providence watching over you
continually for your good. He has given his son Christ Jesus unto you, will
he not with him give you all things needful for you? He has provided a
kingdom for you in Heaven, will he then be wanting unto you on Earth? he will
not. For rather then so, the raven shall be ready to 1. King 17.6
feed Elias; the Ioh 1.17.
fish to save Jonas; the Iud. 15.19.
Asses tooth to yield water to Sampson for his relief: and since our gluttons
will not, our Luke 16.21.
dogs shall pity poor Lazarus.

O could our hearts once become fleshy, and take the impression of these few
lessons, then would we not strive for this world, as we do, Lawyer against
lawyer, neighbor against neighbor, brother against brother, as if we were a
company of beggars thrusting at a dole: then would there be no 1. King. 21.4
Achabs, to be sick for Naboths vineyard: then should we, like Christ's
disciples, want nothing, though we have nothing and then should we have a poor
widows mite for others, how little soever we have for our selves: then should
we have contented minds waited upon with a thousand blessings: we should have
in readiness for the curing of every wound, a Surgeon; for the preventing
of every disease, a Physician; for the ending of every strife, a lawyer; for
the satisfying of every doubt, a preacher; for asswaging of every grief, a
comforter; and all this within our selves: so should we, like Daniel, Dan.
1.12. thrive with water, and pulse, as well as others do with their wine, and
iunkets. And so I come to the second sort of lifters up, which in the pride of
their hearts, do pretend a glory, and praise in those gifts, and graces which
they have received from the Lord.

A little wormewoode is of force sufficient to make bitter a great vessel; and
a little leaven makes sour the whole lump. As is this wormwood, or this
leaven, so is pride. A little of it is of force enough to corrupt, and deprave
even an Angels life. For, be he what he may be, that arrogateth any thing to
himself, he cannot choose, but put some trust therein; and his trust therein,
be it never so little, must needs breed in him some distrust in God, whom
thereby he shall alien, and estrange from himself: and when once the fountain
of all goodness, of light, of life it self is departed from him, how can that
man be but wretched, but wicked, but accursed?

If a merchant, and a friend of yours, after his long travail to the farthest
parts either of the East or West Indies, returning home with great riches,
should in his own country haven before your eyes suffer shipwreck, and loose
al, I know you would pity his estate. Meditate here a while, and think whether
you have not as great cause to pity your selves. You your selves have been
travailers a long time in a strange country, far from your home, much farther
then either of the Indies, and many of you have laden your selves (I doubt it
not) with great riches, with the precious riches, of knowledge, of honesty, and
of Godly living, and you seem to be clothed with sincerity, integrity, and
purity, of faith, love, and other affections, as if all were pure white about
you; and are even ready to enter the haven of the celestial Jerusalem: now if
any of you thus furnished with the abundance of Gods blessings, shall thereby
exalt, and lift up himself, and think in his heart, with the proud Pharisee,
that he is not, Luke 18.11.
as other men are, I may boldly say, that, that man has made shipwreck of
all, and is now as much to be pitied himself, as erst himself would have
pitied that merchant.

If you should be set upon a pinnacle, or upon the ridge of an house, and then
would not look to your footing, could you be thought less then desperate?
Such is your estate: it has pleased God many ways to bless you all; all of
you must needs confess as much. Such his blessings are unto you, as so many
ridges of houses, or tops of pinnacles, whereon he has set you to walk,
though spiritually: but your immodest, and proud usage of the^, argues your
careless looking to your footings. For could you but enter the examination of
your own hearts, it would easily be granted me, that the Magistrate takes a
pride in his authority, the Gentleman in his parentage, the Rich man in his
wealth, the strong man in his strength, the learned in his knowledge, the
preacher in his preaching, yea and every man in every good thing he has, or
does.

So ready are we sacrilegiously to attribute to our selves the praise of Gods
blessings due to him alone, imitating herein those Angels, which, for so doing,
were cast down from Heaven, and are now reserved in everlasting chains under
darkness unto the judgment of that great day, Jude, 1.6. and Nebuchadnezzar,
who for so doing was expelled his palace, and made to eat grass with the
beasts of the forest, Dan. 4.32. and Pharaoh, who for so doing, was brought
out of his kingdom, and lodged in the red sea among the fishes, Exodus 14.28.

No sin has pulled down so many as this which promises to set us up. The
first sin that conquered man, will be the last, and worst sin for us to
conquer. Were it not for this the Pharisees would have received Christ, as
meekely as the disciples did: our mighty ones would come to church, as well as
the people do; our elders would abide reproof, as well as their inferiors do:
our young ones, and ancients too of our own coat would leave swearing as well
as any do: then would our men content themselves to go like Abraham, and our
women like Sarah; then would they not make this their work (as one has lately
and too truly said) so soon as they rise in the morning to put a pedlars shop
upon their backs, and color their faces, and prick their ruffes, and frisle
their hair, (and then, says he their days work is done) as though their
office were to paint a fair image every morning, and at night to blot it out
again.

Hence it is, that flesh and blood puts such confidence in it self. Naked
we are, yet vaunt we our selves, as though we were gorgeously apparelled: weak
we are, yet think we with Nimrod to build a tower to Heaven: ready are we to
renounce Christ, yea daily in deed we do renounce him, yet stoutly we protest
with Mat 26.35.
Peter, that we will die with him, rather then forsake him. Thus whilst every
one speaks pleasing words unto himself, and says I will reign, or I shall
not be removed, or who shall ascend above me? yea though he speak nothing, but
in his heart receives the applause of the people, as surely as he lives, he
shall be cast down to the ground. The Alarm has sounded unto him already
from above: though thou should make thy nest as high as the eagle, I will
bring thee down from thence; says the LORD, Ier. 49.16. He casts down the
proud, and exalts the humble, and meek: this one sentence is observed to be
repeated at the least 19. times in the old and new Testaments, and all to teach
us, how detestable a thing pride is in the sight of God.

Absalom slew his brother Amnon, and did many more things wickedly, and all
that while was he spared; but when once in the pride of his heart he sought to
be king, God resisted him; and hanged him on a tree, 2. Sam. 18.9. Shebna had
his purposes to betray the Church, and to provide for himself against al
dangers, and all that while was he spared; but when once in the pride of his
heart he built a sepulcher for his memorial, God resisted him, and made him to
be buried in another country, Es. 22.18. Herod, he killed James, imprisoned
Peter, and much more did he as wickedly, and all that while was he spared; but
when once in the pride of heart, he accepted the immoderate applause of the
people, shouting out, and saying, the voice of God, and not of man, God
resisted him, and made the vile worms to be his murderers, Act. 12.23.

God resists the proud, and gives grace unto the humble. Flatter not your
selves: whosoever professes of himself, that he is not, as other men are,
that he is no extortioner, no adulterer, no sinner; his profession is as the
profession of that Pharisee, Luke 18.11. and God will resist him: but learn ye
of him, who in humility of spirit has said, LORD, Luke 18.13.
be merciful to me a sinner, and you shall be exalted. Whosoever speaks
pleasingly to himself, and says, Is not this great BABEL, which I have built
for the house of MY kingdom, and honor of MY Majesty? Have I not done thus,
or thus well, by the might of mine own power? his words are as the words of
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.26. and God will resist him: but learn ye of him, who
in humility has said, Ioh. 5.30.
I can do nothing of my self; and you shall be exalted. Whosoever thinks
with himself, I will ascend into Heaven, and exalt my throne above besides the
stars of God, and will be like the most high; his heart is as the heart of
Lucifer, Esaias. 14.13. and God will resist him: but learn ye of him, who in
humility of spirit Psalm. 110.7.
drank of the brook in the way, and became for us a Philip. 2.7.
servant; and you shall be exalted.

And now that we may the better apply our selves to this humility of spirit,
let us here also take two notes with us.

1 Let us enter into a due consideration of our estate, as it is by nature:
which shall easily appear unto us what it is, if we do but call to mind the
metal whereof we are made; the shortness of our lives, and the miseries to
which we are subject.

Consider we the metal whereof we are made. You know, it is no better then
clay, no better then mire, no better then the very slime of the earth. And
therefore it best and most naturally agrees with us, if we be beaten as small
as the dust, and trodden under foot as the mire in the streets. This was well
known (that I may omit the rest) to Abraham, Job, and Paul; for our bodies,
in Abraham's judgment, are dust, and ashes, Genesis 18.27 very ready with every
b^ast of wind to be scatered. And in Jobs judgment they are houses of clay,
Job. 4.19. very easy to be broken. And in Paul's judgment, they are earthly
tabernacles, 2. Cor. 5.1 certainly, and within short time to be destroyed.
The cogitation hereof made Moses to say, who am I, that I should go to
Pharaoh? Exodus 3.11. and it made David to cry out, and say, I am a worm and no
man, Ps. 22.7. and it made Jeremy to say, I cannot speak, Ier. 1.6. And could
the like cogitation but touch our hearts, it would crop, yea more then so, it
would pull off, and consume all our fig leaves of vanity. He that has a
heart to consider, let him consider of what metal he is made; and then be he
proud if he can.

And consider we the shortness of our lives. All flesh is grass, and the
glory thereof is as the flower of the field; the grass withers and the
flower fades, a voice bad Esaias cry so, Esaias 40.6. Wisdom in the 5. chapter
of that book verse 9. tells you, that all things are passed away like a
shadow, and as a post that hastes by. A ship passes over the waves of the
water; but when it is once gone, the trace thereof cannot be found, neither the
path of it in the floods: a bird flies through the air, yet no man sees any
token of her passage: an arrow is shot at a mark, it parts the air, but
immediately the air comes together again, and then cannot you know where it
went through. As is this shadow, this post, this ship, this bird, this arrow;
so are our lives, in great have, and speedely flying away: we are no sooner
borne, but we begin to draw to our end.

All things (says St Chrysostom, homil. 19. ad Eutropium) are but a night,
and a dream; the day comes, and they vanish away. Smoke was, but that is
dissolved; bubbles were upon the water, but they are broken; Spiders webbes
have been in our windows, but we have swept them down. Here we have
patterns of our lives. We that are met here together at this present do live
together; but we shall be dissolved, and therein are we like smoke; but we
shall be broken, and therein are we as bubbles upon the water; but we shall be
swept down with the besome of death, and therein do we resemble spiders webs.

Now would ye use some account to find out of what length your lives are? So
may ye follow either Jacobs, or David's, or the Hebrews, or the Fathers
account. Would you follow Jacobs account? then must you not reckon years; for
when Pharaoh asked him, how old he was? he made this answer: few and evil have
my days been, Genesis 47.9. and Moses prayer to the Lord, was, to be taught to
number his days, Psalm. 90.20. thereby showing how small wisdom is seen in
reckoning after either years, or months, or weeks. Would you use David's
account? then may your hand serve you for a measure; for so your life will be
found to be but a spanne long, Psa. 39.5. Would you reckon like the Hebrews?
Then thus do ye: first deduct your time of sleep, so, that if your years
be threescore and ten, as it is, Psalm. 90.20. five and thirty of those at
once must be dashed out: then take away the time of your youth, for it is not
so worthy to be called life, as vanity, says Ecclesiastes chap. 11.10. and
last of all abate ye the time of your sorrow, wherein you had rather die then
live. This reckoning once made what a small remnant will there be for your
lives? But would ye make choice of the Fathers account? then thus proceed ye:
first cast away the time past; for it is not: then account not of the time to
come, for it is uncertain: and thus shall you leave nothing for your lives,
but the time present; nothing but a moment: and what is a moment to your
expectation? What is a moment to eternity? He that has a heart to consider,
let him consider how short his life is, and be he proud if he can.

And consider we also the miseries, to which we are subject. A long time would
be too short for me to recount them all. Let a general view of them suffice.
The Dictamnum herbam extrahendis sagittis cervi monstrave^e.
Goats of Candie being shot in with a shaft or iavelin, do forthwith seek
out the herb Dittanie, and eat it, by virtue whereof the arrows or iavelins
fall out, and their wounds are cured. If the Chelidoniam visui saluberrimam
hirundines monstrauere vexatis pulloru^ oculis illa medentes.
young swallows eyes be sore, the old bird fetches the herb Celandine, and
applies it to the young ones eyes, and heals them. Vrsi cum Mandragorae mala
gustavere formicas lambunt.
Bears against the evil of mandrakes do use the benefit of Emmets. These,
and many like examples has Plini^ set down, lib. 8. cap. 27. Erasmus has
added this conclusion, Nullum est animal, quod non intelligat sua remedia; etc.
There is no living creature but knows well how to remedy his own diseases.
Man only, only man is of no understanding, he knows not any remedy for any
grief, either of his body, or mind.

Man that is borne of a woman, says Job 14.1. is full of troubles. At land, or
at sea, by day, or by night troubles wait upon him. That which is unsavory,
shall it be eaten without salt? or is there any taste in the white of an egg?
Languishing Job makes this question, chap. 6.6. O then what delight can we
take to live, since our griefs, and miseries, were they well weighed, and laid
together in the balance, would be heavier then the sands of the Sea? Job. 6.4.
The arrows of the Almighty are in us, their venim has even drunk up our
spirits. Miserable men that such should be our lot. And yet behold, much more
miserable are we, if we be not called to grace in this pilgrimage; for so,
after this life we shall be nothing but prays for Satan, nothing but
firebrands of Hell. He that has a heart to consider, let him consider, how
subject he is to miseries, and then be he proud if he can.

A second note to move us to Humility is this: even to consider, whence we
have those good things which we do enjoy. Meat to nourish us, we have it from
the Lord. Apparel to cloth us, we have it from the Lord. The Sun to comfort
us, the Moon to pleasure us, we have them from the Lord. Life for our being,
riches, honor, and whatsoever else for our well being, all comes from the
Lord. This is the reason which St Paul used to beat down pride in the
Corinthians: what have thou (says he) that thou have not received? 1. Cor.
4.7. Art thou rich? it is not of thy self: the Lord gives, says Job. 1.12.
and he can take away. Art thou in estimation in this world, it is not of thy
self. The Lord sets up, says Hannah, 1. Sam. 2.7. and he can pull thee
down. Have thou cunning, or skill in any thing whatsoever? it is not of thy
self: God teaches handycraftsmen to work: himself says so to Moses, Exodus
31.3. and he ca^ again make them unskillful. He can, and will take away thy
riches, be they never so great; he can and will pull thee down, be thou never
so high; he can and will make thee unskillful, be thou never so cunning, or
will do unto thee more then so, if for any his gifts, and graces thou be
puffed up, and swell in pride. Art thou steward of much? little cause have thou
to be proud; thine account shall be for much. If thou have five talents, Mat.
25.20.
thy Lord will look for the increase of five: if thou have more riches then
others, know, that they are bestowed upon thee to relieve, and succor those
that want; thou may not lay them up in store for thy self for many years;
Luke 12.19.20
For how know thou (o fool) whether this night they will fetch away thy
soul from thee? And the^ whose shall those things be, which thou have provided?

And thus, whether we consider our estate as it is by nature, or the fountain,
from which all good things, which we enjoy, do proceed, we may in some
measure be moved to embrace humility. For so shall we be taught, though we
give alms, yet not to blow a trumpet, though we fast twice a week, yet to
make no words of it: though we have done many good deeds, yet to forget them
all. Then shall we be able to make for our Lord borders of gold guilt with
silver; that is, we shall be rich inwardly, howsoever our outward appearance
is: then shall we be willing to strew our best garments and our most
flourishing branches at our Saviors feet: then shall we be ready speedily to
cast down our crowns, yea our very selves, before the Throne of the Lamb.
And our Lord and Savior, this Lamb of God, as he is able, will also be
willing, and ready to lift us up, and will give us a resting place, where no
night shall be; there shall we need neither candle, nor light of Sun, for he
will give us light, and make us to reign for evermore. Even so be it, Lord
Jesus. To God the father, the son, and the holy Ghost, be all praise, power,
Majesty, and dominion, for evermore.

THE SECOND SERMON ON THE EPISTLE OF SAINT JAMES, CHAP. 4. VERSE. 10. Cast down
your selves before the Lord, and he will lift you up.
Return, and cause others to return away from your wicked ways, cast from
you all your sins, wherewith you have transgressed, and make you a new heart,
and a new spirit, for why will you die, O house of Israel? When the Lord spoke
so by his Prophet, Ezech. 18.31. in effect he spoke thus: repent, or be
damned, amend your lives, or be damned; consider it well, and you shall find no
mean. If they then, then we much more now, and now if ever, had need
unfeignedly to repent, and amend our lives. Hereto have we been invited (you
cannot forget it) by a late pretended invasion: but then Psa. 107^.6.
we cried unto the LORD in our troubles, and he delivered us out of our
distress. Hereto have we as lately been summoned (and this you may remember)
by a grievous sickness, by a far scattered plague, by a present death eating
up our brethren almost in every place of this land; but then we cried out unto
the LORD in our troubles, and he delivered us out of our distress. O that we
would therefore praise the LORD for his goodness, and declare the wonders,
that he has done for us.

But what? Are we now amended? have these two messengers of the Lord turned us
from our ungodliness? I would I could say they had: to me it seems, that
they have rather stre^gthened us in our iniquities. For they which were
ignorant, are ignorant still; they which were unjust, are unjust still; they
which were filthy, are filthy still: yea they which seemed religious, like so
many 2. Tim. 4.10
Damases have embraced this present world. Thus have all, as it were, made a
Esai. 28.15.
league with death, and a covenant with the grave, persuading themselves, that
albeit there come a sword, there come a plague, there come the worst that may
come through the land, yet shall there no evil come at them. Now therefore
has the LORD sent a third messenger to try whether thereby he can stir us
up to this repentance, and amendment of our lives. Al of you have heard of it;
the godly, and laboring poor, they especially feel it.

Can we think of it without bleeding hearts how This Sermon was preached Iun.
23. 1597.
this want of bread in all our quarters has set the very print of death in the
yet-living faces of many of our brethren, which are as dear and it may be,
much dearer to God, then our selves? Now reason have we (as the Prophet Hosea
speaks, Chap. 7.14.) to assemble our selves, and howl upon our beds for
corn and for wine; that is, for the belly, and for the throat, necessity
constrains us: yet should we not forget, that their is a greater leanenes in
our souls. Now ready are we to bite the stone, which the Lord has cast at
us; need drives us to it: but withal we ought to look at the hand, which did
send it; for so shall we find it to be a punishment for sins reigning among
us. For this famine is sent us by him, whose property it is to Ps. 107.33.
turn the floods into a wilderness, and the springs of water into dryness, and
a fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein.
It is sent us by him, who for Achans offense, caused Josh. 7.4.
three thousand to be put to slight; for David's sin, flew with the pestilence
seave^ty thousand of the 2. Sam. 24 15
people; for Baashaes own tra^sgression 1. Kin 16.11
brought evil upon his whole household, his kinsfolk, and his friends; and who
knows whether the same God, ever just in his punishings, has laid his heavy
hand upon our poor brethren, for our, or some one of our iniquities?
Howsoever it stands, we may not presume of the contrary, least the Lord make
us like vile Ierem 24 8
figs, which cannot be eaten, they are so naughty.

What remains then on our parts, but that we Joel. 2.13.
rent our hearts, and turn unto the Lord our God with fasting, with weeping,
and with mourning: for he it is that must call for corn, and increase it, or
else we shall bear the reproach of famine still: he it is that must Hos. 6.1.
bind us up, or else we shall continue wounded still: he it is that must heal
us, or else we shall lie thus spoiled still. Come therefore, and rent, not your
garments, but your hearts; cast from you all your sins; Ezech. 18 31
wherewith you have transgressed; turn, and cause others to return from your
evil ways to the Lord your God, and he will be ready to repent him of this
evil: Humble your selves under the Almighty hand of God, and he will once
again make his face to shine unto you. The sum of all is this; Cast down
your selves before the Lord, and he will lift you up.

I have heretofore remembered you of this counsel of Saint James in the first
words of my text: Cast down your selves before the Lord, and of his reason
used by him to persuade you to the obedience of his counsel; in the latter
words, and he will lift you up. And then in the counsel I observed 3. notes,
using the direction of the words themselves.

1 Lift not up, but cast down. 2 Cast down not others, but your selves. 3
Cast down your selves, not before me^, but before the Lord Where I signified,
that just occasion was given, to speak of the reason moving us to the obedience
of this counsel, for we must cast down our selves before the Lord, who as he
is most liberal to us, most present with us, most able to help us, when we
stand in need, is also most willing at all times to work our ease; and
therefore has our Apostle added, and he will lift you up. Cast down your
selves before the Lord, and he will lift you up.
I have already spoken of the first general note, wherein I laid open two
grievous wounds of our Church, and Commonwealth, two reigning evils among us,
the evil of Ambition, and the evil of Pride, and at that time, I applied
medicines to the^ both. Now follows the second note, ( cast down, not
others, but your selves,) which devideth it self into two parts: 1. cast down
not others: 2. but your selves. Cast down not others; for that is injury, and
you may not do it: but your selves, for that is humility, and you must embrace
it: not others; for you may not deal uncharitably with them; but your selves,
for high minded men are to high to enter in at Heavens straight gate. So then,
that ye do no injury to any, but deal charitably with all, out of the first
part, you may learn three things.

1 Not to disgrace your neighbors. 2 Not to judge the persons of sinners. 3
Not to condemn the whole profession, because all live not in the same
perfection.
Cast down not others.] As for the second part it has relation to the third
general note, where it may most fitly be considered, for you must cast down
your selves, not before men, but before the Lord.

Cast down not others) the first thing we learn here, is, not to to disgrace
our neighbors. We that are Christians and iournying toward Heaven, must go,
not so much by walking, as by loving, not so much with our feet, as with our
affections: neither is there any thing which makes a good or a bad life, but a
good or a bad love. If therefore we will to Heaven by the right way, we must be
rich in good works, we must be framed according to the rule of Gospel-like
perfection; we must love not our friends only in God, but our foes also for
God. We presume that fire is then hottest, when it warmeth them that are
farthest of: so is it with love; it is then most fervent and, perfect, when it
forsakes neither friend, nor foe, be they never so far of. Is thy neighbor
thy friend? Civility bids thee love him; Is he thy foe? Christianity forbids
thee to disgrace him. Friend or foe, is he thy neighbor? Civillity then wills
thee Mat. 7 12.
to do unto him, as thou would be done unto; and christianity requires of
thee, that thou Mat. 19.19.
love him as thy self. Now think, how thou love thy self: It is not with a
feigned love, not with a cold love, not with temporary love, not in word only:
therefore must thy love toward thy neighbor, be unfeigned, it must be
fervent, it must be enduring, it must be effectual; add hereto a fifth
condition; it must be holy, that is, thou must love thy neighbor, you must
love one another, in God, for God, and to Gods glory.

The full measure of this our love is set down unto us by our Savior Christ,
Joan. 13.34. Who has given us a new commandment, that we love one another, as
he has loved us, eve^ so that we love one another: where we are willed in
loving others, not so much to regard that love, wherewith we love our selves,
as that, wherewith Christ loves us. As he has loved us, even so must we love
one another. But how is that? Consider with me but 5. things, and you may
learn how.

The first is, the cause which moved Christ to love us. We have been Ephesians.
1.4.
chosen in him by the Father, that we might be saved by him, and therefore has
Christ loved us with a peculiar love above other men, Galat. 2.20. Therefore
must we also love our brethren peculiarly in the Lord, for that very cause,
because (for ought we know) they are the elect and chosen of the Father in
Christ, that they may be saved by Christ.

2 The time, when Christ loved us. He loved us first, 1. Ioh. 4.19. Therefore
must we also prevent one another in love; we must not look that they love us
first (for the heathens can be content to yield love for love, Mat. 5.46.) But
we must love the^ first, and by so loving them stir them up to love us again.

3 The quality of the persons, whom Christ has loved. He has loved us, Joan.
15.9. us: that is all, all the elect, Jews, and Gentiles, Graecians, and
barbarians, bond, and free, men, and women, the base, and poor as well, as the
noble, and rich: for all which, and therefore for all us he dyed, when as yet we
were his enemies, when as yet we were sinners, Romans 5.8. Therefore must we also
love all men, be they sinners, or seem they just; seem they our friends or be
they our foes, be they of what estate and condition soever.

4 The end, for which Christ has loved us. He loved us for no profit of his
own, but for our souls health. Therefore must we also love our neighbors, not
for our own gain, but for their good: and thereto does St Paul counsel us,
Let every man be careful for the things of his neighbor, Phil. 2.4.

5 The measure of Christ's love to us ward. It is a true love; for Christ is
truth it self, John. 14.6. It is an ardent loue^, for Christ laid down his
life, he shed his blood, for his sheep, John, 10.15. It is a never dying love,
for Christ loves his unto the end, Ioh. 13.1. And therefore must we also love
our neighbors truly, earnestly, and constantly. We must abandon al false,
feigned, and vain love, all corrupt love, all gainefull love, al tongue-loue,
and the like, as Christ has loved us, even so must we love one another.

How this love has been written in the hearts of the godly, which long since
have slept in peace, their practices are sufficient to declare. Could any thing
else have made Moses pray to have his name raced out of Gods book rather, then
that the sins of the people under his government should not be forgiven?
Exodus 32.32. Could any thing else, have caused David to make his petitions to
God for to lay the pestilence upon him and his fathers house, and to spare the
people committed to his charge? 2. Sam. 24.17. Could any thing else have moved
Paul to wish with his own damnation to redeem the reiection of the Jews?
Romans 9.3. What shall I tell you of Elizeus, who took order for the safe return
of his enemies, the king of Arams servants, to their Lord and master? 2. Kings
6.22. or of Jeremy, who stood before the Lord, to speak good for such as had
dug a pit for his soul, Ierem. 18.20. or of Steven, who then prayed for the
people, when they stoned him? Act. 7.60.

Naomi might have done her kinseman all the disgrace set down in the law; she
might have pulled of his Ruth. 4 7.
she; she might have spit in his face, and so have defamed him, and his house
for ever; yet would she not. Joseph when he might have disclosed the lust of
his mistress, and have saved his own Genesis 39.19.
imprisonment, did choose rather to conceal it. The supposed father of Christ,
that just one, perceauing that his betrothed spouse was with child before ever
they came together, was minded to put her away Mat. 1.19.
secretly; for he would not make her a public example.

But all these are dead and gone, and (I fear me, I may to truly say it)
their love is also dead and gone with them. For if not so; could deceit, could
bribery, could oppression, could rapine, could usury, could many more such
adversaries of true love be so common among us, as they are? Whence is it,
that the hand of Caine is so ready at the throat of Abel? Genesis 4.8. Whence is
it that the shepherds of Gerar, and the shepherds of Isaac cannot agree? Genesis
26.20. Whence is it that Esau hates Jacob? Genesis 27.41. that Joseph is ready to
be sold for 20 pieces of silver? Genesis 37.28. That Saul seeks David to slay
him? 1. Sam. 20.33. that a man lies wounded by the high way, and neither
Priest, nor Levite will help him? Luke 10.31, 32. Is it not from our want of
true love? Now have we many of Haman his spirit, who did maliciously inform
Assuerus against the Jews, that so he might utterly destroy them, Hest. 3.8,
9. and many of Doeg his spirit, who by his false accusation murdered 85 Priests
and smote the city Nob with all the men, women, and children in it, 1. Sam.
22.9, 18. and many of Ziba his spirit, who did wrongfully slander
Mephibosheth, his Lord, unto the King, 2. Sam. 16.3.

Now the great man curses the poor; the poor man complains of the rich;
the seeming godly man hates his neighbor, for he is wicked; the wicked man
flies from the pure in heart, he is not for his purpose. Know we any thing,
wherein our brother has offended? we will ring it presently in the ears of
his dearest friends. But know we no ill by him? A small matter, we can and will
forge enough; only must we have one condition yielded unto, namely, that we
shall not be reveiled, and then our brazen faces will bear us out without
blushing to report of any man, that there is neither honesty, learning, nor
religion in him; or that he is good for nothing, but to be factious, or the
like.

Thus do the wicked Ps. 11.2.
bend their bow, and make ready their arrows upon the string, that they may
secretly shoot at them, which are upright in heart. And can we much blame
them for so doing, since their nature is so to do? Vilium est hominum alios
viles facere, and qui suo merito placere non possunt, placere velle aliorum
comparatione. You may hold it for a truth, St Jerome has spoken it; It is the
property of a vile nature to seek by tales to make others vile, or by
comparison with others to come to he accounted of.

Dead souls I have no hope to move: to feeling hearts, which God vouchsafes
to touch with his powerful word, as with a sharp Heb. 4.12.
sword, is my speech made. Read, and remember, what is written in the law; Thou
shall not walk about with tales among thy brethren, Lev. 19.16. Learn, and
forget not, why Jerusalem was reproved; it was, because in her were men, that
carried tales up and down to shed blood, Ezech. 22.9. Here, and follow, the
counsel of St James in the words next after my text; speak no evil one of
another. For all which take this reason: he, which slaundreth with his tongue,
may not dwell in the LORDS tabernacle, Psalm. 15.3. So filthy and foul it is
to be a false reporter.

And can it be better to have itching ears to hear such? Surely if he that
speaks slanderously against any man, has the Devil in his tongue, he that
willingly hears such a speaker, has the Devil in his ear. There cannot be
a greater poison, there cannot be a verier cutthroat of all friendship and
amity betwixt man and man, then to love to hear, what peevish tongues shall
seek to speak. Soon creepes it into your ears, that will never out again,
whilst the breath is in your bodies. For instance: suppose a man be misreported
to you, to be spotted with adultery, with bribery, with theft, or with any like
grievous offense; and admit you can be content not to credit all, because no
proof is brought for it, but much against it; yet something remains to the
blot of your brother; yet sticks the scarre of suspicion still. And therefore
the law is, thou shall not receive a false tale, Exodus 23.1. and David's
assertion is; thou shall never dwell in the tabernacle of the Lord, thou shall
never rest in his holy mountain, if thou receive a false report against thy
neighbor, Psalm. 15.3. And Sirachs son gives this counsel; if thou have
heard a word against thy neighbor, let it die with thee, Eccles. 19.10. By all
which, what are we taught else, but how we should hear? If we will needs hear
what is reported of others, and that as we ought, we must not be too easy in
believing, we must wisely weigh, who tells it, of whom, in what manner, to
what end, and such like circumstances; for so may we, more boldly, and with
less danger hear.

The Lord God, Deuteronomy. 13.12. has spoken to the rulers of Israel, thus; If thou
shall hear say (concerning any of the cities, which the Lord thy God has
given thee to dwell in) that wicked men are gone out from among you, and have
drawn away the inhabitants of their city: then thou shall seek, and make
search, and inquire diligently. And why, I pray you, is all this repetition of
words to seek, to make search, to enquire, and that diligently, if not to give
us to understand, what a fault it is to condemn before we know, and by and by
to believe what ever we hear? If an Idolater were accused, and had but one
witness against him, he might not be put to death by the testimony of that one;
for the law says plainly, that whosoever is worthy of death, shall die at
the mouth of 2. or 3. witnesses, Deuteronomy. 17.6. and all to teach us, not to be
light of belief, when we are whispered in the ear against any man, and in
our hearts by and by to kill him by conceaving ill of him upon one reporters
speech. To rob my neighbor of that his credit in my heart, which he has had
there heretofore, unless he deserve it, can in me be no less then a branch
of murder. To answer a matter before a man hear it, is folly and shame, says
the wise man, Prove. 18.13. and can it be less then folly, can it be less
then shame, to believe a matter of our neighbor, before we know it?

This then must be our care; not to believe any ill report against our
neighbor, unless we know it; not to hear it, if we can choose; in no wise
to be the author and reporter of it. For Mal. 2.10.
have we not all one father, has not one God made us all? Why the^ should we
transgress every one against his brother, and break the covenant of our
fathers? It is an Item to us all, and worth our remembering too, although it be
but St Austines: Non poterit habere concordiam cum Christo, qui discors
voluerit esse cu^ Christiano: It is impossible that we should be at one with
Christ, if we be at variance with our neighbor.

Cast down not others] The second thing we learn here, is, not to judge the
persons of sinners. What is man that he should be clean, or he that is borne
of a woman, that he should be just? Job. 15.14. He is Ps 51.5.
borne in iniquity and in sin has his mother co^ceived him. His Esai. 1.5, 6.
whole head is sick, and his heart is heavy, and within him is nothing but
wo^^ds, and swelling, and sores, full of corruption. He is Esai. 1.4.
laden with sins; sins like crimsin, and sins as red as scarlet. Therefore
inexcusable art thou, o man, whosoever thou be that iudgest; for in that, that
thou iudgest another, thou condemnest thy self: for thou that iudgest do
the same things. He that knows well what is in man, tells thee so, Romans 2.1.
When Agur had beheld the follies of other men, he beheld his own too, and then
his saying was; I am more foolish, then any man, Prove. 30.2. When Judah had
thought upon Thamars unrighteousness, he thought upon his own too, and then
his confession was; She is more righteous, then I, Genesis 38.26. When the
Publican had considered other men's sins, he considered his own too, and then
his prayer was; O Lord, be merciful unto me a sinner, Luke 18.13. Come hither,
whosoever thou be, that have a desire to judge other men, if thou be not too
good to learn. Behold (and spare not) the follies of other men, but behold
thine own too; and then will thou say, I am more foolish then any man: think
upon (as long as thou will) the unrighteousness of other men, but think upon
thine own too; and then shall thou thus confess; They are more righteous then
I. Consider (and cease not to consider) other men's sins, but consider thine
own too; and then (if there be any grace in thee) that little bird within thy
breast, will mournefully sing, and pray for thee: O God be merciful to me a
sinner.

So then, thou may behold, think upon, and consider, the foolish,
unrighteous, and sinful dealings of other men, (as a godly man may behold an
image, and detest it) and not offend; but if thou look upon them with
pleasure, or for some advantage against any man, then art thou amiss, then
thou see them not aright. There is a wise eye, Eccl. 2.14. and there is a
foolish eye; Proverb. 17.24. Now if thou have this wise eye, it will remain in
thy head, and teach thee like the be, to gather honey out of every weed thy
neighbor has. But if thou have that foolish eye, it will wander up and down,
and make thee like the spider, out of the best flowers thou can find in thy
neighbors life, to suck strong poison. Ham the father of Canaan, saw his
fathers nakedness, and took pleasure in it; and he had the foolish eye: but
his two brethren, Sem and Iaphet, covered their fathers nakedness, and looked
an other way; and they had the wise eye, Genesis 9.22.23. The Edomites looked upon
the afflictions of their brethren, and are reproved, Obad. 12. for their
foolish eye made the^ rejoice to see it. But Jobs friends looked upon his
afflictions, and are not reprooved: for their wise eye wrought in them a
sorrow for it.

Be wise then, and joy not, when thine enemy Prove. 24.17
falls, nor let thine heart rejoice, when he stumbleth, lest as the 2. King.
5.27
leprosy went from Naaman to Gehazie, so God turn his wrath from them that
have fallen, and make it light upon thee. Be wise then, and when thou see thy
brothers nakedness, let it move thee to a compassion on him, and a fear of
thy self. Be wise then, and when any spectacle of frailty is in thine eye,
think with thy self, that thy neighbors house is on fire, and that it is thy
warning, for what privilege from sin, have thou, or any man, that another has
not? You know that the greatest light may be eclipsed, the fairest beauty
stained, and the goodlyest fruit blasted. So is it with your souls; the purest
may be corrupted.

What if godly Ruth. 3.14.
Bohaz and Ruth will not pass the bounds of continency? Yet 2. Sam. 11 4.
David and Bathschebah, godly also, may be overtaken with that folly. What if
good Genesis 39.12.
Joseph refuse his lady and mistress? yet Genesis 38.18.
Judah, a good man also, may be allured by his disfigured daughter in law. What
if many endued with great graces of Gods spirit, do, like Luke 19.8.
Zacheus, distribute the greatest part of their possessions to satisfy their
injuries and relieve the poor? yet many partaking also the like graces, are to
much given to the love of money. Yea two of the Apostles, Mark, 10.37
James and John, will desire the superiority and the highest places in the
church, howsoever all the rest envy and disdain them for it. Thus are many of
the Lords tallest Cedars blown down to the ground, and think thou (O much
inferior to a Cedar) to stand firm? S. Paul gives thee friendly counsel,
1. Cor. 10.12. He that thinks he stands, let him take heed that he fall not.

Have thou hitherto been fed delicately, and brought up in scarlet? take heed:
ere long thou may perish in the streets, thou may embrace the dung, Lam.
4.5. Have thou as yet had thy head of gold? take heed: least, to become like
Nebuchadnezzars image thy feet turn to clay, Dan. 2.32.33. Have thou already
begun in the spirit? take heed: as good as thy self have ended in the flesh,
Gal. 3.3. Peter he which said even now, that Mat. 26.33.
though all should, yet he would never forsake Christ, Verse. 74.
curses and swears, that he knows not the man. Genesis 19.1.
Lot, he which erst strived so much to preserve his daughters chaste in Sodom,
does now in the mount commit incest with his Verse. 36.
daughters. Solomon, blessed Solomon (for so I reckon him) which so lately
erected a temple for the worship of God, falls now to the worshipping of
Idols; as if the stars were falling from their Heaven, and the light
departing from the Sun.

I will not trouble you with the relation of Genesis 9.21.
Noah's drunkenness; 2. Sam. 12.9
David's murder; Genesis 18.15.
Sarahs lie; Genesis 27.3.
Rebeccaes persuading her son Jacob, to beguile his own father; the theft of
Philem. 11.
Onesimus; the many concubines of the Patriarchs; and the like; only I say, as
David said in another case: O noble Israel, how are the mighty overthrown, 2.
Sam. 1.19. When Elisha told Hazael, whst wickedness he should do in time to
come, that he should slay, and trample men, women, and children under foot;
what? said Hazael: Am I a dog, that I should do this? 2. King. 8.13. If I
should say to you, that the time shall come, wherein you that seem most holy,
shall become murderers, adulterers, thieves or the like, I doubt not, but
every one of you would have his answer in readiness; what? Am I a reprobate,
that I should do thus, or thus? But I say not so of you; those good graces of
the Lord in you, do promise better things; yet let me desire you to remember S.
1. Cor. 10.12
Paul's counsel; He that thinks he stands, let him take heed that he fall not.

What shall we do then, when we here of, or see, the slips and escapes of other
men? Hear what our Savior says, Judge not, that ye be not judged, Mat. 7.1.
The wise man passed by the field of the sloathfull, and lo it was all grown
over with thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof, and the stone wall
thereof was broken down, Prove. 24.30.31. But what did he, when he saw such a
confusion? Himself tells you in the verse following: I beheld, I considered
it well, I looked upon it, and I received instruction; the marginall note of
our English Bibles is, That I might learn by an other man's fault: Our
neighbors life resembles this field; which because he is sloath-full and
slack in husbanding, can bring forth nothing, but thorns and nettles, so that
through the stone wall, which lies wasted and broken down, there may be seen
al manner of filthiness and abomination. In such a case what must we do? Even
as Solomon did; that is, we must behold it, we must consider it well, we must
look upon it, and receive instruction: that we may learn by our neighbors
fault.

Does our neighbor stand in a slippery place, where it is easy for him to
slice? So do we. Is he sent forth weak, naked, and unarmed, to fight, with
powers, and principalities, with the Devil, with the world, withal their
adherents? So are we. Is his flesh as false unto him, as Gehazi was to Elisha?
2. King. 5.25. Is it ready to lie unto him, and to face him out, that it has
not sinned, even then, when it comes from sinning? So is ours. Then judge we
not, that we be not judged. The best men, we see, have had their falls, yet
they have risen again: the godliest, they Mat. 14.30.
sink with Peter, yet they perish not, because they are Verse. 31.
lifted up and saved by CHRIST, as Peter was. Old Adam has caused the children
of light, to commit many and grievous sins, yet their new Adam has removed
them all. Then judge we not uncharitably of them.

Do our brethren in our knowledge fleet from one sin to another, like a fly,
which shifteth from one sore to another? Do they, (like the Jews, 1. Cor.
10.6.) tempt the Lord, do they murmr? do they lust? do they commit
Idolatry? do they serve the flesh? do they sit down to eat, and rise to
play? do they every day fall so grievously, or more then so? Yet may they rise
again. Why then should we judge otherwise of them, then in charity? God
forbid, by speaking thus I should encourage any to sin: for howsoever grace
abounds above sin, yet cursed are they, yea ever cursed shall they be,
which do sin, that grace and blessing may abound unto them, Romans 6.1. We
are forbidden Romans 3.8.
to do evil, where we certainly know that good may come of it; much less
may we make the mercy of God a defense for our sins. Let this then be unto us
as a Memora^dum, never to be forgotten; There is no Romans 8.1.
condemnation to the righteous, although he fall seven times a day; but if any
man shall sin presuming of Gods mercies, let him know that his damnation is
just, and himself is like that thief, which steals because he sees one
among 20. pardoned by the Prince. And so come we to our last note.

Cast down not others] the third thing we learn here, is, not to condemn the
whole profession, because all live not in the same perfection.

The grapes of the vine have some less, and some more sweetness, yet sense
teaches, that all are grapes, and do grow of the vine: so is it with the
Saints of God, some have more purity and some less, yet all are Saints, and
do grow in Christ, that true vine, Ioh. 15.1. What if some (says the Apostle,
Romans 3.3.) have not believed? shall their unbeleefe make the grace of God of
none effect? and Romans 11.22. What if some have fallen into sin, shall the whole
Gospel for their sakes be discredited?

Jacobs family may be blemished; the wife of his love that sleeps in his
bosom may be all spotted; yet evermore shall Jacobs sacrifices be acceptable
unto God, and his family shall be cared for, as the house of the Lord. Jericho
may be conquered and rased by Joshua; salt may be sown in it to make it
barren; and he whosoever shall attempt to build it again, may be cursed, Josh.
6.26. Yet see in this rased Jericho, in this barren soil in this cursed city,
Christ has his spiritual harvest, he has his holy Temple he has his
blessed building. Cursed Jericho has a blessed Zaccheus, Luke 19.2. Aholah
sister to Aholibah, Idolatrous Samaria, may be set on fire with her lovers, and
play the harlot, Ezech. 23.4. she may be made as an heap of the field, her
stones may be tumbled down into the valley, her foundations may be discovered
Micah. 1.6. Yet may such a city, a wasted city, afford many that believe in
Christ, Ioh. 4.39. yea from Galilee, from whence some thought no good thing
might come, Ioh 7.52. Christ called diverse of the Apostles, Ioh. 1.43

Fyrre trees and thorns, nettles and myrrh trees may grow together in the
good-mans garden; and why may there not be in the Lords field as well brambles,
as lillies? why not as well tares, as wheat? The husbandman knew well it was
so, and therefore he charged his servants to suffer the tares to grow up with
his wheat until the harvest Man. 13.30. Assured he was that the wheat would
continue wheat still, howsoever it was accompanied with the tares. Let Gen 11.28
Chaldaea be never so unrighteous, yet may it have a righteous Abraham: let Gen
13 12.
Sodom be never so unjust, yet may it have a just Lot; let Babylon be ever
wicked, yet may it have a godly Dan 1 6.
Daniel; yea let the whole world (for ought we can see) be tied together with
cartropes of vanity; yet shall Tob. 1.3.
Niniveh have a devout Tobias, and Job. 1.1.
Huz a patient Job, and Damascus a zealous Nehemias. Condemn not then the
whole profession, howsoever all live not in the same perfection.

We shall impiously conclude, if against truth we draw our argument from a
multitude: neither will it follow; many Ministers, many Christians, have
devoted themselves wholly to the flesh, to the world, to the Devil; therefore
all of both sorts are naught. For what are we, that we may not judge amiss,
as well as Elias did? He complained that he was left alone. Nay says God, thou
art not alone: I have reserved unto my self seven thousand, which have not
bowed the knee to Baal, 1. King. 19.18. In regard hereof St Paul tells us,
that of Israel there is a remnant left, Rom 11.5. And that great shepherd
speaking of the Church calls it a little flock, Luke 12.32 Fear not little
flock, for it is your fathers pleasure to give you a kingdom. But seven
thousand, but a remnant, but a little flock, and yet you shall not be
discomfited; fear not, for it is your fathers pleasure to give you a kingdom.
A kingdom; and therefore for all inferior things he will not stick with you.

Saul's court shall yield a Jonathan to favor David, 1. Sam. 20.28. Achabs
court shall have in readiness an Ob^diah, to entertain the Prophets, 1. King.
18.13. Zedech^^ court shall afford a Ebed-melech to entreat for Jeremy, Ierem.
38.7. O the merciful kindness of the Lord, how it endures for ever and ever
upon them that fear him! Jobs bones and flesh may be in the Devils hand, but
God will save his life, Job. 2.6. Peter may be imprisoned by Herod, but the
Angel of the Lord will bring him out Act. 12.7. Shadrach, Mes^ach, and
Abedueg^, may be cast fast bound into the seven times hot fiery furnace, but
the Lords Angel will come, and unbind them, and walk with them in the midst of
the fire, so that not one hair of their head shall perish, Dan. 3.25.

Do you remember this little Churches complaint, Ps. 129.1. There she says:
Many times have they fought against me, even from my youth up. Hear now, how
she comfort her self, verse. 2. But they have not prevailed against me. Do
you remember, how she further complained, verse. 3. The pl^^ers plowd upon my
back, and made long furrows. Hear now her comfort in the verses following:
But the righteous Lord has cut the cords of the wicked, and they that hate
Sion shall be all ashamed, and turned backward, they shall be as the grass on
the house rops, which withers before it grows up. And therefore I cannot say
too often, O the merciful kindness of the Lord, how it endures for ever and
ever upon them Psalm. 103.12
that fear him!

This kind and merciful God has reserved to himself, eve^ in the midst of
Wolves, and Lions, some Isaac, some Joseph, some Bohaz, some Daniel, some
Zachary, some Elizabeth, some few or more, whom all the world with all the
malice it has cannot blemish. Condemn not then the whole profession,
howsoever all live not in the same perfection.

And know that all live not in the same perfection, know that some of the best
have had their falls, for these reasons: I will but point at them.

1 That we be brought from that error, which some maintain, namely that the
elect, and regenerate sin not.

2 That the work of repentance, so sweet a grace of God, might be exercised
among us.

3 That Gods mercy in saving great sinners might be magnified

4 That the faithful considering their daily falls, might more earnestly
desire their final deliverance.

5 And lastly, that the Lions whelps, all the children of darkness, by this
means might be occasioned by their blasphemies, to work their own damnation.

Thus has the unsearchable wisdom of our God disposed the evil deeds of his
dear ones to great, and good purpose. What remains then on our parts, but
that we frame our selves to have a fellow-feeling of other men's imperfections,
and not to condemn all, because some are faulty? The Church may be black; and
so she is; for so much she confesses of herself, Cant. 1.5. yet condemn her
not rashly; for her, and our best beloved says unto her: Thou art all fair,
my love, and there is no spot in thee, Cant. 4.7. The Church may be all
spotted, and so ashamed, that she be driven to hide her self in the holes of
the rock, and in the secret places of the stairs, Cant. 2.14. yet condemn
her not rashly: for her, and our best beloved, is so well pleased in her, that
in the same verse he breaks out into these speeches show me thy sight my
love, let me hear thy voice for thy voice is sweet, and thy sight is comely.
The Church may be grieved, and tossed with the misshapen wickedness of her
members, as with a tempest, Esai 54, 11. yet condemn her not rashly: for it
appears in the same place, that her, and our best beloved, will lay her
stones with the carbuncle, and her foundations with saphires; and will make her
windows of pearl, and her gates shining stones. So excellent is the Churches
estate under her well-beloued.

What remains then on our parts, but that we frame our selves, to have a
fellow feeling of other men's imperfections, and not to condemn all, because
some are faulty? And here again we should remember (that so we might be
careful) neither to judge the persons of sinners, nor to disgrace our
neighbors. Endeavor we but to do so, or so well, and then the Churches, and
our best beloved, will be ready to take us up, and deliver us from this worldly
prison, to a heavenly palace; from present dangers to certain security; from
manifold miseries, to never ending felicities. As thy will shall be, so be it
Lord Jesus. To God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, be all praise,
power, majesty, and dominion for evermore.

THE THIRD SERMON ON THE EPISTLE OF SAINT JAMES, CHAP. 4. VERSE. 10. Cast down
your selves before the Lord, and he will lift you up.
SVch is the vehemence of the Lords arrows, when he shoots them abroad, that
though king Achab be in his chariot in the midst of his host, yet one of
the^ shall give him a mortal 1. Kin. 22.34
wound. So powerful is the scourge of God, when it makes a famine to invade a
country, that it creeps into the walls of the house of bread, into Bethlehem
it self, and causes the wealthiest of them all to fly. At such a beck has
the Lord all his creatures, that if he be to be avenged upon the 5. kings of
the Amorites, the Josh 10.12.
Sun, and the Moon will be ready for a season to rest from their courses,
to perform so good a service. So wants he no means Job, 18.16.
to dry up the roots of the wicked beneath, and above to cut down all their
branches.

You therefore, from whom it has pleased God to withhold his blessings of
rule, and riches, look to your selves, as mean as you are. Your ways are
before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all your paths. Avoid then the
way of the wicked, walk not therein, turn from it, and pass by. Easily may
you be snared with their pleasing words; for the wise man tells you, that
they cannot Prove. 41.6.
sleep, except they have done evil; So eat they the Verse 17.
bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of violence. Walk not after such
companions, least God give their Ezec. 23.31
cu^ into your hands, and execute the same judgments, and vengeance against
you, which they have deserved. But rather follow S. James his counsel: Cast
down your selves before the Lord, and he will lift you up.

And you also, whose heads the Lords has advanced over your brethren, look to
your selves. You are sufficiently learned to know, that the voice of the Lord
Psalm. 29.5.
shakes as well the Cedars of Lebanon, as the low, and little shrubs in the
Verse. 8.
wilderness of Cades: and that it is as easy with him to bind the nobles,
and Psalm. 149.8.
princes with chains, and linkes of iron, as to raise up the poor from the
dunghill to the throne. Did darkness cover the country of Egypt, and not the
court of Pharaoh also? Did the destroyer take away the first borne of the poor
peasants of the dwelling of Ham, and not of the King also? Let not the lots of
your inheritance deceive you. What if your soil be as fruitful, as that of
Judah, and your possessions as great, as the greatest? yet may you know, that
your dignity and your wealth, will be reckoned but for toies, not worth a
pardon, when you shall stand in need of one. The counsel therefore is good for
you also, and worth your following too: Cast down your selves before the Lord,
and he will lift you up.

I divided these words into a counsel, and a reason thereof. Cast down your
selves before the Lord, that is the counsel: the reason follows, and he will
lift you up. In the counsel I have been directed by the words themselves to
three general notes.

1 Lift not up, but cast down. 2 Cast down not others, but your selves. 3
Cast down your selves not before men, but before the Lord.
The reason is full of comfort. For albeit we must cast down our selves before
the Lord; yet it is before such a Lord, who as he is most present with us,
most liberal to us, most able to help us, when we stand in need, is also at
al times most willing to work our ease. And therefore is it added in my text;
And he will lift you up.

I have already spoken of the 2. first general notes. In the one I laid open
2. grievous wounds made in the very bowels of our Church, and Commo^wealth, two
reigning evils among us: the evil of ambition, and the evil of pride: at that
time in some sort, I applied medicines to them both. In the other I endeavored
to show how unmeet it was first to disgrace our neighbors; then to judge the
persons of sinners, and last of all, to condemn the whole profession, because
all live not in the same perfection. Of both which heretofore.

Now come I to the third general note, which devides it self into two parts.

1 Cast down your selves not before men. 2 But before the Lord.
Not before men; for that may be hypocrisy, and you must fly from it: but
before the LORD, for that will be true humility, and you must embrace it. Not
before men: for so, may you have the praise of me^, your reward in this world,
hereafter to be cast into torments, when that great and severe judge shall
pass his sentence against you, depart from me ye cursed; but before the Lord,
for so, howsoever ye may be contemned in this world, hereafter shall ye be
crowned with eternity, when it shall be said unto you: Come ye blessed.

Cast down your selves not before men.] Rejoice ye Heavens, and ye that dwell
in them; for, where you are, is salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of
our God, and the power of his Christ: but Rev. 12.12.
woe to the inhabitants of the earth, and of the Sea; for the Devil is come
down unto you with great wrath, knowing that his time is but short: such was
the song of the finger for the victory which Michael had gotten over the great
dragon, Revel. 12.10. As it flood then, so stands it still. Yet, and ever may
the heavenly rejoice; for which there is salvation, and strength, and the
kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ; but a w^ now is and shall be
unto us, as long as the Sun and Moon may endure. For the Devil is come down
unto us with great wrath, he knows his time is but short; and therefore lets he
slip no opportunity, but emploies all his malice, his might, his rage, his
subtilty, his industry, and all to devour us. But if he cannot compass us
about, as he did Eve, when he persuaded her to eat the forbidden apple; or as
he did David, when he caused him to number Israel; or as he would have done
with Job, when he intended to make him blaspheme God to his face; that is, if
he cannot keep us from doing of good works, yet he leaves us not there; but
puts in practice his old and usual course, He will persuade us (for that is
easy with him) he will persuade us I say, to be proud of our well doing.

He has persuaded many Ministers, (shall I say of his own intruding?) assured
I am, he has persuaded many Ministers, to be tongue-tied altogether: but some
there are, whose mouths, with all the policy he has, he has not been able
to shut; yet diverse of them has he persuaded, to take a pride in their
preaching. He has persuaded many of the people (you know it well enough) wholly
to absent themselves from hearing of Gods word; but some there are (this, and
the like places may witness), whose diligence in hearing, he has not been able
to hinder^ yet diverse of them also has he made to like well of themselves for
their diligence. He has persuaded many of the richer sort (the poor know it
too well) to bestow no alms at all; but some there are who in despite of him,
do give daily benevolence for the relief of the needy; yet diverse of them
also, has he made to glory in their almes-giuing.

Are we resolved to satisfy that charge which is laid upon us for praying? he
is ready with us, to wish us to do it in common assemblies, and in the corners
of the streets, that we may be seen of men. Do we intend a fasting? he is at
hand with us, to counsel us to disfigure our faces, that we may seem to men
to fast. Are we willing to humble our selves before our God? that is, is it our
whole intent, to discharge all Christian duties, which God requires at our
hands? yet see the diligence of this worldly prince; he is no where wanting,
to advise us, to do all such things in the sight of men. So does he stain
the beauty of our good works, and steal away our (...): so ^^^heth he of
true professors palpable Hypocrites. So that in good time may this caveat be
given you, Cast down your selves, not before men.

Art thou desirous to chastise thy body by fas^ing? Is it thy mind to be
reconciled to God by praying? Art thou willing to exercise thy charity by
almes-giuing? The^ follow the doctrine which thy Savior delivered upon the
mount: do all such things in secret; let not thy left hand know what thy
right hand does, Mat. 6.3. Thy lot, and mine, is the same as was St Paul's: we
cannot be Christ's servants, if we seek to please men, Gal. 1.10. For Christ
himself has pronounced away unto us, when all men speak well of us. Luke
6.26. Whether we eat or drink, fast or pray, preach or hear the word, or
give alms, or whatsoever we do else, all must be done to the praise, and 1.
Cor. 10.31.
glory of God, our own praise, our own glory must not be regarded.

Neither indeed is there any thing, wherein our selves may glory. For strength
the Elephant, for courage the Lio^, for sweet singing many a bird, for fair
beauty many a vile strumpet passes us. The hare out runs us, the Eagle
outsees us: the Ass outheares us: the Dog outsmels us, Non pudet his
gloriari, (says Isidore.
one) quibus and bruta, and sceleratissimi quique possunt gloriari? Shameless
shall we be, if we seek a glory in such things, wherein unreasonable
creatures, and graceless persons do far exceed us.

Can we say as the Disciples said, Luke 10.17. Lord, even the Devils are
subdued to us through thy nu^^^? yet may we not glory herein; for Christ has
forbidden us so to do, verse 20. Can we say with the Pharisee, Luke 18.11. We
are not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or the like? can
we profess that we fast twice in the week, and that we pay tithe of all that
ever we possess? Yet may we not glory herein; for sorrowful sinners are like
to be more justified, then we: Can we say with the young man, Mat. 19.20.
concerning the laws of God, All these have we kept from our youth? Yet may we
not glory herein; for still we went one thing: if we will be perfect we must
fell all we have, and give it to the poor.

It has been said that Hypocrisy is spunne with so fine a thread, that we
may live as long with a man, as Noah did with Cham, and scarce discern him.
Which how truly it has been said, I dispute not. Assuredly I persuade my
self, that as a man may judge an Ass by his ears, to be but an Ass,
howsoever he be put into a Lucianus in Piscatore. Plato in Cratylo. Eusebius
Caesariensis adversus Hieroclem
Lions skin: so some one thing or other will ever bewray an hypocrite. It is
not the surest to judge of a sheep by the out-skinne only, for wolves may be in
Mat. 7 15.
sheep clothings: neither may you safely choose your cloth by the list. Will
you deem a Pharisee to be good, by his long fringe, or broad Phylactery? Then
surely have you much forgotten your selves. It cannot be, but you have heard
of certain Apes in Egypt clad in purple. Thence came the proverb; Lucianus in
orat. cont. incruditum.
Simia Simia est, etiamsi aurea gestet insignia: A carter may put on Doctors
attire. The Ostrich may have gallant feathers, yet not be able to fly. You may
hold it for a truth: Christianity is rei, non speciei, it is a matter of
substance, not of form and show.

St Bernard found fault with certain Monks, which thought it impossible the
Sun should shine any where, but in their cell. Were he now living, how would
he entreat many among us, who think themselves so godly, so wise, so sincere,
so pure, so perfect, so Christianlike, as if Gods holy spirit had only lighted
upon them. It will not be amiss for them to consider, how our Savior Christ
has in one Mat. 23.
chapter pronounced a sevenfold woe against this sin of Hypocrisy: Woe unto
you Hypocrites, ye are like unto Verse. 27.
painted Sepulchers, or white^ tombs, which appear beautiful outward, but
within are full of dead men's bones, and all filthiness: woe unto you
Hypocrites, for ye Verse. 25.
make clean the outside of the cup, and of the platter, but within are full of
all bribery, and excess. I will not trouble you with the repetitio^ of the
rest, they are al to be read, Mat. 23. And it may be for their bettering, to
give ear to the wise man's counsel: he has said, be not an Hypocrite in the
sight of men; for the Hypocrite shall not come before God, Job 13.16. Neither
can it be lost labor for them to meditate upon that which follows, chapter
15.34. where he joins the Hypocrite with the houses that are built, and
maintained with polling, and briberie: for he says, The congregation of the
Hypocrites shall be desolate, and fire shall devour the houses of bribes: he
adds this reason, because they conceive mischief, and bring forth vanity,
and their bellies have prepared deceit.

What did it avail Judas to seem to be a blessed Apostle, when in the end he
proved himself a cursed traitor? Luke 22.48. What did it profit the people to
seem to follow Christ for his miracles, when indeed they followed for nothing,
but for bread? Ioh. 6.26. Felix could tremble, and seem to be moved at St
Paul's Sermon as he disputed of righteousness, and temperance, and of the
judgment to come, Act. 24.25. but deep was his dissimulation; his drift was
to get money of Paul, as appears, verse. 26. The Scripture tells us, that
the fathers of Israel turned unto God, and sought him early, they remembered
that God was their strength, and the most High their redeemer, Psalm. 78.34. You
see here a goodly show of religious; yet were such fathers of Israel
Hypocrites: for the same scripture adds in the words that follow, verse. 37.
Nevertheless they did but flatter him with their mouth, and disse^bled with
him in their tongues, for their heart was not upright with him, neither were
they steadfast in his covenant. They which call themselves Jews, and are not,
because they lie, shall be of the Synagogue of Satan, Apoc. 3.9.

Thus may many profess that they know God, when their works will show that
they deny him: themselves inwardly being abominable, and disobedient, and unto
every good work reprobate, Tit. 1.16. Wherein (as I take it) you may fitly
compare them with falling stars, which commonly are thought to be in the
firmament, and to be true stars indeed: but thinking so, we are deceived: for
they are only certain fat exhalations, lifted up from the earth by the
operation of the Sun, and carried through the upper region of the air, from
whence being kinled by the heat and force of the fiery element, they fall
again. Is it not so with Hypocrites? Such is their carriage among us, that
commonly they may be thought to be spiritual lights enflamed of God, and in
mind to be conversant in heaven: when indeed they are farthest from it; and
therefore as the light of such supposed stars is momentary and, vanishing; so
the joy of the Hypocrite lasts but a moment, Job. 20.5. though his
excellency, and his head reach unto the clouds, yet shall he perish for ever
like his own dung, and they which have seen him shall say where is he? he
shall fly away as a dream, and they shall not find him; he shall pass away
as a vision of the night.

Thus you see the portion of Hypocrites. Can you now endure to drink of their
cup? Then shall you Esai. 33.11.
conceive chafe, and bring forth stubble, and the fire of your own breath
shall devour you. O ye sons of men, sunken deep in rebellion, turn
again; yet the day is with you: therefore cast away those Idols of gold, and
silver, which your own hands have made; I mean your sins: cast them from
you. Why will you be like them, of whom the Lord has said; This people draws
near unto me with their mouth, and honors me with their lips, but have
removed their heart from me? Esaias. 29.13. Why will you not labor to be such as
you would seem to be? what shall it profit you to be like gloe-wormes, which,
although they shine in the night, are notwithstanding in the day to behold
unclean, and vile worms? What shall it profit you, I say, to shine in the
night of this world, through a false show of godliness; when in the day time,
that is in the world to come, you shall present your selves before your just
judge, foul and abominable?

When the king of Judah proclaimed war against the king of Israel, the king
of Israel returned this answer; the thistle rebelleth against the Cedar, 2.
King. 14.9. And yet what was there, but a king against a king? but a man
against a man? Humble thy self thou proud earth, not before men; for thy
hypocrisy will soon be espied: but before the Lord. For if thou shall dare
continue in thy rebellion, shall not the king of Heaven much more justly say to
thee, the thistle rebelleth against the Cedar? The Jews thought themselves
holy by offering of sacrifices, when in the mean season they had neither
faith, nor repentance. But was God well pleased with them? No: for he detested
him, that killed a bullock, as if he had slain a man; him that sacrificed a
sheep, as if he had cut off a dogs neck; him that offered an oblation, as if
he had offered swines blood; him that burned incense, as if he had blessed an
Idol, Esaias. 66.3. and all to make you know that he detesteth all your
sacrifices, your prayers, your fasts, your alms, yea all your good works too,
when they are done without faith, and repentance, as much as he detested the
sacrifices of the Heathen when they offered men, dogs, and swine unto their
Idols.

Wherewith then shall you Micah 6.6.
come before the Lord, and how your selves before the high God? Shall you come
before him with burnt offerings, and calves of a year old? Will the Lord be
pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousand rivers of oil? Will you
give your first borne for your transgressio^? Will you give the fruit of your
body for the sin of your soul? The Lord has showed thee, o man, what is
good, and what he requires of thee; surely to do justly, and to love mercy,
and to humble thy self, and to walk with thy God, Micah. 6.8. to be of a
contrite heart, to be poor in spirit, and to tremble at Gods word, Esaias, 66.2.
And this is it, which in the Lord, I wish may be printed in our hearts, by
this caveat; Cast down your selves, not before men.

What then? may we not fast, or pray, or give alms? may we not do good works
in the sight of men? Yes; we may, and must do our good works even before
men. And therefore are we counseled to have our lights burning, Luke 12.35.
and to let our light shine before men, Mat. 5.16. and to make our faith known
by our good works, Iam. 2.18. Whereas then we have been counseled to
beware, how we do any good thing in the sight of men, we have been counseled
only, to beware of Hypocrisy, to beware of vain glory, to be wary, that we
neither give alms, nor do any other good thing before men, with a purpose to
gain unto our selves praise, and commendation of men. And therefore when our
Lord forbids us to do good in the sight of men, he adds that which makes it
unlawful; We must take heed that we do it not to be seen of men, or to be
praised of men. As also when he charge us to let our light shine before men,
that they may see our goodworkes, he adds that which makes it lawful; we must
do our good works before men, that by the^ our heavenly father may be
glorified. So then, to do good works before men, in it self is not evil;
yea it is commendable, it is necessary: but to do them to this end, that we
may be well spoken of, that makes it faulty. In like sort to do no wicked
thing before men, in it self is not evil; yea it is commendable, it is
necessary: but to abstain from doing wickedly for fear of man's censure,
rather then of Gods displeasure, that makes it faulty. To do good works, to
abstain from doing wickedly before men; both are such, I cannot but commend
them: but so to do good works, but so to abstain from doing wickedly, as if
we regarded man more then God, both are such, as Christ utterly detesteth them.

Would you now know, for those good works which you are to do in the sight
of men, how to present them before your God pure and spotless? Hear what our
Savior says; Make clean within, and all will be clean, Mat. 23.26. It was
the Lords commandment to Noah, to pitch the Arc with pitch as well within, as
without, Genesis 6.14. Without only was not sufficient, it was to be pitched with
pitch as well within, as without. It is the Lords commandment to you to
sanctify your selves, and to be holy, for the Lord is holy, Levit. 20.26. to
be holy outwardly only will not serve your turns, you must be holy as well
within as without. Your hearts are within, they must be holy. Let your Psalm.
45.1.
hearts indite good matters, and your tongues must needs be the pens of
ready writers. Deck your hearts with faith, and repentance, and then shall
your prayers, your alms, your fastings, and all your good works be acceptable
in the Lords sight.

There is a melody may be made in your hearts, to which only the Lord will
listen; and therefore Paul advises you to make melody to the Lord in your
hearts, Ephesians. 5.19. So Christ did, who said it was meat and drink to him, to do
his fathers will, Ioh. 4.34. and so did David, when with all his might he
danced before the Arc, 2. Sam. 6.14. and so did the Israelits, when they
offered willingly unto the Lord with a perfect heart, 2. Chron. 19.9. But where
this melody is wanting, the Lords delight also will be wanting; and therefore
the Pharisees prayer, the harlots vow, the traitors kiss, are nothing to him:
and therefore he respects not the sacrifice of Cain, nor the fast of Iezabel:
and therefore let Ananiah bring his oblation, and Esau his tears, they will be
abominable in his sight. There is a melody may be made in your hearts, to
which only the Lord will listen; and this is that melody: to cast down your
selves not before men, but before the Lord. Now therefore spare a little more
time to be remembered, how you may Cast down your selves before the Lord, which
is my second part.

This our Lord may, and ought in reverence to be considered of us, as our
Creator, as our King, as our teacher, as our father, as our spouse, and as our
Master. In all which respects diverse duties without excuse must by us be
discharged, if we will aright Cast down our selves before the Lord. Therefore
as he is our creator, it is required of us, 1. That we glorify him. 2 That we
be wholly moved in him and by him. 3 That we rest contented in his holy will.


As he is our king, so must we fear him, 1 Because of the power, and authority
which he has over us. 2 In regard of his Majesty compared with our mean
condition. 3 In regard of the infirmity of our own nature.


And this fear of God has three notable uses. For it serves as a bridle, 1
To restrain us from falling from God by our disobedience. 2 To keep us from
all presumptuous, bold, and indecent behavior in respect of God. 3 To put us
in mind, to make us acknowledge, as the baseness, infirmity and mutability of
our own nature, so also the infinite power, authority, and majesty of God.


As he is our teacher, so two duties are enioined us.

1 We must be ready to learn whatsoever it shall please him to teach. 2 We
must believe it all.
As he is our father, so must we yield him sonne-like subjection; for we must
reverence him, we must imitate him, we must seek unto him for those things we
stand in need of, and lastly we must have patience, in regard of those
manifold, (be they never so grievous) afflictions, wherewith it shall please
God to chastise, try, and nurture us, his children.

As he is our spouse, he looks that we endeavor withal our might to please
him, and that we renounce al other things in the world to cleave fast unto him
without separation.

As he is our Master, so we owe him three duties.

1 We must obey him. 2 We must minister unto him. 3 We must profit him.
O that our heads were full of Ierem. 9.1.
water, and our eyes fountaine^ of tears, that we might weep day and night,
(for day and night had we need to weep) for our continual backslidings from
the observance of such duties as by our Creator, by our King, by our teacher,
by our Father, by our spouse, and by our Master have been enioined us. Shall I
need to tell you (as the prophet Jeremy told the Jews, Ier. 9.2.) that in
heart, you are all adulterers, and an assembly of rebels? You know it as well
as I. Shall I remember you, how you (as they did) do Verse. 3.
bend your tongues like bows for lies, to belie and slander your neighbors,
how there is no courage for truth upon the earth, how every one proceeds from
evil to worse? Would to God, remembering it would amend it. And may it not so
be amended? Is Ierem. 8.22.
there no balm in Gilead? Is there no Physician there? Why then is not your
health recovered? The reason is plain: the balm of Gilead is not sovereign
for you; the Physicians there can little profit you; vain is the help of man:
if you will recover your souls health, Cast down your selves before the LORD.

The time will not suffer me, neither has it ben my purpose, to enter the
particular examination of those our duties before specified, and in diverse
respects laid upon us. Since the performance of all the rest consists in
obedience, that first duty, which the LORD, as our Master, requires at your
hands, I have chosen to speak thereof above the rest, as most befitting the
times, wherein we live.

Concerning therefore our first duty to our chiefest Master; our obedience
consists in this: that we conform our will to Gods will, with a resolution
to do his will. Many are of Israel, which are not Israel, and many are of the
seed of Abraham, which may not be called the children of Abraham. So S. Paul
told the Romans, chap. 9. ver. 6.7. So may I say here: many do will that which
God wills, who notwithstanding conform not their wills to Gods will, neither
can be said to do his will. Where it shall not be much amiss for us to examine,
what it is, to frame our wills to Gods will, and what it is, to do his will:
both which if we will learn with a purpose to perform them, we shall in some
good sort discharge our first duty, we shall obey our Master.

God has a will, which is holy, is pure, is perfect, eternal, everlasting
from all beginning; according to which, his doings are incomprehensible, his
judgments secret, his ways past finding out: by which he rules all, he
governs all, he guides and protecteth all: in which all things are, as they
are. This will of God is always fulfilled; no man hinders it; no man stops
it. The Lord has his decree above all the inhabitants of the earth, and of the
Sea, and whether they will or no, they must be obedient. If he call a bird from
the East, that bird must come; if he speak, he will bring it to pass; if he
purpose, he will do it, his counsel shall stand, he will do whatsoever he
will, Esaias, 46.20. According to his will, he works in the army of Heaven,
and in the inhabitants of the earth, and none can stay his hand, nor say unto
him, what do thou? Dan. 4.35. It was Iehoshaphats acknowledgment; In thine
hand, O LORD, is power, and might, and none is able to withstand thee, 2. Chro.
20.6. No Annas, no Caiaphas, no Herod, no Pilate, no Jew, no Devil could have
wrought the death of our Savior Christ, if the Lords secret will and counsel
had not before determined, that it should be done.

There are two causes why this will of God is called secret, or hidden. 1
Because it is so indeed to a^ ^^^en, til such time as God manifests by
events, what he has appointed to every one. In respect whereof St Chap. 4.15.
James wills every one to put in this condition, if the Lord will, and if we
live, to do this, or that. 2. Because the reason of the Lords will, thus or
thus, when it is manifested, for the most part is not comprehended of man, but
is hidden in himself: as why he chose Jacob, and refused Esau; why he put
Saul away from the kingdom for one offense, and not David for many, no man
knows, it is hidden in the Lord. Only this we know, that he Romans 9.18.
has mercy, on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will, he hardneth.

Now your duty in regard of this will is, as has been said: Non est curiose
investiganda sed adoranda, you must not sift it, but highly reverence it; so
that, whatsoever this hidden will be concerning you, whether to live, or die,
to be rich, or poor, to be high, or low in this world, you must rest in the
same, and be contented, and give leave to the Lord that made you, to do with
you, and dispose of you at his pleasure; and then afterward when the Lord
reveal it by effects, much more must ye rest in it, and give him thanks,
howsoever it is. Good Chap. 2.10.
Job took at the Lords hand evil things, as well as good, sower as well as
sweet; the loss of all, as well as the possession of al and so must you do,
and say with him, The Job. 1.21.
Lord has given, and the Lord has taken it: blessed be the name of the Lord.
But what? Are we able to know, how the Lord Job. 38.41.
feeds the young ravens? how the Phoenix is hatched? how the Storke is kept?
Do we waver, do we fail in things that be common among us? Since then this
will of God, this absolute, this secreat, this hidden will of God is such, as
our wills may in no wise be conformed to it, let us lay our hands up on our
mouths, and stop the course of our lips, lest, meddling with such secrets, we
falter in our speeches before the Lord.

God has another will, which is manifested unto us, which I call another will,
not as if it differed from the former in nature, (for Gods will is one and the
same) but because it remains no longer hidden, as the former does. For Gods
will, as yet it is partly vnrevealed, is commonly called his hidden, or his
secret will: but as it is made known to us, by the written word, and
continual success of things, so is it called the revealed will of God. And
this is that will of God, to which we must make like, fashion, and frame our
wills. And so shall we do, if first we will nothing but what God wills; then
if will it in such a sort, as God would have us will it: and lastly if for such
ends.

What God wills, you cannot well (at lest you should not) be ignorant. The
Scriptures teaching, that the best of you, is borne in iniquity, and conceaved
in sin, and feeds upon transgressians, do they not tell you, that God
wills the amendment of your lives? The not long since pretended invasion,
which made the stoutest to fear; the late, and long, and yet during famine,
which has made most to faint; This Sermon was preached Sept. 15. 1597.
the now reigning sickness among us, which has taken away diverse of our
brethren, and still threatens us; these three great scourges of our angry God,
show they not that something among us is amiss, whereof God wills the
amendment? Thus may all in general out of Gods word, and every one in
particular, by such things as daily befall him, and others, perceive what Gods
blessed will is; to which our wills must be framed after this manner.

Our hearts must be pure, and sincere, without hypocrisy, without guile; all
the powers and faculties of our souls and bodies must be invested with
integrity, and that, not for a season only, but for ever. For now to be fed
delicately, and hereafter to perish in the streets; to have our heads of gold,
and our feet of clay; to begin in the spirit, and end in the flesh, can it be
less then abomination in the Lords fight? We must continue even unto the end:
our hearts must be sincere, they must be pure, not for a season only, but for
ever: integrity must be in all our affections, not for a season only, but for
ever.

And so must we respect two ends. The one, and chiefest which is last, and is
without end, is the glory of God: the other, and secundarie end, taking place
in this life only, is the profit of the Church. So then, if we will nothing,
but what God wills, and that with sincerity, integrity, and purity of our
hearts, our faith, our love, and all other our affections, and that with
perseverance, with continuance even unto the end, and that for no other ends,
but for the good of the Church while we have our abiding here, and here, and
ever for Gods glory; we may simply be said to have conformed our wills to Gods
will.

How necessary these conditions are for the framing of our wills to Gods will,
you may conceive by two undoubted truths in divinity.

The first: Whosoever wills that, which God wills, but does it with another
mind, with an vnpure heart, with corrupt affections, and for evil ends, he
cannot be said to have conformed his will to Gods will, but rather to have done
against his will. St Austen in enchiridio ad Laurent. c. 101. sets it down thus:
Fieri potest, vt hoc velit homo voluntate mala, quod Deus vult bona, a man may
wickedly will that, which God well wills.

For example sake; many a rich father has a graceless son: this son
longs for the inheritance, and therefore wills his fathers death: God also
wills the same, and effects it. Thus we see our just God, and a graceless
child willing one, and the same thing; yet, because what God well wills, that
bad son wills wickedly, he cannot be said to have conformed his will to
Gods will, but rather to have done against his will. As also, when God was
willing that Christ should die, the Jews, Pilat, and the Devil did will the
same; yet, because what God wills justly, and lovingly, they did will
wickedly, and hatefully, we cannot, we may not say, that they conformed their
wills to Gods will, but rather, that they did against his will. Albeit I doubt
not of the truth of that which St Austen has, concerning wicked men, that is;
Dum faciunt contra voluntatem Dei, per ipsos impletur voluntas Dei. For it is a
certainty, that the children of darkness, while they oppose themselves
against the revealed will of God, do fulfill his secret will: yet because they
oppose themselves against Gods revealed will, not with a mind to fulfill his
secret will, we cannot, we may not say, that they conform their wills to Gods
will; we must say, that they do against Gods will.

The second truth as undoubted is this: Whosoever wills that, which God
wills not, but does it with a pure mind, with an upright heart, with integrity
of affections, and for good ends he may truly be said to have conformed his
will to God will. S. Austen in the place before cited sets it down thus:
Aliquando bona voluntate homo vult aliquid, quod Deu^ non vult, bona multo
amplius, multoque certi^^ voluntate. Nam illi^^ mala voluntas esse nunquam
potest: a man may well, and religiously will that, which God much better and
blessedly wills not.

For instance; a happy father has a good son; this his son wills the
continuance of his fathers life; but in Gods good will it is so disposed, that
the father may no longer live. We see here a gracious son willing the life,
and our just God willing the death, of one and the same man: yet, because what
God in justice will not have done, this good child with a godly mind and in
charity wills to be done, he may truly be said to have conformed his will to
the will of God. So may Mary and Martha, although they willed the life of their
brother Lazarus, when God willed his death: and so may the brethren which were
at Cesarea, although they willed PAVLE not to come at Jerusalem, Act. 21.11.
when Gods will was (as appeared by the prophecy of Aga^us) that at Jerusalem
he should suffer for the name of Christ.

So true is it, which S. Austen adds in the same place: Bonae Dei voluntati
potius consonat hominis aliud volentis pietas, qua^ hominis, idem volentis
impietas. Give me (says he) a godly, zealous, and a pure hearted man, and
admit he wills not that, which God wills; yet I say, that his will is
rather conformable to the will of God, then a wicked man's will can be, although
he will the same, that God wills. Where he adds this word potius (Rather)
to show the necessity of our inward integrity, and pure affections.

For to speak simply and without comparison, I must say, as I said before: if
we will simply be said, to have co^formed our wills to Gods will, we must will
that, which God wills, and that with sincerity, integrity, and purity of our
hearts, our faith, our love, and all other our affections: and that with
perseverance, with continuance even unto the end, and that for no other ends,
but for the good of the Church while we have our abiding here; and here and
ever for the glory of our God.

Thus we plainly see, what it is to conform our wills to Gods will. Let us now
in like sort consider, what it is to do his will.

In which kind of speech by the will of God is meant nothing else, but that,
which God commands us to do: so that properly to do Gods will, is to
perform such things, as we are commanded by him. That such things are to be
done, that they are to be performed, it cannot be doubted. But how they are to
be done, and performed, that is the question.

Some are of opinion, that to do Gods will, is nothing else, but inwardly to be
possessed with an hearty, and earnest desire of fulfilling his will; and wholly
to employ all the powers of our souls in the observance of his comma^dements.
They ascribe so much to the Godly purposes, and zealous affections of our
minds, as that they think all external fact, al outward observance altogether
needless. And thus have they thought, because they find, that many have been
said to have done the will of God, to have walked in his ways, to have done
judgment, and justice, to have kept their feet from treading in any evil
path, and so to have been reputed for Saints, who notwithstanding have many
ways, and most grievously fallen. For they can tell you of Peter's denial, of
Lots incest, of Salomons Idolatry, of Noah's drunkenness, of David's murder, of
Sarahs lie, of Rebeccahs persuading her son Jacob to beguile his own father,
of the theft of Onesimus, of the many Concubines of the patriarchs, and the
like, of whose obedience to the will of God, we may not doubt, because we may
not doubt of their salvation.

Which opinion of theirs, as I may not altogether reject; so will I not simply
allow of: for we have two propositions of certain truth.

1 External obedience is necessary to the doing of the will of God: and
therefore that which they think, is not simply to be allowed.

2 The fulfilling of the will of God consists chiefly and especially in our
hearty, and earnest desire of doing it: and therefore what they think, may not
altogether be rejected.

That outward obedience is necessary for our doing of Gods will, is so plain,
that it needs no proof. For to who^ gave God his commandments to be done? Was
it not to man? Now who knows not, that man consists of a body, as well as
of a soul? The body then is bound to obey, as well as the soul. The inward
desire serves not the turn: outward obedience must be practiced. Outward
obedience (I say not perfect, for that is impossible, do we all we can do, we
shall be unprofitable servants; yet I say) outward obedience must be practiced.
And therefore S. Paul has beseeched you to give your bodies to God, Romans
12.1. showing that your bodies should be Gods servants, as well as your souls.
Both are too little, one cannot be enough. Will you glorify God in your souls
you shall do well: but glorify him in your bodies too, 1. Cor. 6.20. Do your
hearts believe, yet that is not enough; your months must confess too, Romans
10.10. your tongues must be kept from evil, and your lips that they speak no
guile too, Psalm. 34.13. your ears must hear too, Matt. 11.15. your eyes must
behold the right too, Prove. 4.25. your hands must be lift up to his sanctuary
too, Psa. 134.2. your feet must be removed from evil too, Prove 4.27. The sum
of all is: you must give your bodies a sacrifice to God. Now a Sacrifice (as
you know) is wherein all the members are offered together, Levit. 1.9. and 13.
Therefore must you give your members also to God. Your eyes, your ears, your
tongues, your hands, your feet, with all the rest, must be employed in the
service of God. For he who commanded you to love the LORD with all your soul,
and with all your mind, Deuteronomy. 6.5. has commanded you also to love him with all
your strength; to teach you, that the strength of your hands, eyes, and ears,
and every other part of you, must wholly be employed in his service. And
therefore as we would be changed in our thoughes, so must we also be changed in
our words, so must we be changed in our works; we must be careful that our
tongues speak no more idely; that our eyes behold no more vanity, that our
ears hear no more folly; that our hands work no more iniquity: and as often
as we shall go about the service of God, which we cannot do to often; every one
of us should call all his powers together, and say with David, Psalm. 103.1. My
soul, praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me, praise his holy name.
And thus much of the first proposition, of the necessity of our outward
obedience.

The second proposition, if you remember was this: The fulfilling of the will
of God, consists chiefly and especially in our hearty and earnest desire of
doing it. The proof hereof is easy: The chiefest part of man is his mind,
therefore the fulfilling of the Law, especially consists in the desires and
intents of the mind: and it so consists in these affections, that touching
the elect (who only believe in Christ, and alone may be said to do Gods will)
God rests contented with this inward desire, as long as this flesh
encombreth them. All other imbecilities are not imputed unto the^. This godly
purpose and earnest desire of doing Gods will stands them in steed. For it is so
grateful to God, as that he accepts this begun obedience for most perfect.
And reckons of the^ that are thus obedient, as if they had kept the whole law;
which he so does, not for this their desire, not for this their begun
obedience, but because by faith they are engrafted into Christ. So chiefly the
fulfilling of Gods will consists in our inward obedience, but not wholly.

I deny not, but that Hezekiah trusted in the Lord God of Israel, so that after
him was none like him among all the kings of Judah, neither were there any such
before him; for he claue to the Lord and departed not from him, but kept his
commandments, which the Lord had commanded Moses: for so we read, 2. Kin.
18.5, 6. yet we read also that this same Hezekiah did some things, which
pleased not the Lord, 2. King. 20.13. Neither may I deny, but that Josiah did
uprightly in the sight of the Lord: for so it is written, 2. King. 22.2. yet it
is written also, that this Josiah would not obey the word of God. 2. Chron.
35.22. Neither will I deny, but that David fulfilled the will of the Lord, for
he is bold to say of himself; O Lord I have refrained my feet from every
evil way, and have not declined from thy judgments, O Lord, Psalm. 119.101,
102. yet his notorious murder and adultery are witnesses of his not fulfilling
the will of God. So then of Hezekiah, of Josiah, and of David, I may say, that
they have fulfilled the will of God, because with integrity of inward
affections they have desired the fulfilling thereof: but to say that
absolutely, and simply they have done this will of God, I may not, I dare not
open my mouth. If thou, O Lord, shall mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who is
able to abide it?

Let this then be our resolution concerning this point: the holy Scriptures by
this speech, by this phrase (to do the will of God) do signify perfect
obedience of the whole man toward God, perfect obedience both of body and
soul: yet because the chiefest part of this obedience is rooted in the mind,
the Almighty by the same phrase signifies, that he is willing to accept the
readiness of our minds, if it be joined with faith in Christ, for most
perfect obedience to the Law. And I add this; howsoever the Lord will accept
the integrity of our minds, when it is joined with faith in Christ, for
perfect obedience, yet he requires the perfect obedience both of body and
soul.

Now let us lay these things to our own hearts and consciences, and see,
whether we have conformed our wills to the will of God, with a resolution to do
it; whether we have performed our obedience to our great Master. To judge of
your hearts is not within the compass of my commission: yet, if it be true,
that a Luke 6.43.
good tree cannot bring forth bad fruit; if it be true, that Mat. 7.16.
grapes grow not of thorns, nor figs of thistles; then may I boldly say,
that your wills are not conformed to the will of God that you have much failed
of that obedience, which your Lord and Master has enjoined you.

The Prophet Hoseah. 4.1.2. told the Jews that the LORD had a controversy
with them; because there was no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in their
land; because by swearing and lying, and killing, and stealing, and whoring,
they break out, and blood touched blood. Whether this same complaint may
justly be made of you, I appeal to yourselues, as judges. It may be your
cheeks will be redd to talk of Christ, as theirs were who went to Luke 23.13.
Emaus, and you will blush apace to seem so holy; but say, will not the
black-moore blush faster then you, when fearfully and fowly you sin against
the Lord? Is there any delight more wicked then other? we are by and by
desirous to wallow in it, to tumble in it, to joy in it, to live and grow old
in it. So bath we in all pleasure and ease this matter of earth, and worms
meat, wherewith we are clogged, as if there were neither corruption to rot it,
nor Heaven to receive it, nor Hell to burn it.

Hence is it, that we are dead in sleep, and watch not at all over the souls
of our children, our servants, and all others committed to our goverments; who,
(were they rightly trained up by us in the grounds of Christian religion) might
happily grow up like to glorious olives, for the Church, and Commo^wealth.

We read Genesis 31.53. that when Laban swore by his false Gods, then Jacob swore
by the fear of his father Isaac; so excellent was the instruction given him by
his father, that in the presence of Idolatrous Laban, neither for fear, nor
favor would he alter his religion: yea, it was so fastened in him, that, having
been 20. years among the Idolatrous Syrians, he changed not the manner of the
oath, which he learned of his father. Are our fathers so careful, to teach
their children in religion? Indeed, if to be skillful in oaths be to be
religious, I cannot find fault with their nurturing. But so they should not
learn Christ.

The time was, when servants prayed to the God of their Masters, Genesis 24.42.
But in these days if they should do so; some must pray unto pride, some to
coveteousnesse, some to gluttony, most to ignorance. Now may we say, as
commonly is said: like servant, like Master, if one love the wicked, the other
will loath the godly; like father, like son, if one sell virtue, the other
will buy sin; like Priest, like people, if one freeze in love, the other will
boil in malice: as the governor is, so are they that are ruled; if one refuse
Christ, the other will choose Barabbas: such as the seed is, such is the
harvest; every one lays away life, and plays with death.

Yet let the children of Abraham, do like Abraham, let them teach their
sons, their daughters, their servants, their people, and all that are ruled by
them, the covenants of the Lord; let them teach them to conform their wills to
the will of God; let them teach them to do his will; let them teach them
perfect obedience both of body and soul. So they with all their seed, and
posterity, shall be blessed, not only in this life with a temporal promise,
but also in the life to come with that ever during promise, that they shall be
inheritours of the kingdom of God. Of which promise, vouchsafe, good Lord, to
make us all partakers through faith in Christ Jesus, to whom with thee, and the
holy Ghost, three persons and one God, be rendered all praise, power, majesty,
and dominion, for evermore. Amen.

THE FOVRTH SERMON ON THE EPISTLE OF SAINT JAMES, CHAP. 4. VERSE. 10. Cast down
your selves before the Lord, and he will lift you up.
WE are come to the promise of the blessing made unto us: He will lift you
up. Wherein let us consider,

1 The person, who it is that may fulfill this promise; it is HE, the Lord,
none but he, vain is the help of man, HE, the Lord, will lift you up.

2 The certainty of his promise, for it is not said, he will assay, he will
try, he will do his best to lift you up, but simply it is said, he WILL lift
you up.

3 The time when this promise shall be fulfilled, which note we must borrow
out of 1. Pet. 5.6. where the matter of my text is thus repeated; Humble your
selves under the Almighty hand of God, that he may lift you up, (...), in
opportunity of time, in due time, in a time when himself shall think it most
meet: He will lift you up in due time.

4 What it is, that is promised unto you, even your exaltatio^, your lifting
up: He will lift you up. Of these few notes at this time, as God shall assist me
with his holy-spirit.

The first is, the person, who may perform so sweet a promise: it is HE, the
Lord, none but HE (vain is the help of man) HE, the Lord will lift you up.

The word of God worthily termed the shoote-anker of an upright conscience,
teaches, that every plant, how gallant, or how fair soever, yea though for
beauty it may be compared to the tree, which springing up in the midst of the
garden, was exceeding pleasant in the sight of man; yet, if it be not planted
by our heavenly Father, shall be rooted out. It teaches that all coins, be
they never so current among men, yet, if they cannot abide this sacred touch,
shall be counted of a base metal, as of tin, or altogether counterfeit, and
so shall be burnt like dross. It teaches, that the great ones of this world,
how mighty soever they are, yea, though their heads reach unto the clouds,
though they be to all others as the tallest Cedars of Libanus are to the low
and little shrubs of the wilderness of Cades, yet if they build their hope
upon any thing besides the Lord, they shall perish for ever Job. 20.7, 8.
like their dung, and you, which have seen them shall say, where are they?
they shall fly away as a dream, and you shall not find them; they shall pass
away as a vision of the night.

And because you have so good a teacher, well may you be persuaded, that a
horse his help is vain, Ps. 33.17. that man's help is vain, Psalm. 60.11.
that the help of Princes is vain, Psalm. 146.3. that much strength is vain,
2. Chron. 25.7. that much wealth is vain, Psalm. 49.6. that all worldly helps
are vain, Esaias, 30.1. A reason of all which may be had, Micah. 5.10. for
neither horses, nor men, nor princes, nor strength, nor wealth, nor all the
worldly helps, that may be, shall be able to deliver you, when the LORD will
punish.

Will you yet know a farther reason of this, namely why those helps before
specified shall not be able to deliver, when the Lord will punish? The 3. verse.
of the 31. of Esai, will yield you two reasons: when the I (...) upon the help
of Egypt, trusting in their Chariors, beca^^e they were many; and their horses,
because they were strong God gi^eth them no other answer then this, The
Egyptians are men, and not God, their horses are flesh, and not spi^^^, Io^^
Egyp^^^^ (...), and not God] that may be a first reason; their horses are
flesh, and not spirit] that may be the second.

The Egyptians are men, and not God, that is, if Abraham's exposition may be
admitted, they are dust, and ashes, Genesis 18.27. very ready with every blast of
wind to be scattered. They are men, and not God, that is, if Jobs,
interpretation be good, they are houses of clay, Job 4.19. very easy to be
broken in pieces. They are men, and not God, that is, if Paul may be the
interpretour, they are earthly tabernacles, 2. Cor. 5.^. certainly, and within
short time to be dissolved. Esai. 2.12.
Cease ye then from the man, whose breath is in his nostrels, for wherein is he
to be esteemed? The Egyptians are men, and therefore may they not be accounted
of, as of hopes, of fortresses, of castles, of deliverers, of defenders; they
cannot teach your Psalm. 144.1.
hands to war, nor your singers to fight: they are not God and therefore must
they be holden, for feeble, for weak, for miserable. Cease then from (...) who
is like a thing of naught, he passes away as a shadow, Psalm. 146.4.
his breath goes forth, he turns again to his earth, and then all his
thoughts perish. The Egyptians are men: will you therefore fly from them, and
seek for help at the God of Jacob? Blessed shall ye be, ye shall be as a
tree that is Psalm. 1.3.
planted by the waters, which spreads out her roots by the river, ye shall
not feel when the heat comes, your leaf shall be green, you shall not care
for the drought of summer; neither shall you cease from yielding fruit, Ierem.
17.8. They are not God: will you notwithstanding repose your trust in them?
Cursed shall ye be: ye shall be like the heath in the desert, ye shall not
see when any good comes, ye shall dwell in the parched places in the
wilderness, in a salt land, in a land not inhabited, Ier. 17.6. Cease then
from man, even from every son of man, for there is no hlpe in him.

Their horses also are flesh, and not spirit.] They are flesh, but cursed be he
that makes flesh his arm; they are not spirit, and never blessed shall he be
whose protector is not spirit. The Egyptians are men, and not God, their
horses are flesh, and not spirit: and therefore let the LORD but str^tch out
his hand; the helper shall fail, he that is h^lpen shall fail, they shall
altogether fail.

But grant we, that in the course of this life, some one may have girded
himself with strength, and decked himself with majesty, so that he may seem
to have exalted himself like an Eagle, and to have built his nest among the
stars; yet let such a one look back to his tr^b^, to his fathers poor
house, to the pit whence he was hewe^, he shall find that at length he must be
cast down to the ground: let him examine his Pedigree and descent, he shall
find that he is but one of the sons of men. And then who knows not what
shall be the portion of his cup?

Man that is borne of woman is of short continuance, and full of troubles; Job
upon his experience has said so much, Job. 14.1. Did it help the children of
Canaan, that the sons of Anak, giants of the earth, dwelt amongst them?
Indeed the Israelites somewhat daunted in bed^ ^at the sight of them, brake out
into these speeches: this people is greater, and taller then we; their cities
are great, and walled up to Heaven, moreover, we have seen the sons of Anak
there, Number. 13.28. But in the end what became of them? They were all destroyed
by Iosuah, they and their cities, and there was not one Anakim left in the
mountains of Israel and Judah, Ios. 11.21.22. Did it profit the Bashanites, to
have so mighty a king as Og was? His bed indeed was a bed of iron; the length
of it was nine cubits, and the breadth four cubits, after the cubite of man.
Deuteronomy. 3.11. and such a man in all likelihood might be some encouragement to his
people. But what was his end? The Lord delivered him into the hand of Moses.
So sweetly sings the Psalmist: He has slain mighty kings, Sehon king of the
Amorites, and Og the king of Bashan, Psalm. 135.10.11. And be recounts it again
in the Psalm. following, ver. 18.19.20. He has slain mighty kings, Sehon king
of the Amorites, and Og the king of Bas^^^. Where to fill up the measure of his
song, he adds to the end of every verse this sweet burden: for his mercy
endures forever. Did it avail any thing the Philistines that 1. Sam. 17.4.
Golias was amongst the^? Proud Golias of whose so His height was six cubits
and a spa^.
huge asta^^^o you have so often heard, whose Verse. 5, 6.
helmet, whose gre^^^^, whose cors^^s, whose shield were all of brass: whose
Verse. 7.
sp^^res shaft was nothing inferior to a weavers beam. But what was his end?
You know it well enough: a David ve^ 42.
child in comparison came with his shepherds staff, with his sling in his
hand, with a few Verse. 40.
smooth stones in his scrip, who in the name of the Lord of Hosts, did s^^^e
great Golias.

What shall I remember you of that excellent, that mighty, that prosperous,
that peaceable king of Assyria, set forth unto you in the 31. of Ezechiel.
Albeit such was his excellency, as that he exceeded all other Monarchs, and
Princes under Heaven; in regard whereof he is said to be like a C^dar in
Lebanon, whose branches are fair, whose shadowing boughs are thick^, whose
top is shot up very high, ver. 3. albeit such was his might, as that there was
no greater power in the world, then his was, in liew whereof, it is said, that
the Cedars in the garden of God could not hide him, that no fur tree was like
his branches, that no chestnut tree did equal his boughs, yea, that all the
trees in the garden of God gave place unto him, verse. 8. albeit such was his
prosperity, as that he seemed to be swadled there with against all
calamities; in respect whereof we read that the waters nourished him; that the
deep exalted him on high with her rivers running round about his plants; that
his height was above all the trees in the field, his boughs were multiplied,
his branches were long, and all because of the multitude of the waters, which
the deep sent out, verse. 4.5. And lastly, alb^^t such was the peace in his
time, as that all peoples committed themselves to his protection: to which
purpose it is said; that all the fowls of Heaven made their nests in his
boughs, that all the beasts of the field brought forth their young under his
branches, that all mighty nations dwelt under his shadow, verse. 6. yet was such
a king, this excellent, this mighty, this prosperous, this peaceable king of
Assyria, ASSAR-ADON filius Sennaherib Rex Assyriae an. 10. Captus a MERODACH
BALADAN An. Mundi 32 43. Func.
ESAR-HADDON delivered into the hands of MERODAC-BALADAN.

I shall not need to tell you, how Genesis 14.1.
four kings, withal their hosts were discomfited by ABRAHAM accompanied
only with his three hundred and eighteen servants, Genesis 14.14. nor, how the
Midianites and Amalek^tes and all they of the East, lying in the valley like
grasshoppers in multitude, with their cammels, like sand, which is by the Sea
side, innumerable, were overthrown by the hand of Gedeon, with his Judge 7.16.
three hundred soldiers, without any stroke of weapon but only the Verse. 19.
bro^king of Pitchers, blowing of trumpets, and crying the sword of the LORD,
and of Gedeon, Iud. 7.12. nor, how those hundred and fourscore and five
thousand valiant men conducted by Rabshakeh, Senacheribs servant were all in
one night overthrown, Esaias, 37.36. The examples before specified; the fall of
the sons of Anak, the destruction of Og, the death of Goliath, the delivery of
Esar-haddon, into the hands of Merodac-Baladan, may persuade you, that it is
but a broken reed of Egypt to rely upon those that are either mighty, or many.
By so doing you may wound your hands, you may pierce your hands, you shall
never help your selves.

What shall I say of honor? It may seem to stand you much instead, when it
sets you a loft, and makes the knee bow, and the tongue sooth, and the head
stand bare, and all for your sakes. The wise man teaches me, what I shall say:
Humility goes before honor, Prove. 15.33. If then you will choose the better
part, if you will be humbled, and forget your honor for a while, you may
conceive with me, that our estates may well be suited by counters, which in a
large account stand for great sums, but after they are shuffled together in
the bag, all are of equal value, the least with the greatest, one with another:
you may conceive with me, that our estates may well be suited by players on a
stage some represent kings, some persons of mean estate, but when the
Plaudites are past, where is any difference? you may conceive with me that our
very selves may welbe suited by sif^^, or wax candles, some are burned, and
consumed to the socket in a reasonable time; some tossed to and fro with a
great wind, begin to run, and spend apace; yea they that have the strongest
wicke hold out no longer, then till the last drop of their moisture quench the
last spark of their light. Your selves can make the application; only I add
thus much of honor, that is a broken reed of Egypt, if you shall dare rely
upon it, you may wound your hands, you may pierce your hands, you shall never
help your selves.

What shall I say of riches? They also may seem to stand you much instead: for
by experience we find it to be true, as it is written: Riches gather many
friends, Prove. 19.4. Yet have I a word to speak unto you; Go to now, ye rich
men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you:, your riches
are corrupted, your garments are moth-eaten, your gold and silver are cankered,
the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh
like fire: you know Iam. 5.1, 2, 3
whence I have it. Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod, and smote the
dust of the earth, and lice came upon man and beast: all the dust of the earth
was lice, throughout all the land of Egypt, Exodus 8.17. such a dust, if not
worse, has stained the beauty of your riches, and shall be no less annoyance
to you, then that truly changed dust was to them of Egypt. Behold the evil
sickness which the preacher saw, Eccl. 5.13. riches reserved to the owners
thereof for their evil. Are not these the broken reeds, whereon you lean so
much? take heed; by so doing you may wound your hands, you may pierce your
hands, you shall never help your selves.

What shall I say of your wits, your trades, and occupations whereby you seem
to live? Be they, as they may be, passing gaynefull to you: yet because your
hearts are so set upon this gain, as that ye neglect the truest gain,
which is godliness; those helps shall be unto you as bad as those letters,
which Vriah carried against himself. 2. Sam. 11.14. as bad as those cups of
Circe spiced with conceits and fancies for the nonce, to make Ulysses his most
skillful Pilots to renounce their duty; as bad as those Pomegran^^s of that
excerable l^ke i^ Palestine, which intise a licorish and wanton eye to pluck,
but are no sooner touched with the finger, but they dissolve to ashes: yea they
are as so many broken reeds, and have their splinters too. Howsoever yea lean
unto them, you may wound your hands, you may pierce your hands, you shall never
help your selves.

What shall I say of all other your worldly helps? one shall serve for all. If
any of you has his child fallen strangely sick, you will by and by seek
help for him, and well may it be done with this Item, that it be done by prayer
to the Lord, and the ordinary help of Physicians: but your conceits are, your
children are bewitched, and therefore can have no help, except they be
vnwitched again. If any of you has his horse, or his ass stolle^, or loses
ware in the night time out of his shop, you will by and by seek to have your
own; and well may that be done, with this Item, that it be lawfully done; but
your conceits are, such a cunning man by his art can help me to my goods,
then why should I loose them? So impatient are we: the Lord does strangly
visit us, we may not endure it, we will seek howsoever to be healed: the
Lord takes away our goods, we may not endure it, we will look to have our
own, although it be in the Devils name.

Much better was his conceit who thus answered his tempting wife: Shall we
receive good at the hand of God, and not receive evil? Job. 2.10. God has
promised (and he cannot but perform) that whosoever calls upon his name,
and gives care to his voice, as to the only shepherd of his soul, good
things shall betide him in this world, and his soul shall live, Ier. 38.20.
his plants shall prosper, his counsels shall take effect, his corn and oil
shall multiply; he Deuteronomy 15.6. and 28 12.
shall lend to many, but shall not borrow himself, his children, like so many
olive branches Psalm. 128.3.
shall enclose his table round about.

If this cannot persuade you (and what godly heart can it not persuade?) to
forsake those your wicked helpers, and to rely only on the Lord; then hear
farther God has promised (and he cannot but perform) that whosoever will not
give care to his voice, but will relieve himself, by the practices of cunning
men, witches, coniurers, and the like, preferring Belial before Christ, the
Prince of darkness before the ever-shining morning star; error because it
pleases, before truth, because it smarteth; may Deuteronomy. 28.38.
sow his field, but shall never reap it, for the grasshoppers shall destroy it:
may Verse. 39.
plant his vineyard, and dress it, but shall never drink of the wine, nor
gather the grapes, for the worms shall eat it: may have Verse. 40.
olive trees in all his coasts, but shall not anoint himself with the oil,
for his olives shall fall: may Verse. 41.
beget sons and daughters, but shall not have them, for they shall go into
captivity. The Lords still-stretched-out hand shall smite such a one with a
Verse 22.
consumption, with a fever, with a burning ague, with fervent heat, with a
sword, with blasting, with mildew; all these shall pursue him till he perish,
Verse. 23.
the Heaven that is over his head shall be brass, and the earth that is under
him, shall be iron.

You that have known it may remember (and you that have not known it) may
learn that in the 28. of Deuteronomy. from the 15 verse to the 68. there are besides
those which I have recited, many other as grievous plagues assuredly allotted
to all such, as disobeying the Lords voice, shall rely upon such helpless
helps, as I have already mentioned. We read, 2. Chron. 16.12. that King Asa was
punished with death for no other cause, but because in his sickness he sought
for help at the Physicians, and not of the Lord: and can we be so senseless,
as to think, when for recovering of our lost goods, or of our healths, we
seek to Satan's instruments, that we shall escape unpunished?

If Ahaziah consult with Beelzebub the God of Ekron about the recovering of his
health, the Lord will send him word that he shall not come down from his bed,
but shall there die the death, 2. King. 1.4. If Saul ask counsel of a witch
the archers shall wound him, and his own 1. Chro. 10.4
sword shall kill him, 1. Chron. 10.13. If Manasseh use them that have familiar
spirits, God will send him such evils, that who so hears of it, both his ears
shall tingle, 2. King. 21.12.

If this cannot persuade you (and what godly heart cannot this persuade?) to
forsake those your wicked helpers, and to rely only on the Lord, as you have
heard what dome abides you for running to such helpers; hear also, how such
may be deciphered unto you out of the holy Scriptures. Would ye know how to
call them? ye may term them rebels against the light, Job. 24.13. brethren to
dragons, Job. 30.29. snares of a fowler in all their ways, snares for the
ungodly, Hos. 9.8. if thou list to scanne their descent, they are the seed, not
of Judah, but of that cursed father of Canaan, their fathers are Amorites and
their mothers Hittites, Ezec. 16.45. If their alliance, Samaria is their elder
sister, Ezech. 16.46. If the lot of their inheritance; it shall be a
never-ending kingdom: but full of weeping and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 8.12.
where their table shall be a table of Devils, 1. Cor. 10.21. their diet worse
then that Coliquintida, 2. King. 4.40. their mirth folded up in the pride of a
smoke, Esaias, 9.18. So is it not for nothing, that witches may not be suffered
to live. The charge is given against them, Exodus 22.18.

The Prophet Jeremy having roundly glanced at their faults, foretells their
fall; that they shall surely be consumed with famine, and with the sword,
chap. 14. ver. 15. with famine for their disquiet, and with the sword for their
execution. And c. 50. v. 35. he says there shall be slaughter upon the
Chaldeans, and a slaughter upon the southsayers; and the rather because they
are the vengeance of the Lord, and the vengeance of his Temple, Chapter 51. v. 11.

The like favor for all the world is to be found at the hands of Ezechiel.
chap. 13.9. where he denounces against all glosing Prophets, which see
vanity, and divine lies, that the scourge of God shall be for ever upon them;
that they shall not be in the assembly of Gods people; that they shall not be
written in the writings of the house of Israel, in the book of life; that they
shall not enter into the land of Israel, that heavenly Jerusalem.

Of like severitie is that sentence pronounced by the Prophet Esaias, chap. 47.
Where willing the Babylonians to repair to their soothsayers, to their
astrologers, to their starre-gazers, to their Prognosticators, (for all these
names he there uses, verse 12.13.) And to make trial whether they can find
profit or strength among them: he speaks to them in the 14. verse. thus:
Behold, they shall be as stubble, the fire shall burn them, they shall not
deliver their own lives from the power of the flame, yea they shall be so
consumed with the flaming fire, as that there shall not be any thing
remaining, no not to much as one coal to warm at, nor any light to sit by.

Considering then your own lots, and this their portion, can ye hope for any
help at their hands? Judge uprightly and you shall find that neither their
leaves are delightful; nor their blossoms graceful, nor their fruits
restoratiue: yea you must confess, that they are but so many broken reeds
full of splinters, whereto if you lean you may wound your hands, you may
pierce your hands, you shall never help your selves.

By this I doubt not, but it appears, what affiance may be had in all
worldly helps, of what sort soever. Now would I persuade you that all true
help is to be sought for at the hand of the God of Jacob. For it is he; the
Lord, none but he, since all worldly helps are vain, it is he the Lord, that
will lift you up. And of this shall ye be well persuaded, if ye meditate upon
Gods presence, upon his liberality, upon his ability, and upon his
willingness: for as he is most present with you, most liberal to you, most
able to help you, when you stand in need: so also is he at all times most
willing to work your ease.

First of his presence. We hold it as a truth undoubted, that God is every
where, and in all things, by his essence, by his power, and by his presence: by
his essence, in regard of his creating the world; by his power, in regard of
his operation, and his working in the world; by his presence in regard of his
preserving, his governing the world. It may fit our purpose in general only to
understand, that God in presence is every where, and in all things. Against
those of Israel; which should seek to flee from the presence of the Lord, we
have the words of the Lord, as they are written, Amos, 9.2. Though they dig
into the hell, thence shall mine hand take them: though they clime up to
heaven, thence will I bring them down: though they hide themselves in the top
of Carmel, I will search and take them thence: though they be hid from my sight
in the bottom of the sea, thence will I command the serpent, and he shall
bite them: and though they go into captivity before their enemies, thence will
I command the sword, and it shall slay them. See my 10. Lecture upon the fi st
Chapter of Amos, p. 115 and Lect. 14. p 159.
No corner in Hell, no mansion in Heaven, no cave in the top of Carmel, no
fishes belly in the bottom of the Sea, no dark dungeon in the land of
captivity can hide Israel from the presence of the LORD. Am I a God far off,
says the LORD, and not a God at, hand? Can any hide himself in secret places
that I shall not see him says the LORD? Do not I fill heaven and earth, says
the LORD? Thus has the Lord spoken, Ierem. 23.23, 24. Nere or farther of, in
Heaven or in Earth, in places most secret, our Lord is a God, he sees all
things, he fills both Heaven and Earth. To like purpose is David's answer to his
own question. His question is: Psalm. 139.7.
whither shall I go from thy spirit? Or whither shall I fly from thy presence,
O Lord? His answer is, Verse. 8.
if to Heaven, thou art there; if to Hell thou art there; if to the uttermost
parts of the sea, thou art there; if to the darkness, thou art there also. Nor
Heaven, nor Hell, nor Sea, nor darkness could hide David from the presence of
the Lord. Yea, the darkness hides not from thee O Lord, but the night shines
as the day; the darkness and light are both alike; so should we confess with
David, Psalm. 139.12.

Consider the Mat. 6.28.
Lilies of the field, the Lord has clothed the^: Mat. 10.29.
Sparrowes light upon the ground, but not without the foresight of the Lord;
the clouds drop fatness, but every drop is by Gods ordinance, and cold salt
tears trickle down our cheeks, with remembrance of our sins committed, every
such tear should be numbered in the Lords Psalm. 56.8.
bottle. The Lilies, the Sparrowes, the clouds, or tears are all regarded by
the Lord. How then can we deny his presence?

And let us not be moved to think, that Gods purity is any whit stained,
because in presence he beholds the crimsin and scarlet sins, the most vile
and filthy actions of wretchlesse man. The Sun you know, casts his most
glorious beams into foul and sordide places, yet none of you will think that
the Sun is therefore defiled. But grant we a possibility for the Sun to be
polluted by shining into such unclean places, yet impossible shall it be for
God, all pure, all holy to partake any variableness or shadow of change.
Wicked man wallowing in his wickedness, because God holds his tongue, may
think wickedly that God is even such a one, as himself; but God, all pure, all
holy, partaking no variableness nor shadow of change, shall at last reprove
man for his wickedness, and for before him the things that he has done, Psalm.
50.21.

It cannot be that the presence of God, who sits upon the circle of heaven,
and thence beholds the inhabitants of the earth as grasshoppers, whose Mat.
5.34.
throne is the Heaven of Heavens, whose Verse. 35.
footstool is the Earth, whose ways are in the great deep, it cannot be, I
say, that the presence of such a God should be avoided. Ipse manet intra omnia,
ipse extra omnia, ipse supra omnia, ipse infra omnia: and superior est per
potentia^, and inferior per sustentationem; exterior per magnitudinem, interior
per subtilitatem: Sursu^ regens, deorsum continens; extra circumdans, interius
penetra^s etc.
He is above all, beneath all, without all, within all: above, by his might,
beneath, by his help, without, by his greatness, within, by his subtilitie:
above he rules al, beneath he contains all, without he compasses all,
within, he pierces all. It is S. Gregory's Moral. expos. in Job. lib. 2. cap.
12. I will not trouble you with many authorities of the Fathers, who in this
point are very excellent and plentiful. Out of that which has already been
delivered, it is manifest, that nor Egypt, nor any region beyond the seas, not
a couch in a chamber, nor a cabin in a ship, nor clouds of the day, nor the
darkness of night; nor the mountain caves, nor the Sea bottom; nor a secret
friend, nor a more secret conscience, not Heaven, nor Hell, nor any like
evasion, can hide us, can hide any our actions from the Lords presence. Which
manifest truth, if we shall yet doubt of, I shall dare pronounce, that
(according to the proverbs) we are (...), that we are (...), more foolish then
Corabus, more foolish then Melitides, those, though natural, yet most happy
fools; of whom the one was never able to number above five, nor the other to
tell of which parent he was borne.

But such palpable and gross ignorance is far from us. For knowing, as we
do, that God was well known in Jury, and his name great in Israel, we cannot
well be ignorant that God is the same God with us, and the presence of his
godhead no less among us, and in our country.

Which may make us the rather wonder to think how boldly we dare deal with
God, how impudently we dare behave our selves in his presence, how wickedly we
dare do eve^ before his eyes; as if our reckoning were, that he had neither eye
to see us, nor sword to punish us, nor judgment seat to condemn us. Do we not
commit all uncleanness, even with greediness in the presence of our God,
which, for our lives, we durst not be so bold as do in the presence of a
child, were he but a doozen years old? So ready are we to eschew momentary
shame that might be discovered by a child, when we care nothing at al to
incur Gods eternal displeasure.

Deceive we not our selves (beloved in the Lord) we might have long since
learned, that God has seven eyes which go through the whole world, Zach.
4.10. You may interpret them with me, many millions of eyes: he is Hieronym. in
Psalm. 94.9. See my 10. Lecture upon Amos. 1. p. 115.
totus oculus, altogether eye, for he sees all things. We might have long
since learned that God has hands to measure the waters, and to span the
heavens, Esaias 40.12. You may interpret it with me, that he has many Millions
of hands, he is totus manus, altogether hand, for he works all things. We may
well remember that God has feet, to set upon his footstool, Mat. 5.35. You
may interpret it with me, that he has many millions of feet, he is totus pos,
altogether foot; fot he is every where.

O then, far be it from us to pluck out the eye of knoweledge, as, when we
sin, to say with those, Psalm. 10.11. Tush, who sees us, God has forgotten,
he hides away his face, and will never see. Let us rather confess with the
blessed Patriarch, that all places are filled with Gods Majesty: as he said,
the Lord was in this place, and I was not aware; how fearful is this place?
This is the house of God, and the gate of Heaven, Genesis 28.16.17. So let us,
(for that place, and this place, and all other places, upon the face of the
earth, are alike) let us, I say, let each of us in particular, wheresoever and
whenever, we shall be entised with sins too pleasing bait, rouse up our
selves, and be awaked, as Jacob was, and say with him: The Lord was in this
place, and I was not aware, how fearful is this place? this is the house of
God, and the gate of Heaven.

The due consideration of this all-eyed, all-handed, all-footed presence of
God, as it must needs strike a terror into the hardest hearts of the children
of darkness, while they In circuitu impii ambula^t. Psa. 11.9. vul.
walk by compass in their crooked and circular endless ways: so also must
it needs afford a sweet comfort to the afflicted souls of the children of
light, walking with a right foot toward the Phil. 3.14.
mark, in hope to attain to the price set before them. For when they shall
persuade themselves that God is at hand with them in all their crosses and
tribulations, they cannot choose but endure with patience, the worst that may
befall them: especially knowing that all all things work together for their
best, because they love God, Romans 8.28. So does Gods presence persuade his
children, that it is he, the Lord, none but He, since all worldly helps are
vain, that it is He, the Lord, that will lift them up.

A second motive to the same persuasion is the Lords liberality, whereof many
things (worthy our meditation) might be delivered; but let it suffice for our
present occasion to understand, that all the good things we have, are from the
Lord. Meat to nourish us, we have it from the Lord: apparel to cloth us,
we have it from the Lord; the Sun to comfort us, the Moon to pleasure us,
we have them from the Lord; life for our being, riches, honor, and whatsoever
else for our well being, all comes from the Lord. What have thou, says St
Paul, that thou have not received? 1. Cor. 4.7. Art thou rich? it is not of thy
self: the LORD gives, says Job. chapter 1.21. Art thou in estimation in this
world? It is not of thy self: The LORD sets up, says Hannah, 1. Sam. 2.7.
Have thou cunning, or skill in any thing whatsoever? It is not of thy self. God
teaches handy-crafts-men to work. Himself says so to Moses, Exodus 31.3.

It is impossible for me to recount those manifold blessings, wherewith our
gracious God from time to time has blessed us: such is their infinity. Let
every one go down into the closet of his own breast; and then say he,
whether the Lord has been liberal to him. O ye righteous Psalm. 33.1.
rejoice in the Lord for it becomes well the just to be thankful; yea, it
becomes each of us very well to take up David's song, and to say with him. O
Lord, let my mouth be filled with thy praise, that I may sing of thy glory, and
honor, all the day long, Psalm. 71.8. Upon which place a blessed Augustine.
Father has this meditation. What means the Prophet by these words (all the
day long?) He means, says he (continually.) O let my mouth be filled with
thy praise CONTINVALLY, because in prosperity thou have been to me a comfort,
in adversity thou have given me chastisement: when I was not, thou made me;
since I have been, thou have preserved me; when I had offended, thou forgavest
me, at my conversion, thou receavedst me, and for my perseverance thou have
crowned me. O let my mouth be filled with thy praise, that I may sing of thy
glory and honor all the day long; that I may sing continually.

And the rather do I commend to you the due consideration of the liberality
of our God, because I would put you in mind of your principal means to avoid
desperation. It is a principal means to avoid desperatio^ to call to mind the
goodness of the LORD forepassed, either to our selves, or others. If we th^nke
with our selves, that it was the LORD that took us from our mothers womb,
that HE has been our hope ever since we hung at the breasts, that HE has
opened his hands from time to time to fill us with his goodness: if thus we
think unfeignedly, can we think that HE will not bless us still?

Here should we compare and lay the times together as David's use was. Thus he
argued: I have heretofore slain a Lion, and a Bear at the fold, therefore God
will also enable me to prevail against the hand of this Philistine, 1. Sam.
17.37. So may we reason: The mercies of the Lord have been bountiful toward
us in former times, to create us of the slime of the ground, to breath into us
a living soul, to nurse us up in a civil country, to redeem us with the
blood of his only begotten son, to visit us with the light of his glorious
Gospel, to bless our garners with store, and our baskets with increase, to be
nowhere wanting to us in any thing that may do us good; such, and in such sort
have the blessings of God been unto us; his arm is not now shortened, he is
the same to day, that he was yesterday: therefore shall his loving kindness
be upon us for evermore.

Why should any afflicted child of God take up Sions complaint, Esai, 49.14.
and say, The LORD has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me. Never would
any so complain, if he would think upon the Lords name, as it was proclaimed
in mount Sinai, Exodus 34.6, 7. The LORD, the LORD strong, merciful, and
gracious: slow to anger, and abundant in goodness, and in truth, reserving
mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin. Never would
any so complain, if he would remember, why Joel would have us turn unto the
Lord, Joel, 2.13. His reason is, the Lord is gracious, and merciful, slow to
anger, and of great kindness, and repents him of evil. Never would any so
complain, would he but believe the Lords answer to Sions complaint, Esai,
49.15. Can a woman forget her child, and not have compassion on the son of
her womb? Be that possible; yet will I not forget thee, says the Lord.

O all ye that thirst, come to the waters of comfort: bibite, and inebriamini;
let me use the words to you, although in another sense, Ier. 25.27. bibite, and
inebriamini; drink, and drink till your souls be more then satisfied. Call
to remembrance how he has accepted the thief upon the cross confessing.
Matthew sitting at the receipt of custom, the woman washing his feet with her
tears, the Canaanitish woman begging for her daughter, the woman taken in
adultery, the Publican standing a far off, the Disciple that denied him,
that other Disciple which persecuted him and his followers, the wicked that
crucified him: call to remembrance these his mercies, yea call to remembrance
all other the tender mercies of the Lord, which have been ever of old, and
say, whether such his liberality has not persuaded you that He, the Lord,
none but He, since all worldly helps are vain, that He, the Lord, will lift
you up.

A third motive to the same persuasion, of no less weight then the two former,
then that of Gods presence, and the other of his liberality, is his ability;
of which the schoolmen in general teach thus: That God is absolutely
Almighty. In this general they all agree, but when they come to scanne, how
God may be said to be thus Almighty, they vary much.

Some say that God is therefore said to be Almighty, because he is able to
do, whatsoever he will do. These do so tie Gods power to his will, as if he
were able to do nothing, but what his will is to do. But St. Austine was of
another mind in Enchirid. c. 95. where he says, Deum multa posse, quae tamen
nolit, nihil autem velle, quod non possit. God is able to do many things,
which he wills not; but wills not any thing, which he is not able to do:
plainly showing, that Gods will and power are not equal; that his power is
extended to more things, then his will: that those things which God is able to
do, are more then those things which he wills. The Scriptures also do
confirm this difference of Gods will and power. Think thou, says Christ,
that I cannot pray now to my Father, and he will give me more the^ twelve
legions of Angels? Mat. 26.53. Christ was able to ask his Father, and his
Father was able to give him that host of Angels, but neither would he ask, nor
his father give. God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham,
says our Savior, Mat. 3.9. He is able, but will not. God has mercy on whom
he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardneth, says the Apostle, Roman.
9.18. Is it not herehence plain, that God is able to have mercy on all, and is
able to harden all, but will not? So true is it, against the first opinion,
That God is not therefore said to be Almighty, because he is able to do,
whatsoever he will do.

Others are of opinion that God is therefore said too be Almighty, because he
is absolutely and simply able to do al things, whatsoever may be spoken, or
thought of. If you shall ask the^, whether God can sin, their answer is, he
can, but will not: if, whether he ca^ suffer, they say he can, but will not: if
whether he ca^ lie, they say, he can, but will not. But this opinion is, as more
wicked, so more foolish then the former. For to say that God is able to do
such things, as are repugnant to his nature is, as to say, the fire is able to
cause cold, the Sun to make darkness, and a bad tree to bring forth good
fruit. But S. Paul has not feared to say that God cannot do some things, 2.
Timoth. 2.13. He says, If we believe not, yet abides he faithful, yet
abides God faithful, he cannot deny himself: he says not, he will not deny
himself, but plainly he says, he cannot deny himself. And why can he not
deny himself? The reason is set down before: because he is faithful. He is
faithful, non tam voluntate, quam natura the is naturally faithful, and
therefore can he not deny himself. I add; he is naturally living, and
therefore cannot die; he is naturally righteous, and therefore cannot sin;
he is naturally immutable, and therefore cannot be changed; he is naturally
God, and therefore cannot be like man. Quam mult a non potest, and omnipotens
est? Here is matter to wonder at; God cannot do many things, and yet he is
Almighty: yea because he cannot do those many things, therefore is he Almighty.
For could he die, he were not Almighty; could he ly, he were not Almighty;
could he be deceived, could he deceive, could he do wickedly, he were not
Almighty. Qua^ multa non potest Deus, and omnipotens est? How many things is
God not able to do, and yet is Almighty, says S. Austine de Symbolo ad
Catechumenos, lib. 1. cap. 1. So true is it against this second opinion, that
God is not therefore said to be Almighty, because he is absolutely and simply
able to do all things, whatsoever may be spoken or thought of.

But why the^ is God said to be Almighty? Out of that which is already
delivered, this proposition may be gathered; God is therefore said to be
Almighty, because he is able to do all such things, as naturally in themselves,
and simply, are not impossible with God. The truth whereof, as it might
evidently appear by particulars, whereon I cannot now stand; so also may it
sufficiently be manifest, if in general only we will consider this Alablenesse
of God. I deny not, but earthly man, hard to believe the works of God, in man's
eyes improbable, has ever been ready to demand, How? How can this, or these
things be? An Angel from heaven may tell Sarah of a son, after it has
ceased to be with her after the manner of women; but she will laugh within her
self: but she will say, what! after I am waxen old, and my Lord also! Genesis
18.12. But what says the Angel to her; Shall any thing be hard to the LORD?
verse. 14. God may promise a whole months meat to the children of Israel
lusting after flesh; but Moses will hardly believe it; but Moses will say: Six
hundred thousand footmen are there among the people, among whom I am, and thou
say, I will give them flesh to eat a month long. Shall the sheep and the
beenes be slain for them, to find them? Either shall all the fish of the Sea
be gathered together for them to suffice them? Number. 11.21. But what says God
to Moses? Is the Lords hand shortened? You shall see now whether my word shall
come to pass, or no, verse. 23. A Prophet may prophecy in the greatest famine
of Samaria, albeit an Asses head, and Doves dunge be bought at an unreasonable
rate, that yet to morrow at a certain hour a measure of fine flower, and two
measures of barley shall be sold at a reasonable rate: but a great man will not
believe it; but a prince will say: though the LORD would make windows in
Heaven, can this thing come to pass? 2. King 7.2. But what says Elisha to
this Prince, Behold, thou shall see it with thine eyes, but shall not eat
thereof, verse. 2.

Distrustful men, to satisfy our selves in such distrustful reasonings. Hear
we what S. Austin says, Ep. 3. ad Volusianum, concerning the works of God to
us improbable. Tota ratio facti, potentia facientis: considera autorem, toll
dubitationem: the whole reason of the doing is the power of the doer, it is God
that has done them. Consider the author, and all doubts will cease. Sing we,
with the sweet singer, Exodus 15.11. Who is like unto thee, O LORD, among the
Gods? Who is like thee? So glorious in holiness, so fearful in praises, so
doing wonders. Say we with the shipmen, Jonah. 1.14. Thou, O LORD, have done
as it has pleased thee.

This point, as it cannot well choose, but strike a terror into the seared
consciences of the wicked, because God is able to cast both body and soul into
hell fire; so may it well yield comfort to the Godly: comfort to the barre^;
for he was able to make Ha^nah fruitful: comfort to the afflicted; for he was
able to deliver Job from his miseries: comfort to the hungry, for he was able
to send food to Elias by ravens: comfort to the thirsty, for he was able of an
Asses tooth to make a spring of water, to quench Sampsons thirst: comfort for
all, for God is able to do al in all: able to deliver from the fiery furnace,
able to make the shadow in the dial of Ahaz to run back 10. degrees: able to
cause the Sun and Moon to rest from their courses. Thou haste done great
things O LORD, LORD, who is like unto thee? O consider the Almightinesse of our
God, and say, whether you are not thereby persuaded, that it is he, the Lord,
and none but he, since all worldly helps are vain, that it is he, the Lord,
that will lift you up?

A fourth motive to the same persuasion, is the willingness of God: whereas he
is most present with you, most liberal to you, most able to help you, when you
stand in need, he is also at all times most willing to work your ease; This
willingness of God imports the necessity of the fulfilling of Gods promises,
and so concurreth with the second general note, whereof in the next Sermon.

THE FIFTH SERMON ON THE EPISTLE OF SAINT JAMES, CHAP. 4. VERSE. 10. Cast down
your selves before the Lord, and he will lift you up.
THE second note is, of the certainety of the fulfilling of this promise,
concerning our lifting up. It is not here said he will assay, he will try, he
will do his best to lift you up, but simply, he will lift you up.

The promises of God, made unto the sons of men, in the word of God are of
two sorts: either they have a condition annexed unto them, or else they are
without condition: the Gospel, which is Gods power to salvation to them that
believe, is the foundation of the one: the law which is his rod of iron, to
crush them in pieces that transgress, is the wel-spring of the other. Both one
and other assuredly true, in their time shall be fulfilled. For is the 1. Sam.
15.29.
strength of Israel, as man, Number. 23.19
that he should lie? or as the son of man that he should repent? Is he not
Heb. 13.1.
yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever? That Rev. 1.4.
was, that is, and that is to come? My meaning is, not only in substance, but
in will and intention, does he use lightness? Are his words yea and nay? Has
he been known to affirm, and deny too? No. All his promises, all his
threatenings, all his mercies, all his judgments, all his words, yea, all the
titles of all his words are Rev. 1.7.
Yea and Amen, so firmly ratified, that they cannot be broken; so standing
immutable; that they cannot be changed. Mat. 5.18.
Heaven and Earth may pass, they may be changed, they may wax old like a
garment, but the word of the Lord endures for ever.

When Ahiiah the prophet had foretold Jeroboam of his overthrow; namely, that
God would sweep away 1. Kin. 14.10
the remnant of his house, as a man sweepeth away dunge till it be all gone:
that of his stock none should die in the city, but the dogs should eat; none
in the fields, but the fowls should pray upon: that there should a king come
over Israel, to set abroach all those evils; unwilling to leave any hope, that
this time was not yet to come, that it was far of removed; he corrects
himself with sudden and quick demand, and makes the answer unto it;
what? (says he) Yea, eve^ now, 1. Kin. 14.14. as if he had said, what? said I,
it should come to pass thus, or thus? Yea even now it is come to pass, it is
already done. What this Prophet has spoken concerning the Lords threatenings
against Jeroboam, may be verified of all the promises of the Lord: such is
their certainety, ratified by the Lords own words: My covenant will I not
break, nor alter any thing, that is gone out of my lips, Psalm. 89.34.
confirmed, by his visiting of Sarah, as he had said, and doing unto her,
according as he had promised, Genesis 21.1. allowed of by Joshua's consent, when
he told the Israelites, that there had failed nothing of all the good things,
which the Lord had said unto them, but all came to pass, Josh. 23.14. What?
shall I say then, that Gods promises shall be fulfilled? Yea, even now; even
now they are come to pass, they are fulfilled already.

God has spoken once, and I have heard it twice, that power belongs unto
God, says David, Psalm. 62.11. and so let me say, God has spoken once, and I
have heard it twice, that truth belongs unto God. God is very constant in the
performance of his promises. To drive it into our conceits he has spoken it,
once and twice: not once, but once and twice, many times; he has spoken it
eternally, immovably, effectually, without revokeme^t: once in the law, and
again, and again in the Gospel. This sweet milk may be sucked plentifully
out of both the breasts of the Church, out of Moses, and out of Christ; out of
the Prophets, and out of the Evangelists; out of the Law, and out of the
Gospel. O happy are they, that feed only on this milk.

It is commonly said, that truth cannot pass forth without contrarieties, and
quarrels of judgment. And so is it here. The truth of God, the neverfading
truth of his promises, has somewhat been encombred with doubts. This doubt
has especially been made: How it may stand with the constancy, and truth of
the eternal God, to pronounce a judgment against any man, or place, and not
effect it? or, to repent for any thing he has done, or has promised to do
hereafter? For if it be plain that God fails in bringing to pass his
judgments and threatenings, how can I assure my self, that he will be constant
and faithful in his mercies, and promises? if it be plain that he repents
for any thing that he has done, or has promised to do hereafter, how can I
assure my self, that he will not repent of those good promises, which I
account of, as made unto my self?

Now, who knows not, how the Lord repented for making man on the earth? Genesis
6.6. how he repented for making Saul King? 1. Sam. 15.11. and how he promised
to repent of good or evil, accordingly as man should repent of, or hold on,
his evil? Ier. 18.7, 8, 9, 10. The LORD said unto Abimelech, Thou art but a
dead man, because of the woman which thou have taken, Genesis 20.3. yet the event
fell out otherwise, and Abimelech was purged with God. The LORD said to sick
Hezekias, put thine house in order, for thou shall die, and not live, Esai,
38.1. yet did Hezechias live fifteen years after. The LORD would have it
proclaimed in the streets of Nineveh, Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be
destroyed, Ion. 3.4. yet did Nineveh escape that plunge, and was reserved to
understand of her final destruction by the ministry of Nahum. These places,
and the like intimating in some sort both repentance, and also change of mind
and purpose in the LORD of Heaven may be some cause of the former doubt. For
satisfying whereof diverse have answered diversely.

Some answer thus: As the spirit is said to make request for us with sighs
that cannot be expressed, Romans 8.26. so may God be said to repent himself.
Now the holy spirit cannot be said to cry, as if it self did cry, or to
pray, as if it self did pray, or to sigh, as if it self did sigh; but because
it stirs in the Saints of God such affections; and makes them to cry, to
pray, and to sigh. And so they understand that other place of St Paul, Ephesians.
4.30. Grieve not the holy spirit, that is, say they, take heed that by your
wicked living, ye offend not the Saints of God, in whom the holy spirit
dwells. In their application they say, that God may then be said to repent,
when he makes his children, in whom he dwells, to repent for their sins.

But this exposition, albeit in some places it may have good use, as in those
before cited of the holy spirit: yet may it not generally be applied to all
such places, wherein God is said to repent. It repented God that he made man,
Genesis 6.6. Here this sense may not be admitted: to say, it repented man that
God made him: for it repented God himself, that he made man. It repented God
also, that he had made Saul king, 1. Sam. 15.11. neither here may this sense
be admitted, to say; it repented Saul that God had made him King: for it
repented God himself that he had made Saul King. I will speak suddenly
against a nation, or against a kingdom to pluck it up, to root it out, and to
destroy it; but if this nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their
wickedness, I will repent of the plague, that I thought to bring upon them,
says the Lord, Ierem. 18.7. nor here may this sense be admitted, to say; the
people should repent of the plague, which the Lord had thought to bring upon
them: for it is God himself, that will repent of the plague, which he had
thought to bring upon the people. I deny not, but God may truly be said, to
do that which he makes us to do; but to say, whatsoever God may be said to
do, therefore he may be said to do it, because he makes us to do it; this
is utterly to be denied.

Others answer thus: God may then be said to repent, and to change his mind,
when things themselves be changed. For example sake: as long as men ly
wallowing in their sins, the wrath of God, Gods scourges shall be upon them:
such is the will of God revealed in the Law. But when men shall repent them of
their sins committed, God also shall repent him of his fore-threatned
plagues; when men shall be changed, there shall be a change also, not in the
will of God; for that is impossible; but in the wrath of God: his curses shall
be turned to blessings. And this sense is tolerable in the place before cited,
Ierem. 18.7, 8. I will speak suddenly against a nation, or against a
kingdom to pluck it up, to root it out, and to destroy it: but if this nation
against who^ I have pronounced, turn from their wickedness, I will repent of
the plague, that I thought to bring upon them; because they are changed, from
worse to better, my curse shall be changed into a blessing: I will repent of
the plague, that I thought to bring upon them. And in the 2. verses following;
9, 10. he says, I will speak suddenly concerning a nation, and concerning a
kingdom, to build it, and to plant it; but if it do evil in my sight, and
hear not my voice, I will repent of the good, that I have thought to do for
them: because they are changed from better to worse, my blessing shall also be
changed into a curse; I will repent of the good that I have thought to do for
them.

This exposition howsoever it be natural to this place, may not generally be
fitted to all other places. I deny hot, when men repent themselves of their
sins committed, but that Gods sentence, in regard of any eternal punishment
to be inflicted on them, shall be changed; but to say, that his sentence in
regard of temporary punishments shall be changed, is more then I dare, as long
as I think of the continual afflictions, wherewith godly hearts have daily
been tried.

Others answer thus: God may be said to repent, as he is said to be angry, and
jealous. Where we may note that these attributs, and all other like these, must
be taken (...), as if they were used for man's easier understanding. It is a
common thing for God, in his holy word to apply himself to our capacities, and
to attribute to himself such things, as are usual in the course of our lives.
For instance: because men use not to be revenged on others, except they be
angry, therefore when God revengeth our wickedness, he is said to be angry.
Again because men by their exceeding care they have to keep their wives
chaste, do get to be called jealous: therefore God caring in like sort to keep
his spouse chaste, to preserve his Church spotless, is called also Ielous. So
is it here. Because men use not to change their former purposes and intents,
except it repents them, that they had so purposed and intended before;
therefore God is said also to repent, when he alters not his will, for that
is unchangeable; not his decree, for that cannot be altered; but the thing
which he had promised, or threatened. Thus is God truly said to repent,
according to St Austines discourse, Lib. 83. quast. quae.. 5.2.

Now, touching the word of the Lord, which came to Abimelech, Hezechiah, and
Nineveh, and was not fulfilled, and therefore to carnal eyes might seem to
make much against the constancy and truth of the eternal God: the Schoolmen
teach thus: Aquin. 1. q. 19. art. 7.
Aliud est mutare voluntatem, aliud velle mutationem: it is one thing to change
the will, another thing to wish that a change should be. God will have the law,
and the ceremonies at one time, gospel without ceremonies at an other time:
this was his will from everlasting, constant, and immovable, that in their
several courses both should be. There may be a change in the matter, and
subject, yet not a change in him, that disposes it. Our will is, in winter to
use the fire, in summer a cold, and open air; the thing is changed according
to the season: the unseasonableness of the summer craving fire, and the warmth
of the winter needing none, will argue the thing changed; but our will, whereby
we have decreed and determined in our selves so to do, remains the same. So
writes S. Austine to Marcellium: The husbandma^ at one time sows, at another
time moweth, as a third time du^geth his fields: according to the diversity of
times, his works are changed. Shall we say then, that the art of husbandry is
changed? No: nor yet the will of the husbandman. This is the ground of it; A
mutatione effectuum non valet consequentia ad mutationem causarum, voluntate
libera operantium: let the causes be free-working wills, howsoever the effects
may be changed, they shall stand immutable.

Some teach thus: the decrees, and purposes of God consist of two parts: the
one whereof God reveals at the first, and the other he concealeth a while,
and keeps in his own knowledge: as in the action enioined to Abraham, Gods
purpose was twofold, 1. To try his obedience, 2. To save the child: and if
any shall impute it to inconstancy thus to bid, and vnbid, he may know that the
will of the Lord was not fully understood in the first part. Hitherto belongs
that which S. Gregory has, lib. 20. moral. cap, 23. Nouit Deus aliquando
mutare sententiam, sed nu^quam novit mutare consilium. God changes his
sentence pronounced sometimes, but never changes his counsel intended.

By this counsel intended, he means that decree of God, which from all
eternity he has made and established with himself, concerning any thing to be
done according to the good pleasure of his will: yea, by this counsel he
means the very will of God, which is holy, is pure, is perfect, eternal,
everlasting, from al beginning; according to which his doings are
incomprehensible, his judgments secret, his ways past finding; by which he
rules all, he governs all, he guides, and protecteth all, in which all
things are, as they are. This his will, this his counsel is always
fulfilled; no man hinders it; no man stops it.

By the sentence of God pronounced, he means his sentence passed, concerning
punishment to be inflicted upon any, either in regard of man's deserts, or in
relation to second causes. In regard of man's deserts: so was the sentence
passed against NINEVEH: yet 40. days, and Nineveh shall be destroyed. The sins
of Nineveh were winged sins; they flew up above the top of Carmel; they
aspired and pressed before the Majesty of Gods own throne; they cried out in
the ears of God, and enforced him to pass his sentence: Yet 40. days and
Nineveh shall be destroyed. In relation to two causes: so was his sentence passed
against Hezechias. Put thine house in order, for thou shall die, and not live.
The kings sickness was such, such was the weakness of his body, such was the
extremity of his disease, as that the Prophet had good reason to warrant his
prophecy: Put thine house in order, for thou shall die, and not live.

Here may we see a manifest difference between Gods decrees, and his
menacings, between his counsails, and his threatenings. between his secret
will, and his revealed will. Immovable are his decrees, but his menacings
changeable; vnmutable are his counsails, but his threatenings variable; his
secret will may not, when his revealed will shall, be altered. One might have
said, and have said truly both ways, Lazarus shall rise again, and Lazarus
shall not rise again. Esteem it by the power and finger of God, it shall be;
but leave it to nature, and to the arm of flesh, it shall never be. Esaias
might have said, and have said truly both ways: Hezechias shall die, and
Hezechias shall not die: looking only to nature, and to the arm of flesh, he
could say no otherwise, but Hezechias shall die; but looking to the might, and
mercy of God, who received the prayers of the king, he must needs have said,
and said truly, Hezechias shall not die. Jonas might have said, and have said
truly both ways; Nineveh shall be destroyed, and Nineveh shall not be
destroyed; the sins of Nineveh might have warranted the one, and Gods mercies
the other. Gods decree, Gods counsel, Gods secret will reserved salvation for
them, against whom his menacings, his threatenings, his revealed will proclaimed
destruction.

Others teach thus: In most of the Lords threatenings there is a condition
annexed, which always is not expressed, but sometimes understood: and it is, as
hinges to adore; it turns forwards or backwards the whole matter. Where we
must not forget, that a conditional sentence puts no certainty; nihil ponit
in esse, as the schoolmen speak; it forces nothing, but accordingly as the
condition shall be either broken, or kept. The Lord said to Abimelech: Thou
art but a dead man, his meaning was; except thou restore to Abraham his wife:
Sarah was restored, and Abimelech purged with God. The Lord said to Hezechiah,
Put thine house in order, for thou shall die, and not live, his meaning was;
except thou be humbled before me by prayer: Hezechiah was humbled, and lived
fifteen years after. The Lord would have it proclaimed in the streets of
Nineveh, Yet 40. days, and Nineveh shall be destroyed: his meaning was, except
Nineveh repent: Nineveh repented, and was reserved to understand of her final
destruction by the ministry of Nahum.

Thus, I hope, that the afore-cited places are answered, and that the doubt
arising from them is cleared. So it remains, that we believe Gods promises to
be certain, full of constancy, and full of truth. It was Balaams confession:
God is not as man, that he should lie, neither as the son of man, that he
should repent: has he said, and shall he not do it? and has he spoken, and
shall he not accomplish it? Number. 23.19. It was Samuels confession; Indeed the
strength of Israel will not lie, nor repent: for he is not as man, that he
should repent, 1. Sam. 15.29. It was Gods own protestation my counsel shall
stand, my will shall be done: as I have spoken, so will I bring it pass; as I
have purposed, so will I do, Esai. 46.10.11.

If for Balaams confession, if for Samuels confession, if for God his own
protestation, we will not believe the certainety of Gods promises, what shall I
say? Surely that the spirit of incredulity, which possessed Pharaohs heart,
has also possessed ours. He was preached unto, not only in the name of the
Lord, and with kind exhortation, as: Exodus 5.1.
Let my people go: not only by threats, and sentences of judgment, but also by
apparent plagues (and what preaching can be more effectual?) by Ex. c. 8. etc.
frogs, by lice, by flies, by grasshoppers: morraine, botches, darkness,
hailestones, blood, and death it self, were arguments of persuasion. But could
all these things move him? No: but the first time he returned into his house
and hardened his heart; the second time when he saw he had rest, he hardened his
heart again: the third time his heart remained obstinate; so likewise the
fourth time (though especial warning was given him, as: Let not Pharaoh from
hence forth deceive me any more;) yet this fourth time he returned into his
house and hardened his heart again.

We also have been daily preached unto, not only in the name of the Lord, and
with kind exhortation, as; Amend your lives for the kingdom of God is at
hand; not only by threats, and sentences of judgment; but also by apparent
plagues (and what preaching can be more effectual?) by war, by sickness, by
famine, as so many arguments of persuasion. But could al these things move us?
No: but the first time from this place and the like, we returned to our houses,
and hardened our hearts: the second time when we saw we had rest, we hardened
our hearts again; the third time our hearts remained obstinate; and likewise
the fourth time, Gal. 3.10.
(though especial warning were given us, as: Cursed is every man, that
continues not in all things, which are written in the book of the law, to do
them) yet this fourth time also, have we returned to our houses, and hardened
our hearts again: and so return we still, and harden our hearts still, as if
we meant to build up incredulity, as high as ever Babel was intended, eve^ up
to Heaven, and there to defy God to his face.

What may be thought of this? Even what S. Paul has said, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. All
men have not faith. If we look to the infancy of the world, God sent his
Patriarchs, and found not faith: if to the generation following; God sent his
Prophets, and found not faith: if to the succeeding age, God sent his own
Son, and found not faith: And when the Son of man comes again, shall he
find faith on the earth? Luke 18.8.
So contrary is it to our corrupt natures, to believe any thing, which by
discourse of reason we cannot comprehend, or wherewith by custom, and
experience we have not been invred.

In this general defect what shall we do? It is no bad counsel, to lay
before our eyes the example of our Father Abraham for imitation. A promise was
made to him, Genesis 15.5. thy seed shall be in number as the stars in heaven.
Faithful Abraham considered not his own body, even now dead, being almost an
hundred years old; neither the deadness of Sarahs womb, but believed the
promise of God. Afterward this promise was more particular: In Isaac shall
thy seed be called, Genes. 21.12. here also was he strengthened in faith, and
gave the glory unto God. At last a charge is given him: Take now thine only
son Isaac, whom thou love, and get thee unto the land of Moriah, and offer
him there for a burnt offering, upon one of the Mountains, which I shall show
thee, Genesis 22.2. What? must he, in whose loins the treasure of the whole world
lies hidden, must he, of whom the promise was so lately made, must Isaac now
be slaughtered? Yea, Abraham persuades himself it must be so; and is ready to
lay the knife to the child's throat; and yet believes he, that in this same
Isaac all nations of the earth shall be blessed: and yet believes he under
hope against all hope, that in this same Isaac, his seed shall be called: he
persuades himself that God will rather raise Isaac out of the ashes, then
fail of his promise,

See we not in this pattern, how we ought to be affected toward the promises
of God? we must believe them, even against hope, being fully assured, that he
who has promised, is able also to perform. What if tentations assail us?
What if sin dwell in us? What if the Law accuse us? What if death it self do
even devour us? Shall we therefore doubt of Gods promises? No: we must believe
them, even against hope, being fully assured, that he who has promised is able
also to perform, and not that only, but willing also to perform. He is a
Lord of mercy; Psalm. 130.7.
with him is plentiful redemption. Redemption a thousand ways: redemption by
nature, and redemption against nature; redemption by hope, and redemption
against hope: redemption by things that are, Psalm. 105.8.
and redemption by things that are not. He has alwaie been mindful of his
covenant, and promise, that he made to a thousand generations. He promised
salvation to Israel, and effected it in the midst of the red Sea: promised
salvation to his children, and brought it to pass in the fiery oven: promised
salvation to his Prophet, and wrought it in the Lions den. O! let the
willingness of so powerful a God move you to believe his promises. Has he
PROMISED to lift you up? He will lift you up. Nor Sea, nor fire, nor all the
Lions in the Forests, nor all the lets in the world shall withstand him, he
will lift you up, but you must stay a time then. And this is my third note.

Dwell in this land, and I will be with thee, and bless thee, says the LORD
unto Abraham, Genesis 26.3. Without doubt it is a great blessing of God upon his
children, when they abide where God appoints them. If we carue unto our
selves, it shall be unto us according to our boldness. But if we tarry Gods
leisure, if we follow his calling, and use his direction, surely it shall be
unto us, there, wheresoever we shall be, according to mercy. So was it to
Barzillai when he would be exalted, 2. Sam. 19.33. So was it to the Shunamite,
when she cared not for preferment, 2. King. 4.13. So was it to the Disciples,
when they were willing to leave all, Luke 5.11.

It may be thou art poor; So were the Smyrnians: dwell in thy poverty, and be
content as they were, and then what God said to them, Rev. 2.9.
shall be said to thee: I know thy poverty, but thou art rich. It may be
thou art afflicted. So were the Apostles: dwell in thy afflictions, and be
content as they were, and then shall thou rejoice in the midst of them all.
Act. 5.41.
It may be thou art spoiled of thy sons and daughters, and of all thy
substance; Such was Jobs lot: dwell in these thy losses, and be content as he
was, Job. 1.21.
and even then shall thou say; blessed be the name of the Lord. Dwell where God
places thee, and he will be with thee, and will bless thee. Dwell in the
land: it is David's, counsel, Psalm. 47.3. His inducement is: and verily thou
shall be fed. Dwell in the land] Psalm 37.1.
Fret not thy self because of the wicked men; envy not their prosperity; be
not grieved because they flourish; for they shall soon Verse. 2.
be cut down like grass, they shall wither as the green herb; yea, they
shall be so cut off, as that they shall not live out half their days: but
dwell thou in the land; commit thy way, thy self, thy life, and all thy
affairs unto the Lord: wait patiently upon him; tarry his time; and he shall
give thee thine hearts desire: verily you shall be fed.

I deny not, but that the consciences of the godly can hardly be quieted, so
long as they feel Gods wrath against themselves. For thus we read in the
prayer of the Church; LORD, how long? will thou be angry for ever? shall thy
jealousy burn like fire? Psalm. 79.5. LORD, how long? How long will thou
withhold thine help and aid from us, and let the wicked insult over us, as
they do? Will thou be angry for ever? Will thou never put an end to our
miseries, those testimonies of thy heavy wrath, and continual anger against
us? Shall thy jealousy, over thine own glory, and us also, (even for our good
could we see it) shall it burn like fire? shall it consume us utterly, as the
fire does every thing that is before it? I deny not, I say, but that the
consciences of the Godly, sometimes disquieted with the feeling they have of
Gods wrath, may enforce them to break out into these, or the like speeches:
but assured I am, they should in all hope and patience wait upon the LORD, who
by his Prophet, Ps. 37.10. has thus spoken to alay this their impatiencie: Yet
a little while, and the wicked shall not appear: look after his place, and
he shall not be found. Yet a little while] understand, wait thou in hope, and
patience, and the wicked shall not appeare] nor he, nor any of his posterity
shall be left among the sons of men: look after his place] see now, whether
thou can find the place of his abode, seek with all thy diligence, and thou
shall not find him] for he is perished as Psalm. 37.20.
the fat of lambs, even with the smoke is he consumed; utter destruction is
befallen him, for as is the fat of lambs, even so is he perished; sudden
destruction has overtaken him, for as is the smoke, even so is he consumed.

Be it then true (as needs it must be true) that the face of God is for ever
against them that do evil, to cut off their remembrance from the earth: and
grant we that hence it follows (as needs it must follow) that therefore the
godly, have no cause to envy the prosperity of the wicked, but rather to pity
them: what remains, but that we consider, how the distressed child of God,
even falling down under the burden of his miseries, because he sees no help
near at hand, may find comfort?

To let pass those many ends, for which it has pleased God to lay his crosses
upon his children, whereof every end duly considered, would be an argument of
force sufficient to work patience in the most affl^cted: let us briefly
consider two propositions, both pointing at the time, when Gods promises shall be
made good unto us.

1 God oftentimes withdraws himself, and his gracious help from his
children, to make them the more earnest in seeking to him.

2 God oftentimes deferreth his help till greatest necessity.

Touching the first; namely, that God withdraws himself, and his gracious
help from his children, to make the^ the more earnest in seeking to him, we
have the confession of Christ's own spouse; who opening the door of her heart to
her welbeloved, that was now past and gone, and making diligent search to find
him, her soul so loved him, speaks thus, Cant. 3.1. I sought him, but I
found him not: and again, Cant. 3.2. I sought him, but I found him not: and
so likewise, Cant. 5.6. I sought him, but I could not find him; I called him,
but he answered me not. We have also David's protestation: In waiting have I
waited for the LORD, I have waited pacitntly for him, Psalm. 40.1. And we have
the doctrine of the whole Church, against which the gates of Hell shall never be
able to prevail: The Saints of God, howsoever they fall not finally in the end,
nor utterly at any time, do notwithstanding fall grievously, do fall
dangerously: so, that for a time they may seem to be forsaken of God. But this
miss of Gods presence and favor, makes them the more earnest in seeking to
him. So the Spouse sought, and never left seeking, till she had found her
best-beloved: and David waited, and never left waiting, till the Lord had
inclined to him, and heard his cry: and Gods holy ones, fallen thus
grievously, thus dangerously, do request, and never leave requesting with
vnexpresseable sighs, till God come with his right hand stretched-out to lift
them up. So true is this first proposition, God oftentimes withdraws himself
and his gracious help from his children, to make them the more earnest in
seeking to him.

The second was this; God oftentimes deferreth his help till greatest
necessity. We read, when the king of Assyria had invaded the kingdom of
Ezechiah, won his cities, subdued his country, conquered his people, and had
made him destitute of all help, that then the LORD raised up the king of
Ethiopia to call the Assyrians from the siege of Jerusalem, 2. King. 19.9. We
read, when David had been chased, as a bird by the fowler, from country to
country, first to Samuel in Ramah, then to Achimelech in Nob, afterward to
Achish in Gath, sometimes into a cave, sometimes into a wilderness, that then
the LORD delivered him, and set his feet in a large room, Psalm. 18.36. We
read, when Abraham was at the very instant to kill innocent Isaac, lying upon
the fagots, that then the good will of him, that dwelt in the burning bush,
sent a Ram into a near bush to be sacrified in steed of Isaac, Genesis 22.13.
Could any have thought, that an East wind should have filled the camp of
Israel with Ps. 105.40. Exodus 16.12.
Quails? Many a blast had that wind blown before, but never Quails. Could
any in that great want of bread in the wilderness have looked for Exodus 16.15
Ps. 105.40.
Manna from Heaven? Many a dew and frost had they seen upon the ground
before, but never the like. Durst any presume to think, that Jordan should run
back, that the red Sea should devide it self; never did they so before, yet
now Ps. 114.3, 5.
Jordan runs back, the red Ps. 136.13. Ex. 14 21, 22.
Sea devides it self. The Babylonians would have sworen that the Lions
should have devoured Daniel, and the fire the three children; yet against
nature, the Dan. 6, 18.
Lions became meek, and the Dan. 3.26.
fire merciful, when they were to deal with the servants of the most High.
Excellent is that of CHRIST, sleeping in the ship on a pillow, suffering his
disciples to be so long tossed with the violence of the Sea, till they cried
out, LORD save, we perish: for now in this extremity, he awaketh, rebukes the
winds, stilleth the storms of the Sea, and causes a peaceable calm to
follow, Mat. 8.23. I shall not need to trouble you with the remembrance of
Sampson, of Job, of Peter, of Paul, of Lazarus, and many others, miraculously
above all hope freed from thirst, from miseries, from imprisonment, from
shipwreck, from the grave it self, and the like: out of that which is before
delivered, the truth of the second proposition may be inferred. God oftentimes
differreth his help till greatest necessity.

Both these laid to our hearts and consciences, and duly thought upon, will
afford comfort to our most fainting spirits; for that they will stay our
minds on the leisure of the Lord. Thus should we think with our selves; are
we better then the spouse of Christ? better then David? better then any other
the children of the Lord? If not: then in our greatest afflictions, in the
deepest grief of our consciences, void of all spiritual comfort, learn we of
the spouse, to seek and never leave seeking, til we find our best-beloved;
learn we of David to wait, and never leave waiting, till our God incline to
us, and hear our cry, learn we of the rest of Gods children to request, and
never leave requesting with vnexpresseable sighs, till God come with his right
hand stretched-out to lift us up.

Why should we at the first look to have our desires? Abraham was old before
he had any children, and so was Zachary, and yet in the end the Lord promised,
and also performed. It is a certainety, when we have lest hope for obtaining
our desires, we may soonest receive them. God uses not at the first to grant
our requests, but differreth them for the trial of our faith, and patience,
that like as the wheat corn grows not til it be dead; so his works may not
answer our expectation, till they seem to us impossible. And therefore as
Iudeth, chap. 8.14. spoke unto the governor of Bethulia, so let me to you, my
brethren, provoke not the Lord our God to anger; the words are in the latter
end of the 14. verse; My brethren, provoke not the Lord our God to anger, it
follows; for if he will not help us, within these five days, he has power
to defend us when he will, even every day, or to destroy us before our enemies.
Do not you therefore bind the counsels of the Lord our God, bind not the
counsels of the Lord our God. For God is not as man, that he may threatened,
neither as the son of man to be brought to judgment; therefore let us wait
for salvation of him, and call upon him to help us, and he will hear our
voice, if it please him; he will hear our voice, if it please him.

Therefore be of good comfort, you that now sorrow, for you shall be comforted;
you that now be hungry, for you shall be satisfied; you that now weep, for you
shall laugh. The Lord will shortly come, bear but a little, and in his time all
shall be well with you, all tears shall be wiped from your eyes, and be you
assured, that whatsoever he has promised to you, (so true is he, so good is
he, so himself is he, so constant, so immovable is he) it shall be fulfilled;
the LORD will rise early to do it: he will set wheels as it were, to his
power, and goodness, that he may speedily bring it to pass. And has he
promised in his good time to lift you up? So will he lift you up.

Now a word or two of the thing he promised unto you: it is your exaltation,
your lifting up.

Where we must be warned, not to dream of any temporary exaltation, of any
worldly lifting up, like the Jews who dreamed of the restitution of David's
kingdom, Mark. 11.10. or like the Apostles, who looked that Christ should
shortly restore the kingdom to Israel, Act. 1.6. Preferments should not be
aimed at: ambition should be put apart from us, for our exaltation is
spiritual, we shall be lifted up, but in a spiritual sense.

I deny not, but it is God, that advances the heads of the mighty over their
brethren: by him kings reign: and true it is, preferment is neither from the
Psalm. 75.6.
East, nor from the West, nor from the South; God is judge, he makes low, and
he makes hie; he is the bestower of all temporal blessings. Yet withal I
know that such his blessings are bestowed in common, as well on the wicked, as
the godly: the Sun shines as well on the evil, as on the good: the rain
falls as well on the unjust, as the just. God binds not himself, either to
one, or other, but storeth up his blessings for both: health, wealth, honor,
and whatsoever else, this world may afford, he storeth up for both, just and
unjust, good and evil, according as himself shall dispose to both. Certain it
is he will dispose to both sorts; but to whom of both sorts he will dispose, it
is not in man, nor in any son of man, to discern.

Set we then our hearts at rest, for any assurance we have of these temporal
blessings: without doubt our exaltation is spiritual, and so shall we be
lifted up. The holy are vouchsafed to enter into the kingdom of God, but we
know, this entrance must be through many afflictions, Act. 14.22. Through
persecutions, and tribulations, 2 Thessalonians. 1.4. All that will live Godly in
Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution, 2. Tim. 3.12.

Give care ye faint spirits, be strengthened ye weak hands, ye feeble knees
receive comfort. Is it true indeed, that the godly must be known by the badge
of afflictions, of tribulations, of persecutions? Yet be ye not dismaide. Be
the burden you bear, never so unwieldy, be it never so heavy; there is one in
Heaven (and he can come a pace, for he flies upon the wings of the wind) who
is able to master it, and to lighten it. And therefore though we walk in the
very shadow of death, we must not take discomfort at it.

The Lord sits above the water floods, he commands the Heaven, the Earth,
the Sea, and all that in them is. Never will he forsake his children, neither
in health nor sickness, light nor darkness, in the land of the living, nor in
the land of forgetfulness.

But be it, we are not set free from our miseries; be it, I say, that God
suffers us, as he suffered Stephen to be stoned; or as he suffered many his
blessed Martyrs, to be stretched on the rack, to be burnt with fire, or more
grievously to be tormented, yet must we be full of comfort: for God has, does,
and yet hereafter will deliver his children, and yet hereafter will deliver us,
not only from the death of our bodies, when worms, and rottenness shall have
made their last prey upon us, but from the death of our minds too, from that
death, I say, whereby the spirit is buried under sorrows, and finds no
creature in Heaven or Earth to give it comfort.

Content we then our selves for any assurance he have of any temporal
exaltation, it is manifest our exaltation is spiritual, and so shall we be
lifted up. So shall we be lifted up, from mortality, to immortality; from
this vale of misery, to the city of happiness, Jerusalem, which is above;
from a momentary life, to life eternal. Which eternal life though we cannot
fully possess as long as this flesh encombreth us, yet in this flesh also in
part we do enjoy it. For in this flesh we know God to be the only very God,
and whom he has sent JESUS CHRIST. And this is life eternal, says Christ
himself, Ioh. 17.3.

Hitherto belongs that which is written, 1. Cor. 13.9. we know in part, and
we prophecy in part. And Colos. 1.13. God has translated us into the kingdom
of his dear son, and 1. Ioh. 3.14. we know that we are translated from
death unto life. Other like places might be alleged: but these may suffice to
show, that even in this life we have a feeling and a taste of eternal life: and
therefore, that even in this life our exaltation is begun, which then shall be
perfected, when we shall be lifted up from mortality to immortality; from
this vale of misery to that city of happiness, JERUSALEM, which is above;
from a momentarie life to life eternal. Gracious God, make us so to cast down
our selves before thee, that thou in thy good time may lift us up.

EST DEO GRATIA.
THE TABLE CONTAINING IN ALPHAbeticall order the particulars of this book.
A.
AAron. 11 62. His rod. 7. 62. Abimelech. 65. 137. 143 Abraham. 14. 149. His
faith. 53 Absalon. 70 Achan. 11. 36 Achitophel. 66 Adulterers, 13, 45
Afflictions. 22, 152. Compared. 34. Evil. 33. Profitable 37. They are Gods
instruments. 34 Afflictions of the godly. 22 Comfort in Afflictions. 31 Agur.
34. 67. 85. Ahab. 32 93 Ahola. 89 Ahaziah. 38 All shall be saved, in what
sense? 4 Ambition. 61 Anabaptists. 24 Anak. 118 Ananiah his oblation. 103
Ananias. 63 Gods Anger. 36 Asa. 38 Athaliah. 64 Astrologers condemned. 124
B.
BAasha. 23. 36 Barzillai. 66. 146 Begin betime. 46 The Benefits of God. 67
Bethesda. 48 The Blessings of God. 129 Our bodies must serve God. 111 The
flying Book. 18 The breeding of a man from his childhood. 17 Want of bread. 77
C.
CAin. 6 Cain his sacrifice. 6. 103 Carnal men. 17 Cast down not others. 78,
79. 84. 89 Cast down your selves not before men. 95. 100 Things Casual and
contingent in respect of us. 33 Christ diversely reputed. 1, His kingdom no
earthly kingdom. 1 Christ our Master must be followed 8 not to be offended. 9
By Chance nothing falls out. 32 The golden Cherubines. 55 The three Children,
22 The rule of Charity. 22 Christ described 39 Christ is the way, etc. 46
Christianity. 79 Christianity a matter of substa^c^. 98 The Churches
complaint. 62. 91 The Church hurt by ambition 62. 63 The Churches estate under
Christ. 92 Circes cups. 121 The Commonwealth. 64 Condemn not all. 89
Coniurers. 37 39 An exhortation to co^tentme^t. 65. 67 Contentation. 70
Continue to the end. 55. 56. 57. 107. Cozbi. 25 The creatures of God used
against man for sin. 10 Crosses what they are 20. of two sorts. 20. every man
must take up his cross 22. the Papists take up unnecessary crosses. 23. so do
the Donatists 24 and Anabaptists. 24. how we must bear our Crosses. 30 an
exhortation to endure our Crosses. 30 Crosses are evil; yet must we rejoice
in them. 33 Our Crosses must be taken up daily 34 Cunning. men. 37
D
DAvid. 15. 33. 36. 81. 86 112 David's adultery 53 his love. 81 his zeal. 53
his murder. 87. 110 The Decrees of God consist of two parts. 141 Delays made
in following Christ 47 We must Deny our selves. 13 What it is to Deny our
selves? 14 Helps for the Denying of our selves 15 Inward Desire. 110
Desperation. 130 The Devil is come down with great wrath. 95 He staineth our
best actions. 96.
Doeg. 82 Donatists. 24 Donatus. 26 The Drunkard. 44 Against Drunkards. 11. 13.
64
E.
EBedmelech. 91 We bath in Ease. 114 A wise Eye. 85 A foolish Eye. 85 Elah. 11
Elias. 48. 21 Elisha. 11 Universality of Election. 3. 7 Elizeus. 81 The Elm.
24 Enchanters. 37 Epicures. 17 Esau. 6 Esau his tears. 103 Esarhaddon. 120
Examples teach. 41. followed too much. 42. of good men to be imitated. 52. of
the elect of 4 sorts 52
F,
FAith necessary. A general defect of Faith. 144 Famine. 77 Saints may Fall.
87. 88 The best men may Fall. 83 Why the best have had their Falls. 91 Jonas his
Fish. 32 Peter his Fish. 32 The Flying book. 18 Whether the minister may Fly
in time of persecution. 27 Follow Christ. 51. 46. all must not be followed. 44,
45. man is given to following. 41 Friendship between senseless things 24
G.
Gain. 121 Gedeon. 34 Gloe-wormes. 100 God Almighty. 131. 132 God his will.
106. 141. ability. 131. power. 131. 132. his secret will. 106 revealed will.
106. decrees. 141. 142 threatenings. 142 We must seek to God in all troubles
and losses. 122. 125 God knows all. 43. seethall. 43. 128, able to do all.
131 God sees our sins. 128 God is present every where. 125. 126 127, 128,
129. is merciful. 12. 48. 130. 131. is true, 136. 143. is the fountain of all
good, 74. 129 God his Majesty described, 152 his goodness, 31, his
liberality, 129. his providence. 32. 67 God how said to be angry, 140 to be
iealouse, 140. to repent, 140 The Godly sometime disquieted in conscience, 147
The Glutton, 44 Al our Good is from the Lord, 74. 129 Good works done before
men, 101 done in secret 97. how they may be spotless. 102 Governers
admonished. 17 Grapes. 89
H.
HAm. 85 Haman. 65 82 The Harlots vow. 103 Make Have in the way to heaven, 54
Hazael. 87 Hear not tales. 83 How we may Hear them. 84 Make melody in your
Hearts. 102 The hardness of our Hearts. 144 Heaven 56 The way to Heaven. 50
Heliotropium. 25 The Help of man vain. 35. 116 All worldly Helps vain. 116
God deferreth his Help till greatest necessity. 149. 150 withdraws his
help. 148
Herod. 50 71 Hezechiah. 112. 138. 142. 143 his zeal. 25, his Honor. 65
Honor not to be trusted to. 120 Humility. 67. 71. 120 motives to Humility. 71.
74
Hypocrisy. 98 99 Hypocrisy spu^ with a fine thread 98 An Hypocrit will ever
be bewraied 98 The portion of Hypocrites. 100
I.
IAbin. 35 Jacob. 29 56 Idolaters. 13 Iehoram. 23 Jericho. 89 Jeremy. 81
Iezabell her fast. 103 Imitation. 41 The pattern of our Imitation. 51 English
infamous for Imitation. 42 Christian Imitation. 45 Job. 33 Jonas his fish. 32
Jonathan. 61. 91 Joseph. 54. 81 his chastity. 53 Joseph sold. 32 Ioshuah. 25
Josiah. 112 Judah. 42 85. 86 The sins of Judah. 35 Judas. 99 Judge not the
person of sinners. 84
K.
Keep the right way. 46. 50
L.
Labor. 21 Lazarus. 142 The Life of man short. 72. 73 The Liberality of God.
129 Stay the Lords leisure. 146 The Lord our creator. 103 our Father. 103. 104
our King. 103 our Master. 103. 104 our Spowse. 103, ^04 our Teacher. 103
Lot. 87 Lots incest. 53. 56. 110 Lotterie. 33 Love. 79. 81 Love one another
how. 79. 80 the measure of our Love. 79 want of true Love. 81. 82

M.
MAn: whereof he is made 71. his life short. 72. 118. subject to miseries, 20.
73. 74. sinful, ^3. 84. his help is vain. 35. his frail ^. state, 69. 116.
how compared. 120 Manasseh. 31 Manna. 62 Marchasite. 31 Marculus. 26 A Martyr.
25 The wicked may die as Martyrs. 26 How a man may be a Martyr at his death.
26 The cause makes a Martyr. 26, 27 Martyrdom. 25 Masters followed. 8 God is
Merciful. 12 Gods Mercies. 36 Make Melody in your hearts. 102 Micaiah. 21
Ministers admonished. 16 Miriam. 11, 23, 61 Moses his love, 54. 81. his
incredulity. 53. his zeal. 25 Moses. 14. 15. 25
N.
NAaman. 86 The Name of God to be called upon. 37 Naomi. 16. 81 Nebuchadnezzar.
69 Our Neighbors life. 88 Nineveh. 138, 142, 143 The Ninevits. 12 Noah's
drunkenness. 87. 110
O.
OBadiah. 91 Obedience begun, 112. perfect. 113 Our Obedience to Christ as our
Master. 105 Out obedience to the will of God. 111 Og. 118 An Old man described.
49 Onesimus. 87 110
P.
PAndora. 17 Patience in afflictions. 30 Paul, 16, 59. his love. 54 Pecocke. 60
Persecution: personal or general. 28. 29 Whether a Minister may fly in time
of Persecution. 27. 29 Persians. 30 Peter, 25. 87. his denial, 53, 56, 87,
110. his fish. 32 The Pharisees prayer. 103 Pharaoh. 69. 143 Pharaohs daughter.
22 Philistines. 18 Phinehas. 25 We bath in Pleasure. 114 Polycarpus. 26
Pomgranats of Palestina. 121 Poor. 70 The Poor to be releeved. 22 Pride. 69
Pride of gifts and graces. 68. 69 The Proud God resists. 71 Preferment from
the Lord. 74, 129, 151 Promises of God of two sorts. 135 God true in his
Promises. 136. the certainty of his Promises, 136, 137. 143, 150. how we must
be affected to his Promises. 145 Condemn not the whole Profession for the
faults of some. 89 Prosperity. 34 Prosperity dangerous. 34 Gods providence. 31
The Publican. 85 The Publicans prayer. 85 Many Punished for the fault of one.
47 Purposes of God have two parts. 141
Q.
QVestions curious. 58
R.
REbecca. 87. 110 Rehoboam. 12 49 Rent your hearts. 36. ^7 Repent. 37, 49
Repent betime. 48 An exhortation to Repentance. 36 Whether God Repents. 137,
138 Rich. 65 Riches not to be trusted to. 121 Rose Laurel. 13 Rue. 25 Run in
the way to Heaven. 55
S.
SAcrifice blind and halting. 55 Solomon. 16, 32 his Idolatry, 56, 37, 110 The
Samaritan, 22 Saul. 25, 54 Sarah. 11. her lie. 87, 110 The Sentence of God.
141, 142 Shebna. 70 Shimei. 33 Simonie. 64 Silvester. 63 Our Sins. 35, 36, 43
The Sins of great men. 44 Sleep not. 54 The Sleeper. 44 The Slips of others.
87 The holy Spirit. 138 Sorrows in man's life. 21 Speculations vain. 58
Spices. 31 Falling Stars. 99 Stephen. 54. 81 Jacob Swear. 114
T.
TAles, against hearers. 83, 84 Against Tale tellers. 83 Tares with wheat. 54,
90 The Thief. 12 The Lords Threatenings have a condition annexed. 142, 143 A
warning to Tradesmen. 121 The Traitors kiss. 103 Troubles in man's life. 20
Truth ever opposed. 6
V.
Universal grace refuted. 3. etc. The Voice of the Lord to be heard. 38
W.
WAntons. 13 Keep the right Way. 50 One Way to Heaven. 50 Wheat and tares
together. 54 The Wicked God avengeth, 10. they are rebellious, 10. they may die
like Martyrs. 26 The will of God. 105. secret. 105. why so called. 106. hidden.
106. revealed. 106 To do the Will of God. 105. 110 Our Wills must be conformed
to the will of God. 107 and how. 108. 109. Outward obedience to the Will of God
110. 111. the fulfilling of his will wherein it consists. 110. 112 Gods
willingness to help. 135. Witches 122, 123, 124 Seek not to witches. 37 Wolf
signifies three things. 28 Women painted. 38 70 The Word of God. 116 Worldly
help. 116
Z.
Zeal. 25. joined with a good cause. 25 Evil Zeal. 25 Ziba, 82 Zimrie. 25
FINIS.

