An excellent Tretise, shevving such perilous, and contagious infirmities, as
shall ensue.1569. and.1566. with the signs, causes, accidents, and curatio^,
for the health of such as inhabit the.7. 8. and.9. climat. compiled by Master
Michael Nostrodamus, Doctor in Physic, and translated into Englysh at the
desire of Laurentius Philotus, Till.

Imprinted at London by Ihon Day, dwelling over Aldersgate beneath S. Martins.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

The Contents of this Tretise.
The Epistle. A Regiment for vvynter. A Regiment for the Spring. A Regiment for
Summer. A Regiment for Autumn. Of the Pestilence. Of the bluddy flix. Of the
burning fever. Of the quartayne. Of the quotidian ague. Of the catarrhus or
revvme. Of the pluresies.
To the right excellent, noble, and virtuous Lord, my Lord Emanieu, Bishop of
Macon, Pronotharie of the Apostolic Seat, etc Michel Nostrodamus, your
humble, and obedient servant, and orator, wishes health and long life in
Christ.
I Have received your letters (right reverende and my very good Lord)
the.xxvi. day of May.1558. in which, you declare your abondau^t goodness not
only to me, in taking my traueiles of my Prognosticatio^ and Almanac which I
sent you, in the best part: but also to all men, when you vvyshed the^ to cum
forth as a warning to corect and amend their ill life, and dissembling trade*
and where as your excellency affirmith, that things forseen may be alterid,
or at the leest the malice of them mitigatid, and that the sickness and
infirmities of this year folovvyng, be diverse in their kind, dangerous,
mortal, and universally reigning: for which men shall scant have time to
counsel with the lernyd doctors, and masters of Physic. Wherefore to shovv
my duty, and humble service unto you at this time, I have at your request,
devised a treatise, in which I have touched the diseases, and maladies,
which shall spring the year of.1559. and.1560. with the preservation from
them: and the curyng such as shall be troubled with any of them. And if I shall
deserve any praise, and laud of the common people for my labor, I will they
give all that to your honor, which are the only occasion of this
enterprise. And if there shall any fault be found in this book, let them
ascribe that to the difficulty of the work, and not to my negligence. Thus I
leave to trouble your Lordshyppe any longer, vvilling such as will take profit
by my labor, to have my medicines well made by the help of good and lernyd
Apothecaries. And such as may have the lernyd doctors and masters of
Physic, I vvyshe that they leave my book, and follow their counsel, not
sparyng any expense: For life is more of value, the^ money, or treasure. (For I
make my book for there cause which can not have the lernyd with the^.) God
send your excellency, long life, bodily health, and increase of honor.

At Salo^, in the province of Craux, the.xii. of August. 1558.
A Regiment for the VVynter.
BECAUSE I find the co^stitucion of the air (from the.xii. of December.1558.
until the.xi. day of March so lovving.1559) to bring forth much cold,
rayning vveather, pestilentiall and stinking mystes, by reason of Saturn in
the East, as I have said in my Prognostication: causing Phlegmatic humors to
abou^d of which shall spring Catarrhus, Reumes, Head ache, Pestilentiall
sickness, and Sciatica, with Coughinges, and such like, so that many shall die
thereof, as well young as old. Mors etiam saxis, marmoribusque venit. In so
much that fevve shall be free from this calamity, wherefore to keep the body
in health it shall be expedient to eschew bathinge, sluggishnes, long sleep,
using ever before meat some kind of exercise. And at time of di^ner or
supper, use more quantity of meat then any other season, and in meat use hot
spicis, wine and mustard, for these make the body hoate, strengthen the
principal parts of the body, and concocte the could fleame ingendrid by this
perilous and intemperate season of the year.

A Regiment for spring time.
SPring time begin the.xi. day of March and end the.xii. of June. During
which time the blud in the body shall be corruptid, and engender Fevers, both
tertians intermittent, and continual, with Carbu^cles, Botches, Dysenterie,
Squinancy, Infla^mations. etc. It shall be very necessary therefore for all men
(but especially from.xvii. to.xl. years in age) to open a vain, vomit, or take
purgation, which their minds stand most unto: othervvays they shall be in
marvelous peril and danger of death* o dira caeli fata. Use exercise, but
not so much as in the vvinter be not long fasting. Use things to make the body
loose, also such as be sour, dry, and cold.

A Regiment for the Summer.
Summer begin the xii. of June and continue until the.xiii of September, in
which space of time the body of man shall be molestid grievously with red
collar ingenderid of the intolerable heat, causing Frenzy, Sinochus, and
causon agues, which shall grievously torment many young persons, also morbos
epidimiales, pestilens, pthisis, and other which I will not name. Therefore
abstain from vehement labor, use things that be cold, svveet, and pleasant,
and well smelling, of easy digestio^ and eat little meat. Yea to drink cold
water, using boyld meats altogether, with bathing, washing and keeping the
body clean from filthe both in the head, arm holes, feate, and hole body,
and use al means which do cool and make the body moist.

A Regiment for Autumn.
AVtumne begine the xiii. of September and end the.xii. of December, and
because the nature of the time shall be inaequalis ac inordinata ac diuersas
infert passiones. Therefore chiefly in this time there must be much diligence
vsid, for there can be no perfect order appointyd as is the other before because
that now it shall be hot, now cold, now moist, now dry, yea and in some
day al thies shall happen. o quanta inclementia caeli. They that shall have
learning in physic, now let them have compassion on the miseries that is
like to fall by sickness. Notvvithstanding it is necessary to abstain from
excess of meats and drinks, banketing, watching, lascivious chambering,
which breed ravve and cold humors, and indigestid in the veins and hoole
body, abstain, or at the least, use moderate eating of the fruits of this
season as apples, pears plumbes, cheries, for they make cacochymie and il iuyse
in the body, and vvyndines with colicke, and corrupt the meats if they be
not eat first at meat. It is good in the beginning of this quarter to purge,
vomit, or let blood, by thaduise of some learned Physician. Now I will
begin briefly to touch the infirmities which shall reign this year,
beginning first with the contagius sickness of pestilence.

Of the Pestilence, with the cause vverof it spring, and the order in this
disease.
COnsidering that many as well in times paste as in our late days, have
abundantly vvryten of this dreadful and perelous sickness: I need to speak
little of it. Yet seeing al men either can not read them, or else understand them,
I thought it mete to set it forth for all men's health: in so much as all men
shall be in danger of so cruel an enemy. And first, as touching the cause of
it, there are diverse, one is the sins and wickedness of the people for which
God have and do send the pestilence for the revvard of sin. An other is
taken of the sterres and co^stellation. Nam ortus and occasus syderum, magnae
coniunctiones, luminum eclipses, mutationes magnas in corporib. nostris
faciunt. The last is taken of the philosophers and phisicians, which is the
inspiration and dravving in of the pestilentiall and corrupt air, into the
body full of ravve humors, and such as are apt to receive corruption. The next
way to preserve the body from this infirmity is to open a vain or purge, to
flee from the corrupt air, to use abstinence, moderat diet, exercise, also
fleeng long sleep, of often eating and drinking when as nature require it not
this make the body preparid to the pestilence. Also not to go abroad in the
air before the sun have shevvid, and vvha^ you go abroad in the air, eat
some electuary, or other alexipharmacu^ fastingas, Methridatum, treacle, bole
armenius, and such like* vvering also some pomea^bers, well made to smell on,
and not to eat meat and drink in the morning, as some do, thinking thereby to
resist the corrupt air, but how ignorantly they do, I refer that to the
judgments of such as are lernyd in physic. The signs how to know if
thou art infecte with this sickness, is not to be taken of the urine, for that
do often deceive the most expt therein, but thou shall feel thy self prone other
unto much sleep, or else that thou can eat in any case sleep with found
imaginatio^s also pricking and tingling in the flesh, cold without, but
inwardly extreme hot with drines, hedach, often vomiting, and heavy cheer
with out a manifest cause* the cure of this sickness is to open a vain if the
age of the pacient, strength, and time of the year agree hereto, nere to the
place where the swelling apere (if there be any) else in the part vvher he
felith most grief, this ons being endid, give the^ this potio^ to drink.. Of
the roots of tormentill, ditanie, gentian, betony, set wal, of every one.3.
dragmes, of Bole armenius, and terra sigillata, each two dragmes, of myrrh
and aloes hepaticke one ounce, of saffron half a dragme, beat these and make
of the^ a fine and subtle powder, of which let the sick take in Scabies or
Turmentill water, half a dragme, and so being in bed, he must be made to
svveet.v. or.vi. hours according to the strength of the pacient. And in all
the time of his svveet, let him nether sleep, eat, nor drink. After the
svvet endyd, let him be dried with vvarme, and clean clothes. And if he desire
to eat, give him a little broth made of a chickin, or such like, but no great
quantity Let him keep his chamber for certain days after, and have merry
company, and music, using perfumes in his chamber vvitth Masticke, Myrrh,
Olibanus, Fra^kensence. etc.

If he have any carbuncles, or sores, because the Surgians have the daily
practice of it, I vvil omit it.

Of the burning Fever.
OMytting all other kind of Fevers, I will speak of the causon or burning
Fever, because there is as great fear of it this year, as ever was the last
two years past: as well in England, as in our clymate, by certain and son
dry constellations, in the Summer season. Therefore such as are vexid with
this burning fever, before althinges let them be let blood, yea ad animi fere
deliquiu^. Otherwise the great heat will not be asvvagid. Let them drink
ptisanes, and could water, strovving their chambers with vine leaves, bovves
of vvillovve, cold herbs, and such like. And give them to drink sirope of
Violets, Roses, Nenuphar, yea and if you vvil, bathing shall be very
profitable. So that all the cure of this disease, do consist in these two
points, that is, in expelling the humor collerick abunding in the body,
which is by lettinge blood, vomyte, and svveating: and by extinguishing the
great inflamatio^ of the liver, veins, arteries. etc. which is done by
drinking cold water, ptisanes, cold siropes, and Iulepes, before mensionid.
This done being vvare of sudden altering the body, thou shall by gods help
come to thy perfect health.

Of the Quartayne.
IF the enemies of Astronomy vvil maintain their folish, and arroga^t opinions
against her, this vvare sufficient argument to overthrow them, in that they
do manifestly, se how the body of man is alterid, and troublid diverse vvayes,
by the influence of the heavenly creatures (I mean the planets, and fixid
sterres,) as among other the quartaine is one, whose forse I suppose, was not
of long time so generally known. Yea and the heavens shall give such
vnsesonable weather, that the humors rather shall be more, and more subject, to
corruption: then to be alterid to the health of the body, so that the quartaine
shall not away at the spring (as many suppose) but drive until Summer, et vix
tunc finietur. therefore in the spring it shall be good to purge melancholicke, and
phlegmatic humors, yea and unto strong natures, to open a vain. They must
absteyne from porke, biefe, salt meats, ravve fruits, gose, svvanne, crane,
ducke, and all fowls living in maryshe placis. And use meats light of
concoction, with good wine vvhight and pleasant, and finally all his diet
must be, how to make his body, hot and moist. And to flee things that are
cold and dry, as well outwardly as to be inwardly received.

Of the quotidian Ague.
MY mind is rather to prescribe a good order of diet then a way of curation,
in this and other agues which do long moleste the body, because where time do
serve, there may be remedy and counsel sought at the learned, but for their
cause I write, which dvvell far from the masters of Physic in country
towns, and villages. The quotidian do invade such, as be gross, cold, and
slugishe. And the fit continue from the beginning to the end.xviii. hours.
The diet must be extenua^s, et incisoria. Using at the beginning, clysters,
after when the disease do more increase, use Oximell, and things to provoke
urine: as the root of smalage, persely, fenell, flovverdeluce, and the.iiii.
great seades which are cold. etc. Also in this case it is good to vomit, and
anointe the stomach fasting, with the oil of vvormevvoode, mastick, or
petroleum.

Of dysenteria or bloody Flixe.
DYsenterie in Greek, may be namid in Lattine tormina, but with us an
exulceratio^ of the bowels. Of this disease there be four sundry kinds, as
Galene vvriteth* but I vvrighting to the unlearned, vvil omit them, mynding
rather to make them understand both it, and the remedies: then to make them
co^ning in Galens doctrine, although there is nothing more better, or more nere
in this case. The disease is manifest of it self for when in the stole you
perceive yelovvishe, or saffron color, oylishe, and fat, or blody with
fylmes (as it war perchement vvete: they call it excoriation of the guts)
with inward griping, pricking, and extreme pain so that they cum, ad animi
deliquiu^ great heat, and marvelous drines. The way to cure this sickness, is
first to give him milk hot from the covv, or else boilid, for to drink, if so
be he have no ague. (But if he have an ague, then it will corrupt in the
stomach, and make his ague the more vehement.) Also you may give him to eat
boylid tenderlye, colevvortes, also plantayne, sorell, etc. with the yolks of
eggs. Let his drink be rain water but not ronning out of leaden spoutes:
and if you can not have pure rain water, and wholesome, then take of fountain
water of the rock, and dippe in it a gadde of stele red hoote, and let him
drink it: for it is meruailously comfortable unto the stopping of the flux.
Or if his stomach can not suffer water, you may give him wine vsid as you do
the water aforesaid. So that all the scope of curing this malady is, per
adstringentia, resicca^tia, vrina^ mouentia. etc. medicines which in this
case we use, are thies. The roots of roseca^pine, holyoke, the leaves of
vvillovv revvpontick, sanguis draconis, terra sigillata, bolus armenius,
mulberies, raysine curnelles, the husk of a pomegranate, the shells of sea
crabbes, beaten in powder. etc. But if light things help not, then with all
speed seek the help of the learnyd masters, of physic. For I can not, nor
any man, set forth all the particular accidents, that come in this sickness,
they be so variable, and therefore cannot appointe any sure, and perfect remedy.

Of the pluresy and the curation thereof.
PLuresie, being Morbus per peracutus (and therefore most dangerous of any
other before rehearsid except the pestilence,) I think it mete, not litly to
ouerpasse it, but also for thy wealth sumvvhat to make mention of it. This
infirmity spring of much and abundant blood, flovvyng to the ribs, and
there inflammed. The signs of it are shortness of breath, a sharp, and hard
pulse, a great pricking under the ribs, vehement pain, with a continual
ague: which although at the first he feel not, yet in the process he shall
(if the vehemy of the other, do not make it the more sufferable.) He must for
the first.iii. days use only a ptisane, afterward milk of almondes, or fine
bread with the broth of a cock, or in the end of the sickness, to drink water,
in which cinamome is boillyd. And also eat skaled fyshes of clean, and pure
waters. The chief practiced remedy in this our time, is presently to let
blood, on that part the pain is. Nam natura ibi molitur euacuationem. The
veins in this case, is the liver vain, or vain of the spleen called
lienaria, if at the seventh day he feale great anguyshe, and grief, you must
use boxing with scarification, to suck sanious blood and matter. Also
emplasters made of dill, camomylle, rosecampine. etc. boylid: not neglecting
oyntmentes to ripe the thing, with medicines to cause him void by spitting,
the aforsaid corruption. Such is diadragacanthes, diapenideon, pastilli
pectorales, ecligma de pulmone vulpis, glicirrhize, saccharum violatium, etc.

Which diverse make mention of, in the cure of this disease.

Of the Revvmes and Catarrhus.
CAtarrhus cum vvha^ as the humor fall from the brain, in to the mouth, and
jaws. This may spryng of two causis: either by heat, dissoling the humors
conteinid in the head: or else by coldenes, of which at this time I will
touch the curatio^. Therefore it is very expedient, to avoid all things
which fill the head with vapors, as to much drynking of wine, bathing,
and vvashinge the head, with slepyng after meat, and kembing the head also
after meat, with great suppers, and late. Also onyons, garlycke, mustard,
radishe rotes: and al ravve herbs, and fruits, be augmenters of this mischief.
Therefore (abstaining the things above mentionid) it shall be profitable to
anoynte the head with oil of lylies, revve, dill, and almondes. Also you may
by the advice of some learnyd man, take some clyster, or other potion, which
do expel the hurtful humor. You may moreover, make a tvvilte, and apply it to
your head, with these things following, made in powder. of the flowers of
betony, melilote,, and camomyll, the leaves of roses dried, laurel, penereal,
and orage, of every one half an handful, of cinamome, and cloves, one dragme:
of nutmegs a dragme, and an half: of macis half a dragme: bring all thies in
to powder, and make of them a tvvilte, according to use and art. It is also
very good to purge the head by sternutation, and nesing, with the iuse of of
beetes, or colevvortes, loking tovvard the son, or such like thing* moreover
it is very profitable to dry the brain, with odoriferous bals, and
pomeambres: and also with fumes made on the coals, holding his head over it
fasting in the morning. You may in this case, use mastick, lignum aloes,
gallamoscata, frankensence, baye beries, amber, musk, rosemary, cloves,
cinamome, etc. which be very medicinable in this behalf.

FINIS.
ANNO CHRISTI. 1559. Mense Martij.

