Perlegi Tractatum hunc, and dignum existimo ut Typis mandetur.

THO: WEEKS R. P. Episc. Land. Cap. Domest.

A TREATISE, MAINTAINING that Temporal Blessings are to be sought and asked
with submission to the will of God.

Wherein is Confuted the Presumptuous way of absolute praying for Temporals, in
the particulars, broached, and defended by Mr. Rice Boy, in a late Pamphlet,
Entitled The Importunate Beggar.

As also a Discovery of the late dangerous errors of Mr. John Traske, and most
of his strange Assertions.

Both necessary to be known of all for the avoiding of the like errors, and
continuing in the Truth

By EDW: NORICE.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Milbourne at the Unicorn near Fleet bridge. 1636.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, It is so that about 7. years sithence, there arose an
opinion in the Western parts, that men are to pray for temporal things in as
absolute a manner as for spiritual, and that the promises are alike: one of
the chief broachers of this opinion (being a Minister) comes to me before the
same was publikly known, and craftily demands of me, whether we may not
absolutely pray unto God for bread, and depend upon his providence for
necessaries; to which I answered, that I conceived we might and ought: shortly
after I understood that there was more in the matter, and that under bread and
necessaries, they intended, health, life, food, raiment, good success in
affairs, and all other conveniences belonging to our selves, or others; with
this rule and position that whosoever did believe should certainly obtain
those things in the particular, and if any did not, it was because they wanted
He publikly maintained the faith of miracles to continu still. And that all
which dyed of the plague wa^ted faith.
Faith.

Hereupon were the consciences of many people, that lay under some outward
afflictions (as poverty, sickness of themselves or theirs, il success, etc.)
much disquietted and troubled, being charged by them with unbelief in their
prayers (as some of them confessed) and making their moan concerning the same,
I was entreated to deliver some grouds in public about the point, and to lay
down directions concerning a right manner of praying for temporal things, that
they might know whereupon to settle themselves, and their practice: This upon
request (there being yet no open contestation) I was willing to do; and taking
a stem upon a Festival, handled to that purpose the fourth Petition of the
Lords Prayer, delivering therein certain arguments against such kind of absolute
praying for outward things, and defending the common received doctrine of the
Church of England, and all other Churches.

VVhereat understanding shortly after how much he was displeased, I copyed out
my Arguments, and sent them to him; vvhereupon he sent abroad a large discourse
of the point, declaring upon what Grounds they held their opinion, and with
what cautions of repentance and love, asvvell as faith. And not long after (as
I remember) an Answer to my five arguments, inveighing every where against me,
and my Sermon, writing with his answer to me, sharp Invectives against me, for
what I had done and maintained; which letters I have by me yet to show, full
of reproach. Hereupon I was constrained to extract certain of his grossest
Assertions, and to commend them to the view of the Neighboring Ministers, that
they might see what Doctrine was taught, and secretly vented among their
people: warning him vvithall, not to make any public Controversy in the
Church, in regard of the law forbidding the same, and admonishing him further
by private Letters of his error, and evil dealing with me After which he was
privately and lovingly dealt withal, by diverse learned and able Ministers,
laboring to convince him, but all in vain; for in stead of harkening to their
counsel, he reproached their persons with vaunts and brags, as he had used
me before, and was so far from reforming this opinion, that he ran out into an
other extremity of Separation, disclaiming utterly of the Church, or any
Communion with it. I then seeing the man to be so wilful in his ways, meddled
no more in this point, but (having satisfied many) gave it over, and so it has
rested these five years, or thereabouts.

Now after all this time (being it seems in love with his old conceits) he
has unseasonably printed by stealth al those former passages: the Discourse of
his Opinion; my Arguments with their answers; the extract of his Assertions, It
was, Puerilis theologia.
stiling it my Prosopopeia; and his distinction of faith into Eternal, and
Temporary, intituling the same, The importunat Beggar; which he has
interlarded with many foul sla^ders, unworthy imputations, and bitter
invectives, comparing me, and other Ministers that dealt with him, to Jannes
and Jambres, with those Egyptian jugglers which withstood Moses, with such like
stuff whereof he is full. And this he does under pretense that I had again
refreshed the Controversy as much as before; whereas it cannot be proved,
neither can I possibly remember that I have at all meddled with the controversy
wellneers these five years, but had almost forgotten it.

Being thus unworthily dealth withal, I thought it necessary for the
vindicating of my self, but chiefly of the Truth from his slanders (if leave
may be given) to return some answer to his Pamphlet, and to maintain and
confirm the ancient received Doctrine; and usual practice of Christians in
this behalf; to which purpose, I conceived it best to publish the Sermon it
self, (according to my brief Notes) and withal, by way of Explication, to
defend the truth of my Arguments against his Replies and Answers, as they lie
in order, that all may see and so judge of what was then delivered, and is
still defended by me. Herein admonishing the Reader first of these few things.

1. That in my Reply, I style him not reproach fully the Boy, according to his
name; nor yet the Beggar, according to the title of his book, as I might have
done; but rather the Temporary, according to his singular opinion of a
Temporary faith, as best suiting with the matter in hand, and the foundation of
his building.

2. That in my Sermon, (which I little thought should have bin made so
public) I gathered such Argumento, and handled all in such a manner, as the
time of Preparation would afford, and was most agreeable to the quality of the
Auditory; with course I have followed in this Apology, being chiefly to deal
with such, and not with any of the Learneder sort, For which cause I cite those
Authors as are most familiar.
as knowing none entangled with the error.

3. That in my proceeding, I have endeavored as to avoid his scurrility, a
thing not imitable: so also not to trace him in all his vvandring Discourses,
which were endless: but rather to answer plainly to the point and matter,
leaving the rest to vanish as a mist, the light of Truth coming in place:
which I speak to prevent any more slanders of his (if it may be) that I have
not answered his Arguments, or mis-transcribed his Writings, because I have not
rehearsed every impertinent speech, or idle passage in the^, which I held
needless, but only the substance of his Doctrine and drift, as he defends
it in his Book; wherein I have not wronged him (that I know) a syllable. And
thus Reader, commending all to the blessing of God, and thy self to his grace,
praying that we may all be guided by a right Spirit, I remain

Thine in, and for the Lord, and his Truth. Envv. Norice.

A TREATISE, MAINTAINING, that Temporal Blessings are to be sought and asked,
with submission to the will of God, as it is in the fourth Petition,
Give us this day our daily bread.

Math. 6.11.
Our Lord JESUS CHRIST, the great Shepherd of the Flock, has left nothing
unsaid or undone, that may serve for the instruction or comfort of his people,
and therefore knowing how necessary Prayer is for the procuring of the same
(being his own Ordinance) has left them direction for that also, how it ought
to be framed, with what Petitions, and to what ends, and that not only by
diverse speeches and passages occasionally uttered to that purpose, but by a
form and frame of prayer purposely made to give them direction therein,
commonly called, The Lords Prayer, containing the sum of all lawful
petitions, and the order of them. Now these words are a part of the same, and
contain the fourth Petition, or principal request, as they are reckoned in
order; concerning outward things, or the matters of this life, very necessary
to be known, for our better direction in the seeking of such matters at the
hands of God. The matter then desired, according to the letter, is Bread, and
that for the day; whereby is meant, all the absolute necessaries of this life,
as bread, or somewhat answerable unto it, is absolutely necessary (in respect
of the means) for the preservation of the life of man; whence the Scripture so
often mentions the same as the chief, Genesis 28.20. Genesis 49.20. 2 Kings 25.29.
Eccl. 9.11. etc. for that error of supersubstantial conceited by some out of
the original, to apply it to the Sacrament, etc. I meddle not with it, being
sufficiently confuted See Mr. Scudder. (...), vel (...), Luke 11.2.
by others. By Daily, is meant that which is requisite for the day, or for the
time present, without further solicitude: so that in sum, maintenance for
life is here desired, wherein we consider for our present purpose, three things.

1. Who may hopefully and warrantably ask outward things at the hands of God,
and that is such as have first sought heavenly things of God, as their Father;
from the Coherence. 2. On what terms, and by what claim they may ask outward
things, and that is, only as a gift, Give us. 3. In what quantity and measure
those things are to be sought, that is, such as are necessary for the present
time. This day, etc. bread.




When Ezra and the Israelites had set their faces toward Sion, and bent
themselves to erect the worships of God at Jerusalem, they celebrate a Fast, to
seek a right way for themselves, their little ones, and all their substance,
Ezra. 8.21.

Nehemiah, and all the true Israelites having humbled themselves for their
sins, before the Lord at Jerusalem, and sought for grace, then they put up
their request for the fruits of the land, and temporal things which the
enemies possessed, Nehemiah 9.36, 37.

The Prophet David, a man of much faith and grace, and a great worshipper of
God, does often solicit the Lord, for outward deliverances and mercies, and
in his own behalf and the Churches, puts up this petition, That their Garners
may be full, from kind to kind, that their Sheep may bring forth thousands,
their Oxen strong to labor, etc. Psalm. 144.13, 14. The like did Jacob and
Agur, for their parts in their times, being both believers, and worshippers of
God, Gene. 28.20. Prove. 30.8. And all these prayed in faith, which has reason
for it.

Seek first the kingdom of God, and all these things shall be added, Math.
6.33. The Eye of the Lord is on them that fear him, upon them that hope in his
mercy, to deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine,
Psalm. 33.18, 19. Such may expect it.

Iam. 4.3.

Reproof of two sorts.

to their desires, and care for no more, nor look any higher. These as commonly
they pray not at all for them, so yet if they do, they have no promise of
obtaining: because their hearts are not upright in the desires of them, there
being no good end proposed, but the satisfying of their lusts, neither does the
Lord own them as his people, but they are people of the world, whose portion
is in this life, Psalm. 17.14. such as whose God is their belly, that mind
earthly things, Phil. 3.19. though these therefore may have and possess outward
matters, (as oftentimes they do) yet not as the fruits of Gods special
providence, nor testimonies of his favor and grace, but as effects of his
general providence, whereby he feeds and preferves all creatures, both man and
beast, Psalm. 36.6.

2. Such as ask in prayer, and seek in the means, some spiritual blessings,
as knowledge, and faith, and grace, so far as may concern their own
particular good, to assure them of heaven, and keep them from hell, and so to
secure them from evil; but not out of any true love to the things themselves,
(their Hearts being upon the world) much less the glory of God, the advancing
of his kingdom, the doing of his will, which are the Precedents to this fourth
Petition. These are but selfe-lovers, and not true lovers of God for his own
sake, and therefore have no promise of any good, temporal or spiritual, Zech.
7.5.

favor of God, the renewing of their hearts, the honor of Gods name, the
advancing of his kingdom, etc. in the first place with the chief affection,
as their only choice, whatsoever else be denied them. These have the evidence
of adoption, they may come unto God, as their Father, and expect at his hands
any spiritual or temporal good, bread, food, apparel, life, good success in
their lawful endeavors, etc. as things promised to such persons; and if they
have them not, it is because the Lord will chasten them for some evil, or try
their faith, patience, and submission, or recompense it in better things, which
are all blessings, and done in favor to them, having this assurance, that they
shall want nothing that is good for them, Psalm. 34.10.

then those things shall be supplied, whatsoever is expedient: But beware of
deceit, of politic seekings, of an earthly mind, whom God does answer
according to their heart, Ezekiel. 14.5. Cross then the course and custom of the
world herein, and thou shall find best success.

Give us, etc. Whence we learn, that

Jacob. If God will be with me, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment
to put on, then etc. Gene. 28.20. Also speaking to Esau his brother, These are
the Children which God has graciously given thy servant; Genes. 33.5. David
also asked life, and God gave it him, Psalm. 21.4. he took his life as a
gift; and how thankfully he acknowledged that, and all outward blessings else
to be the gifts of God, and to proceed merely from his goodness, is
abundantly expressed, 1. Chronic. 29.12, 16.

Not to multiply testimonies, (the Text it self being a universal and
perpetual direction in such cases) it has this evidence or ground, why they
are so to be asked.

Adam in his innocence had them all that way, Genes. 1.29. much more having
forfeited all by sin, are we to receive them as gifts repaired by the grace
of Christ. He that spared not his Son, but delivered him up for us all, how
shall he not with him also (...).
freely give us all things? Romans 8. verse 32. therefore are so to be asked and
received.

Reproof, of all such as lay arrogant and false claims to the outward things
they possess, as being their own by some merit, desert, or soveraigntie they
have over them, without any relation unto God at all in their thoughts or
speeches: Such was that lofty Tyrian, who boasted, how by his great wisdom
and understanding he had gotten him riches and treasures. Ezekiel. 28.4.
And that Egyptian Dragon, My river is mine, Ezekiel. 29.3.
and I have made it for my self. And such are they that attribute all to
Fortune, chance, or their own industry, or at the best, to some secondary
cause or other.

These persons, as commonly they ask nothing at the hands of God by prayer, so
seldom or never do they return thanks unto him for any thing they enjoy,
either health, life, or any comfort else: but sacrifice to their Nett, and
burn Incense to their Dragge, as the Prophet peakes, Hab. 1.16. The Lord is
not at all acknowledged of them, unless when they are crossed or hindered in
their expectations, then will they be ready to murmr and exclaim against
the providence of God, as if some great wrong were done unto them, and even to
blaspheme; which whence comes it, but from their pride, that esteemed them
selves the sole owners, and worthy of all things? To omit others taxable herein.

Acts 17.28. 2. To ask these things at his hands, as gifts of his bounty, not
merited, but freely promised in Christ, leaving the manner and measure of the
dispensation to his own pleasure, who is the giver of them. 3. To return
thanks unto him for whatsoever we enjoy, and to acknowledge his goodness,
be it more or less. So did Jacob, so did David, and so will all that are
faithful. Thus of the second branch.

time: Whence we are taught, that

Jacob, Genes. 28.20. Bread and raiment, not delicates, Vide Pet. Martyr in
locum.
nor robes: useful matters, not unnecessary hoards. Give me neither poverty
nor riches, (says Agur) but seed me with food convenient for me, Prove. 30.8.
and when we have food and raiment, let us be therewith content, as the holy
Apostle exhorts, 1. Timoth. 6.8. setting it in opposition to the seeking of
riches, and great abundance after mentioned. So here our Lord directs us to
pray for daily bread, or food for the day.

Psalm. 34.10. Hebr. 13.5. I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee.

Timoth. 6.9. especially when they are greedily desired; therefore does Agur
desire and pray rather to be without them, Prove. 30.8. giving a reason for his
request in the verse ensuing.

Lord has allotted the^, but they lust after great abundance, affluence, and
store, whatsoever they see any other to possess, or whatsoever they conceive
may be possessed to advance themselves and theirs to all generations. These
persons are either very confident of their power to use such things as they
ought, which is a deceit too common: or else they regard not how they use them,
which is the profaneness of too many. Howsoever, it is contrary to the rules
of God, and to his appoynment, that will have his people contented with his
allowance, and such as are sensible of their own good, submit unto it; they
that do not, run into those temptations and snares, mentioned by the
Apostle, 1. Tim. 6.9. which drown them in perdition and destruction in the end.

2. The error and deceit of them that under the name of daily bread, and
things necessary, will comprehend all such particulars, as they conceive to be
good for them or theirs; such as are health, life, liberty, peace food,
raiment, good success in such or such a business, design, or purpose;
withal, charging their consciences, with as certain a belief of obtaining
those particulars, as of remission of sins, the grace of God, and salvation
it self; and thereupon condemning and judging such for unbeleevers in that
behalf, as obtain not by prayer all, or any of those particulars so conceived
to be good, expedient, or necessary for them. Against which error, (because
there is need) I intend to lay before you some Arguments, and grounds out of
the Word of God, as well to rectify the Judgments of those that err, as to
comfort such as are unworthily dejected; but not to maintain, or side in a
quarrel, much less to reproach any man's person, which is far from me.

Argument 1.
Thus then I reason:

Those promises that have implied Conditions in them, cannot absolutely be
relied upon, or expected; for our faith is grounded on the promises.

But the promises of outward things (although necessary) are such.

Therefore they are not absolutely to be relied upon, or expected.

This appears in two Cases.

1. Of Chastisement, when the Lord will visit any of his people for their
sins; for then does he strip them of their outward comforts in part, and
sometimes wholly unto death: The former appears in all the corrections of the
faithful; the latter, in that example of the Jews, Lament. 4.4. where the
parents and children both dyed through extreme famine. Yet are they not
charged to want faith for this, so much, as but humiliation and repentance: and
who will bear any correction at all at the hand of God, if by his Faith he may
presently remoove it from him? And how can that be a sign of unbelief, that
does most accompany believers, and is a special testimony of Gods love? Revel.
3.9.

2. Of Probation and Trial, when God will prove and try the patience and
obedience of his servants: For in that case, they that have been endued with
most faith and grace, have been brought to the greatest exigents, and wants, as
in Hebr. 11.37. they were destitute, afflicted, and tormented, etc. 2. Corin.
11.27. Paul was pinched with hunger and thirst, with cold and nakedness; and
Luke 16. Lazarus was in extreme poverty and dyed: yet these were full of
faith, and of the spirit of God. [To which that of Job may be added.] Now who
would endure these trialls and distresses, if by faith and prayer he may
remove them? Or with what Warrant can they absolutely pray against them, seeing
they have no promise that they shall be spared? or how can Patience have her
perfect work without them? or Faith her crown and reward promised on that
Condition? Therefore the promises of outward things have Conditions employed to
the people of God, and are not absolutely intended.

Explication. When I say that the promises of temporal things have employed
conditions in them; I do not deny that there are any conditions expressed
concerning those things: for it is plain that there are, Levit. 26. the whole
Chapter being full of the Conditionalls, If. So Deuter. 28.1, 15. and Isai.
1.19. If ye consent and obey, ye shall eat of the good of the land, etc. But
that such promises as run generally, and seem to be absolute, without
limitation or reservation, (of which there are many, 1. Timoth. 4.8.) have yet
in regard of the particular persons and benefits, certain conditions employed,
and reservations to the will and pleasure of God, in regard of correction or
trial, whereunto all his people are to submit and subject their wills and
desires, which is their obedience, wherein by a secret act of recumbencie they
rest upon the goodness of God, See Mr. Goodwins Return of Prayers, page 51.
etc*
and his gracious promises and providence, that all shall be for the best,
howsoever they have not every particular benefit they desire, and think
expedient for them or theirs. And this is that which I mean by conditions
employed.

Whereas then the Temporary insulteth in his great victory gotten our of the
word [Implyed] as arguing, that in no place conditions are expressed: it is
very vain, the proposition being directed unto Gods administration in
particular, to his several servants, according to his will, which in that
regard is secret to himself, and not revealed but by experience: for who
knows which of his servants, (even of the most faithful) the Lord may try,
with the want of outward things, as the Martyrs, Job, Lazarus, etc.
notwithstanding the promises of temporal blessings in the general: which
shows that God has not confined himself to one only way in dealing with his
people, concerning those things, but reserved cases to himself, as of
correction or trial, which to seek to cross, by an absolute and peremptory
kind of praying for outward things, what is it else, but a tempting of God, a
beating off (as far as in us lies) of his most usual and profitable dealing
with his servants, and so an unsavory sacrifice unto him. In that respect
therefore they have conditions employed, as I say, Otherwise, I need not (as he
thinks) run to the word [Implyed] for shelter, seeing there are conditions
plainly expressed, Levitic. 26. as before. And herein I wish the Reader to
observe the foolish reasoning of the Temporary, who to disproove conditions
employed, grants conditions expressed, yet intending the contrary: For these
are his words: You know and must needs confess, that the Lord made absolutely
to his people Israel precious promises, Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. In which promises
there is no promises there is no condition employed. It is true indeed, those
promises were made upon condition of obedience, etc. but the condition lies on
their part; Gods part is absolute, etc. page 32.33.

I suppose these words need no other confutation than themselves. The promises,
were absolute on Gods part, the condition lies on their parts, If thou obey;
as if the Lord had made a covenant with himself, and not with men: and as if
there be conditions put in the promises to be performed, the same were not
conditional upon the performance to be made good or not. Else there are no
conditional promises at all, but all must be absolute, and absolutely
performed; and doubtless whatsoever the Lord has absolutely promised, shall be
absolutely performed. His long Discourse then of the sins and punishments of
the Israelites, For in that they lost te^porals thorough their disobedience, it
shows the promise to be conditional.
is but against himself, which I note the rather, because of his insolent and
reproachful tauntings in that place against me, and my preaching, as if it were
Popery, and what not?

To my Instances, he pretends, First, that I have mistaken their opinion in
speaking only of Faith, whereas they include repentance also, and love.
Whereunto I answer, that in their scandalous practice in the Country, the
whole burden was put upon Faith and believing generally: Such was the general
complaint ^o me.
But this man steps in to refine the matter, and joins many other things as
included, which yields him much matter of discourse, and so of evasion in a
mist of many words. All which was framed since the Sermon, of purpose (as I
conceive) to hide the shame of their opinion: therefore he printeth that
before my arguments, which should stand after them.

To the second instance he answers, that those things, which Saint Paul and
the Martyrs suffered were blessings, because persecution is a blessing not to
be prayed against, etc. page 23.36, 67. To which I briefly reply, that
persecution in it self, and it is own nature considered, is no blessing, but a
mischief rather and misery, an evil to be prayed against; and the contrary
much to be desired, as plainly appears by Psalm. 74. wholly, Psalm. 122.6. 1.
Tim. 2.2. Acts 8.3, 4. compared with Chap. 9.31. Therefore is the Temporary
pitifully out, and takes The adjunct for the subject.
one thing for another; as because the persecuted are blessed, and that it is a
blessed thing to suffer persecution for the name of Christ, therefore
persecution it self were a blessing. As if because such as are slaundred,
reviled, tortured, racked and tormented for the sake of Christ, are blessed:
therefore slanders, revilings, racks, tortures and torments, are blessed
things in themselves; which if they be, then are they not only not to be prayed
against, but to be prayed for, and desired. Thereupon is he mistaken in the
Martyrs, For they were offered delivernace, if they would have forsaken the
truth.
that refused not deliverance, because persecution is a blessing (as he
affirms) but because the Conditions were not such as they could consent unto,
else had they persecuted themselves. Howsoever to the point. Seeing persecution
brings the want of outward things, and that be a state, whereunto the Lord does
often call his people: to pray absolutely against all outward wants, and for
outward benefits, putting the fault upon impenitency or infidelity, if we
have them not, how weak a practice is it? for it is the same in this, as in
other states of affliction, all are blessed to the faithful, Psalm. 94.12.
neither has he any reason to single out this from other cases, but that he
would make matters come in to his own way, without any ground of Scripture at
all. Else he would have annexed some answer to the instance of Lazarus, [and
the Story of Iob] which are against him in his opinion directly, therefore he
slides by them. As for the buffettings of St Paul 2 Cor. 12.7.
by Satan, wherein his prayer in the particular was not granted, In private
conference.
he answered likewise, that Saint Paul had no Warrant to pray against those
temptations, A crazy passage many ways, and against the sixth Petition of the
Lords Prayer.
being nothing else but Original sin, which if he had been delivered from,
then he should have had no need of Christ. It is a marveilous thing, that any
man should dote upon such opinions, or others admire him for them. But to
proceed.

The second Argument.
Such things as are ordinarily denied the best and most faithful servants of
God, and accompany not their condition here, cannot be absolutely prayed for,
or expected, neither will that procure them; for that were to cross his
Providence.

But these matters are so, as is rehearsed.

Therefore, etc.

This appears by two Testimonies.

1. Of Saint James, chap. 2.5. God has chosen the poor in this world to be
rich in faith, and heirs of his Kingdom: Rich in faith, and yet outwardly
poor; the abundance of faith then helps not their poverty. 2. Of our Savior,
Math. 25.35. I was hungry, and ye fed me not; thirsty, and ye gave me no
drink; naked, and ye clothed me not, etc. Whereby it appears, that some of
the members of Christ shall be poor and distressed, wanting necessaries, in
all times, to the end of the world: neither are these taxed for want of faith
at all, nor yet does the Lord fail of any of his promises to his servants,
much less by a continual course, therefore are they denied, etc.
Explication. When I say that outward things are ordinarily denied to the
servants of God, I intend such an administration in all ages and times toward
some, and that not a few of them, so that it is no extraordinary matter, nor
limited to some times and ages only, and this the instances prove. For when
Sr. James says, God has chosen, etc. Non quod omnes, sed quod plures
pauperes, quam divites hujusmundi elegerit Deus-Paraus in locum.
He means, that in his eternal counsel he made choice of such more than
of others, not for their poverties sake, but according to his pleasure, not
utterly excluding others, but for the most part, showing, and manifesting his
Grace toward these in every age, whom he calls Poor, not because they have
not affluence and abundance, but (as the Original word imports) scarce
things necessary, (...) signif mendicus, and more than (...) pauper.
without help and supply from others, which outs off the answer of the
Temporary, holding those poor to be such as have all things convenient,
(...), etc. Aristophanis Plutus, act. 2. scen. 5.
only Riches and Braverie excepted (unless he will grant a contradiction in
his answer; which is no strange matter with him) and this is by an ordinary
dispensation and course in all times and ages; whence it is, that I say, that
outward things accompany not their condition here; that is, necessarily, but
that they may often want them.

And this may serve also to confirm the second instance, out of Math. 25. For
if some of the most faithful members of Christ want not things necessary in
every age, how shall that be the trial of all the rest that did not relieve
them, His mystical interpretation of the place, does not overthrow this
Collection from the literal sense, which all acknowledge.
or the contrary in them that did, seeing our Lord sets it down, and proclames
it for a general Trial at that great day? Whereas therefore the Temporary
demands, if this be granted, that many of the Saints shall want necessaries,
what will follow? I answer, this will follow, That Temporal necessaries do not
necessarily accompany the state of the faithful in this life, neither is it
through want of faith or repentance that many of them have them not (as he
affirms) but they may abound in faith and grace, and excel them that have
them, (CHRIST JESUS putting himself in their persons, and in that very
condition:) and thereupon, that the promises of Temporal things, are not so
absolute without some conditions employed, else they should absolutely be
performed to all the faithful, the Lord being most true in the performance of
all his promises. And that then the faithful themselves are not in that
peremptory manner to require them in Prayer, and to expect them so, as that
either the Lord must be unjust, if they be not granted, or they wanting in
faith and grace that obtain them not, which is the point in controversy; and
then his opinion is very unsound, and his practice audacious and
unwarrantable, on the terms he maintains it. How fearful then is that
Passage of his, I use his own language. page* 22.
that if any say they have Repentance, Faith, and Love, and miss of the very
thing faithed in Prayer: they make God a deceiver, because he never gives the
one without the other.

The third Argument.
That which did never put any certain difference between one and another in
outward things, is not the absolute condition of those things, for that cannot
stand.

But Faith and Grace did never put any certain difference between one and
another in outward things. Ergo, is not the absolute condition of those things,
nor annexed unto them.

This appears by two places.

First, Eccles. 9.2. All things come alike unto all, and there is one event, to
him that fears GOD, and to him that fears him not, etc. And no man knews
love or hatred by all that is before him, ver. 1. Which would not be so, if
there were any certain bettering of the outward estate by Faith and Grace.

Secondly, Math. 5.45. Your heavenly Father makes his Sun to rise on the
evil, and on the good; and sends Rain on the Just and on the Unjust. So
that the very same dispensation in outward things, belongs to one as to
another, and there is no difference; Which providence does interpret the
promises concerning these things.

Explication. When I say that Faith and Grace do put no difference between
one and another in outward things, my meaning is (according to my words) no
external difference, The internal I acknowledged in a Letter to him.
that a believer shall certainly better his outward estate by his Faith, and an
unbeliever infallibly hurt his outward estate and condition by his unbelief,
so that one may be known from another, by their thriving or not thriving in
the world, that the Children, Corn, Cattle, Ground, and Possessions of the
one, shall be ever more prosperous than the other, which was my Illustration in
my Sermon. For this is so contrary to the Scriptures, and all experience, that
it is a very shameful thing to affirm it. Yet, if outward things were
necessarily annexed to faith, In regard of their fruition.
it must be so, and such blamed for unbelief with whom it is otherwise, which
were to condemn the generation of the righteous.

Whereas then the Temporary produces diverse promises out of the Scriptures of
the old Testament, containing blessings belonging to the righteous, and their
seed; and on the contrary, many threatenings to the wicked in that kind: he
should have done well withal, to have answered those questions, and resolved
those Cases, that troubled Job and his friends, the Prophet David, and Jeremy,
about these matters; the former uttering his complaint thus: Wherefore do the
wicked live, become old, and are mighty in power? Their seed is established in
their sight, and their offspring before their eyes. Their houses are safe from
fear, neither is the rod of God upon them, etc. Job 21.7, 8. The other thus
confessing: My feet were almost gone, my steps had welnigh slipped: for I was
envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked. There are no
bands in their death, but their strength is firm, they are not in trouble as
other men, neither are they plagued like other men. All the day long have I
been plagued and chastened every morning, etc. Psalm. 73.3, 4. etc. Jeremy in
this manner expostulating with the Almighty: Wherefore does the way of the
wicked prosper? Wherefore are all they happy that deal very treacherously?
Thou have planted them, they have taken root, they grow, they bear fruit,
Jerem. 12.1.2. He should have resolved these cases, and showed how this could
stand with the promises of outward blessings to the faithful, and the
contrary to the wicked, and then he had done something: But this, either
through ignorance he passes over, or else, purposely, because it made against
him, he passes by in silence. Neither could he say any thing to Job or
David, if he had been with them (according to his own way) in those cases,
but that there was a Plague in their hearts, and they wanted Repentance, Faith,
or Love, else it had been otherwise with them, and so he might have gone
amongst Job's miserable comforters, of whom he complains, Job 16.2.

But it is evident out of those testimonies, and the like administration in all
times, that faith and grace does not make or discover any certain difference
between one and another in outward things to be known by, but that the most
faithful may be in deep adversities, while the wicked prosper and flourish.
Concerning then those temporal promises under the Law, upon condition of
obedience, it is evident that they were part of the Pedagogie of the Jews, to
train them on, and allure them to be obedient to the Law of God, as also to
lead them to the consideration of better things, as the milk and honey, the
corn, the wine and oil of the land of Canaan also were. Whereas now under the
Gospel we have a better Covenant, (...).
established upon better promises, the spiritual blessings of the kingdom of
Christ, Hebr. 8.6.
remission of sins, peace of conscience, the Holy Spirit, with the graces
thereof, and the everlasting rest to come. And for those temporal promises,
they may be appendices to the Covenant, in as much as Christ is made Heir of
all things, So Calvin on Heb. 1.2.
and so do most properly belong unto the faithful: yet seeing none are
perfectly obedient, and the Lord does direct and order all to the everlasting
good of his people, therefore neither under the Law heretofore, nor now under
the Gospel were those temporal benefits necessarily conferrd upon the just,
but their faith and patience were exercised and tried with the want of them,
more or less, according as it pleased the Lord to single out any of his
servants, (as he has done many) thereunto; and that without either breach of
promise in God, or want of faith and grace in his servants and people: so that
although the blessing do belong truly to the faithful and their seed,
according to the Scriptures, yet the outward benefits themselves in particular,
are not ever so bestowed upon the believers, as that thereby they may certainly
be known and distinguished from others, the Lord reserving that in his own
power, to deal according to his holy pleasure and will with his own, having
always in store better things for them, than he does at any time deny them.

My Instances produced for the proof of what I affirm, the Temporary labors
to put by with his Interpretations, as of Eccles. 9.2. All things come alike to
all, etc. which he would have to be the judgment of the world, only recited
by Solomon, but not approved of, that the world does so think and speak, that
all things come alike, and there is one event; but it is not so indeed, this
being an evil under the Sun, (which Solomon saw) that men think, and speak
so, making that a parallel unto it, in Malac. 3.13. Your words have been stout
against me, in that ye say, it is in vain to serve God, etc. Wherein 1. he
walks alone, having no Expositor to concur with him, or assist him in that
sense (that he knew) as he confessed in a private Letter.

2. He runs directly against Salomons intendment, See Eccles. 2.14, 15.
and overturnes the coherence with the former words, and the drift of the
place, which is to show, that the persons and works of good and bad, are so
under the power and providence of God, and ordered by him, that no man was
certain to better his outward estate by his obedience, and righteousness, but
that the same event in outward things might befall him, that befell the wicked
and ungodly, which is an evil under the Sun, that is, one of those
grievances, that in this world denied any perfect happiness to the just
themselves, in as much as all their obedience could not secure them from the
common evil events of the ungodly, but that all things came alike to all, and
no certain difference did outwardly appear between them, in life, or in
death. Which is confirmed by that pertinent place to this purpose, chapter
8.14. There be just men to whom it happens according to the work of the
wicked, and there be wicked men to whom it happens according the work of the
righteous. A wicked man may be visited with Famine, Pestilence, or the Sword,
so may the righteous: an ungodly person may be crossed and afflicted in his
person, offspring, estate, and name, so may the most godly and faithful: See
Weemes Christian Synagogue. lib. 2. cap. 5. fully of this point.
The holy Scriptures are full of examples; as in Job, David, Hezekiah, and many
others, for as died Saul and Ahab, so died Jonathan and good Josiah. As for
that place then in Malachie, it contains nothing but the evil consequence and
use that some men made of the prospering of the wicked, and the afflictions of
the just. As if therefore it were in vain to serve God, and there were no
profit at all in it, either here, or hereafter: which very Temptation assaulted
the heart of David, Or of Asaph as some think.
as he confesses, Psalm. 73.13. Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, etc.
But he was satisfied and resolved to the contrary out, of the word of God. All
which do plainly prove the point in hand, that outward blessings or benefits
are not necessarily and infallibly annexed to faith, and to the faithful, for
the fruition of them; and so the contrary to unbelievers (as the Temporary
would have it) to difference the one from the other.

And concerning that other testimony taken from Math. 5.45. He labors to
avoid it, by showing, that the outward benefits the faithful enjoy, they have
by promise through Christ, but the others not so; whereas that is no part of
the Question, how, or by what claim either of them have these things, but that
they have them: neither of the internal difference that faith and grace makes
between one and another, which no man doubts of, but the external difference
in outward things, whether that be certain, as thereby to difference the good
from the bad, which is the point controverted, and this not only the former
instances disprove, but this testimony, confirmed by common and daily
experience; in that the evil, and the good, the just, and the unjust are
equally partakers of the benefit of Sun and Rain, Muscul: in locum. Quare Deus
non discrimines inter bones and males.
with other general effects of Gods gracious providence and goodness, as our
Savior there reasons; which I say, therefore do belong to all, that is,
that by a general dispensation all are partakers of them.

And thus I conclude, (not to trace him further in his wanderings) that the
promises of outward things are not so absolutely made unto the faithful, as
that by the fruition of them, they are certainly differenced from others: and
that the Lord must be unjust, if he deny these things unto his servants, upon
their Prayers, or they wanting in faith, or some necessary grace in themselves,
which is the maine opinion of the Temporary. So to proceed.

The fourth Argument.
That which the Lord Jesus and his Apostles did pray for, or against
conditionally, is so to be done of us: for we are bid to follow their
Examples, and to try our Spirits and Practices by theirs, and not theirs by
ours.

But our Lord and his Apostles did so. Ergo.

This is proved by two places.

First, Luke 22.42. Father, if thou be willing, let this Cup pass from me,
yet not my will, but thine be done. Here is the deprecation of an outward
evil, not absolutely, but with submission to the will of God.

Secondly, Romans 1.10. Making request, if by any means, I might have a
prosperous journey, by the will of God to come unto you. Here is an outward
benefit; yea, somewhat more (a service to the Church) desired with submission
to Gods will. And St. James lays down a rule for all to follow in such cases.
Ye ought to say, If God will. Iam. 4.15. What is it then to teach that we
ought not to say, If the Lord will, but directly to cross the word of God?

Explication. The Argument is grounded upon the examples of our Savior Christ,
and the Apostles, in a moral duty, that concerns all Christians in all times
to practice; that is, prayer unto God, and submission therein to his will: In
which cases we have Commandments given us in the Word, to follow their steps,
and to do as we have them for examples. For I have given you an example, that
ye should do, as I have done to you, John 13.15. Leaving us an example, that
we should follow his stepps, 1. Pet. 2.21. Be ye Followers of me, as I also
am of Christ, 1. Corin. 11.1. To make our selves an ensample to you to follow
us, 2 Thessalonians. 3.9. Those things which ye have both learned, and received, and
heard, and seen in me, do. Phil. 4.9. Wherein Examples in moral duties, are
proposed for imitation, especially those perfect patterns of him, who did no
sin, neither was guile found in his mouth, 1. Pet. 2.22. The general Orthodoxe
Doctrine of the Church of God.
This being the Divinity that I have learned, That in matters peculiar to his
Office of Mediatorship, as to be a sacrifice for sin, to make atonement, to
present our prayers unto God: or peculiar and proper to his divine nature and
power, as to walk upon the water, to raise from the dead, etc. We neither are
called, See Christian Synagogue. lib. 2. cap. 5.
nor yet is it in our power to imitate his actions: but in matters of moral
obedience; Vide Amesium in 1. Petri. cap. 2. ver. 21.
as in Patience, Humility, Meekness, Love, Submission to the will of his
Father, his example and pattern is proposed, and recorded for our imitation
and practice; and of this nature is the point in question. Which I therefore
propose not indefinitely, as to say, that That which our Savior Christ did in
general (without limitation) is to be done of us: But what he did in this
matter of Prayer being a Moral duty, and so likewise the Apostles. Which to
say, is a doctrine fit to be spewed out of the Church (as the Temporary does
in his answer) how beastly and blasphemous is it? And for the ground of his
speech, that we are to live by rules and precepts, and not by examples, that
being a Pillar of the Church of Rome, it is even as vain. Exemphim Christi,
est praxis theologiae, ibid.
For are we not commanded to follow the examples of Christ, in those things,
as before has been showed? Which general command comprehends all
particulars, of that nature, that they need not be mentioned, as the
Temporary foolishly requires; neither is this any Pillar, especially a chief
Pillar of the Church of Rome, (as he speaks) to imitate our Savior Christ,
and the holy Apostles in Moral duties, and matters of obedience, for then they
would have better Pillars to support them, than we know they have any. It is
well spoken for them, but simply for himself, who condemns all the Churches
of Christ, as no Churches, for not imitating those first patterns of the
Apostles, and their examples in those times (as he elsewhere alleges.)
Therefore herein I teach no Will Worship, nor Idolatrous action, nor any thing
tending that way: but what is warranted by Scripture, and backed with reason.
Keck: de locis commu. page 281. See Perkins in Math. 6. page 328.
Exempla enim nihil sunt aliud, quam generalis doctrinae, and regularum
universalium specialia symbola. Our Savior himself confuteth the Pharisees,
and defends his Disciples partly by examples. Matthew 12.3. St. Paul proves
and confirms the greatest Article of our faith, by an example. Romans 4.22, 23.
The holy Scriptures oftentimes recommend unto us, the examples of the
Patriarcks, the Prophets, the Martyrs, as patterns for our imitation, to
follow them. Heb. 11. etc. Therefore how rude is this man to reject the
examples of Christ himself, and the Apostles, with such foul language as he
does? But he has somewhat to say against the Proofs.

1. That Prayer of our Savior (he says) was extracted from him; the
horriblenesse of the punishment for man's sin retaining for a time, the whole
humane mind, until his Divinity raised him up again; after which he spoke
after another manner, as Matthew witnesses, alleging the testimony of a
namelesse author, that it was Nequaquam justa precatio. Christ knowing full
well that he must die, etc. Whereunto I answer, that is certain, that our
Lord did never any finfull action, neither was he subject with Moses to speak
unadvisedly with his lips through distemper: Psalm. 106.33.
Nor was his Humanity ever tainted or overcome with any sinful perturbations,
Vide Melancthon: De Passione Christ's per Pezelium. page 282.
or impotent Passions, as either to desire, or to utter things unlawful or
evil, that none might imitate: therefore, howsoever his agony was very great,
Christi trepidationes non fuerunt similes nostris. ibidem.
and the Humanity did that which was proper unto it, seek the diverting of an
evil, if it might be, yet withal, at the same instant he does advisedly and
holily submit himself to his Fathers will therein, without any reluctancie at
all, being one entire action. How suspitiously and dangerously then does the
Temporary handle this Prayer, as if it were some unadvised speech, and fall of
the Humanity, out of which the Divinity recovered him again. For the defense
whereof he would make one Evangelist to contradict another, and cites a
namelesse Author, saying, that it was Nequaquam justa precatio (a speech that
had need be warily understood) and all this to explode this example Or rather
to be abhorred
from imitiation, and so to establish his error.

But for the clearing of all this, I think it fit to produce the judgment of
a godly learned Author on the place, speaking thus: It is the collection of
most Writers.
Attamen ut liberetur petit, unde colligimus, etc. Yet he desires to be
freed. Whence we gather, that it is lawful for us to deprecate those evils,
that are approaching: For if it be natural to grieve for them, then are not
they to be condemned that desire to be freed from them. But herein, the
moderation or correction that Christ does use is diligently to be marked, when
he adds, Yet not my will, but thine be done: In which saying, he asks
that, which he teaches us to ask, Thy will be done in earth, as it is in
heaven. This therefore may be a rule to us of all our Prayers, concerning
things of this life, wherein it is not certain to us what the Lord would have
to be done. And such are too bold and confident, as will undertake to prescribe
unto him, on whose sole pleasure we depend, and all ours. This being the reason
why the Prayers of many are not heard, because they are bold, not so properly
to pray, as with a kind of authority to command, and to prescribe unto God what
they will have to be done for them. Gaulther in Luke 22.42. Which one
testimony might be sufficient to end the Controversy, were the Adversary
reasonable, but he has more to say.

2. That of Romans 1.10. does show the desire St. Paul had to come to them, but
he had no promise of God, that he should come to them, and therefore it is no
marvel that he puts in an [ If,] as any one must do, when he asks what
God has not promised, etc. To which I answer. 1. That herein I cannot but
marvel at the daring spirit of this man, that in the former Proof, does
little better than tax the LORD JESUS himself of some fall and fault in his
conditional Prayer: And here he accuses the holy Apostle for praying (and
that very often) for such a thing as for which he had no promise that he
should be heard. Without ceasing always, ver. 9. (...)


There is no marvel (says he) though he doubts, seeing he had no
promise, etc. For, whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin, and where there is no
promise at all, there can be no faith. Therefore those frequent prayers of St.
Paul were offered up without faith, and were sinful Prayers, by his opinion,
who elsewhere affirms, Page 15.
that faith and doubting are so contrary, that codem instanti, they cannot
stand together; and that the word [ If] arising from thence, does stand
between God and us, as a cloud. This is his arrogant censure of the Apostles
prayers.

2. I would demand of him, or any that hold with him, whether Saint Paul had
not as much ground of assurance, and as certain a promise, for his coming to
the Romans, as the Temporary, or any other have of any particular Temporal
benefit they ask at the hands of God, for the promises run only in general.
It is not said of any particular person, that he shall have this or that
particular Favor, Benefit, or Request, but in general only, and all this St.
Paul had. For as a Believer he had the promises of those Temporal benefits
that were necessary for him; as an Apostle he had a special promise from
Christ of assistance in Preaching the Cospel to the Gentiles (of which the
Romans were part) Act. 26.17. As an earnest Petitioner for this particular
favor, (being more necessary than any Temporal matter,) he had as much, and
far more promise of audience, than any Temporary believer has of any Temporal
benefit that he conceives to be good for him. And yet had he no promise for
what he asked? What promise then has the Temporary for all his Temporals,
whereof he is so confident? But what if the Apostle had a promise from God,
and a particular assurance of his coming to the Romans? for it is certain
that he had a promise of coming to Rome, Act. 23.11. and before that he was
assured of it, Act. 19.21. And when he wrote the Epistle he was confident in
it, Romans 15.24. Where then is the truth of the Temporary, in saying that he
prayed for that, for which he had no promise.

Which practice elsewhere, he calls babbling, in two places, Page 20. and 57.
Does it not rather appear herehence, that in all our undertakings we are to
have dependence upon God, and to wait upon his will, resigning our selves to
his good pleasure, and therefore in our prayers either expressly, or implicitly
to desire (as the Apostle does) by the will of God to do this or that work,
to have this or that benefit from him, to make our journeys prosperous, etc.
(as the word imports: (...). As we say, A good journey.
) and not as the Temporary proudly teaches, Give me this, and give me that,
for I know it is good for me? which kind of language wise Parents would not
allow in their children. Doubtless, it argues not a little arrogance in this
man, to quarrel so with the words of the Apostle, desiring by the will of god
to have a prosperous journey to the Romans. May he not as well alter the
third Petition, and say not, Thy will be done, but Our wills be done, in our
prayers? for it tends unto it apace. But he goes on further yet.

3 That of Saint James, Ye ought to say, If the Lord will, is intended only
against those vain boasters, who would peremptorily say, We will go to such a
City, etc. seeing no man knows that he shall live a day, but to reserre it
to prayer for temporal necessaries is a gross abuse, seeing* Saint James
speaks of Saying, and we of Praying.

For answer whereunto, I say, that Saint James speaks not, only of saying,
neither is it the saying or not saying of those words simply, So Calvin on the
place.
that he intends, but the reproof of the arrogant confidence, and
groundless security of such, as if their lives and actions had been in their
own power, and all at their own disposing, would without any acknowledgment
of God, or dependence upon his providence, considently undertake all their
actions, neither in heart conceiving, nor in words expressing any submission at
all to the will of God, or dependence on his providence: Against both which
evils does the Apostle inveigh, teaching men as well in their hearts to
acknowledge, as by their tongues to confess their relying wholly upon God, and
dependence upon on his will, in all their designs and purposes: which thing
has such relation to Prayer, as that the one cannot stand in truth without the
other, neither are they ever severed in practice; for he that does truly
acknowledge the soveraigntie of God in all things, and his absolute power over
him and his actions, will also by earnest prayer seek his grace and favor, to
dispose of him in mercy for the best, considering his own unworthiness of any
good. My times are in thy hand. Psalm. 31.15.
And seeing the counsel and purpose of God is unknown to us, concerning our
lives, our estates, and the event of all our doings; such a one will with
submission to the will of God, offer up his requests concerning outward things:
as, if it may stand with his pleasure to grant him this or that benefit, or
favor: if it may tend to his glory: if it may further our everlasting good,
etc. and so speak before men. Of which practice, what better pattern can we
have than that of Saint Paul, who not only offered his prayers in such cases
(and that more than of a secular nature) with such a submissive, If the Lord
permit; if God will, etc.
if, but used it often in his speeches and writings, as appears by Act. 18.21.
1 Cor. 4.19. 1 Cor. 16.7. Romans 1.10 Phil. 2.19, 24. and yet had a more special
and particular promise in those cases, than any man now can ordinarily have;
neither has he ever till now (that I have heard) been taxed for unbelief
therein, or praying without a promise, much less babbling, proh scelus!

And herein I wish the Temporary would take notice of his notable ignorance
and rashness together, who in grounding his opinion for absolute prayer, has
reference only to the revealed will of God, excluding his secret counsel and
purpose altogether. For although it be true, that the written Word of God does
contain in it a perfect discovery of good and evil, to regulate our
obedience: and that therein is plainly declared, what things are lawful or
unlawful, (for the general matter of them) to be asked at his hands: yet for
the determination of the particulars, to whom, how, and in what manner those
things shall be done, it is not revealed, but reserved unto his secret
counsel and purpose, to be ordered and disposed according to those glorious
ends that he has ordained and appointed. Dan. 4.35. Psalm. 33.11.
And this is that will, So Tareus on the place.
which Saint Paul intends in the forenamed places, and that St. James here
means, when he requires that we say, If the Lord will. For St Paul doubted
not of the revealed will of God, for the lawfulness of his desire to go to
Rome and Corinth, but for the time, the comfort of his journey, and the good
success, which were secrets, therein he desires favor. Neither does Saint
James question the lawfulness of traveling to Cities and Towns, in men's
lawful trades, for commerce and gain, as if it agreed not with the revealed
will of God: but the purpose of God concerning the lives of particular persons,
and their several successes therein, which is reserved to his secret will,
which they knew not; and therefore are to interpose that condition, Hebr 6.3.
If the Lord will, or, If God permit. Which consideration the Temporary will
not acknowledge, but stands only upon the revealed will, as if it were definite
and determinate to each particular, concerning persons and matters, making
great ado about the sufficiency of the Scriptures, and the absoluteness of
the promises, as if the purpose of God concerning the temporal condition of
all his servants were there manifested, or were to be ordered one way. Job,
David, Solomon, the Martyrs, Lazarus, (whether it be a parable or not) were
all the servants of God, had all the same general promises, and yet their
outward conditions were very different, which was not revealed to them in the
word, but by experience, whereby that secret will of God was seen; and here
is the submission of the faithful, when they pray that the will and purpose of
God concerning them, may be effected in mercy toward them, and themselves
patiently submit unto it, crossing and denying their own wills and desires: so
that if it please the Lord to try them by wants, and by a low estate, as Job
and Lazarus, they are contented: if by any other crosses and great afflictions,
they say Thy will be done: and they challenge nothing of certainty, but that
they be not forsaken, Hebr. 13.5. Unto this will therefore all the servants of
God are to submit themselves, not only* in deed, but in word, and that not in
saying alone, but in praying, if it stand with the will of their Father, if it
be his pleasure, Which is an, If, of submission, not of unbelief.
if it be good for them, if it tend to his glory, to take off such a cross,
to be^tow such a favor on them, which is not contrary to the revealed will,
(the promises being indefinite) but agreeable to it, that has taught us in
such cases so to pray: therefore are we not gone from praying to bare saying,
as the Temporary dreameth, and so his taunting speeches at the word (If) in
prayer, as arguing always infidelity, as a cloud that stands between God and
us: as that which makes our prayers not agreeable to the word: as that which
deprives us of many blessings, as that which lulls men in security, etc. are no
other then the froth of Imagination, and the vanishing vapor of error. And
his direction in all our prayers for temporal things to come unto God in this
sort, Lord, thou have commanded us to ask the very thing we now desire, and
therefore we expect it at thy hands, here is our Evidence, we know it is good
for us, etc. charging the Lord with his promise, mise, and condemning them that
miss of the particulars, so asked with unbelief, and a plague in their
hearts, is a presumptuous kind of praying, and an unwarrantable ground of
censuring. And thus of the fourth Argument.

The fifth Argument.
If the Faith of Miracles was limited and bounded by the will of God, then all
other faith is so: But the faith of Miracles was confined to the will of God,
and his pleasure. Ergo.

This appears, 1. By Acts 19.12. where it is plain, that Saint Paul had the
Faith of Miracles, and healed Diseases. 2. Yet. 2. Timoth. 4.20. He complains
that he left Trophimus at Miletum sick. No doubt but he desired his health,
and prayed for it, but could not obtain it, though it be promised, that the
prayer of Faith shall heal the sick, James 5.15. Because it is subject to
Gods pleasure and will; which shows the promises to be conditional.


Explication. The ground of my Argument is, that the faith of Miracles, and the
gift of healing the body in those times, had as certain and as special
promises, as a justifying Faith has for any particular Temporalls; which is
prooved by the Commission and power given the Apostles, Matthew. 10.8. Heal the
sick, cleanse the Lepers, raise the dead, cast out Devils, etc. and by that
of James, the prayer of Faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him
up, etc. Iam. 5.15. which yet was so confined to the will of God, that al were
not healed or raised thereby, Mr. Goodwins return of prayers, page 50.
for then none must have died at all, or if they had, must have been raised up
again. Therefore notwithstanding those absolute promises, a secrer reservation
to the will of GOD, was employed in regard of the particulars, so it was limited
and bounded. To which the Pemporary replyeth, That both the Faith of Miracles,
and all other Faith, had no other bound but the revealed will of God, utterly
denying the other, and thereupon my Argument. Which if it were so, then the
former consequence must needs follow, that all must be healed, and all raised,
seeing the promises run absolute, and general, according to the letter, and
are so to be understood, according to his own renent, without any other
limitation intended.

Whereas then I produce the example of Trophimus, whom Saint Paul left behind
him sick, to prove the gift of healing not to be unlimited; using these words,
no doubt, he desired his health, and prayed for it, etc. To this he answers
deridingly (after his manner) Who told you, that Saint Paul prayed for the
health of Trophimus? another may say no doubt, he did not pray for him, etc.
The secret things belong unto God. I know not how it can be rightly resolved,
unless you call Paul or Trophimus from the dead again. Wherein I cannot but
admire the rudeness of this man's spirit, and language, that before charge
the Apostle with unbelief, and praying without any promise, which in two other
places he calls babbling: and here he questioneth his Charity, making a
great doubt, whether he did so much as offer up a prayer for his sick friend
to recover him. It is no marvel, if he vilisie others with his foul language,
that dares thus to handle the holy Apostle. Would not he himself think it
much to be so taxed? to be with a Christian in sickness, to have need of his
health, yet not so much as to offer up a prayer unto God for him, but there to
leave him? Surely it were no Christian carriage, and therefore most unmeet to be
imputed to so excellent a person for grace and holiness, as Saint Paul was.
For my part then, I say again, as I said before, that there is no doubt but
Saint Paul prayed for Trophimus. He that presses this duty so much upon all
Christians, in his Epistles, that practiced the same so much himself for the
believers, ant that by name, Ephesians. 1.16. Col. 1.9. Phil. 1 3.4. 1 These. 1.2.
being absent from them: that was so full of grace and love himself: that for
a believer, a companion with him in his troubles, Acts 20.4. he should not
offer up a prayer for him in his sickness, being present with him, shall still
be uncredible to me, and the contrary no secret nor uncertain collection. Now
if he did pray for him, and yet he was not recovered by it, as the Text
shows, then it follows, that the faith of miracles and gift of healing, and
so all prayer for temporal blessings on our selves and others are confined
unto the will and pleasure of God, The a. Epistle to Tim. seems to be written
long after S. Paul was at Miletum. Ergo, Trophimus remained sick, long.
in respect of the particulars, although the promises run absolute and
general, and therefore have employed conditions in them, which is the point in
Question. Whence it will also follow, that prayers offered up for all such
things, are to be made with the Conditional If, it stand with the will and
pleasure of GOD, expressed, or employed and intended.

And thus have I fortified my Five Arguments, which the Temporary so
scornefully opposes, not tracting nor following therein his rambling
discourses, and wandering impertinences, which were endless; much less his
ridiculous descants, In his Answer to the Second part.
and idle inconsequences, as not becoming the gravitie of the matter, and
point in hand: but only discovering and urging what I conceive for substance,
to be pertinent to the point, and agreeable to the Truth.

There were also a Question or two added and resolved, necessary for the
removing of such scruples and doubts as may arise in the minds of any
concerning this matter, which I think fit to set down and explain.

Quest. If any ask, how then shall we pray in Faith, for any outward things if
it be uncertain, whether we shall have them?

Answ. I answer: we believe that we shall have whatsoever is good for us
(which the Lord best knows) either the outward benefit, or grace to supply
it, as 2 Corinthians. 12.9.

Explication. That which is said to be good for us, I understand two ways,
Positively, or Privatively: 1. Positively, when we have the very benefits
themselves in particular that we desire, as Abraham had a son of his own to
be his heir, Sampson had water at his request, Judges 15.19, etc. 2.
Privately, when the thing we desire is denied us, but a better is bestowed
upon us, either corporal, or spiritual, as Abraham was denied Eliezer or
Damascus, (which he intended, Genesis 17.18, 19.
and Ishmael, though he prayed for it) but had an Isaac to be his heir,
Gal. 4.28.
the heir of promise. Deuteronomy. 3.24. etc.
Moses was denied an entrance into the earthly Canaan, but was received into a
heavenly. Saint Paul was denied upon his earnest and often request, 2 Cor. 12.9.
the remooving of a temptation, but had a better thing given; grace sufficient
for him, and a blessed use of the affliction. Which things were all good for
them, and far better than the things denied, which they requested, and prayed
for; And this by the Lords disposing, who knows best what is good for his
servants, and for the glory of his own name; denying therefore many things in
mercy, which he might grant in judgment. Now this then is certain, that
whatsoever is good for the people of God, they shall obtain by prayer,
according to his gracious promises made to them, upon which they are to ground
their confidence in prayer, Ps. 34.10, 17 psa. 84.11.
without any wavering or doubting at all, which is sufficient, though they be
held in suspense concerning the particulars, and resign themselves therein to
the will of God: Quod utilo est agr^t^, magis novit madieus qua^ agr^tus. Aug.
therefore is such a submission no prejudice to faith in prayer at all, neither
are their prayers in vain, though they be not their own choosers.

Object. We may pray absolutely for things necessary, as we may, to do the
will of God, and that his name might be glorified by us; seeing such things
conduce thereunto.

Sol. The will of God is done and his name glorified, as well by our passive,
as by our active obedience, in suffering quietly his pleasure and will, and
has the like reward, Ioh. 21.19. Iam. 1.12.

Explication. I hold and believe, that such things as necessarily and directly
tend to the glory of God, and the salvation of men's souls, they may absolutely
pray for, as being the sum of all our desires; and that therefore we may
absolutely pray for grace, Iere. 31.18. Luke 11.11 Luke 17.5. Math. 6.10.
for faith, for repentance, for the fear of God, for his holy Spirit, which
necessarily conduce thereunto. But for external things with their personal
relations, we cannot in that manner importune the Lord for them, because we
know not what way God will be glorified by us, whether by the enjoying, or the
not inioying of them; nor by what course he will save our souls, whether by
giving us these things, or by denying of them, which is the more usual, nor
yet yield us help and comfort by remooving our temptations and sorrows, or by
giving us grace and strength sufficient to bear them, and rightly to use them.
For the confirmation of which truth, hear Master Calvin answering an
Objection, Calvin in 2. Cor. 12 9.
Whether Saint Paul (seeing he was denied his request) prayed in faith or not,
for the removing of the temptation upon him: I answer (says he) as there is
a diverse way of asking, so there are two kinds of obtaining. We ask those
things simply, of which we have a certain promise; such are the establishing
of the kingdom of God, the hallowing of his name, remission of sins, and
whatsoever tends to our salvation: but when we think the kingdom of God may
or ought to be furthered by this or that way or means, this or that thing to
be necesary for the hallowing of hisname, we are often deceived. Likewise do we
manytimes fail in things that concern our salvation. Therefore those former
things, we ask safely and without exception, yet is it not our part to appoint
the manner or means, which if we do express, always a secret condition is
included: Therefore was Paul heard in the end of of his prayer, though he had
repulse in the form of it, etc. Thus Mr Calvin; And what else is the contrary,
but the setting up of man's wisdom above the wisdom of God, and our wills above
his will? to make our own choice as we think good, and to have all our own
way, confining (as it were) the Lord himself by our peremptory prayers.
Therefore seeing the maine end of our prayers may be attained as well by
suffering as by doing; and by wanting outward things, as well as by enjoying
them, we are not absolutely without any exception (at least implied) to offer
up our prayers for those things, nor so to understand the promises.

To these Questions and Answers has not the Temporary given a word of
resolution, (although they contain the very substance of the point) perceiving
(as it may be suspected) how they made against him; therefore like a good
Scholar, he denies the conclusion, retorting the words upon me, and so leaves
it.

Now there were besides these Arguments delivered in public, the testimonies
of certain Authors sent him in privare, which he has concealed, returning me
then this only answer, that he could not believe them. Yet that others who are
willing to believe the truth, may see that I am not alone in this opinion, I am
willing to produce some few testimonies instead of more, to give satisfaction;
as a sixth Argument.

1 And first it appears to be the Doctrine of the Church of England, for in
the third Homily of Prayer, It is the doctrine of the Church of England, and
all other Churches of Christ.
there are these words. Whenever we make our prayers unto God, we are
chiefly to respect the honor and glory of his name: which thing we shall best
of all do, if we follow the example of our* Savior CHRIST, who praying that
the bitter Cupp of Death migh pass from him, would not therein have his own
will fulfilled, but referred the whole matter to the good will and pleasure of
his Father.

And in the Book of Common Prayer, there is this form, Restore to this sick
person his former health (if it be thy will) or else give him grace, etc.
Visitasion of the sick. Wherein as well the ground as the manner of practice is
discovered, and this is and ever has been generally received and taught
amongst us.

2 Vrsinus on the 4th Petition lays down the point at large, how temporal
things are to be asked, and resolves that they are to be asked, With condition
of the will of God. because the Lord has promised them indeterminatly (not
expressing particulars) but spiritual things may absolutely be prayed for,
being absolutely promised. With much more against the Temporaries opinion, and
his unseemely scoffing at the Conditional (If) in the fourth Petition of the
Lords prayer. Vrsin. Catech. page 652.

Bucanus in his learned Institutions handles the point exactly by way of
Question and Answer, resolving the same wholly according to what has been
showed in the particulars, sufficient to give any reasonable man satisfaction.
Bucan. Institut. Page 673. etc.

Calvine, and Gualter were before cited, according to the Orthodoxe Tenent of
the Reformed Churches abroad.

3 Doctor Preston and Master Goodwine of late have set down their opinions to
the same purpose. The former in The Saints daily Exercise, page 99. The latter
in his judicious and comfortable Tract of the Return of Prayers, using these
words. How did thou frame thy prayer for that thing which is denied thee?
Did thou pray for it absolutely, and peremptorily as simply best for thee?
Thou must not then think much, if such a prayer be denied, for therein thou
wentest beyond thy Commission: but if thou did pray for it conditionally, and
with an (If) as Christ did, if it be possible, (which Instance is a strong
ground for such kind of Prayers) and not my will, but thy will be done, etc:
Then thy Prayer may be fully answered and heard, and yet the thing denied, etc.
Chap. 9. And in an other place thus: Allthough the promise (of GOD) to hear
and accept the prayer be general and universal, yet the promise to hear by
granting the very thing it self prayed for, is but an indefinite promise,
wherein we are to rely upon God by an act of recumbencie, though by an act of
full assurance we cannot, the promise being not universal ( speaking of that
in Iam. 5.) then adds, Of like nature are all other promises of things
outward and temporal, etc. All desires in this petition are conditional, If
it may stand with Gods will and pleasure. So M. Scudder, pa. 234.
Treating hereof at large in the whole 3. chap. whither I refer all such as
are willing to be further satisfied in the point, for resolution of the
doubts, which else I could willingly have transcribed; but the book is to be
had: And of this judgment are all that I have seen, not to recite any more
particulars.

By all which testimonies, the Temporary may perceive how uncouth his opinion
is, and in how solitary a way he walks to defend it, that has none to bear
him company, but a few favorites of his own, that admire his deepnes in this
and other things, without any great reason. And that whereas he boldly pleads
that his opinion is no other than such as Moses, Christ, and the Apostles, and
other godly Ministers have taught their congregations heretofore, If it has
been ever taught, how is it now raised from the dead?
which is now again raised from the dead: he discovers his understanding and
faithfulness together in thus speaking; as also, his modesty in maintaining it
on such terms as he does. For thus runs the torrent of his Language: Know this
for certain, that as humiliation, and love, and faith is the gift of God, so
the Lord never gives them to any, but withal he gives the thing faithed. For
if they affirm they have humiliation, and love, and faith, and yet have not
the thing faithed, they make God a deceiver, because he never gives the one
without the other.

Now our petitions for outward things are not agreeable to the will of God,
when we put in this word (If) as to say, if it be thy will to give us this or
that, but when the thing we desire is both commanded and promised.

Come out then, oh thou conditional from among the petitions of the Lords
prayer, and sit down yonder, thou wast never placed there by Christ's
appointment, thou have robbed God of his glory, thou have deprived us of many
blessings, and a long time lulled us asleep in too much security, as also,
blinded us with too much ignorance, etc. With many the like Passages in this
discourse, not worth the rehearsal, being full of gall and folly.

And here I should shut up all, but that I think it expedient to discover a
strange distinction of faith, Which I had before noted; rotidem verbis, in
regard of the distinction.
invented by the Temporary, whereon he setleth all the building of his
confidence for outward things, and it is this.

We are to distinguish Faith into two sorts:

The one is called Justifying, or eternal faith, and so called, because the
Object it eyeth is of an eternal nature, it apprehends eternal promises.

The other is called, Temporary Faith, and so termed, because the Object it
eyeth, is some Temporal thing, this apprehe^deth only Temporal promises.

Both which sorts of faith are required in Gods servants, the power of one, to
keep his soul to eternal life, the other to provide necessaries for the
body, while God shall give this life; for, The just shall live by faith.
Wherein,

1. He has coined a distinction never heard of, in this sense as a Temporary
faith, because it has relation to Temporal things. For a Temporary faith is
always, and only so called, because it lasts but for a time, in which
respect our Savior styles some (...), Non, temporales, sed temporarij, in
spiritualibus.
Temporaries, Math. 13. and so all Writers understand the word, speaking of
that kind of faith, and such persons. Vrsin. Catech. page 104.

2. He applies and in a manner confineth) that saying, The just shall live by
faith, to outward things. Which the Apostle uses and applies only to
justification and salvation, and the conco^mitants of them, Romans 1.17. Gal. 3.
Heb. 10.38. all; Spiritual matters belonging to that eternal faith, as he
calls it.

Thus he must needs either confound himself, or contradict the Scriptures; for
whereas he labors to maintain his distinction, by alleging that both those
faiths are one in the root, but diverse in respect of the objects only: yet
should he not have perverted a maine place of Scripture to another sense, then
the Holy Ghost does use it, by annexing it to that branch of Temporals, by way
of Antithesis: nor yet have formed to himself such a word for the faith of
Temporals, as is neither found in Scripture, nor any good Author. Yet he is so
confident, as to go on, and conclude in this manner: So now you see
(notwithstanding your great stir) the distinction being grounded on the Word of
God, remains unmoueable. Supposing (it seems) his distinction to be like
himself, upon the like conceit of such a ground.

And this I have the rather insisted upon, that it may appear to his admirers,
how confident and peremptory he is in his opinions, and upon how weak grounds,
that they may beware of him in other things as well as in this. For my part, I
bear much slander and reproach from him, being foul and injurious in his
language; all which I refer unto the Lord, accounting my self unworthy to
suffer rebuke for any part of his Truth. Wishing unto him more modesty and
humility, and then (no doubt) he would be more Orthodox, according to the
promise. Psalm. 25 9. The meek will he guide in judgment, the meek will he teach
his way.

Exhortation to all that depend upon God, to ask such things at his hands as
are expedient for them, as Agur did, without desiring abundance, which does but
ensnare the owners, as experience shows: and herein to take the written word
of God for a rule, what is lawful or unlawful to be asked, whether it
concern the life, goods, estate, maintenance, success of our selves or others;
and withal to submit to his secret will and pleasure for the disposing or
bestowing of the same, as it shall seem best to his Majesty, for the glory of
his name, and our own good, resigning our selves wholly thereunto, and
believing assuredly that what is best shall be done unto us, according to his
infinite wisdom and providence; therefore in all our prayers, if not expressly
(which is not absolutely necessary,) yet implicitly to include the same, and
then we shall be sure to pray according to his will, and our Prayers shall not
be in vain.

FINIS.
Nilergo optabunt ho^^i^es? si e^^^silium vis,
Permittes ipsis ex pendere n^^^inibus, quid
Conveniat nobis, rebusque sit utile nostris.
Nam pro jucundis aptissima quaeque dabunt dij.
Charior estillis homo, quam sibi; nos animorum
Impulsiu* and caeca magnaque cupidine ducti
Cori^^^am peri^^^, (...)
N^^u^^, qui (...).
(...). Sat. (...)
AN Advertisement concerning TRASKISME.

As a Parallel to the Former.

Of M. TRASKE, and his Opinions.
WHereas Mr. John Trask some certain years since was justly censured in a
High Court of this Land, for Iudaisme, and the dependant errors, it is so that
not long after, he fell (the cause in himself remaining) into contrary
extremities, Dum stulti vitant vitia^ etc.
of Evangelicall pretense, under the specious shows and names of Christ, of
Faith, of the Gospel, of Joy, and such like alluring titles; thereunder hiding,
and secretly venting many pernicious errors, * Romans 16.18. (...).
to the endangering of none of the worst people, and of late is grown to a
great extremity herein. I desire (being by God's Providence made acquainted
with the same) if leave may be given (which hereby I crave) to discover and
publish some of his chief Assertions and Grounds, that wheresoever they are
met withal, their owner (who lies hid) may be known, As, Ex vngue L^onem.
and so the innocent armed against the peril, and they are these following:

The Law is a rule of the flesh, and to live after the Law, is to live after
the Flesh. Romans 8.1.

The error of the Antinominant and Anabaptists.
The Law is not to be preached to Believers by Gospel Ministers.

If Repentance and Faith be wrought only by the Gospel, then what does the
Law work in any man's conversion to God, or conformity to Christ?

The Law did once discover sin, See contrary Romans 7.7.
it does so no more, nor yet for direction; Love herein transcends the Law; as
far as Life does Death.

Then we are Justified by a qualification.
The New Covenant has no condition at all, Faith is not the Condition of the
Gospells promises, but only a qualification in us.

This is only true of the Law. Romans 2.15.
The Gospel was in man's Nature before the Fall.

Faith is not to be tried by any fruits or effects, but only by the
persuasion it self.

Every saving grace is a sign. 1 Ioh. 3.14.
Faith is the only sign of Salvation.

The new Creature is only Faith in Christ.

Regeneration is not to be tried, by any other fruits, effects, or signs, but
only by Faith, wherein it consists.

Justification and Sanctification confounded.
Sanctification is not by the Spirit in our selves, but only in Christ, showed
in acts and not in the habits of grace.

Believers when they fall into any sin, This touches upon the Familists.
be it Adultery or Murder, are not to mourn nor grieve (for that savours of
the flesh) but still to rejoice, because it is written, rejoice evermore, and
that joy is the special means to bring them out of their sin.

The word (...) is not opposed to careless.
Careless Christians are the choicest believers, because they depend wholly
upon Christ.

To doubt of the favor of God after sin committed, is worse then the sin it
self.

Judas confessed, but believed not
It is as easy to believe remission of sins, as to make confession of them.

Christ is involved in every Proverb of Solomon.

The 15. Psalm is only a description of Christ, and the beatitudes, Math. 5.
only belong to him, and to (...) man that ever was, or would be, be: all men
are vanity.

Christ is never compared to the wise, but to the Husband.
The saying of Solomon, rejoice in the wife of thy youth, is not meant of a man's
wife, but of Christ, because he can satisfy us at all times.

It is two great presumption for any Minister to undertake the Exposition of
any whole Book in the Scriptures; Therefore he holds that which he cannot show.
because he cannot show how Christ is involved in every pert.

The Ephesians left their first love. Rev. 2.4.
Every true Believer (howsoever it seems) does always grow in faith and love,
and answerable fruits.

Then, no living man can say that he loves his brother
No man can say he does love his Brother, till he has laid down his life for
him. Neither can we say our selves, that we love the Brethren, but we may say
of others, that they do, so expounding 1 John 3.14.

He calls this, The glorious way; [The subject] so he writes.
and styles himself, The Subject in whom the Lord delights to work through
Christ.

THese are the Flowers of his Garden, dispersed abroad in Print, and Writings,
and by word of mouth whereby he has labored to seduce the simple, which I
think sufficient only to mention for their absurdity, an answer being too much
credit to them, although the most of them are already By Master Hynd, Mr.
Burton, and Doctor Tailor in his Regula vita, at large.
answered, in public and private, only I think it expedient to advertise the
Reader, and all that have to deal with him, of five things:

1. That they give no heed to any Catalogue of his Gospel grounds, because he
has published many of contrary quality, in diverse particulars, one crossing
another, as thus:

Believers do always grow in faith and love, and the exercise of all pious
duties.

A man may be a Believer, and for a time have neither humility, love, trust,
nor any other grace bud forth in practice.

The Law shows what man should do.

The Law is not the rule of Life. With many such.

2. That they take no great heed to his interpretation of Scripture, for that
he will suddenly devise, as many senses as will serve his turn.

3. That they credit not easily his Protestations, or Denials, because therein
he has been found most unfaithful, and false, witness one for all, in a
Letter:

I pre^^st before God, who knows all, and before JESUS CHRIST, the Judge of
all, that I hold no other but that one Gospel which Moses wrote of; the Lord
Jesus, and his Apostles Preached; the Martyrs witnessed; our King defends;
our Divines, Pre^^^h and maintain, etc.

A fearful Protestation, yet how true, the former assertions declare.

4. To beware of his Riddles, for when he would hide his Error, he will turn
it into a Riddle; as thus:

They would have the Law to be a Rule of life, to such as know it in the
infinite holiness of it, the veil being removed from their hearts, as they
dare think on no righteousness by it at all, but only in and by Jesus
Christ. -- Again,

The Law has nothing at all to do with Believers, but they have most of all to
do with the Law, etc.

5. To beware of his fawning by which he deceives, but chiefly his pride
through which he erreth, and dares to abuse the holy Scriptures as he does.

And thus recommending also this disery to the care of every Christian, for his
own safety, that he may try the Spirits before he receive them, and not run
under the curse of believing, or venting New Gospels, Gal. 1.8.
I end with this advertisement, That the Spirit of regeneration, is a Spirit of
Truth. Ioh. 3.5.14.17.

FINIS.
Ventri servire, and blande loqui, seu assentari; duae sunt notae Psendo
Apostolorum.

Pet. Mart. in Romans 16.18.

